ay

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

THIRTY-FIRST REPORT”
ON ,
FUNCTIONING OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HOSPITALS
UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND
FAMILY WELFARE

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 16.08.95)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16.08.95)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


|

- IVC FORU OLEH VAM

० 4
0 02010 01170 3111, 48 4
|! vi
SIATIGZOH THAME OO 3 39 To: 0868 A |
10 WAT2IAIM JAMS AO, ये: छ ant अब bs

ATLAS

AHGAS AYLAR

.

12 YRATHAM AL IAAT OETA TST:

ASAT VAI

(2९:80:01 ao! tldae, Byte Marl. ७1.1):
(RUBE AE ne addst अ6110 91007 ७

TALE 8 AMAA? AYLAR


die
2.
3:

No छू

CONTENTS

Composition OF THE Committ!
FoREWworbD...
INTRODUCTION .

(i) Health Scenario in Indi
Gi) Aim .....:66..
(iti) Methodology

Part-I
GENERAL PROBLEMS

(1) Overcrowding ....
(2) Referral characte:
(3) Computerisation .
(4) Duplication of facilities
(5) Coordination amongst Ho:
(6) More Autonomy to the Medical Superintenden
(7) Maintenance/Repair of Medical Equipments
(8) Strengthening of Blood Banks........
(9) Poor performance in Family Welfare
(10) Campaign against AIDS
(11) Establishing an Epilopsy Centre
(12) Exposure of Doctors to latest Developmen
(13) Problem of Cleanliness and Maintenance
(14) Shortage of 8५व....................-
(15) Doctors on prolonged Deputation.
(16) Indicipline in Hospitals ............
(17) Lack of Residential Accommodation
(18) Separate CGHS Wing:
(19) Senior Citizen:
(20) Geriatrics ..
(21) Provision for poor patient
(22) . Facilities for visitors/attendants .
(23) Budgets «.........

Part-II

STATE OF THE HOSPITALS

(a) All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AILMS), New Delhi........
(b) Post-graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research
(PGIMER), Chandigarh
(c) Jawaharlal Institute of Post-graduate Medical Education and
Research (JIPMER), Pondicherry.......
(d) All India Institute of Physical Medi
(AIIPMER), Bombay...
(e) Safdarjung Hospital, New
(f) Dr..Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi
(g) Lady Hardinge Medical College and Associated Ho
Delhi, (Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital and Smt. Sucheta
Kripalani Hospital)
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSER VATIONS

Annexures I—XVII
MINUTES मल cs

PAGES
()-Gv)
(v)
(vi)

(vi)-(vii)
(vii)-(viii)

ra ee

x
७०००० ०९०-३-३० ० $ ७ ७ ०० + + + ५

12-18
19-23

24-26
27-29
30-33

34-36
37-41

42-56
57-81
82-107


. owaags
worsutoH Tai
“Odsnda2 11880 11)
: imi, (1)
(goloberliaM (il)

Se ile

(1)

५ 5 50/801४ न: 4g
HO 10 maldort

fai 59181
,: ३३४

Sy ४90४1 qbed.
i 182): intecl


iy

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1994-95)

Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Zs
35

4.
5
0:
7
8

9.
10.
iL,
12.
13.
14,

#15:

Dr. M. Aram
Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri O.P. Kohli

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

. Shri ५. Hanumantha Rao
. Shri Md. Salim

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. 1.0, Sanadi

Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22%

Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

Dr. Vasant Pawar

Prof. P.J. Kurien

Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
. Shri K.T. Vandayar

५ Shri Aslam Sher Khan

. Shri Inder Jit

. Shri Anna Joshi

. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

* Nominated on 30th March, 1994 vice vacancy caused by the appointment of Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel as Minister

of State for Power.
** Nominated vide Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 34717 dated the 7th September, 1994.

0)


Gi)

38. Shri Rambadan_

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

*42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43, Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44., Shri Suraj Mandal

45, Shri Kanshi Ram

*Nominated yice vacancy caused by _—the __ resignation
24th August, 1994,

of

Shri

Brahmanand

Mandal

we.f.


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3, Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

4, Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri O.P. Kohli

6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

8. Shri Md. Salim es

9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. I.G. Sanadi

‘11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

21. Prof. P.J. Kurien

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37, Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

(iii)


(iv)

38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40, Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43.'Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44.’ Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

3. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

4. Shri N K. Singh, Deputy Director

5. Shri Om Dutta Sharma, Under Secretary

6, Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

way


w

FOREWORD

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee, do hereby
present, on its behalf, this Thirty-first Report of the Committee on the functioning of the
Central Government Hospitals, under the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare.

2. A Press Communique, inviting views/suggestions from the general public on the
subject was issued and the Committee received several memoranda/suggestions in response
thereof.

3. The Committee took evidence of representatives of the Department of Health,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Director General, Health Services and Directors/
Medical Superintendents of All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Post-graduate Institute
of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, Jawaharlal Institute of Post-graduate
Medical Education and Research, Pondicherry, All India Institute of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Bombay, and Medical Superintendents of Safdarjung, Dr. Ram Manohar
Lohia and_Smt. Sucheta Kripalani Hospitals, New Delhi.

4. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to all the institutions, associations, bodies
and individuals who appeared before the Committee or submitted memoranda on the
subject. The Committee also wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Ministry for
furnishing the requisite material and information required in connection with the examina-
tion of the subject and for giving evidences before the Commiftee.

5. The report was considered and adopted by the Committee at its meeting held on
9th August, 1995, 1!

New ऐश; P. UPENDRA
August 9, 1995 Chairman,
Committee on Human Resource Development.

)


INTRODUCTION

Health ‘Scenario in India

1. Health of the people is a prime index of the all-round development of a country.
Health scenario in India has improved noticeably since Independence. Two of the most
important indicators of Health Expectations of Life at Birth and Infant Mortality
Rate—have shown noticeable improvement during this period. For example, while the
Expectation of Life at Birth has increased from 31.7 years in 1951 to 61.1 years in the year
1991, Infant Mortality Rate has come down from 146 per thousand in 1951 to 86 per
thousand in 1991, This has been possible due to the phenomenal growth in infrastructural
facilities and personnel for medical care over the years.

1.1 These achievements notwithstanding, health scenario in India still remains dismal,
due to variety of reasons, one of them being abnormal increase in population, Sudden
outbreak of ‘Plague’ and ‘Malaria’ in certain parts of the country last year, has been a cause
of deep concern to the people in general and to those responsible for promoting the health
care in the country. Recurrence of such diseases, in fact, is a sad reflection on our health
care system which has failed to meet the basic preventive and curative health needs of the
people.

1.2 The health services in India are primarily looked after by three sectors, namely, the
government, the private and the voluntary sectors.

1.3 People, particularly belonging to the lower and middle classes, all over the country
are mainly dependent on the Government Health System but are disappointed with the poor
quality of services rendered by it. The growing dissatisfaction with this sector is driving
people towards the private sector for medical needs and thus forcing them to spend huge
sums of money. People in the poorest rung of the society, who are unable to afford the
exorbitant charges of private medical services, are, however, left with no other alternative
but to depend only on the Government-run health services

1.4 The Government hospitals, in turn, are over-stretched and not able to come up to
even the required minimum standards, They are generally over-crowded for want of proper
medical facilities at the primary and secondary levels, as also due to lack of referral services.
The area cavered by them includes the huge rural hinterland where Government health care
services are generally inadequate or non existent

1.5 The voluntary sector, perhaps the most effective and appropriate but the smallest of
the three, is not fully geared to make a significant impact on the overall health status of the
people, nor substitute for the state’s clear responsibility to meet the medical needs of the
people.

Aim

2. It was'in this sombre background that the Committee felt the need to study the
maladies afflicting the health care system in India. The Committee, to begin with, had
decided to examine the functioning of the Central Government hospitals located in various
parts of the country and subsequently to come out with a report containing pragmatic

recommendation/suggestions to improve the present condition of the medical health care in
the country

(vi)


(vii)

2.1 While making its recommendations, the committee has given due regard to the fact
that Health is a State subject, and the Centre’s role under the Constitution should remain
focussed on policy coordination in medical care and public health, drug control, food safety
and promotion of excellence in patient care and medical education and research. An
elaborate network of Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and a chain of referrals at District,
State and Central levels has been set up during the last several Five Year Plans to subserve
the goal of Health For All (HFA) through PHC approach as incorporated in the National
Health Policy, 1983 (NHP).

2.2 It is in this context that the Committee has tried to assess the achievements and
problems of one of the two Central initiatives in the health sector viz., the central
Government Hospitals. A separate report has been made with regard to other initiative i.e
the CGHS, the Central Government health scheme.

2.3 The Committee proceeded from the premise that hospital services, especially in
public hospitals, must seek to serve the key objectives of patient care, convenience and
satisfaction. Only thus they would be able to meet the criteria of equal access to medical
care,-adequacy and quality thereof and fair and just treatment to poor patients seeking
medical care. It is only when such criteria are met in reasonable measure in public hospitals
that the Government acquires the moral authority to regulate private systems to meet similar
criteria. This will be especially significant during the period ahead when massive privatisation
of medical care seems likely as a consequence of the new economic policy of 1991.

Methodology

3. The Committee, in this connection, visited several Central Government hospitals with
a view to making an on-the-spot assessment of the ground realities, both at the macro and
micro levels. The Committee also ed two hospitals working in private and corporate
sector to have a comparative idea in this regard.

3.1 During its visits to various hospitals/institutes, Members of the Committee went
round all the Wards/Departments to have an in-depth view of the services and facilities
being provided by them. Besides having a series of meetings with the officials of the
Ministry, the Committee also held wide-ranging discussions with the Medical
Superintendents, Heads of Departments, doctors, nurses and other staff of the respective
hospitals regarding the handicaps faced by them in providing an efficient and satisfactory
medical care to the people. The Committee also interacted with a cross-section of the people
during its visits and enquired about the problems encountered by them at various levels in a
hospital. The Committee also went into various aspects of functioning of a hospital,
particularly those afflicting the services rendered by it.

3.2 In the hospitals visited, the Committee found that while some problems were
common, bedeviling all the hospitals, others were specific to particular hospitals/institutes.
For example, the overcrowding, particularly in OPDs and Emergencies, long waiting period,
lack of adequate beds, duplication of facilities and lack of coordination between various
hospitals, inadequate facilities for visitors and attendants, shortage of faculty, doctors and
staff, particularly in groups C and D, and acute shortage of superspeciality services, lack of
cleanliness and proper maintenance, etc. were found to be the common problems faced by
all the hospitals.

3.3 Accordingly, the generab problems have been dealt with first, followed by those
specific to the individual hospitals. It may also be pointed out that the matters relating to
medical education and research in Institutes like All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), New Delhi, Post-graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research


(viii)
(PGIMER), Chandigarh, Jawaharlal Institute of Medical Education and Research
(JIPMER), Pondicherry, and All India Institute of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation,
Bombay. (AIIPMER) have been touched only in so far as they affected the patients’ care
and convenience. Emphasis in the case of these Institutes has been on the functioning of the
hospitals attached to them.

o


PART-I
GENERAL PROBLEMS

1. Overcrowding

4. The Committee, after visiting various hospitals, is of the view that overcrowding is
the central feature of all the Central Government Hospitals which is getting gradually from
bad to'worse. The load of patients has enormously increased in all the hospitals over the
years. For trends in the three major hospitals, see Annexure 1. The OPD/ casualty of the
‘ALIMS, New Delhi, and the PGIMER, Chandigarh, now attend to an average of 5895 and
2600 patients respectively, every day. JIPMER, Pondicherry also attends to over 4000
patients in OPD/casualty daily. Similarly, Safdarjung and Dr. R.M.L. Hospitals, New Delhi,
attend to about 6,000 and 3600 patients respectively, every day. The Lady Hardinge Medical
College and its two hospitals attend, on an average to 2500 patients every day.

4.1, Overcrowding in the major hospitals, the Committee believes, is the direct outcome
of lack of adequate medical care facilities and personnel at the PHCs, and the District and
Sub-district hospitals for providing primary and secondary level treatment to the patients.
The prevailing ethics in public, especially Central Government hospitals, is that ordinarily,
no patient seeking medical care should be turned back unattended, As a result, patients
from many parts of the country come directly to these hospitals even for minor ailments as
the only alternative left to them.

4.2. The Committee also feels that the overcrowding: arises from an additional
phenomenon witnessed in Delhi, where some patients seem to try out one hospital after
another for the same treatment.

4,3. One problem, which is the direct outcome of overcrowding, is the shortage of beds
in various hospitals. With the number of patients requiring admission in hospitals increasing
day by day, shortage of beds is acquiring alarming proportion. For example, the number of
patients admitted in Dr. R.M.L. Hospital every day has gone up from 74 patients in 1970 to
as high. as 120 patients in 1994.

4.4 The Committee, is of the view that due to influx of patients from various parts of the
country to Delhi and the population of Delhi increasing at a rapid pace, Central
Government hospitals are under constant pressure and admit patients more than their bed
capacity. As a result, two to three patients have to share a bed in many Wards. For other
details in this regard see Annexure I. पा

4.5. Another related aspect is the lack of adequate space, both built-up and open, in the
hospitals. Some hospitals are so short of space that there is hardly any scope for their
physical expansion and also for providing more beds. Similarly, the doctors/faculty members
are also facing acute shortage of office/examination room and usually three to four of them
have to share a single room.

4.6. The Committee is of the opinion that the hospitals are bursting at the seams, both
on the OPD and inpatient sides. There is a phenomenal increase in the number of patients
with no corresponding increase in the number of beds and other infrastructural facilities. As
a result, these hospitals are overburdened and work much beyond their capacity.

Bl


2

Overcrowding, the Committee feels, impinges upon not only the quality and efficiency of
medical services but also adversely affects research activities in Institutes like AIIMS,
PGIMER and JIPMER. :

4.7. In view of the above, the Committee emphasises the need for taking immediate
steps for reducing/regulating the flow of patients coming directly to these hospitals. The
problem of overcrowding, the Committee feels, can be tackled only if all its dimensions are
simultaneously and equitably addressed. The Committee recognises,. therefore, that
overcrowding may be reduced only by a simultaneous improvement in (a) the levels of
management efficiency in hospitals, (b) improvement in peripheral facilities in District and
State hospitals for primary and secondary treatment, and (c) organising a functional referral
system.

4.8. To start with, the Committee suggests that there is a need to optimise all existing
and available physical facilities to control overcrowding. The Committee would emphasise
the necessity for opening more counters and creating space for OPD patients. Since
overcrowding also results from lack of guidance and direction to patients and a patient
friendly handling system, there is a need for constant review of arrangements as to how far
appropriate information and guidance is available to patients and their relatives visiting the
hospitals. In particular, constant vigilance is needed for a better interface between clerical
staff and patients visiting the hospitals.

4.9. The major and long term solution to the problem of overcrowding in the hospitals,
the Committee feels, calls for improvement and expansion of medical facilities at the district
and the State level, not only in Delhi but also in the major hinterland regions of North
India, to take care of the primary and secondary health care needs of the-people, so that
patients needing specialist care only could be referred to the Central Government hospitals
or other prestigious tertiary care institutes, located mostly in Delhi.

4.10. Another solution in this connection, according to the Committee, could be setting
up of the OPDs away from the main wing of the hospital, preferably in the same complex,
with self-contained essential test/dignostic facilities to divert the patients seeking OPD
attention from those needing detailed investigation and treatment. The Committee is happy
to learn that the AIIMS is already in the process of setting up such OPD, away from the
main hospital area, which would be provided essential facilities for basic pathological tests
required for primary care. Such OPDs, the Committee feels, would not only reduce the
congestion in the main hospital, but it would also release some working space for physicians,
etc.

4.11. The Committee feels that conscious and urgent steps for reducing the waiting time
and. promoting easily accessible and cheaper testing facilities would go a long way to
mitigate, if not eliminate, overcrowding in the hospitals. Increased waiting time, in the
Committee’s opinion, is a direct manifestation of overcrowding and in almost all the
hospitals, the Committee found, that the waiting period was very long, ranging from one
hour to three hours.

4.12 The committee agrees that it may be difficult to lay down a specific waiting time
applicable to all facilities and disciplines but it is not impossible for each hospital to evolve
its own internal norms and standards for each Department to reduce the waiting time to the
maximum extent possible, after studying the pattern of patients. An overall goal in each
hospital could be to strive to reach a situation where the patient should not have to be away
from home for more than half a day in order to get OPD treatment. From that objective in
view, each hospital should work out how best and how soon this can be achieved
progressively over a fixed period of time. In fact, one half of a day at OPD is considered

oN


3

adequate keeping in view the fact that patients will also have to spend extra travel and
transactional time in reaching the hospital and returning home. Alternatively, provision of
two shift OPD may also be considered. .

4.13. With the growth of technology, more and more sophisticated tests would be
needed to support diagnosis and therapy and large investments are inevitable, particularly in
prestigious hospitals. This is partly the result of patient expectations from any premier
institute where they expect and are encouPaged to expect better and more state of the art
diagnostic and curative procedures. Such procedures are not only hightech but generally tend
to be cost-escalating. In this context, it is the duty of the leaders in the profession, especially
those heading the Departments, to examine and assess, through proper audit, whether
technological procedures adopted are, in every case, necessary and relevant to patients’
needs in our country. This judgement can be made only by the leaders within the medical
community itself, who can be relied upon to look into all aspects of prevalence and
incidence of diseases, its proximate determinants and the socio-economic background of
patients. In many cases of ordinary ailments, Indian Systems of Medicine could be equally
effective, if not more, and may be considered for expansion.

4.14."In order to reduce the waiting time, special efforts should be made to minimise
the time taken to know results of various diagnosis/tests. While the Committee notes the
impressive increase of testing facilities—both routine and specialised—in Central
Government hospitals, as well as in private sector hospitals, it also would like to draw
attention to the great disparity that exists in the charges for similar tests conducted in private
hospitals and diagnostic centres. No doubt, it is claimed that a part of the disparity arises
from the need to recover a reasonable return on capital invested in setting up such private
corporate hospitals and research centres. Therefore, the Committee is convinced that for a
long time to come, our public hospital systems (including AIIMS) will continue to bear the
brunt of tests, diagnosis and treatment of the people. The Committee accordingly, expects
continued pressures on the facilities of AIIMS and major Central Government hospitals and,
therefore, there is no escape from periodic review of services as to how to reduce waiting
time, nature and need of test facilities being set up and the fees to be charged therefor. It
also envisages that this problem would remain steadily acute in AIIMS where most
complicated cases are brought needing appropriate sophisticated tests which have to be
ordered in such a manner as to prevent bunching or overcrowding. The Committee,
therefore, emphasises the need for a periodic review and upgrading of facilities, procedures,
logistics, fees, etc. with the primary aim of increasing patients’ convenience and reducing
delay in getting test result,

2. Referral Character

5. The premier institutions like AIIMS and PGIMER were set up for promoting high
standards of medical education and training and also for providing comprehensive medical
care to the people. These were originally thought of being only as referral hospitals where
patients would be referred from other hospitals for specialised treatment of a higher order.
In other words, these hospitals would not entertain new patients in the OPDs. However, due
to overcrowding and lack of medical facilities in and around Delhi at various levels, these
hospitals have lost their referral character and become just like any other hospital working at
the District level.

5.1. The critical role that has been assigned to the referral system in National Health
Policy (NHP) deserves emphasis; for the PHC approach is predicated on the proposition that
only 5% of ailments need reach tertiary hospitals and the rest can be treated at primary and
through referral to secondary levels. Only through such an integrally related referral system,



4

the poorer sections of society, living in rural and remote areas, can get equitable access to
quality medical care and preventive public health measures.

5.2 The Committee is deeply concerned about, the deteriorating standards of research
and patient care particularly in the hospitals attached to the AIIMS, New Delhi and
PGIMER, Chandigarh

5.3 An efficient and organised referral system, the Committee feels, can be a good
edifice of a competent medical care available in all the lower level peripheral hospitals. This
means that hospitals and health centres in and around Delhi and also in the States have to
be sustained and simultaneously developed with adequate funds over a period of time, so
that a successful referral system can function in premier hospitals like PGIMER, Chandigarh
and AIIMS, New Delhi. The experience of PGI Chandigarh, which, even though conceived
and run as a referral hospital right from the outset, illustrates the extent of inevitable
pressure existing for direct admission. After considering various practical difficulties, the
committee is of the view that there must be a clear objective to make them purely referral
hospitals by a fixed date, and all necessary short and medium term problems must be sorted
out within a definite timeframe. The Committee is conviced that this decision brooks no
delay and expects that approppriate mechanism would be developed to achieve this.

5.4 While planning for an integrated and organised referral system from the PHC level
up to the Central hospitals at tertiary level, the Committee desires that utilizing the facilities
available with non-profit corporate sector hospitals in various parts of the country as
supplementary and complementary to the government infrastructure should also be
considered

3. Computerisation

6. The Committee noticed that the use of computers for maintenance of patient-related
records has not been given due attention in most of the Central Government hospitals. The
Committee is of the opinion that there is an immediate need for providing computers in a
big way, not merely for keeping various records but also for effecting a better coordination
between various Departments/wings of the hospital. Computers should be used for
improving patient care and follow-up.

4, Duplication of facilities

7, The Committee noticed that there was a lot of duplication of facilities and services in
the Central Government hospitals. The Committee feels that in view of the shortage of
space, beds and financial resources, duplication of services in different hospitals becomes
wasteful which should be avoided to the extent possible.

7.1 Duplication of specialists services among central Government hospitals seems a case
of non-optimal use of resources, especially when hospitals are entirely under Central control.
This calls for better coordination and implementation at the level of the Ministry. The
Committee concedes that some overlapping of specialities is inévitable but duplication has
led to skewed development of facilities and mismatch between specialised facilities and
trained manpower not only at the level of doctors but at other levels also, since. successful
practice of specialities is a matter of integrated development of complementary facilities and
team work. The Committee recommends that steps be taken to coordinate the development
of specialities and superspecialities in various Central Government hospitals and promote
greater horizontal liaison among the specialists in hospitals. There is also a need to evolve a
scheme to link a number of smaller hospitals with a major hospital having a critical mass of
specialists’ expertise.

7.2 In the interest of patient-care, each hospital should specialise in certain disciplines so


5

that people know as to which hospital they should approach for a particular disease. Such an
arrangment would also lead to a proper distribution of patients in various hospitals, optimum
utilisation of equipment and lessening of over-crowding.

5, Coordination amongst the Hospitals

8. The arrangement suggested in the para above, the Committee feels, would not work
unless there exists effective coordination amongst various hospitals. The Committee noticed
total lack of coordination among the Central Government hospitals in Delhi, not to speak of
other hospitals. Instances of patients going to different hospitals for the “same ailment also
came to the notice of the Committee, which again, the Committee feels, is due to lack of a
coordination mechanism among the various hospitals. The Committee emphasises the need
for having a close liaison and coordination among different hospitals with a view to avoiding
many problems which currently are bedeviling the patient care services. Such type of
coordination, to begin with, the Committee feels, can be worked out between the Safdarjung
Hospital and the AIIMS so as to help reduce the burden on both these hospitals and also to
increase the patients convenience. Possibility of such a linkage has been discussed in para
AIM 9 at page 14 Supra.

6. More automony to Medical Superintendents

9. Directors/Medical Superintendents of some hospitals voiced concern about their
dependence on the Ministry officials even for smaller and urgent works that needed
immediate attention. Mention may be made here of the filling/creation of posts, particularly
those of the Groups ‘C’ and ‘D’ employees. Such a state of affairs, it was argued, leads to
avoidable delays which ultimately tell upon the efficiency and quality of patient care in
hospitals. More autonomy to the Directors/Medical Superintendents (MSs) was, therefore,
demanded. The Committee recommeds that this aspect should be given serious consideration
by the Department in the interest of efficient administration of the hospitals.

9.1.Another related aspect brought before the Committee was the demand for
redesignating Medical Superintendents of major hospitals as Directors with all the concomi-
tant powers enjoyed by the latter in certain hospitals/institutes. The Committee was
informed that such redesignation would not have any financial implication as the post of MSs
has already been upgraded to that of Addl. D.G. of Health services, which is equivalent to
the rank of Additional Secretary, Government of India. This demand, the Committee feels,
appears to be reasonable and may be considered for implementation as it has hardly any
financial implications.

7. Maintenance/Repair of Medical Equipments

10. The Committee noted that the equipments available in different hospitals have not
been properly maintained. Repairs are not done promptly when they go out of order. The
Committee feels that the maintenance of equipments is very crucial as the patients face lots
of problems if the equipments are not repaired in time. They are fleeced by private labs/
diagnostic clincis which charge exhorbitant amounts even for routine and normal tests. It has
come to the notice of the Committee that patients are referred to private labs/dignostic
centres for various tests on the pretext of equipments in the hospitals being out of order and
private dignostic centres are allowed to import medical equipments at concessional rates.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate steps be taken for providing
necessary infrastructure for getting the medical equipments repaired in a reasonable time.

8. Strengthening of Blood Banks

11. The Committee found that blood banks in most of the Central Government
hospitals had no modern facilities and equipments commensurate with the nature of services

RS3358


6

required today. In view of the menace of killer disease like AIDS spreading through blood
transfusion, the Committee emphasises the need for providing adequate facilities for carrying
out HIV tests in the Blood Banks of each hospital immediately. It recommends that the
Department should provide facilities for modgrn Blood Banks in each hospital where
fractionation of blood into-its different components can be done and transfusion of blood is
made foolproof.

9. Poor Performance in Family Welfare

12. The Committee is disappointed over the fact that the functioning of the family
welfare units, in almost all the hospitals visited by it, was very poor. For example, in
PGIMER only five vasectomies were done against 417 tubectomies in the year 1994
indicating the gender bias of the programme. While 1156 conventional contraceptives were
distributed, there was not even a single case of insertion of uterine devices during this
period. Position prevailing in other hospita more or less the same. It was found that the
infrastructure provided for the purpose was not being put to optimum use. Near total lack of
motivation and dedication in the staff was also noticed. The Committee is surprised to note
the indifferent and nonchalant attitude of the Ministry in regard to such a high priority
aspect of our socio-economic development. It, therefore, recommends that family welfare
units provided in the Central Governmental hospitals be strengthened and activated
_immediately. More emphasis should be laid on vasectomy as family welfare devise and
suitable incentive/motivations be provided.

10. Campaign Against AIDS

13. An increasing number of cases of suspected ‘AIDS’ ure being reported from various
parts of the country, particularly in metropolitan and major cities. There is, however, not
enough awareness among the people about this deadly disease. The Central Government
hospitals, which are supposed to be role models in such campaigns, do not appear to be
serious about the problem.

13.1 The Committee, therefore, feels that the Central Government hospitals should at
least now rise to the occasion, keeping in view the gravity of the situation and launch
massive campaigns against the spread of this disease. These hospitals could bring out
posters, leaf-lets, etc. and display them conspicuously in the hospital premises for the benefit
of the people.

11. Establishing An Epilepsy Centre

14. Epilepsy, in many ways, is a different illness than other illnesses like Hypertension,
Diabetes, Heart problem and Cancer, etc. It being a life-long illness, requires a long-term
planning. According to the rough estimates, there are about nine million patients of epilepsy
in India. In the last couple of decades, there has been a significant increase in the number of

’ epilepsy cases in India. There is also a lack of awareness and knowledge about the disease.

14.1 Epilepsy, in our country, is mostly being treated in Neurological centres of the
major hospitals. The facilities available for treating epilepsy patients in these hospitals,
including AIIMS, are insufficient and unorganised. The Committee, therefore, feels that
there is an imperative need to establish an Epilepsy Centre, to begin with, in New Delhi,
which should aim at developing a holistic approach for treatment of epileptic patients. The
Centre should endeavour evolving a national policy and also promoting research in the
indigenous system of medicine to provide best medical care to the epileptic patients. Once
the Centre is developed, similar centres, either separate or branches thereof, should be set
up in other parts of the country.



12. Exposure of Doctors to latest Developments

15. Enough opportunities, the Committee feels. are not being made available to
doctors to keep track of the lutest advancements in the medical sciences / technology,
which is a fast developing discipline. The Committee is of the opinion that doctors/
professors should be given adequate opportunities for refreshing and advancing their
knowledge and skill by interacting with their counterparts in advanced countries. The
Committee, therefore, feels that Government should take immediate steps for providing
adequate opportunities for this to doctors and faculty members. The technicians/
paramedical staff handling various sophisticated and modern medical equipments should
also be provided the required training with a view to imparting efficiency and precision in
their work.

13. Problem of Cleanliness and Maintenance

16. The Committee found that cleanliness and hygiene in various hospitals are very
poor. Chocked sewage und leaking water pipes were seen in some hospitals. Toilets were
very dirty and stinking. Garbage and disposed cotton, etc. were found lying uncovered.
The Committee is deeply concerned at such state of affairs as stagnated water and open
garbage become breeding grounds for various organisms. The Committee feels that
hospital authorities are not paying adequate attention to this aspect and recommends that
immediate steps be taken to keep the hospitals clean and hygienic.

16.1 The CPWD is responsible for the maintenance of hospital buildings, including
operation theatres and various wards. The Committee noticed that the upkeep and
maintenance of hospital buildings was very poor which needed urgent renovations. Some
buildings, particularly in Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. RML Hospital and Lady Hardinge
Medical College and associated hospitals were found to be in an uninhabitable condition.
When asked about the reasons, the Committee was informed that due to absence of any
check or control by the hospital Administration, the CPWD was not prompt in attending
to the complaints. It was, therefore, argued, that either the hospitals should have their |
own engineering departments or the CPWD units posted in the hospitals be brought
under the administrative control of the respective Medical Superintendents to expedite
and improve the maintenance work. The Committee feels that these suggestions deserve
serious consideration by the Department. The Department may appoint a Comimittee of
experts to examine the present state of buildings and suggest suitable measures.

14, Shortage of Staff

17. The Committee found that there is a general shortage of manpower particularly
of those belonging to Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ in all the hospitals. The Committee observed
that many posts of faculty members und senior doctors were lying vacant for many years
mainly because of reasons beyond the control of the hospital/Institute authorities. This
problem is more prominent in JIPMER, Pondicherry, where, ordinarily, nobody is willing
to go. Similarly, in AILPMER, Bombay, the Committee was informed that the faculty
and doctors are reluctant to join mainly because of acute shortage of residential
accommodation. The PGIMER is also not an exception in this regard where unattractive
pay-scales were cited as one of the reasons for Doctors not joining the Institute.

17.1 As regards vacancies in Groups ‘C’ and ‘D’ the Committee was informed that
the process of their recruitment was through the Staff Selection Commission and the
employment exchanges which take unduly long time for selections. In the case of higher
posts, the involvement of various Ministries in sanctioning and filling the posts, prolongs
the process. Faced with such a problem, the Director PGIMER even demanded that the


8

Institute should be vested with the power of creating and filling up all the posts in the
Institute.

17.2 The Committee also found that the increase in the number of doctors over the
years was much more than the Group ‘C’ and ‘D” staff. There is, no doubt, an acute
shortage of such staff in all the hospitals which ultimately is reflected in poor and truncated
services. The Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate number of posts in ‘C’ and
‘D’ categories be provided after assessing the requirement of every hospital at the earliest
and the process of filling the posts at various levels should be reviewed and streamlined so as
to avoid unnecessary delays. Special efforts are needed to ensure that vacancies of teaching
staff and the doctors are filled up as soon as possible.

15. Doctors on Prolonged Deputation

18. The practice of doctors/professors going on deputation, after having had costly and
advance training at government cost and coming back for taking promotion, came to the
notice of the Committee. The Committee deprecates the idea of doctors/professors for
having best of both the worlds, as it is against the very ethics of medical profession. It,
therefore, recommends that the Department should take a serious view in these cases and
discourage such practices.

16. Indiscipline in Hospitals

19. The Committee received a number of complaints about the rude behaviour of a
section of doctors arid staff towards patients and of lower staff with doctors. It also noticed
that, generally, the relationship between the employees and the hospital administration is
not cordial. The Committee noticed, during its visits, that there is a general lack of discipline
and courtesy in various hospitals. Irresponsible unionism has become rampant amongst. the

‘employees of the hospitals which culminates, quite often, in ‘bandhs’ and ‘strikes’ . For
example, PGIMER, Chandigarh, AILMS and Safdarjung have witnessed many such incidents
in the recent past. The Committee noticed that there was no effective grievance redressal
machinery available in any of the hospitals.

19.1 The Committee is of the view thatthe problems between the administration and
the employees should get immediate attention as and when they arise and should not be
allowed to deteriorate. Disruption in hospital services is a very serious matter which should
be avoided at all costs as it is’ ultimately the human life that suffers.

19.2 The Committee, therefore, feels that deterrent punishment, coupled with an
efficient grievances redressal system/mechanism like JCMs in government establishments,
should be provided in each hospital immediately so as to prevent the staff from taking
recourse to strikes, etc. Equally important is the need for an ‘Ombudsman’ type of
machinery at each hospital for looking into patient complaints. Further, the Committee
would suggest that time has come for hospitals to subject themselves to social audit of their
assorted activities.

19.3 The Comittee would also recommend early redefinition of the role and functions of
Hospital Management Boards. Normally, these boards are intended to be responsible for
smooth functioning of all aspects of a hospital’s working. But then, its effectiveness and
credibility are constrained by the fact that they are often (as in AILMS) composed solely of
those responsible for providing hospital services and attending to internal management and
coordination issues. Unless outsiders are also associated with such hospital management
boards, their credibility will not improve, nor will the issue of patient care remain at the
centre of the scheme of things.



17. Lack of Residential Accommodation

20. Lack of residential accommodation is a major problem being faced by all the”

hospitals. Satisfaction level in this regard. both in the case of doctors and staff including
nurses, is very low. The situation with regard to junior and senior resident doctors is still
worse. ?

20.1 When asked as to what the Department was doing to improve the situation in this
regard, the Secretary, Health, informed the Committee that provision had been made for
constructing a “Delhi Nurses’ Colony” in Srinivaspuri for which possession of land had been
taken over. He further informed that the Lt. Governor of Delhi had agreed to give two
acres of land and about 100 quarters in Rohini. Unfortunately, the Ministry of Finance could
not provide funds for this purpose last year.

20.2 The Committee feels that the Ministry of Finance should have made some
provision for this purpose last year so that at least the process of taking over of the land and
the quarters from the Délhi Administration could: have been started. The Committee
strongly recommends that a suitable allocation should be made this year for this purpose at
an appropriate stage. =

20.3 The Committee was also informed by the Secretary, Department of Health, that he
was willing to take up the matter of allocation of land at suitable sites with the D.D.A. and
NOIDA for the purpose of constructing residential quarters for hospital employees.

20.4 The Committee is of the view that doctors and nurses are responsible for running
the patient care services 24 hours and are required to come frequently at odd hours and also
at short notice. If they are provided accommodation in or around the hospital they would be
able to provide an efficient and timely patient care. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that sufficient number of residential units for all categories of employees be provided in the
hospital pools for this purpose. The Department should take up the matter with the Ministry
of Urban Affairs and Employment to get adequate number of quarters earmarked for the
hospital functionaries in the nearby government colonics. The Committee also emphasises
the need for providing adequate hostel accommodation to Resident Doctors and nurses,
preferably within the campus of the hospital itself. The nurses should also be given priority
in the working women’s hostels situated near a hospital.

20.5 The problem of accommodation of doctors and nurses in all Central Government
hospitals deserves to be given priority. Inadequate capital budgets should not stand in the
way of construction of quarters for doctors and nurses, specially at PGIMER, Chandigarh
and JIPMER, Pondicherry, where vacant land is available. In other places, earmarked
general pool accommodation must be sought or if land is available at a distance, group
housing for doctors and nurses must be planned in an integrated way. Reliable transport
provision could be made on a group basis. Investment in such accommodation, in a phased
manner, would ultimately contribute in providing a better patient care.

18. Separate CGHS wings

21. CGHS beneficiaries being located mostly in metropolitan cities, particularly in
Delhi, where a number of Central government hospitals are functioning, deserve a separate
wing for them and their dependants. The Committee found that CGHS wings, provided in
the hospitals particularly in the Safdarjung and Dr. RML hospitals, are not functioning
satisfactorily. It was complained to the Committee that CGHS beneficiaries do not: get
adequate attention and the facilities for which they are entitled to, even after they come duly
referred by their dispensaries. A patient, on an average, has to wait nearly two to four hours
for getting examined by the specialists. This waiting period, the Committee notes, is more
than that in case of the OPD patients.. The Committee is of the view that procedure for
consultation / tests for the CGHS beneficiaries, duly referred by their dispensaries, needs to



10

be reviewed and streamlined by the respective hospitals so as to provide them quick and
efficient services.

19. Senior Citizens

22. The Committee observed that pensioners /Senior citizens, who deserve a priority
treatment, are not getting it in the hospitals. They are also treated like other patients and
are made to wait in the general queue for longer hours despite their advanced age. The
Committee emphasises the need for making special arrangement for senior citizens and
infirms in all the hospitals immediately and it should be ensured that they are not put to any
inconvenience and are provided prompt service.

20. Geriatrics

23. The concept of geriatric clinics in India has not gained momentum although
problems relating to the aged/elderly people in the country are becoming more complex
with the disintegration of joint family system and the fast increase in the number of upper
age people. There is a growing feeling of insecurity, coupled with related health problems,
amongst elderly people. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should
take necessary steps to develop ‘geriatrics’ as a specialised subject, and provide sufficient
number of specialists and infrastructure for opening Geriatric Clinics in all the Central
Government hospitals.

21. Provision for Poor Patients

24. The Committee is deeply concerned about inadequate facilities for treatment of poor
patients for major illnesses, especially those involving various complicated procedures. ‘The
Committee has noted that (a) several major invasive procedures, e.g. cardiac surgery are too
expensive for the poor people (unaffordable even for middle cla (b) there is a wide
disparity, amounting to almost a factor 1 to 3, between private and public hospitals, even at
the lowest priced public hospitals, For most of these life conditions, the patient has to

produce substantial private funds even after contributions are received from the PM’s and °

CM's relief fund, etc. and (c) the costs are unlikely to come down soon.

24.1 While a point of view was expressed by some witnesses that procedure may not be
a likely priority for the poor, the Committee is not impressed with this argument.
Urbanisation and its attendant problems, considerable adulteration in food and drugs,
tensions of a competitive modern life, etc. are some trends increasingly affecting the rich and
the poor alike, except that the poor are subject to the double jeopardy of exposure to both
infectious and non-communicable diseases. Therefore, the Committee would suggest that the
Ministry must. urgently explore all appropriate sources of funds to as: poor patients
coming to AIIMS or other Central Government hospitals for treatment of specific life
threatening illnesses. If a mechanism can be set up, such National Catastrophic Illness
Assistance Fund, then resources can flow from all sources, including private charities and
international agencies and organisations. Besides, there can be many imaginative methods of
requiring both government and private hospitals of a certain size and even profit-making
nursing homes to make earmarked contributions to the fund. Procedures would, of course,
have to be developed to create a decentralised self regulating network of major participating
hospitals to have early and quick help to poor patients.

24,2 In fact, the Committee is of the view that private and corporate hospitals enjoying
duty exemptions or zero duty imports of equipments, etc. have an obligation to provide a
percentage of their services free to the poor so that the latter too may have access to their
specialities. The Committee is aware that such linkages, established earlier on a loose basis,
were not monitored and led to problems in verification. The alternative, a contribution to


abl

the fund as suggested above, may be more transparent and unambiguous. The Committee
would request the Government to consider this suggestion early.

22. Facilities for visitors / attendants

25. It should also be the responsibility of the hospital administration to take care of the
problems of persons accompanying the patients. The Committee, while visiting various
hospitals, noticed that there was total lack of basic facilities for visitors / attendants except in
the PGIMER, Chandigarh, where ‘Janta Sarais’ have been provided for this purpose. These
Sarais have facilities for stay, cooking, washing, etc.

25.1 In a place like Delhi, patients coming from outside face a lot of problems in getting
a suitable accommodation before/after they are admitted to hospital. Most of them are
forced to spend their nights on the footpaths or in make-shift tents in the hospital premises.
The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to construct Dharamshalas / Sarais by the
Government, in association with charitable institutions, who may be interested in this noble
cause. Such institutions should be provided all necessary help in procuring land, etc., on
concessional rates by the Government.

23. Budgets

26. The Committee came across a general complaint about the lack of adequate funds in
all the hospitals visited by it. Lack of funds, in fact, was cited as one of the reasons for
several problems in the hospitals.

26.1 The Committee is of the view that medicine being a growing science, its glittering
technology-led expertise has created increasing expectations among the people. More and
more funds are getting pre-empted by high-tech equipment and sophisticated procedures.
This is accentuated by pressures of doctors and staff who are trained to use and operate such
high technology and, therefore, interested in its promotion on a competitive basis. As a
result, routine maintenance, general needs, minimum hospital requirements, etc., which
directly affect the adequacy and quality of patient care, get crowded out in a period of
steady compression of public expenditure to reduce the fiscal deficit. Results of this trend
have already begun affecting central government hospitals., including the prestigious AIIMS,
which are getting inadequate funds for maintenance and ensuring minimum standards of
cleanliness, consumables and safety.

26.2 The Committee is fully aware of the general resource crunch in the country. It,
however, feels that in view of the need for improving quality and adequacy of medical care,
the Government should explore the possibility of generating/sparing more resources for
allocation to this sector.


PART-II
STATE OF THE HOSPITALS
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), NEW DELHI

AIM 1. The All India Institute of Medical Sciences was established in 1956 as an
autonomous institution of national importance by an Act of Parliament with the objectives
(a) to develop patterns of teaching in under-graduate and post-graduate medical education in
all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical education; (b) to bring
together, in one place, educational fa of the highest order for the training of personnel
in all important branghes of health activity; and (c) to attain self-sufficiency in post-graduate
medical eduction. Accordingly, the Institute has been provided comprehensive facilities for
teaching and research in medical education.

AIM 1.1 As a deemed university, ALIMS conducts teaching programmes in medical and
para-medical courses, both at under-graduate and post-graduate levels, and awards its own
degrees. Teaching and research are conducted in 42 disciplines. In the field of medical
research, AIIMS is the pioneer having more than 600 research publications by its faculty and
researchers in a year. AIIMS also runs a College of Nursing.

AIIMS Hospital

AIM 2. The basic aim of the Institute, however, is not only to develop high standards of
medical education but also to make medical care available to the largest number of people at
minimum cost. The Institute has a modern hospital for this purpose which provides both in-
patient and out-patient services. A 100-bed hospital attached to the Institute was started on
31st December, 1958, in the old hospital building (presently, the Nurses Hostel). The bed
strength of the hospital was increased to 200 during the next year. By the time the present
building of the hospital was occupied in 1967-68, the bed strength of the hospital has gone
up to 569. The present sanctioned bed strength of the main hospital is 865 (Annexure III).

AIM 2.1 General and specialised medical care s
are available at the Institute hospital. Advanced faci for the diagnosis treatment of all
kinds of diseases have been established at the hospital. In addition to general medical and
surgical services, a large number of speciality clinics, including four super speciality centres,
take care of the most complex and intricate cases referred to the Institute hospital from all
over the country, The laboratories supporting the hospital services for diagnostic purposes
are equipped with state-of-the-art instruments.

ices in all the branches of medicine

AIM 2.2: However, burn cases, dog-bite cases and patients suffering from infectious
diseases dre not entertained in the AIIMS hospital. AIIMS also manages a 60-bed
Comprehensive Rural Health Centre at Ballabhgarh in Haryana and provides health cover to
about 2.5 lakh population through the Centre in Community Medicine.

OPD Services

AIM 3. The Hospital runs 13 General OPDs and 59 Speciality Clinics. Normally, the
General OPDs are held in the morning and the Speciality Clinics in the afternoon.

AIM 3.1 The total OPD attendance during 1978-79 was 6,70,381, and after 10 years, in
1988-89, this attendance had gone up to 11.05,125. In 1993-94, the OPD attendance in the
main hospital was 12,34,811, including casualty attendance. The figures stood at 17,68,698 in
1994-95 when the OPD attendance at the main hospital and the speciality centres is put
together, which means 5,895 patients attend, on an average, various OPDs of AIIMS every
day (Annexure IV).

AIM 3.2 There is a separate OPD for the AIIMS staff and their dependents where

12


ra

13

patients are registered and examined in the morning, as well as in the evening. It is called
“Employees’ Health Scheme” (EHS OPD).

Casualty Services

AIM 4. The casualty of the hospital provides round the clock service for expeditious
treatment of all medical, surgical and medico-legal emergencies that come to it

AIM 4.1 The total number of patients who attended the casualty and the operations
performed in the operation theatre is given below:

Year Casualty attendance No. of emergency operations
(major & minor)

1978-79 39.924 4,037
1988-89 91,480 6,638
1993-94 108,894 8,289
Admissions

AIM 5. The number of admissions in the hospital during 1978-79 was 22,078 which,
after 10 years, went up to 43,966 in 1988-89. Similarly, this figure in 1984 was 36,412. In the
year 1994, the number of admissions increased to 55,110.

Operations

AIM 6. The number of operations performed in the AIIMS hospital in the year 1984-85
was 59,473 of which, 9,432 were major and 50,041 minor, constituting 16 percent and 84 per
cent respectively. The number of operations in 1994 went up to 75,526 of which 20 per cent
constituted minor and 80 per cent major operations (Annexure LV).

Committee’s Visit

AIM 7. The Committee visited the All India Institute of Medical Sciences on October
26, 1994. It found almost all the Departments and Wards extremely crowded, stretching to
the utmost the services provided by the Institute. The waiting period for out-patients ranged
between one to two hours. :

AIM 7.1 Shifting of the Outpatient and Casualty wings outside the Institute’s premises,
provision of more funds for expansion and strengthening of infrastructural facilities, effecting
better coordination between the four Centres of the Institute, career planning for Doctors
and employees, treatment of the poor and restoration of the status of the Institute as the
country’s top referral body, as originally conceived, and related matters figured in the
discussions held by the Committee with the officials of the Institute.

Overcrowding

AIM 8. The Director, AIIMS, informed the Committee that during 1993-94, 1.7 million
patients came to the hospital for treatment while it was equipped to treat, satisfactorily, not
more than six lakhs patients. It was argued that the Institute, because of overcrowding, is
facing an acute shortage of space. It has already been decided that the existing OPD
alongwith basic testing facilities, should be shifted to a 14.5 acre area in a nearby locality,
Rajnagar, so that indoor-patients could be provided proper medical facilities at the Institute
The foundation stone of this OPD has already been laid and it is expected to come up in
about five years

AIM 8.1 The Committee feels that no progress is likely to be made, unless some
crucial, initial steps are taken right now to mitigate, if not eliminate, overcrowding in OPD
The Committee emphasises the need for consciously trying to bring down the waiting time
and making testing facilities easily accessible and cheaper. The Committee would also

+)RS3358


14

emphasise that for making the AIIMS a purely referral hospital, efforts must be made to
coordinate various planning decisions at the Centre and in the States and to ensure adequate
and timely allocation of funds for the development of selected peripheral hospitals around
Delhi and in the neighbouring States, which will contain the bulk of the admission rush to
AIIMS. A system of deputing senior specialists, from AIIMS to the peripheral hospitals as
visiting professor / faculties to help raise the standard of patient care may be considered.

Linkage between AIIMS and Safdarjung Hospital

AIM9. As regards the AIIMS, the Committee was made aware of the original idea of
having a linkage between the AIIMS and the Safdarjung Hospital, with the latter acting as
the focus for primary treatment and a reference for complicated cases to be sent to AIIMS.

AIM9.1 It seems to be, at first sight, an attractive idea but much scepticism was
expressed during the evidence before the Committee, whether it can be a practical
proposition now, especially in view of the growth of parallel specialities and superspecialities
in both the hospitals. The Committee feels, however, that the possibility should continue to
be kept in mind and explored because it would enable an integrated view of cost effective
use of resources and demonstrate as to how an effective referral system can be developed.

AIM9.2 The Committee is fully aware of the availability of considerable competence
and expertise in Safdarjung Hospital in selected specialised areas which had been built up
over nearly four decades. But, in a period of constrained public resources, it would be
proper for the Department of Health not to ignore any opportunity at integrated
development of expensive facilities, when patient convenience can also be enhanced. It
should not be beyond human ingenuity: to work out a reasonable understanding of details
with all concerned. While the intention of the Committee is not to allow the specialisation
built up in Safdarjung to wither away, it emphasises the fact that the facilities in 511५5 and
Safdarjung should be complementary and supplementary to each other and duplication of
facilities be avoided to the extent possible.

Continuance / closure of undergraduate education

AIM10. At this stage, the Committee would like to advert to a related issue of the
continuance or closure of undergraduate education at AIIMS hospital, because it was
pointed out to the Committee that AIIMS can not become purely a referral institute, as long
as it continues to provide undergraduate medical education, which implies that all types of
cases have perforce to be treated at AIIMS to provide medical experience to students.

AIM10.1 Argument in favour of continuing with undergraduate education at AIIMS
seems to be that its mandate includes the promotion of excellence in medical education and
associated curriculum development, orientation in pedagogue methods etc., so as to serve as
a pace-setter in medical education, demonstrating successful new approaches to curriculum
development, educational changes and ethical concerns which can be adopted by all the
medical educational institutions in the country.

AIM10.2 The key argument against continuing undergraduate education at AIIMS. is
that it makes a significant contribution to overcrowding at the Institute, but under-graduate
students need to attend to general cases to enable them to acquire adequate clinical training.
If in the process, it increased overcrowding and limits the referral role of AIIMS, this cannot
be helped.

AIM10.3 The Committee has given much thought to this matter, and links that seem to
exist among unbearable overcrowding levels, undergraduates’ educational needs and
constraints on referral status. The Committee is of the view that the Department must, on
balance, and taking a long term view of the sustainability of high level of competence at

)RS3358


15

AIIMS, relocate the undergraduate seats at an alternative institutions taking them away
from ALIMS. Indeed, Safdarjung hospital itself could accommodate the fifty seats’ taken
away from ALIMS. Safdarjung was a teaching institution itself till recently, affiliated to
University College of Medical Sciences (UCMS). Many witnesses felt that taking away
undergraduate education from AIMS may have to be considered as a necessary policy
change at the present state of development and problems faced by AIIMS; as Health
Secretary himself admitted that there could always be possibilities to relocate the fifty seats
in other Medical Colleges in Delhi if transfer to Safdarjung presented problems.

AIM10.4 The Committee would, therefore, recommend that serious thought should be
given to early possibility of doing away with the undergraduate education at AIIMS, more so
because of the need to restore the referral character of the Institute. If overcrowding at
ALIMS is to be tackled effectively, we should not accentuate the problem by provision of
general medical care merely to provide for undergraduate education.

AIM10.5 While the Committee is impressed by the excellence that AIIMS continues to
be known for, it would certainly be in the interest of the public health that bright minds
from various medical colleges all over the country continue to avail of the specialities of
AIIMS at the postgraduate level.

Need for an Integrated Command Structure

AIMI11. The Committee would stress the need for a more coherent and integrated
command structure within AIIMS (including its various associated centres) in the interest of
efficiency and better patient care. In this regard, the Institute seems to have reached its
optimal level, both from space and the management considerations. Within the Institute,
several Centres operate catering to special needs and disciplines. There are differences
between the Centres in regard to degree of delegation of powers, oversight, and
accountability. The Committee was told that there does not seem to be adequate horizontal
communication between Centres and the Departments and collegiate culture in decision
making. There is no cgordination among various wings of Institute,

AIM11.1 Ina prestigious institution like AIIMS, there are competing demands among
disciplines and Departments, for space, beds, budgets, use of equipment and other facilities.
The limits imposed on non-plan expenditure are always too severe, especially in the current
phase of compression of public expenditure and inflationary pressures. As a consequence,
maintenance and hospital routines have suffered considerably. The planning process also
does not always seem to lead- to optimal distribution of resources within and among
institutions which leads to mal-utilisation and wastage of resources and facilities. Cases were
brought to the notice of the Committee regarding lack of balance in investment. between
equipment, personnel and maintenance needs. Such problems require to be sorted out, case
by case, in time, through systematic coordination which, in turn, depends on a dynamic and
coherent chain of command. है

AIM11.2 The Committee recognises the difficulty in evolving such a command structure
in an institution of high competence like AIIMS and other Central Government institutions.
But, while such a command cannot be constructed in a bureaucratic fashion, it must Temain
sensitive to the fact that these institutions must have adequate freedom of action, so that
they are able to develop a sense of pride and team work to aim at excellence in medical
care, education and research. For this purpose the Committee would suggest that the
Government should urgently review how a structure composed of collegiate and interactive
leadership, greater transparent relationships and channels of easy communication ‘between
different levels of faculty, between faculty and students and among various centres and
discipline can be brought about within a year or so.


16

AIM11.3 The Committee would endorse the danger pointed out by an eminent witness
who feared that if the current stresses bearing on the Institute continue, it may affect quality
of care and leadership in the field of medicine and health. The Committee takes a serious
note of a widely shared view that morale of individuals on AIIMS faculty, is low because of
instances of individuals with proximity to high places, disturbing the evolution of a coherent
command structure and creating handicaps to the’ evolution of a harmonious collegiate policy
and decision making, so urgently needed at AIIMS.

Decentralisation of Facilities

AIM12. Furthermore, the Committee would recommend the development in the
Ministry of an independent data base of technology developments (and associated unit cost)
in medical care, so that comparative unit cost for hospital procedure and_ routines at
different locations, can be examined to ensure costs-effective use of resources. There could
always be a case for concentrating expertise in one or a few institutions on sound grounds of
need and economies of scale and scope, but in a large country, there is a need for wider
dispersal. In fact, wherever repeated requests are made by Members of Parliament, for
example, either for a new All India Institute or for branches of AIIMS to be set up in
different parts of India, what is conveyed is the feeling that in a vast country like India,
‘technological frontiers and opportunities for state-of-the-art cure in medicine should be
dispersed among a variety of institutions, both public and private, in different parts of India,
and regulated through a framework of coordinated promotion.

Need for a Technology Assessment Group

AIM13. Having regard to the main goal of AIIMS viz to promote the growth of
excellence in medical education research and care, the Committee would suggest setting up
of an independent technology ssment group to look at directions of future development
in medical science, relevant to our epidemiological problems. In respect of disciplines
available at the Institute and at different Institutions of excellence all over the country, the
group could be asked to suggest a framework for their future growth path, avoiding needless
duplication, and ensuring optimum utilisation of facilities in Government hospitals. The
group should consider the plans of all known premier public and private institutions in
metropolitan cities and State capitals, starting with the network of larger hospitals at Delhi.
In the Committee's view, such an exercise may help avoid duplication of facilities and
wasteful repetitive investment in high cost equipment and facilities which need to be cost-
effectively utilised. All such investment will not only be expensive to instal but will
inevitably tie up future investments also, almost compulsorily, in their own favour because of
the prior investment made in them.

Autonomy of the Institute

AIM14. The AIIMS was set up as an autonomous Institute by an Act of Parliament.
The Act had envisaged an Institute Body and a Governing Body at its apex and there was a
tradition of government nominating the Minister of Health as its President. The Committee
would like to note that the advantages and disadvantages of this tradition have been debated
from time to time but there has been no departure from the traditional practice, nor could
the argument been clinched either way.

AIM14.1 The Committee has given serious thought to the conflicting views available on
the utility and propriety of continuing with the practice of the Health Minister being
nominated as the President of the Institute. This has been stretched so far that even after
demitting office, the ex-Minister continues to remain the Institute’s President. The
arguments in favour briefly appear to be that this was initiated in the past so that such


17

Ministerial presence may increase the influence of the Institute in governmental circles.
It has also been argued that there is nothing in the Act to prohibit the Minister from
being nominated -as President.

AIM14.2 It may be pointed out that the Act does not, at the same time, provide
that the Minister would be ex-officio President of the Institute, which could easily have
been done had such been the intention. On the other hand, there is much evidence, to
the contrary, particulary from eminent witnesses closely associated with the growth of
AIIMS. They are of the firm opinion that neither the Health Minister nor the Health
Secretary should be nominated as a member of the Institute Body. Instead, the only ex-
officio members should be the Director-General of Health Services and the Finance
Advisor in their official capacities and the Minister and the Secretary should keep out
of any direct involvement in bodies charged with manning of the AIIMS and its day to
day working. The advantage would be that not being directly involved and thus
becoming party to the Institute Body’s decision, the Minister and the Secretary would
be able to assess matters objectively and hold the Institute body accountable to
performance.

AIM14.3 As regards the President's post. an appropriately eminent person drawn
from the profession, can be appointed as member of the Institute Body and later
nominated as President, as has been done in IIMs, ITs and Chitra Tirunal Institute at
Trivandrum. It has been argued that the advantage of such a course would be that
government and Institute would find their respective roles distinct, without either undue
government interference or without the Institute abdicating its responsibility.

AIM14.4 The Committee has noted that recently a one-man enquiry committee had
gone into the question and come to the conclusion, much to the Committee’s dismay,
that the present tradition to nominate the Health Minister as President of the Institute
Body deserves to be converted into a formal arrangement under which the Minister
could always be ex-officio President.

AIM14.5 After careful consideration of all aspects of the matter and after taking
into account the practice among other institutions of excellence, set up by the
government, the Committee would unequivocally recommend ‘that the Government
should not accept the view of the said enquiry committee and, if possible, formally
terminate the arrangement under which the Health Minister and Health Secretary are
appointed as Members of the Institute's Board. Unless such changes in policy"are made,
it is not possible to ensure autonomy of the Institute in practice. ५५.

aa
Gynaecology and Obstetrics as

AIMI15. The Gynaecology and Obstetrics ward was highly crowded. About 400
patients, the Committee was informed, visit Gynae OPD everyday, who have to wait
for hours to get examined. There is an acute shortage of space as well-as beds in the
ward. More than two patients have to share the same bed alongwith the just-born
babies. As a result, infection risk, both for the mothers and the neonates, is very high,
post-partum cases are accommodated in the fire escape area due to lack of space.

AIM15.1 Equipments such as Ultrasonography were over-used and needed
replacement. The Committee was informed that a research and training centre, run with
the WHO assistance, had been closed down. Despite the basic infrastructure for in-vitro
fertilisation being available, it could not be used for lack of funds.

AIMIS.2 The Committee, therefore emphasises the need for (a) providing more
beds in the Gynae and Obstetrics ward; (b) expanding and modernising the Nursery;


18

(c) replacing the overused and old equipments; and (d) encouraging research and training in
the Department.

Strengthening Department of Renal Sciences

AIM16. The Committee found the fucilities/infrastructure in Nephrology Wards
inadequate. The Committee was informed that the existing facilities, including beds in the
wards, are just enough for only one-fourth of the patients needing immediate admission.
‘These facilities, the Committee learnt, are shared by the patients of Urology also. As a
result, even the serious patients and those requiring dialysis, have to wait for weeks for
admission.

AIM16.1 Increasing incidence of diabetes and stress-related diseases like hypertension,
due mainly to fast changing life style and high level of pollution, the number of persons
having renal problem is growing at an alarming rate. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends to expand/strengthen facilities in the wards and also to provide modern
infrastructure for research and training in the Department of Renal Sciences at the earliest.

Previous Parliamentary Scrutiny

AIM17. The Estimates Committee of Lok Sabha had examined the functioning of
AIIMS twice: (during the Sth and 8th Lok Sabha) and had come out with many
recommendations in regard to increasing management efficiency and patients’ convenience.
The Director, AIIMS, informed the Committee that the progress made in implementing
them has not been satisfactory. The Committee would like the Department to initiate actions
immediately in regard to the key recommendations of the Estimates Committee contained in
Annexures V and VI

Budget

AIM18. The Committee noted that during 1994-95, against an allocation of Rs. 81
crores at BE stage, the Institute was provided Rs. 83 crores in the RE. During 1995-96, the
Institute has been allocated Rs. 89.29 crores, as against the demand of Rs.110 crores. It was
contended by the Ministry that keeping in mind the availability of funds and the trend of
expenditure, the allocation made to the Institute for the year 1995-96 seems to be adequate.

AIM18.1 The Director, AIIMS, informed the Committee that, over the years, while the
expenditure of the Institute had increased tremendoysly, there had not been a corresponding
increase in the funds made available to it. While in 1977 the Institute was spending 20 per
cent of its total expenditure on treatment of patients, this has been reduced now to about 5
per cent only. It was argued by the Director, AIIMS that the annual increase in the budget
in fact gets neutralised by the existing rate of inflation. He suggested full neutralisation of
non-plan allocation as against the existing partial neutralisation: :

AIM18.2 The Committee was also apprised of the constraints under which the Institute
was functioning, such as inadequate water supply, lack of infrastructure facilities and
inadequate funds required for immediate replacement of equipnients, . etc.

AIM18.3 The Committee agrees with the suggestion given by the Director, AIIMS, and
strongly recommends that the inflation on non-plan expenditure should be taken into

_ consideration while allocating funds not only to the AIIMS but also to all the Central
Government Hospitals.


POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH

PGI 1. The Post-graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER)
started functioning at Chandigarh in June, 1966, originally under the Government of
undivided Punjab. After the reorganisation of the State, however, the administrative
control of the Institute passed on to the Union Territory of Chandigarh in November,
1966. It was declared as un autonomous institute of national importance by an Act of
Parliament (Act 51 of 1966) in April, 1967. The Institute is now functioning under the
administrative control of the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, Government of India. i

PGI 1.1 The main objectives of the Institute are (i) to train post-graduate students in all
branches of medicines; (ii) to conduct research of the highest order; and (iii) to provide
patient care of a high standard. The PGIMER conducts post-graduate and post-doctoral
courses in almost all disciplines of medical sciences. It also imparts training and conducts
courses in’ para-medical and medical technologies. It proposes to start MD in Physical
Medicine and BSc in Physiotherapy shortly,

PGIMER Hospital

PGI 2. The PGI hospital, known as Nehru Hospital, extends medical facilities to the
people of Chandigarh and the rieighbouring States of Haryana, Punjab and Jammu &
Kashmir. It provides comprehensive services in various fields of medical care. The
important statistics regarding major services provided in the hospital during the year 1994
is contained in Annexure VII.

Committee’s Visit

PGI 3. The committee visited the PGIMER, Chandigarh, on December 28, 1994, and
went round various wards and Departments to have a first hand information regarding the
facilities and services being provided there. During the course of its visit, the Committee
found that most of the wards were crowded. It was also observed that the Departments of
Obstetrics & Gynaecology and Paediatrics were acutely short of beds. The general lay-out
and upkeep of the hospital was, however, found to be satisfactory, except those
Departments which were found to be highly crowded, The Committee noted that
arrangements for the treatment and facilities provided to the patients in this Institute were
comparatively better. The Committee found that “Janta Sarai” meant for patients and their
relatives was a unique feature of the Institute. The Committee inspected the Sarai, saw the
general arrangement for staying, washing, cooking, etc., and found them useful and
comfortable.

PGI 3.1 The committee, after visiting various places in the hospital held discussions
with the Director, Heads of Departments and officials of the Institute. Issues such as
increasing the bed capacity, installation of modern equipment in certain Departments, need
to have a separate OPD block, vacancy in certain categories of posts, lack of residential
accommodation and adequate hostels were discussed. The Committee also met the
employees’ union (s), Nurses and Resident Doctors’ associations and heard their
grievances. ‘

19


20

Separate OPD

PGI 4. The PGIMER, Chandigarh, is not an exception to the general malady of
overcrowding in the hospitals. As is evident from the statistics provided above, the average
number of outdoor patients visiting the OPD is,very high, which affects the efficiency and
quality of services provided by the hospital. In view of this, the committee emphasises the
need to have a separate OPD and Emergency, with essential testing facilities etc., away from
the main Institute, in order to avoid overcrowding. The committee was informed that a
separate OPD Block was coming up. Construction of this OPD should be expedited.

Referral Character

PGI 5. Need to restore the referral status, which has been lost mainly due to
overcrowding in the Institute, was also emphasised by all sections of the Institute. It was
argued that due to non-development of services in the Medical Colleges and hospitals in the
neighbouring States, patients with ordinary illness also come directly to this Institute. The
committee feels that one remedy could be to strengthen services in those Medical Colleges
so that rush to the Institute can be contained. The concerned State Governments, the
committee feels, should display due interest in developing health facilities in their areas on a
priority basis.

Chandigarh Medical College

PGI 6. The Committee was informed that the Chandigarh Medical College is proposed
to have a 500-beded hospital but its progress has been disappointingly slow. The Director/
Principal of this medical college, who is also the Secretary, Medical Education, Chandigarh
Administration, informed the Committee that the progress in this regard was very slow
mainly due to paucity of funds. The Committee was given to understand that responsibility
for the slow progress in this regard lay onthe part of Union Ministries of Finance and
Health and Family welfare. It was argued that once this hospital comes up, the burden on
the PGI hospital would be reduced to a great extent. The committee, therefore, feels that
the necessary formalities and requirements towards establishing this hospital, which has
already been unduly delayed, should be completed by the Department in consultation with
the concerned Ministries/Departments. Ministry of Finance should make necessary
allocations for the proposed hospital so that it is set up within the next two years.

More beds in Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology

PGI 7. The Committee found that the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology has
got only 92 beds with an occupancy rate of 107.5% which, by any standard, is very high.
The committee saw two, and sometimes more than two patients, sharing the same bed in
this Department. It therefore, is of the view that the number of beds in this Department
needs to be increased suitably so that the resulting complications and inconvenience to
patients is avoided. ,

High death rate

PGI 8, The Committee also noted that death rate in the Institute is as high as 7.6%.
When asked, the Director, PGI informed that it was mainly because of extremist violence
and patients being brought at a very late stage. The Committee is deeply concerned at such
high death rate in the Institute.

Vacancies in staff. strength

PGI 9. The committee was informed that 176 posts in different categories, including
those of Professors and Asstt. Professors, were lying vacant for a very long time. It was also
stated that selections for 13 posts of Professors had been held up for more than three years.
On being asked, the commitee was informed that it was mainly due to lack of autonomy in
this regard; lengthy prodcedure for creation/sanctioning of posts; lack of housing and
unattractive pay and allowances to the Doctors and Professors. For instance, even adhoc
appointments against Class Il posts are required to be cleared by the President of the


21

Institute, after thorough scrutiny by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Govt. of
India. All Class 1 posts require the sanction of Department of Expenditure Government of
India before they can be created. Earlier, posts of Professors only needed such clearance. It
was submitted that the Institute’s Governing Body should be fully empowered to create all
posts within the sanctioned plan budget to avoid unnecessary delays in appointments.

PGI 9.1 A demand to give to the Director, PGIMER, all the powers which are enjoyed
by the Vice-Chancellor of a University, was also voiced before the Committee. The
Committee expresses its deep concern about vacancies in teaching positions, as well as in
Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts, remaining unfilled for long periods. The Committee recommends
that immediate steps should be taken to fill up the vacancies. The Committee feels that the
suggestions of the Director, PGIMER, regarding appointments to all Class I posts by the
Institute’s Body and providing more autonomy to the Director need serious consideration by
the Department.

College of Nursing

PGI 9A. The College of Nursing, the Committee was informed, is facing acute shortage
of faculty members. Besides, there is a lot of resentment among them due to stagnation in
cadre structure and discripancies in their pay-scales. Most of the faculty members of the
college who joined as Lecturers 15 to 18 years ago, are still continuing in the same post,
inspite of the-recommendations/directions of the PGI Academic Committee and the PGI
Governing Body in this regard. The pay scale of the Principal of the college is lower than
that of an Assistant Professor.

In view of the above, the Committee feels that the Department appears to have adopted
an indifferent attitude to the grievances of the faculty members. It is surprising that a proper
cadre structure for the college has never been planned: The Committee recommends that the
Department should implement all the relevant recommendationsMirections of various bodies
mentioned above. Efforts should also be made for creating adequate posts in the college as
recommended by the Nursing Council of India.

Private practice by doctors

PGI 10. The need to allow Professors and Doctors to practise privately, on sharing basis
with the Institute, was suggested as one of the measures to retain and also to attract
qualified doctors and specialists, to the Institute. The Committee does not agree with the
proposition and feels that this suggestion, if implemented, would give rise to more problems
than it intends to solve.

Residential accommodation

PGI 11. Residential accommodations in PGIMER, the Committee was informed, is
available to about 27 per cent of its employees. The committee, during its visit, found that
some residential houses for staff were under construction. The committee, however, feels
that the satisfaction level in this regard is very low and it needs to be improved suitably. The
Committee recommends that suitable provisions be made in the budget of the Institute next
year for constructing residential quarters for which enough space is available in the premises
of the Institute.

Regional Cancer Centre/Trauma Centre

PGI 12. During its discussions with the officials the need for strengthening and
expanding the Cancer Centre and the Neuro-Surgery Centre in the Institute was emphasised.
The Director informed the Committee that the Cancer Centre was being developed with
their own efforts and that no specific allocation was being made for it.

1)53358


22

PGI 12.1 In view of increasing cases of Cancer, the Committee feels that the demand
for upgrading its Radiotherapy Department into a Regional Cancer Centre appears to be
justified.

PGI 12.2 The Committee was also apprised of the need to have a fully developed
Trauma Centre in the Institute. In the wake of more road accidents and extremist activities
in Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir, which form the Institute’s hinterland areas, the
Committee feels, there is a dire need for providing a Trauma Centre and also for
strengthening the Neuro-Surgery Centre in the Institute. The Committee, therefore strongly
recommends provision of adequate funds and other facilities at the earliest (i) for upgrading
Radiotherapy Department into a Regional Cancer Centre, (ii) providing a Trauma Centre
and (iii) for strengthening the Neuro-Surgery Centre.

Lithotripsy and MRI

PGI 13. The Committee was surprised to learn that there were no facilities for
Lithotripsy and MRI in this premier Institute. The Committee feels that the facilities
mentioned above be provided to the Institute early.

Janta Sarai

PGI 14. The Committee places on record i
provided at the Institute for stay, cooking, washing, etc., by patients and attendants. The
Committee found these ‘Sarais’ to be very useful and comfortable and feels that such Sarais
should be provided in all Central Government hospitals. Charitable Trusts and other such
ies should be approached for running such “Sarais” or “Dharamshalas” in the campus, if
ible, otherwise in the vicinity of the hospitals. The Government should provide
necessary facilities/concessions in/procuring land, etc., to the bodies/institutions interested
in the matter.

appreciation of the “Janta Sarai” facilities

Library

PGL 15. while going around the Library, the Committee noticed that books, particularly
the new arrivals, were not properly displayed. Older books were found in very bad shape.
The Committee feels that most of them need binding. It was found from the visitors’ book
that not many readers were visiting the Library. The Committee found very few students in
the reading room. The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation given in this regard
and feels that there is a need for looking into the reasons for the Library not attracting good
number of readers and improving its working.

Lack of discipline

PGI 16. During its meeting with the representatives of employees and other associations
of the Institute, the Committee realised that the employees did not have cordial relations
with the Institute authorities. Warring factions of employees’ associations traded charges ~
against each other, particularly against the Director of the Institute on different counts. The
Committee was informed that various categories of staff and Resident Doctors had gone on
strike several times in the recent past. One particular incident involving nurses and security
staff was brought to the notice of the Committee. Cases have gone to the Court even.

PGI 16.1 The Committee deeply concerned about indiscipline and lawlessness
prevailing in the campus’ which adversely affects the functioning of the Institute. The
Committee found that there is no proper grievance redressal machinery in the Institute. The
Joint Consultative Machinery (JCM) is non-existent. The Committee feels that there is
urgent need for creating a better understanding between the authorities and employees of
the Institute. It, therefore, emphasises the need for reviving the JCM urgently. The hospital

{
RSE


23

ration, the Committee feels, needs to be more flexible and transparent in its
functioning.
Resident Doctors

PGI 17. The Doctors’ Association complained of lack of modern equipment and
facilities for having seminars and symposia, decent pay-scales and adequate residential
accommodation. The Association of Resident Doctors highlighted demands such as long
duty' hours, experience as Junior Residents not counted for promotions, low amount of book
contingency, reserve ‘vacancies not being filled up, etc. The points raised by them, the
Committee feels, deserve immediate and sympathetic consideration by the Government.

Budget

PGI 18. The Committee was informed that the plan allocation in the BE 1994-95 was
Rs. 17 crores. In the 8.8 1995-96 the Institute has been given Rs. 18 crores against an
amount of Rs. 24.60 crores denyanded under Plan which included allocation of Rs. 10.13
crores for capital works. In addition, the Institute requested for allocation of Rs. 15.00
crores for the following five schemes:—

- Hostel for Men Rs. 1.50 crores

2. Slab in the Old Library and partitioning of Rs. 0.50 crores
space

3. MRI Rs. 5.00 crores

. Paediatric Centre Rs. 6.00 crores

5. New Coronary/CT Care Unit Rs. 2.00 crores

Rs. 15.00 crores

PGI 18.1 It was explained by the Department that the request for additional allocation
of Rs. 15 crores for new schemes, however, could not be accepted, as they were not
included in the 8th Five Year Plan. The Secretary, Department of Health, pointed out that
the Institute had been given Rs. 10 crores out of the German aid for buying equipments.
Within this outlay of Rs. 18 crores, he suggested, they could reprioritise their works and
take up some of the schemes mentioned above.

PGI 18.2 The Committee feels that the demand of the Institute for more funds for
taking up new projects appears to be justified and recommends that the Department should
provide the required amount at an appropriate stage.


JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION AND
RESEARCH (JIPMER), PONDICHERRY

गए 1..' Jawaharlal Institute of Post-graduate Medical Education and. Research
(JIPMER), Pandicherry, is under the administrative control of the Ministry of Health’and
Family, Welfare and provides comprehensive health care to the community, besides
promoting the high standards of medical education and research. JIPMER traces its origin to
November, 1956, when the ‘Ecole De Medicine De Pondicherry’ established by the French
Government, was taken over by the Government of India in the wake of the ‘de facto’
transfer of Pondicherry. In 1964, this Institution was upgraded as a regional centre and
named as Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research,

JIP 1.1 JIPMER is affiliated to the Central University of Pondicherry and conducts
under-graduate, post-graduate and post-doctoral courses in various disciplines of medical
sciences. Post-graduate courses in higher specialities, such as Cardiology, Plastic Surgery
etc., are also proposed to be started in the near future.

JIPMER Hospital

JIP 2. JIPMER Hospital caters to the health care needs of the people of Pondicherry
and the neighbouring areas of Tamil Nadu, free of cost. For rendering good patient care, the
hospital has many specialised facilities, such as. Cardiothoracic Surgery, Plastic Surgery,
Paediatric Surgery, Urology, Cardiology, etc. The hospital has many sophisticated
equipments, such as, CT Scan, Ultrasound instruments, Autoanalyser, Cobalt 60
Teletherapy, etc. A Cardiac Cath Lab is expected to be installed soon.

JIP 2.1 The hospital also runs some special clinics for Cancer, Endocrinology,
Cardiology, Paediatric, etc. The JIPMER also runs mobile health clinic vehicles, meant to
take medicine to the door steps of the villagers under the Re-orientation of Medical
Education Programme (popularly known as ROME SCHEME).

JIP 2.2 JIPMER Hospital provides some special facilities like lockers in the cloak room
for the benefit of patients. The hospital maintains a ‘Poor Patient's Fund’ for providing
financial assistance to poor patients to purchase medicines, creches, etc. and to ‘meet
transport and funeral expenses. There are three rest houses for the benefit of poor patients
who do not need hospitalisation but need short spells of treatment, and also for those
waiting for hospital admission.

JIP 2.3 During the year 1994, 12,08.418 outpatients and 32,747 inpatients were treated

in the hospital. The daily average OPD casualty attendance is around 4343. The present bed
strength of the hospital is 860, inclusive of 65 paying beds (see Annexure VIII).

Facilities in the Waiting Room

JIP 3. The Committee, while visiting the Institute on January 17,1995, noticed that the
waiting room of the OPD was crammed and the space was not adequate. Chairs/benches
provided there were very old and insufficient. There was no facility for attendants and
relatives of patients who were found squatting in the open lawns. The Committee feels that
adequate facilities should be provided in the waiting hall and steps taken to clean and
beautify its campus at the earliest.

Use of Computers
JIP 4. Medical record keeping system, though ofganised, appeared to be archaic and
the Committee found that computers were not being used for this purpose. The Committee

was informed that the entire hospital services were being centrally computerised. The
Committee feels that the progress in this respect is very slow and needs to be expedited.

24


25

Neuro-Surgery Department

JIP 5. The Committee was surprised to note that the hospital of the Institute, which
also runs graduate and post-graduate courses, does not have a Neuro-surgery Department
and facility for kidney transplant. The Committee was informed that a proposal for
providing these services was pending with the government. The Committee recommends that
the proposal should be considered and cleared without further delay.

Existing beds
JIP 6. The Committee noticed that patients were facing a lot of difficulty due to

shortage of beds in Obstetrics & Gynaecology and Medicine wards. The Committee suggests
that extra beds should be provided in these Departments on priority basis.
New OPD block

JIP 7. The Committee is of the view that the OPD and Emergency services in the
hospital are inadequate and need to be expanded and improved. The Committee was
informed that government had sanctioned the construction of a new Casualty Block at an
estimated cost of Rs. 601.93 lakhs but the work was yet to be started. The Committee
recommends that construction work should be taken up immediately.

Granting autonomy

JIP 8. The question of granting autonomy to the Institute was also discussed which
evoked mixed response from the Institute/hospital community. While it was opposed by the
Employees’ Association, the students and the faculty members welcomed it. The Committee
feels that granting autonomy could be conducive to the progress of the Institute and there is
a need to initiate the process after convincing the employees in this regard.

Residential accommodation

JIP 9. The Committee was informed that there is an acute shortage of residential
accommodation for the faculty members/doctors and the Group ‘C’ and ‘D” staff. For nearly
2168 Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ staff in the hospital, only 294 quarters are available. Thus, only 13.1
per cent of its employees have a chance to get accommodation. The Committee is of the
view that, in a remote place such as Pondicherry, getting accommodation is very difficult and
costly. Hospital staff doing emergency duty informed the Committee that they were facing
lots of problems on this count. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for
providing adequate number of quarters for all categories of staff.

Auditorium etc.

i ‘
JIP 10, Absence of facilities for recreation, such as an Auditorium and infrastructure
for indoor games etc. for students was also brought to the notice of the Committee. The
Committee feels that these facilities should be provided at the earliest.

Vacancies in Staff positions

JIP 11. The Committee was informed about the vacancies in the teaching staff,
particularly in Departments like Radiodiagnosis. ENT, Orthopaedics and Dentistry. Out of
the sanctioned strength of 119 in the Faculty, the Committee was informed, the existing
strength was only 93. The Committee is distressed to note that a-large number of faculty
positions are lying vacant for sufficiently long time and that nothing could be done in this
regard despite several efforts made by the hospital authorities and the students. The
Committee notes with serious concern that against a total number of 2753 posts, sanctioned
for the Institute, the existing strength is 2527, viz. 226 posts are lying vacant. The
Committee feels that vacancies in teaching staff and those in Groups ‘C’ & ‘D’, affect



26

adversely not only the quality of medical education but also patient care. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that all-out efforts be made to fill up the existing vacancies without
further delay.

JIP 11.1 One of the reasons given for vacancies not being filled up promptly was that
nobody wants to serve in this remote corner of the country. The director of the Institute
argued that some definite transfer policy’ would have to be laid down for improving the
situation. It could be done, he argued, by resorting to transfer of faculty members from
three institutions i.e. Lady Hardinge Medical College (LHMC), Maulana Azad Medical
College and University College of Medical Sciences, Delhi. When asked about its possibility,
the Director, Medical Education, accompanying the Committee, stated that such transfers
were possible. The Committee,, therefore, suggests that this proposal should be considered in
all its aspects and implemented at the earliest.

JIP 11.2 Abnormal delay in the sanction of posts by the government was also brought
to the notice of the Committee. It was informed that a proposal for creating posts, as
recommended by the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU), was pending with the Government. The
Committee feels that there is an urgent need for sanctioning those posts and recommends
that the proposal of the SIU needs expeditious disposal.

Budget

JIP 12. The Committee noted that JIPMER was allocated Rs. 5 crores in the BE of
1994-95, which was raised to Rs. 9.02"crores at the RE stage. The Committee further noted
that Rs. 5 crores have been provided in the BE of the year 1995-96 also, When asked, the
Committee was informed that the amount given at the RE level in the year 1994-95 included
an amount of Rs. 3 crores provided out of German Aid for buying equipments, etc. The
Committee was further informed that the Institute had submitted proposals for purchase of
two major equipments (a) Cardiac Cath Lab. and (b) Oxygen Concentrated, amounting to
Rs. 2.50 crores.

_ गए 12.1 In view of the above, the Committee feels that the amount allocated for. the
Institute for the year 1995-96 will not be sufficient to take ‘care of its requirement, such as
expanding some of its existing departments, adding new superspecialities and providing some
basic facilities for students, doctors and other staff. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the allocation for the Institute be enhanced suitably keeping in view the requirements of
the Institute,


कर

ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL MEDICINE & REHABILITATION (AIIPMER),
BOMBAY “

AIP 1. The All India Institute of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Bombay, is a
pioneer institute in the field of Rehabilitation Medicine in the entire South-East Asia. It
has facilities for medical rehabilitation services, which cover Rehabilitation, Nursing,
Physiotherapy, Occupational Therapy, Medical Social Work, Vocational Guidance,
Evaluation, Adjustment and Training. It has a 45-bed hospital with Operation Theatre for
reconsturctive surgery and facilities for pathology and X-ray investigations, etc. It also
runs workshops for producing prosthetic and orthotic appliances for the use of patients.

AIP 1.1 Besides, the Institute, is also engaged in training students, both at graduate
and post-graduate levels, and in research activities of rehabilitation medicine. Over the
past few years, the Institute has been trying to reach the disabled population in rural
areas in general and in the areas having a large population of scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes in particular, through ‘camp approach’. These camps are conducted in
collaboration with voluntary, semi-government and local organisations.

AIP 1.2 The Institute has prepared a scheme of providing Mobile Rehabilitation
Units. The Institute has also started a District Rehabilitation Centre at Virar as a project
of extra-service, under the istry of Welfare, for creating manpower at the grassroot
level. The Director of the Institute works as a Regional Director.

AIP 1.3 A Regional Rehabilitation, Training: Centre is functioning in the Institute
since its inception. Master trainers of this centre conduct training courses for therapists in
various disciplines, who ultimately work in the rural areas

AIP 1.4 Important statistics regarding performance of the hospital during 1993-94 is
given at Annexure IX.

Committee’s visit

AIP 2. The Committee visited the Institute on February 28, 1995. The Committee
found that the Institute was doing a commendable job, particularly in providing
mechanical aids and appliances to the spastic and handicapped people, including crippled
children. The Institute, the Committee noticed, provides a holistic ie., curative,
preventive and rehabilitative treatment to its patients. It is also providing vocational
guidance to the handicapped people to enuble them to achieve economic self reliance.

AIP 2.1 The Committee, after visiting its labs, wards and various workshops, held
discussions with the Director and other officials and enquired about the problems being
faced by the Institute in providing an efficient and adequate service to its patients.

Shortage of staff

AIP 3. The Committee was informed by the Director that the work-load on the
Institute was increasing at a rapid pace. For example, the patient-load of the Institute
had grawn from nearly 200 in 1963 to approximately 25,000 patients in 1994. .A
corresponding increase in the staff, he pointed out, had not taken place. This had
adversely affected the quality of services to its patients. The shortage of staff is acute in
Departments like Occupational Therapy, Physiotherapy and Prosthetics and Orthotics, he
informed. Posts of Additional Director, Dy. Director and Pathologist are lying vacant and
the Director has to depend upon only three Registrars and one CMO.

AIP 3.1 The Committee notes that, in the absence of adequate staff, the services
being provided in the Institute are being affected adversely which needs to be avoided by
all means. The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate steps be taken to

27


28

create the required number of posts in all categories and also fill up the posts lying vacant
now.

AIP 3.2 There is only one Orthopaedic surgeon in the Institute (in the Central Health
Services Cadre) and that is the Director himself. The Committee, after considering the fact
that there was an overall increase in the worklodd of the Institute and that its patients being
mostly Orthopaedic based, feels that there is an urgent need for providing adequate number
of trained orthopaedic surgeons in the Institute.

AIP 3.3 It was also pointed out to the Committee that the teaching staff of the
Institute, specially MSc(OT) and MSc(PT), did not have the corresponding designation nor
did they have the pay-scale equivalent to those in other teaching institutions. The Committee
feels that such a discrimination is not justified and their demands for similar designation and
pay-scale should be considered for immediate implementation.

Residential Accommodation

AIP 4. The Committee was also informed that due’ to lack of adequate residential
accommodation, people who were posted to the Institute were reluctant to join even after
they have been transferred to the Institute. Similarly, the reason for lack of adequate
nursing staff was also attributed to the shortage of residential accommodation for them, The
Committee feels that in a city like Bombay, where the problem of accommodation is very
acute,the Institute is deprived of eminent faculty and essential staff because of shortage of
residential accommodation. This ultimately affects patient care and satisfaction adversely.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should provide adequate
number of quarters for doctors and staff of the Institute. The Committee also feels that
keeping some quarters at the disposal of the Director, as is the case in Safdarjung Hospital ,
should also be considered. Construction of a residential complex in the Institute’s premises
on the land lying vacant should be given a serious thought by the Department of Health.

Strengthening of Workshops

AIP 5. During its visit to various workshops of the Institute, the Committee observed
that a number of mechanical appliances, including braces, limbs, shoes etc., were being
manufactured and assembled there. On being asked about the marketing of these products,
the Director informed that the rates of the products were fixed way back in 1959-60 and had
remained static ever since. The prices of the products are, therefore, not commensurate with
the actual production cost. He however, stated that for undertaking such an operation,
expansion of the production base and infrastructure would be needed on a considerable
scale. Adequate financial allocation would also have to be made for this.

AIP 5.1 The Committee is of the view that the production base of the workshops
manufacturing various appliances/devices for handicapped people, particularly its. smithy
section, should be expanded and modernised so as to enable the Institute to take up the
production of appliances etc. on a large scale and also to market them. It will help the
Institute, the Committee feels, to augment its sources of income. The Committee
recommends that the requirements of the Institute should be assessed and suitable funds be
made available to the Institute for this purpose.

Separate Trades/Sections

AIP 6. When the Committee enquired about the possibility of introducing newer trades
and separate sections in the Vocational Training Workshop, the Committee was informed
that it could not be done due to lack of space and manpower. The Director, however, added
that the Institute was already seized of the matter. The Committee emphasises the need for
expediting the proposal under consideration.


29
Shortage of Space

AIP 7. Another problem that is being faced by the Institute is lack of space. The
Committee saw an open space on the left side.of the main Institute building, lying vacant.
The Committee is of the opinion that the space could be utilised for physical expansion of
the Institute. The Committee is also of the opinion that the old buildings in which the
workshops are being run, can be demolished and a multi-storeyed building can be
constructed where some of the Departments can also be shifted.

AIP 7.1 The Committee was informed that a proposal for constructing a building had
already been finalised and an amount of Rs. 50 lakhs was provided for this purpose. It,
however, could not be utilised as the Planning Commission did not approve it. Planning and
designing process also had taken a longer time because the architect was Delhi-based and
had to come to Bombay for this purpose. In view of the acute shortage of space and
accommodation, the Committee recommends that the Department should get the necessary
approval in this regard from the Planning Commission at the earliest. Appointing an
Architect based in Bombay or taking the help of CPWD, Bombay should also be
considered.

Stipend to Vocational Guidance Trainees

AIP 8. The Committee feels that the stipend] being paid to the vocational guidance
trainees is very meagre and, therefore, recommmends that it should be increased suitably.
More organisations, such as Indian Oil Corporation, ONGC, Steel Authority of India and
other nationalised banks should be persuaded to contribute for this cause.

Facilities for Attendants

AIP 9. Another aspect noticed by the Committee was the total lack of facilities for
visitors/attendants of patients, particularly those coming from far-flung areas of the country.
In a city like Bombay, people coming along with their spastic and handicapped children ne
to be accommodated somewhere near the Insititute, if not in the campus itself. The
Committee, therefore, is of the view that this aspect also needs a serious consideration by
the Department.

Budget

AIP 10. The Institute has been allocated Rs. 1.50 crores on the Plan side and Rs. 1.47
crores on the non-plan side for the year 1995-96,

AIP 10.1 To a question, whether it would be sufficient for the Institute in view of the
fact that they have proposed new buildings and extension of building, the Department
replied that Rs. 50 lakhs had been provided separately for the same. But the Committee
noticed that there is lack of space in almost all the Departments and there is also a need to
modernise and expand its various workshops for which, the Committee feels, the allocation
would be insufficient. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the budgetary provision
for the Institute be raised suitably.

RS3358



SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL

SF1. Safdarjung Hospital was initially started as a Base Hospital for Allied Forces during
the Second World War. After the War, this hospital was attached to Lady Irwin Hospital (now
known'‘as Lok Nayak Jaiprakash Hospital). In 1954, the Government of India took over this
hospital and converted it into a full-fledged hospital. This hospital has come up to its present
status in a phased manner,

SF1.2. Safdarjung Hospital has 33 Departments which, besides including the basic
Departments like General Surgery, Medicine, Obstetrics & Gynaecology, paediatrics,
Orthopaedics, Eye and ENT, also include super speciality units such as Cardio-Thoracic and
Vascular Surgery (CTVS), Neurology, Neuro-Surgery, Paediatric Surgery, Urology.
Nephrology, etc. The hospital runs 35 special clinics also in different disciplines.

SF1.3. The hospital has facilities for all the pathological, biochemical and micro-biological
investigations. It has a total body scanner and a Sleep Analysis Lab functioning in the
hospital. Important statistics relating to the working of the hospital have been provided in
Annexure X.

Committee’s visit

SF2. The Committee visited the Safdarjung Hospital on the 30th January, 1995, and
inspected various Wards, OTs, OPDs and other places in different groups. It found all the
Wards/Departments, particularly different OPDs, overcrowded, waiting period for patients
being unusually long, i.e. from one hour to three hours. The OPD of Orthopaedics was
crammed with patients, with hardly any space and other facilities for them. Most of them were
sitting/ying on the floor, both in and outside the OPD building. Reception of this OPD was
being used as a plaster-room and lacked proper ventilation and cleanliness. Similarly, the
OPD of Gynaecology and Obstetrics was also found to be very crowded. There was an acute
shortage of beds in the wards resulting in two patients sharing one bed and in some cases,
even more. Shortage of nursing staff, the Committee was informed, was one of the chronic
problems affecting the services of the hospital. Burns and Plastics ward was not properly
ventilated, Lot of dust had gathered on windows, particularly in the wards located on the
ground floor. Surprisingly, no outdoor patients were seen when the Committee visited the
ward.

SF2.1. Buildings of certain Departments, such as orthopaedics, Gynaecology &
Obstetrics, Cardiology, etc., were found to be in poor condition. Overall cleanliness and
maintenance in the hospital was much below the desired level. Water pipes were leaking at
different places and public utilities were very dirty. Some operation theatres were in a bad
shape and needed major renovations. The maintenance of the Nurses Hostel was totally
unsatisfactory.

SF2.2. Members of the Committee, after visiting various Wards and Departments, had a
discussion with the Medical Superintendent and the Heads of various Departments regarding
problems faced by them in running the hospital efficiently.

SF2.3 Lack of sufficient number of medical and paramedical staff; inadequate powers to
the Medical superintendent and shortage of residential accommodation/hostels for doctors
and nurses were some of the major problems put before the Committee. The need to have
some super-speciality services, more posts at different levels, recognising Burns and Plastics
Department as a separate Institute. recognising the hospital as a teaching hospital,
construction of a new Gynae OT, separate CGHS wing, a library building, an Auditorium,
Nursing Home and the Department of Rehabilitation and Physiotherapy was also emphasised.

30

.)RS3358


31

SF2.4. The Committee also met the representatives of the Association of Resident
Doctors, Nurses’ Union and the Safdarjung Hospital Workers’ Union and enquired about

the grievances and problems faced by them. |

SF2.5. The Committee, after having a discussions with the officials of the hospital and
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (Department of Health), feels that the issues
mentioned above need immediate attention in order to provide satisfactory medical care to
the patients.

Staff position

SF3. The Committee noticed some discrepancy in regard to staff position, sanctioned
strength and vacancies, in various categories of posts (Annexure XI). When asked to
explain, the Committee was informed that the actual number of posts, exceeding the number
of sanctioned posts, was more apparent than real. Due to time-bound promotions, the posts
at different levels become interchangeable. The total number of posts has to be compared to
the number of sanctioned posts. In other words, for the purpose of having a correct idea of
the vacancies, it is necessary to compare the total number of sanctioned posts from the
lowest level upto the highest level and also the total number of filled posts at all these levels.

SF3.1. The Committee was further informed that out of 1190 posts of nurses, 155 posts
in various categories were vacant, mainly due to non-availability of reserved category
candidates, in spite of advertising several times in newspapers and through Employment
Exchanges. On being asked, one reason given for the poor response in this regard was lack
of accommodation for them. The Medical Superintendent suggested that the reserved
category candidates must be given an offer of provisional appointment without holding any
formal interview. They could be regularised after they had served satisfactorily for some
time. In view of shortage of nurses in the hospital, the Committee feels that this suggestion
may be considered by the Ministry for implementation.

SF3.2. As regards Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ staff, the Committee notes that not enough posts
have been provided over the years, unlike in the case of doctors. The Committee was
informed that the promotional avenues for them are virtually non-existent, most of them
retiring without any promotion in their entire service life. The Committee emphasises the
need to improve this situation at the earliest by (a) providing more posts in Group C and D;
and (b) opening avenues of promotion for those stagnating for more than ten years in one
scale. The Committee desires that all-out efforts be made to fill up the vacant posts, in all
categories, by taking suitable measures,

SF3.3.The Committee also came to learn that recognition to the Blood-Bank functioning
in the hospital had been withdrawn. Explaining the position, the Medical Superintendent
informed that the recogiition of the Blood Bank was not a one-time affair, as it is renewed
from time to time. Due to a few deficiencies noticed last year, recognition to the Blood
Bank was suspended. The Committee feels anguished that such an essential facility has been
suspended and no adequate efforts appear to have been made to revive it. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that steps be taken to correct the deficiencies pointed out,
in order to restore the recognition of the Blood Bank without any further delay.

Cardiology

SF4. The Department of Cardiology is in a very bad shape. The Committee was
informed that it was being reorganised. Some of the basic equipments needed for
monitoring/treating/testing of the heart-patients are not available. In view of the increasing
number of heart patients, the Committee feels that there is an urgent need for strengthening
the Cardiology Department by providing adequate facilities and essential equipments. The
Committee recommends that a Cath Lab should also be provided.



32 -

Residential Accommodation

SFS. There is an acute shortage of residential accommodation and hostels in the hospital
for doctors as well as paramedical staff and nurses. The Committee is alarmed to see the
poor satisfaction level in the case of employees of all categories (Annexure XII). The
Committee feels that this is a genuine problem which needs to be looked into by the
Department of Health, in consultation with the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment.

SF5.1. As regards accommodation for Resident Doctors, the Committee noticed that in
spite of a five fold increase in their strength (from 110 in 1966 to 544 in 1994), the number
of dwelling units for them has remained the same (87 single rooms and 23 married two-room
sets). Resident Doctors are supposed to stay in the premises of the hospital or very near the
hospital and work for 10 to 14 hours every day. By providing adequate number of dwelling
units to them, the Committee feels, the quality of patient care would certainly improve. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that a multi-storeyed hostel type accommodation for
Resident Doctors and Nurses be constructed at the earliest in the campus of the hospital for
which necessary funds be provided.

Construction of Multi-Storeyed Buildings

SF6. The Committee found that nearly 25 percent of the wings/wards of the Safdarjung
Hospital are located in old barracks which are in a dilapidated condition. The Medical
Superintendent informed that 90 percent of these barracks were beyond repair and had been
declared unfit for habitation. These barracks, being single storeyed, occupy lot of space. The
barracks do not belong to the Department of Health/the hospital. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should take up the matter for getting these barracks
transferred to the hospital, so that multi-storeyed buildings could be constructed in a phased
manner after demolishing them. These multi-storeyed - buildings could house all
superspeciality departments such as Gynae OT, the CGHS Wing, Library, Auditorium, etc.

Burns and plastics Department

SF7. The Committee was informed that the Burns and Plastics Surgery Department,
which is one of its kind in India, needs further strengthening and a face-lift. The Medical
Suprintendent pleaded that the Department may by upgraded to the level of an Institute
with a view to providing better medical care and convenience to the burn patients. It will
also work as referral hospital for burn patients. The Committee also feels that’ this
suggestion should be considered by the Department of health for implementation. The
hospital may, in the meantime, submit a detailed proposal to the Department of Health in
this regard. The Committee, at the same time, feels that the functioning of the Department
at present, leaves much to be desired and suggests immediate steps to be taken to improve
the state of affairs as recommended by the Committee.

National Institute of Orthopaedics .

SF7A. The Committee understands that the Department of Orthopaedics of the hospital
had been accorded the status of a National Institute, for which funds and land were also
allotted. The Committee came to know that no progress has been made in this respect and it
appears that the proposal has been put into cold storage. While the Committee is not aware
of the reasons for this, it feels that the proposal needs to be revived and implemented as
early as possible.

Budget

SF8. Safdarjung Hospital is one of the largest hospitals which caters, basically, to the
medical needs of poorer sections of our society, both in and outside Delhi. There is no
denying the fact that the hospital services need to be strengthened adequately for which
sufficient funds would be needed, The Committee was informed that budget allocation had
been reduced to Rs. 39.90 crores for the year 1995-96, as against the allocation of Rs. 41.18
crores in the previous year. The Department, in its written reply, had stated that this


33

amount would be adequate to cover the expenditure on Plan and non-Plan side and assured
the Committee that the additional requirements for maintaining adequate health care
services would, however, be considered at RE stage.

SF8.1. The Committee does not agree with the view of the Department of Health that
the amount provided would be sufficient to cover the expenditure of the hospital in 1995-96.
The Medical Superintendent also demanded more funds for the hospital. In view of the
varidus requirements of the hospital, mentioned above, and also taking into account the
escalation of costs, the Committee feels that the allocation of funds for the current year
needs to be enhanced suitably at an appropriate stage, While doing so, need of the hospital
for constructing residential accommodation, replacing old equipments and improving other
facilties should be kept in’ mind.



DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL

RML 1. Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, originally known as ‘Willingdon Hospital
and Nursing Home’, was estublished in the year 1932. Its administrative control was later on
transferred to the New Delhi Municipal Committee. The hospital was taken over by the
Central Government in the year 1954, The hospital is spread over an area of 25 acres of
land. Total staff strength of the hospital, at present, is about 2700, and it has 937 beds.

RML1.1. It has superspecialities like Neuro-Surgery, Burns and Plastic Surgery and
Cardiology. New Superspeciality units of Neuroiogy, Paediatric-Surgery and Cardiothoracic
Surgery have also been added recently. Other services provided by the hospital are:
Anaesthetics, General Medicine, General Surgery, Orthopaedic Otolaryngology (ENT),
Opthalmology, Paediatrics, Gynaecology & Obstetrics, Psychiatry, etc. It also has a De-
addiction Centre, Blood Bank, Physiotherapy and Dialysis Services.

RML1.2. The hospital provides post-graduate education (MD, MS, etc.) in various
specialities like Surgery, Medicine, Radiology, Paediatrics, Skin, ENT, etc. It is also a
training centre for under-graduate medical students of Lady Hardinge Medical College, New
Delhi. A School of Nursing, with a strength of 75 students, is run by this hospital to train
nursing students for Diploma in Nursing.

RML1.3. The hospital provides all indoor/outdoor services to patients reporting for
treatment, irrespective of the fact whether a bed is available or not. The services are
provided free of cost to all the patients coming to Emergency. There is a Nursing Home for
the CGHS beneficiaries. General patients have to pay charges for some investigations and
nursing home facilities as per the rates fixed by the Government. Latest equipments, the
Committee was informed, have been added in the hospital to upgrade its facilities in various
Departments. Infrastructural facilities have also been improved in General OPD,
Emergency, Nursing Home, etc. to provide better treatment and amenities to patients and
their attendants (Annexure XIII).

RML1.4. The hospital has provided a large pool of free trolleys (of a particular colour)
in the OPD and Emergency for the use of patients. The attendants can carry and leave these
trolleys anywhere in the hospital after use. These trolleys are collected by the stretcher
bearers. The communication system in the hospital had been upgraded by providing seven
long distance radio pagers and 25 short distance pagers to contact senior doctors at a short
notice. Besides, the stationery for patients records have been modernised and colour coded,
as per the guidelines issued by the DGHS recently.

Committee’s Visit

RML2. The Committee visited Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital on January 4, 1995,
and inspected different Wards/Departments in groups. Members of the Committee talked to
the patients and enquired about the quality of services and facilities being provided to them.
While a few of them expressed their satisfaction, most of them complained about long
waiting periods, which ranged from one hour to three hours.

RML2.1. After going round the hospital, the Members had discussions with the Medical
Superintendent and various heads of Department. The main issues, which came up for
discussion, were lack of space with no scope for further expansion, shortage of Group ‘C’
and ‘D’ staff, overcrowding in the hospital, shortage of residential accommodation,
establishment of CTVS department, expansion and improvements in Emergency services,
etc.

Handing Over the NDMC Plot

RML3. The Committee found that the load on Dr. RML Hospital is increasing day by
day and because of its location there is no scope for its further expansion. The Committee
was shown a plot of land, measuring about 2,000 square meters, presently under the
occupation of NDMC, which is lying adjacent to the Casualty of the hospital. The Plan

34


EB)

showing the position of land is shown at Annexure XIV. The Committee was informed that
this land could be’ very useful for expanding the Emergency services, which are already
overstretched. It was also informed that the hospital had taken up the matter with the
concerned Department several times but nothing has materialised so far. The Committee
also feels that this piece of land could be useful keeping in view the acute shortage of space
in the hospital. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take up
the matter and make all-out efforts to acquire the land for the use of the hospital.

Handing over Lower Hastings Square

RML4. The Committee was informed that a proposal was initiated and it was decided
by the Government to hand over the Lower Hastings Square, which is situated next to the
boundary of the Hospital, to Dr. R.M.L. Hospital in 1977. This land is required by the
hospital for its expansion, including construction of an additional hostel for Resident
Doctors. Presently, this land is under the occupation of the President’s Secretariat. The
Committee feels that the Department should take up the matter with the President's
Secretariat and the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment to get possession of this plot
of land for improving hospital services.

Residential Accommodation

RML 5. Another major problem, brought to the notice of the Committee, is the shortage
of residential accommodation for doctors, nurses and Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ employees. There is
no residential complex in the campus, as in other hospitals. Percentage of hospital pool
accommodation is also very low. Due to lack of space, construction of a residential complex
in the hospital campus is also ruled out.

RML 5.1 At present, only 317 quarters are available for 1637 employees of various
categories. Break-up and other details in this regard are at Annexure XV.

RML 5.2 The Committee feels that the position of residential accommodation in the
hospital is very poor which needs to be improved urgently by providing sufficient number of
houses from the General Pool of different categories in the nearby Government colonies.

RML 5.3 The possibility of earmarking some flats in the multi-storey building being
constructed opposite the Casualty wing of the hospital for senior doctors should also be
taken up.with the concerned Ministry so that their services are readily available, whenever
required, at short notice.

Burns and Plastic

RML6. Some of the services in the hospital, the Committee feels, need further
expansion/modernisation by providing adequate inputs/infrastructure for improving the
quality of patient care. One area, for example, is the Burns and Plastic Ward. This Ward,
located in the same complex as the new Operation Theatre building, is in a poor condition
and requires immediate attention. The Committee emphasises the need for upgrading this
Ward as the burn patients are highly prone to infections.

Neurology

RML7. Other area which needs attention is the Neurology Department, which has been
added to the hospital not too long ago: There is only one room where the EEG is done and
patients are also examined by doctors. The upkeep and maintenance of this Ward, the
Committee feels, require attention.

Other Specialised Services Needing Upgradation

RMLS8. Some of the services of the hospital, by virtue of highly trained manpower and
special equipments, have become centres of excellence. These services, the Committee feels,


36

if augmented by providing desired inputs, would go a long way in further improving the
patient care. These services are:

(i) Neurosurgical Services

(ii) Nursing Home Services

(iii) | Organised Emergency Services हर

(iv) . Cardiology Services

(v) ' Hyperbaric Oxygen Chamber
Budget

RML9. The Committee was informed that the sanctioned budget in 1994-95 in respect

of this hospital was Rs. 460.00 lakhs on plan side and Rs. 1755 lakhs on non-plan side. The
plan budget was raised to Rs. 883.00 lakhs at the RE stage which included a component of
German assistance meant for purchasing equipments, etc. It was further informed that a
provision of Rs. 605.00 lakhs had been made under Plan and Rs. 1843.00 lakhs under Non-
Plan for the year 1995-96. The Department contended that there was no reduction in the

allocation of funds during 1995-96 and that the funds were sufficient to meet the
requirements of the hospital. जप

कथा 9.1. The Committee does not agree with the Department of Health in this regard.
Even during discussions with the hospital authorities, the Committee was told by the
Medical Superintendent that the funds provided to the hospital were not adequate.
Dr. RML hospital, besides providing medical care to the general public, has the
responsibility of providing some special services like running a VVIP dispensary in the South
Block, providing medical care to PM House and also to foreign dignitaries visiting India as
State Guests. It also provides medical cover to various public functions like Republic Day,
Independence Day, and to international and national conferences held in Delhi from time to
time. It also supplies, both materials and staff, whenever demanded, to the Medical Centre
being run in the Parliament House Annexe. In view of the urgent requirements of the
hospital for providing new services and strengthening the existing ones and also for running
special services mentioned above, the committee is of the opinion that the amount provided
would hardly be sufficient. It, therefore, recommends that more amount should be provided
to this hospital at the appropriate stage.


LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND’ ASSOCIATED HOSPITALS

LH1. Lady Hardinge Medical College (LHMC) lias two associated hospitals—
Smt. Sucheta Kripalani Hospital (SKH) and Kalawati Sarari Children’s Hospital (KSCH)
These two hospitals are located in the campus of the LHMC and are attached to it for the
purposes of teaching and research. The principal of Lady Hardinge Medical College also
functions as the Medical Superintendent of both the Hospitals. The administrative set-up and
budget allocations of these institutions, however, are separate. The two hospitals are under
the Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS), Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare.

LH. 1.1. Smt. Sucheta Kripalani, Hospital is basically a general hospital which provides
some special services, in additon to the routine patient care and laboratory services. The
college/hospital also imparts training in occupational therapy and physiotherapy. Similarly,
training is also provided to pharmacy students and Dieticians.

LH 1.2. The KSCH is primarily a children’s hospital, which is one of its kind in North
India. It provides both indoor and outdoor medical care to children upto 12 years of age.
(Annexure XVI)

Committees Visit

LH 2. The Committee visited the Lady Hardinge Medical College and its associated
hospitals on February 16, 1995. Members of the Committee went round different wards/
departments of ‘the two hospitals in separate groups.

LH 2.1. In Smt. Sucheta Kripalani Hospital, almost all the departments/wards,
particularly Accident & Emergency, Orthopaedics, Gynae and Obstetrics and General
Surgery were found to be overcrowded. In most of the wards, particularly in the maternity,
two to three patients were found to be sharing a bed because of bed shortage. Equipments
in the Dental Department were found to be very old and outdated. Cleanliness and
maintenance of some of the Operation Theatres were found to be very poor. Two
Ambulances, provided to the hospital, were found to be out of order. Sewage system in the
hospital, the Committee was told, was very old which got chocked quite often, resulting in
storage of filthy water at different places. Water supply in the hospital was stated to be not
only inadequate but also impure, which had resulted in the outbreak of Hepatitis amongst
Doctors in November, 1994,

LH 2.2. Similarly, in Kalawati Saran Children Hospital, every ward, specially the
Nursery, was found crammed with babies, more than two sharing the same bed. Wards were
highly stuffy with no proper ventilation, not to speak of air-conditioning. Mothers were
squatting and feeding their newborns on the floor as: there was no facility for this purpose.
Department of Physiotherapy was so short of space and congested that it was not possible to
even walk inside. Equipments installed for exercises, etc. were mostly archaic and outdated.

LH-2.3. The Committee was also shown as to how the shopkeepers of Panchkuian Road

. have’encroached upon the boundary of the Hospital and were dumping their garbage etc. in

its premises. The Committee would like the Department of Health to take up the matter
with the appropriate authority with a‘ view to get the encroachment cleared.

LH 2.4. The Committee, after going round the hospital, held discussion with the |
Medical Superintendent and the Heads of various Departments/Wards. A detailed account
of the functioning of both the hospitals and the services being provided was given by the
Medical Superintendent. Lack of enough space; buildings being very old requiring massive
repairs; strengthening of Departments like Physiotherapy, Dental, Eye and ENT; improving
facilities in Paediatric Surgery, Accident emergency, ICU, Labs, Nursery and OTs; enriching

37

-)RS3358



38.

the library of the hospital; creation of Urology Department; providing Radiotherapy to
Cancer patients; shortage of residential accommodation for doctors and staff, vacancies in
the faculty, etc. were some of the main issues that figured during the discussions.

LH 2.5. The Committee also had discussions with the representatives of the Faculty
Association, Resident Doctors’ Association, Nurses’ Association and Employees’ Union.

Need for Separate OTs

LH 3. The Committee. was distressed to see that OTs of General Surgery and
Orthopaedics, Eye and E.N.T. are combined. On being asked, the M.S. informed that it
was due to shortage of group ‘C’ and ‘D” staff, required as per recommendations of the
Medical Council jof India (MCI). The Committee is of the view that opening of separate OTs
is the need of the hour in view of fact that a large number of patients are reporting for
operations in these areas. The Committee, therefore, suggests that steps should be taken to
separate the OTs and adequate staff may be provided for the purpose.

Accident Emergency and Cancer Centre Yi

LH 4. The Committee was told that projects pertaining to provision of an Accident
emergency and Cancer Centre in the hospital were pending with the Ministry. The
Committee recommends that these proposals should be cleared expeditiously

Shortage of Doctors and Staff

LH 5. The Committee was apprised of the fact that there was no regular staff for
manning certain very crucial services of the hospital. The, Committe was astonished to learn
at th alty of the hospital was being run by Junior Residents since 1992 and had no
ff. Likewise, the staff in the Forensic Medicine Deptt., the oldest. Department in
the hospital, was found to be inadequate keeping in the view the high crime rate prevailing
in seven police stations which are, attached to it. The Committee was also told that due to
the shortage of Sr. Residents, there was a restriction on admission of patients to the
Departments ‘of Medicine, Surgery and Orthopaedics

LH 5.1. The Committee feels that since the SKH ‘is a general hospital providing
treatment to poor people for all kinds of ailments and serving as a training centre for
undergraduate students, there should not be any restriction on admission to any of the wards
of the hospital due to shortage of staff/doctors. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
all vacancies in the hospital should be filled up at the earliest and wherever there is a need
to provide more posts of Senior/Junior Residents, these should be created immediately.

LH 5.2. The Committee was informed by the Employees’ Union that posts had not
been sanctioned/created, particularly in the categories of Group ‘C’ & ‘D’ in the hospital,
for a very long time, whereas a large number of posts had been created in other hospitals
like Dr. R.M.L. and Safdarjung. The Committee; was further informed that employees, who
had rendered 25-30 years of service, had not been given even a single promotion and most
of them retired from the same post. When posts could be created in other hospitals as per
the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) norms, the Committee wonders why the same could not be
done in Smt. Sucheta Kripalani Hospital. The Committee feels that this grievance appears to
be genuine and recommends that more posts should be created in Group ‘C’ & ‘D’
categories so that they are put at par with their counterparts in other hospitals.

LH 5.3. It.was pointed out by the representatives of the faculty that the scale of pay of
the Professors in the CHS teaching sub-cadre was less than the scale of pay of Professors in
the University of Delhi. The Committee was further informed that while doctors, who joined
in 1983, had become Professors in 1991 after the completion of just 8 years, those who


i)

joined in 1971 could become Professors only in 1991, as their service rendered before
1.1.1983 in CHS sub-cadre was not counted for the purposes of promotion and the services
was written off by the Ministry.

LH 5.4. The Committee feels that grievances of the faculty appear to be genuine and is
of the opinion that the Department should take steps to remove this anomaly in the pay
scale and the’ service’ rendered by the CHS teaching sub-cadre before 1.1.83 should be
considered for promotion purposes.

Strengthening of Sanitary/Security Services

LH 6. The Committee found the cleanliness and maintenance in the hospital to be very
poor. Security in the Hospital also is not upto the mark. The main reason given for this was

lack of enough sanitary/security staff. For detailed information Please see Annexure XVII. :

The Committee feels that these services are equally important and recommends that enough
security/sanitary staff be provided to the hospital at the earliest.

Shortage of Space

LH 7.°The Committee observed, during its visit, that the hospital is so short of space
that there is hardly any scope for its expansion. It found the hospital and college building
very old, requiring massive repairs. It also found that the maintenance of the building was
very poor. The Committee feels that since the renovation cost of the building will be much
higher, there is need for construction of multi-storeyed buildings by demolishing the existing
dilapidated structures in a phased manner. (

LH 7.1. The Committee opines that there is an urgent need for construction of the
following complexes in view of the fact that there is an acute shortage of space in all the
departments:

(i) Accident Emergency Block
(ii) Operation Theatre Block
(iii) Central Sterilization Department
« (iv) Radiotherapy—CT Scan Unit
(v) Maternity Centre.

LH 7.2 The Committee, therefore, urges the Deptt. to make available sufficient funds
to construct these complexes at the earliest.

Computerisation

LH 8. The Committee feels that there is a need to computerise certain services in the
hospital, especially record keeping in the OPD's, and suggests that computerisation be
undertaken soon.

Need for OT Technicians

LH 9. In the case of Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital, the Committee was informed
that a lot of neonatal equipments had been purchased but no OT Technicians were there to
Operate them, and at present this work was being done by doctors and nursing staff. The
Committee feels that these costly equipments require proper handling and care and
recommends that the posts of OT Technicians should be created and filled up at the earliest.
Strengthening the Delivery Room

‘LH 10. The Committee found the facilities in the Delivery-Room inadequate, when
compared to the number of deliveries that are being attended to. i.e. 15,000 deliveries per

year with only six obstetrics tables and 12 beds and without therequired number of staff.
Considering the large number of deliveries in the hospital, the Committee feels the necessity



40

of strengthening the existing facilities in the delivery room and recommends that more
obstetrics: tables and beds, with adequate staff, should be provided.

Development/Expansion of some services in KSCH

LH 11. The KSCH, being the only hospital for Children in the entire North India,
attracts patients, from far and wide. Existing infrastructure is not sufficient enough to take
care of patients coming for treatment. There is, therefore, absolute necessity for the
expansion of this hospital by providing necessary inputs and infrastructure. The following
facilities/services are required immediately in this hospital:

., 24-hour Laboratory Services-Biochemistry, Haematology, Radiology, EEG and EMG.
F ‘Portable X-ray machine.

.-C.T, Scan facilities for children.

. Echocardiography with coloured doppler attachement.

. 24-hour Central suction and oxygen facilities.

DAupwn ye

. Infrastructure and equipments ‘necessary for quick transportation of patients from
‘Emergency ‘to the wards,

7. Strengthening of Emergency.
8. Development of Super-speci
(a) Paediatric Cardiology.
(b) Paediatric Cardio-thoracic surgery.
(c) Paediatric Haematology

(d) Paediatric Gastroenterology

(e) Paediatric Dermatology

(f) Paediatric E.N.T.

(g) Paediatric Surgery

(h) Paediatric Orthopaedics.

U. & OPD services,
such as:

LH 11.1 The Committee recommends that the services’equipments mentioned above
should be provided to the hospital so as to make it a premier institution for paediatric care
in. the:,country. है

Residential Accommodation

LH 12. As far as residential accommodation for the doctors and employees of the
hospital is cohcerned, the Committee was informed that they were being denied
accommodation under the General Pool. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for
denial of accommodation to them from the General Pool which, the Committee was
informed, was being given to employees of other hospitals. The Committee fails to
understand the reasons for such discrimination. It, therefore, feels that.a policy decision in
this regard must be taken at the earliest and.some quarters be provided from the General
Pool in the nearby areas.

LH 12.1. The Committee also feels that the old bungalows, which are presently in the
campus, should be replaced by multi-storeyed residential flats so that more accornmodation
could be provided.

LH 12.2 The Committee was informed that hostel accommodation for Resident Doctors
is inadequate. One remedial measure suggested to the Committee was to construct a multi-
storeyed hostel in ‘this hospital. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should
consider constructing a multi-storeyed hostel accommodation at an early date.


41
Budget

LH 13. In the case of Lady Hardinge Medical College and Sucheta Kripalani Hospital,
the budgetary provision on the plan side has been reduced from Rs. 3.70 crores in 1994-95

-to Rs. 3.15 crores in 1995-96. When asked'+to explain,s the Department stated that the

reduction in the Budget Estimate of 1995-96 in respect of the hospital is due to lesser
allocation made by the Planning Commission to Central Sector Health Programmes in 1995-
96..The Committee was further informed that a sum of Rs 6 crores has been given out of
German aid and Rs. 3.50 crores was made available to the Hospital during the year to
purchase CAT SCAN. The Committee was informed by the Medical Superintendent that the
‘hospital lacked in modern equipments for treating patients and since the hospital was
attached to the college, it required more funds. The Committee agrees with this plea.

LH 13.1. The Committee is surprised to note that the total allocation for the Kalawati
Saran Children’s hospital has come down from Rs. 7.68 crores (RE) in 1994-95 to Rs, 6.68
crores (BE) in 1995-96. There is also a reduction in the plan budget from Rs. 3.18 (RE
1994-95) crores to Rs. 2 crore in BE, 1995-96. The Department, however, stated that there
was no real decrease, as an amount of Rs. 6.68 crores has been provided in 8.8, 1995-96 as
against the allocation of Rs. 6.25 crores in 3.8. 1994-95, The Committee does not agrée
with the Department’s idea of making a comparison between BEs of the 1994-95 and 1995-
96, and feels that it should instead, be made between RE of the last year and the BE of the
subsequent year, Th’ Committee feels that the hospital should be given more funds for
creating more facilities and improving the exisitng ones in the hospital.

Wg!

General Recommendations/Observations

LH.14 The Committee found that the LHMC today is in a very bad shape with no state-
of-the-art equipment and other facilities. This pioneer institution appears to have been
relegated to the last place in terms of facilities and equipments, as compared to the other
medical colleges in the city, which came into existence more than four decades later. The
Committee is distressed to see that the LHMC, one of the oldest medical colleges in the
country, is languishing in this manner.

LH 14.1. In view of the past performance of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and
also it being the only institution for training woman doctors and nurses, the Committee
would like to put forth the following suggestions for the active consideration of the
Department so as to restore the past glory of the College:

(i) Designate Lady Hardinge Medical College for Women as an Institute of National
Importance.

(ii) Support development of highly specialised health care services for women and
children which would also be the national training and research centre in
Obstetrics-Gynaecology and Paediatrics.

(iii) Allocate national level research schemes and ‘projects to ‘the institute.

(iv) Permit affiliation with well-established medical colleges in the developed countries.



SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS

“1. Overcrowding

७ Hospitals in or outside Delhi are extremely overcrowded with patients. This is mainly
due to lack of adequate medical care facilities and personnel at the PHCs'’, and the
and sub-district hospitals for providing primary and secondary level of treatment to patients.
As a result of this, patients from all parts of the country directly approach the hospitals even
for minor ailments instead of going to the PHCs or the district and sub-district hospitals
Another. factor, particular to Delhi, is that some patients try to approach many hospitals.
one after the other, for the same ailment for psychological satisfaction. (Para. 4)

This results in shortage of beds, resulting in two to three patients sharing the same bed
in,many hospitals. The hospital authorities cannot increase the number of beds due to acute
shortage of space. The solution to the problem is that the Government should pay
immediate attention to improve and expand facilities for medical care at the primary and
‘scecondary levels so that only those patients needing specialist care and attention, are
referred to the tertiary level hospitals located in the Metro cities. The problem could be also
tackled partly by setting up screening OPDs, with essential testing facilities slightly away
from the main hospitals. The Committee, therefore, recommends that overcrowding may be
reduced by simultaneous improvement in: 305. 1

(a) the levels of management efficiency in hospitals;

(b) improvement in peripheral facilities in District and Sub-districts hospitals for
‘ primary and secondary treatment; and

(c) organising a functional referral system. (Para 4.7)

There is a need to optimise all existing and available physical facilities to control
overcro' ‘ding. The Committee would emphasise the necessity for opening more counters and
creating space for patients attending OPDs. There is also a need for proper guidance and
direction to patients approaching the OPDs so that patients do not have to wander from one
counter to another. This will, to some extent, ease congestion and overcrowding of patients
at strategic points. There is also an urgent need to reduce the waiting time of the patients at
various counters keeping in view the-patients’ convenience. The underlying idea behind this
proposal should be that the patients visiting OPD do not have to spend more than half a day
at the hospitals for purpose of consultation/treatment, etc. (Para 4.12),

2. Referral Character
The premier institutions like the All India Institute of Medical. Sciences (AIIMS)
and the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research were set up to

promote high standards of medical care, training and research. These were originally
marked as referral hospitals where patients would be referred by other hospitals for

42


43

a-specialised treatment of a high order. These hospitals were not- supposed to entertain new
patients, with common diseases, which could be treated at the ordinary hospitals. In course of
time, due to non-availability of primary health care facilities at the peripheral health centres

* resulting in influx of patients to the nretro cities. the premier institutions like AIIMS and

PGIMER have lost their referral character as they have to attend to all kinds of patients,
irrespective of the nature of dist This has prevented specialists to carry out research of the
highest order as their attention is primarily focussed on the day to day medical problem of
ordinary patients. (Para 5)

The Committee was informed that there was a proposal under consideration with the
Government to restore to AIIMS and PGIMER their referral character. The Committee
would like to know the fate of the proposal. The Government should draw a time-bound
programme to convert these hospitals into purely referral hospitals and sort out all the related
issues/problems of strengthening the peripheral medical facilities by providing them adequate
finance and other resources. (Para 5.3.)

3. Computerisation

There is an immediate need for providing computers in the hospitals for maintenance of
patient—related records, and for better coordination between yarious departments/wings of
the hospitals. (Para 6)

4. Duplication of Facilities

Duplication of specialist services in the hospitals results in non-optimal use of scarce
resources. This requires proper co-ordination and redesignation of the ‘hospitals with
specialised services. There is a need for greater horizontal liaisoning among the specialists and
to evolve a scheine for linking a group of smaller hospitals with one major hospital having
specia expertise. For example, heuro-surgery facilities to deal with accident cases could be
made available in one hospital and a group of smaller hospitals could make use of these
services for entire region. (Para 7.1)

Duplication of services, and facilities in hospitals, particularly in view of the constraints of
space, beds and financial resources, results in wasteful expenditure and, thus, should be
avoided as far as possible. Every hospital could specialise in a particular area/discipline so that
the patients know which hospital they should approach for a particular disease/treatment.
(Para 7.2) .

5. Coordination amongst Hospitals

Duplication of services/facilities cannot be altogether avoided unless there is a proper
and efficient coordination between various hospitals. there should be a close liaison and
coordination among different hospitals for making available efficient specialist services to
patients. For example, Safdarjung Hospital and AIIMS could work with greater coordination
between them so as to reduce the burden on each other. (Para 8)

6. More autonomy to Medical Supperintendents

Medical Superintendents of 5016 hospitals have voiced concern about their dependence
on the Ministry even for day-to-day works needing immediate attention. This results in
avoidable delay, affecting the efficiency arid quality of services rendered by the hospitals.
(Para 9)

The Committee recommends that the Medical Superintendents should be given more
autonomy to enable them to discharge their functions more efficiently. The Ministry may



44

consider redesignating the posts of Medical Superintendents of major hospitals as ‘Directors’
with all the concomitant powers. Such redesignation ‘would not have any financial
implication: as the posts of Medical Superintendents of major hospitals have already been
upgraded to that of Additional D.G. of Health Services, which is equivalent to the rank of
Additional’ Secretary to the Government of India. (Para 9.1)

7. Maintenance / Repair of Medical Equipment

Maintenance of sophisticated and costly equipments is very crucial keeping in view the
investments made in their procurement and also the patients’ care and convenience. The
Government should’consider running of workshop in Delhi for this purpose where all the
medical equipments and appliances could be serviced / repaired without delays.’ (Para 10)

8, Strengthening of Blood Banks

The Blood Banks in the Central Government Hospitals have no modern facilities and
equipments commensurate with the nature of services required today. There is an urgent
need to look into this problem, keeping in view the detection of new and deadly diseases
like AIDS etc. The Government should provide HIV tests facilities and modern blood banks
in’ each hospital where fractionation of blood into its different components can be done and
the transfusion of blood is made foolproof. (Para 11)

9. Poor Performance of Family Welfare

The Committee found that the infrastructure provided in the Family Welfare Units in
each hospital was not being put to optimum use. Near total lack of motivation and
dedication in the staff was also noticed. The Committee is surprised to note the indifferent
and nonchalant attitude of the Ministry / hospitals in regard to such a high priority aspect of
our socio-economic development. It, therefore, recommends that family welfare units
provided in the. Central Government hospitals be strengthened and activated immediately.
(Para 12)

10. Campaign Against AIDS

i

The Central Government hospitals, which are supposed to be role models in campaign
against AIDS, do not appear to be serious ubout it. The Committee, therefore, feels that the
Central Government hospitals should launch massive campaign against the spread’ of this
deadly disease. (Para 13)

11. Establishing an epilepsy Centre

Epilepsy in our country is being treated in Neurological centres of the major hospitals
where the facilities available for its treatment are inefficient and unorganised. The
Committee feels that there is an imperative need to establish an Epilepsy centre, to begin
with, in New Delhi. Once this centre is developed, similar centres, either separate or
branches thereof, should be set up in other parts of the country. (Para 14.1)

12. Exposure of Doctors to latest Development

With the advancement of medical science and technology, there is an urgent need for
doctors/professors to keep pace with the latest medical innovations so as to pass on the
benefit of these advancements to patient care. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Doctors and Faculty Members should be provided with adequate opportunities to
undergo training, and refresher courses, from time to time, to improve the quality of
services. Simultaneously, the technicians / para medical staff handling various sophisticated
and modern medical equipments should also be given requisite training to facilitate efficient
handling of these equipments and bring precision in their work. (Para 15)


45

13. Problem of Cleanliness and Maintenance

Cleanliness and hygienic conditions in various hospitals are of very poor standard.
Choked sewage leaking water pipes, stinking toilets and heaps of garbage lying uncovered in
various corners of the hospitals could be seen almost in every hospital. The Committee is
deeply distressed to see such unhygienic conditions and the hospital authorities paying scant
attention to such an important aspect of medical care. The hospital buildings, including the
Operation Theatres and the wards, are no better in their upkeep and maintenance. (Para 16)

One of the reasons cited for this state of affairs is that the CPWD, which is primarily
responsible for the maintenance of the buildings, is not giving prompt and efficient services
and they are also not under the direct administrative control of the hospital authorities. The
hospitals should, therefore, either have their own engineering departments or the CPWD
unit should be put under the direct administrative control of the respective Medical
Superintendents to control and supervise the maintenance work. (Para 16.1)
14. Shortage of Staff

The shortage of staff. particularly in Group *C’ and ‘D* categories, in almost all the
hospitals has been observed by the Committee. Similar was the position for many posts of
faculty members and senior doctors which were lying vacant for years together. The problem
was more prominent in JIPMER, Pondicherry, where no one is willing to go because of the
distance factor. Similarly, in AIIPMER, Bombay, doctors are reluctant to join mainly
because of acute shortage of residential accommodation. Unattractive pay-scales have also
been cited as another reason for doctors not joining the Government institutes. Further,
while the number of doctors over a period of time, has increased manifold, there is Boe
corresponding’ increase in the staff of Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ categories. (Para -17) :

The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that shortage of staff in Group’C’ and
‘D’ categories should be immediately made good and procedure of filling the higher level
posts should be reviewed and streamlined to avoid delays in recruitments. (Para 17.2)
15. Doctors on Prolonged Deputation

The Committee deprecates the practice of doctors/professors going on deputation and
coming back at the time of promotions, which is against the very ethics of medical
profession. It therefore recommends that the’ Department should take a serious view in these
cases and discourage such practices. (Para 18)
16. Indiscipline in Hospitals

Complaints of rude behaviour by Doctors and other staff in hospitals are a common
feature. There is no cordial relationship between the hospital administration and the
employees either. Irresponsible unior is very much rampant amongst the employees,
culminating, quite often, in ‘Bandhs’ and ‘Strikes’. There is no effective grievance redressal
machinery in the hospitals. While the genuine grievances of the employees should be
redressed promptly, thrdugh the medium of JCMs or other grievance redressal machineries,
indiscipline resulting in chaotic situations. causing inconvenience to patients, should be
firmly dealt with. It would be useful to set up a mechanism similar to the JCM in
Government establishments, in each hospital to redress the grievances of the staff. The role
and functions of hospital Management Boards also need to be redefined in order to improve
the effectiveness and credibility of these Boards. The services of outside experts in these
Boards may also be utilised to improve the state of affairs. (Para 19)
17. Lack of Residential Accommodation

Doctors and nurses are responsible for running the patient care services round the clock
and are required to come to hospitals at odd hours at short notice. In case they are provided
residential accommodation nearer the hospitals they would be able to discharge their duties

)RS3358



46

- more efficiently and-promptly. The Committee, therefore, recommends that sufficient
number of residential units for all categories of employees be provided in the hospital pools
and the Department should also take up the matter with the Ministry of Urban Affairs and
Employment to get adequate number of quarters earmarked for the hospital functionaries in
the nearby Government colonies. There is also a strong-félt need to provide adequate
hospital accommodation to the resident doctors ‘and nurses, preferably within the campus of
the hospital itself. Nurses should also be given priority in the Working Women’s Hostels
situated near. the: hospitals. (Paras 20.4)

The Committee is happy to learn that there is a proposal to construct Delhi Nurses’
Colony in Srinivaspuri for which the possession of land has been taken. There are proposals
in hand to acquire two acres of land in Rohini. The Committee is, however, distressed to
note that funds for. the purpose were not provided by the Ministry of Finance last year and
recommends that sufficient funds be allocated-for this purpose. The Ministry of Health may
also vigorously pursue the matter of allocation of land at suitable sites with the D.D.A. and
N.O.1.D.A. for construction of residential quarters for the hospital employees. (Para 20.1 &
20.3)

18. Separate CGHS: Wings

The CGHS Wings, presently“ earmarked and functioning in Safdarjung and Dr. Ram
Manohar Lohia Hospitals, are not geared enough to cope with the needs of the CGHS
beneficiaries. At times, the time taken in the CGHS wings is more than the time taken in,

the general OPD’s. It.is, therefore, recommended that the procedures for consultation/tests
etc. in the CGHS wings of the hospitals need to be thoroughly streamlined so as to provide
prompt and efficient services. (Para 21)

19. Senior Citizens

There should be special arrangements in the hospitals for the senior citizens and the
retired CGHS beneficiaries keeping in view their old age problems. (Para 22)

20. Geriatrics

The Committee recommends that Government should take necessary steps to deyelop
geriatrics’ as specialised subject, and provide sufficient number of specialists and
infrastructure for ‘opening Geriatric Clinics in all the Central Government hospitals. (Para 23)
21. Provision for Poor Patients

The Committee has noted that several major invasive procedures, e.g. cardiac surgery
are far too expensive for the poor people. Therefore, it would suggest the Ministry must
urgently explore all appropriate sources of funds to assist poor patients coming to AIIMS or
other Central Government hospitals for specific life threatening illnesses. If a mechanism can
be set up, such as a National Catastrophic Illness Assistance Fund, then resources can flow
from all sources, including private charities and international agencies and organisation.
Besides, there can be many imaginative methods of requiring both government and private
hospitals of a certain size and even profit-making nursing homes to make earmarked
contributions to the fund. (Paras 24.1 &. 24.2)

22. Facilities for Visitors/Attendants

The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to construct ‘Dharmashalas/Sarais’ by
the Government, in association with charitable institutions, who may be interested in this
noble cause. Such institutions shoufd be provided all necessary help in procuring land etc. on
concessional rates by the Government. (Para 25.1)

23. Budget

The Committee noticed that there was a general complaint about the lack of adequate
funds and in fact, it was cited as one of the reasons for several problems in the hospitals.
The Committee is fully aware of the general resource crunch in the. country. It, however,
feels that in view of the need for improving quality and adequacy of medical care, the
Government should explore the possibilities of generating/sparing more resources for
allocation to this sector. (Para 26.2)

.)RS3358

se


ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES, NEW DELHI

1. The Committee found the AIIMS Hospital highly crowded. It was informed that
more than seventeen lakhs patients visit the Hospital each year, while the capacity is just
enough for six lakh patients only. Such over-crowding level is affecting adversely not only
the patient care in the Hospital but also the quality of research and training in it. The
Committee emphasised the need to do something urgently in this regard.

2. The Committee feels that no progress is likely to be made, unless some crucial,
initial steps are taken right now to mitigate, if not eliminate, overcrowding in OPD. The
Committee emphasises the need for consciously trying to bring down, the waiting time and
making resting facilities easily accessible and cheaper. The Committee Would also emphasise
that for making the AIIMS a purely referral hospital, efforts must be made to coordinate
various planning decisions at the Centre and in the states and to ensure adequate and timely
allocation of funds for the development of selected peripheral hospitals around Delhi and in
the neighbouring States, which will contain the bulk of the admission rush to AIIMS.
(AIM: 8.1) :

3. The Institute, because of over-crowding is facing an acute shortage of space. It has
already been decided to shift the existing OPD, alongwith basic testing facilities to a nearby
locality, Raj Nagar, foundation-stone of which has already been laid. (AIM 8)

4. A system of deputing senior specialists from ALUMS to the peripheral hospitals as
visiting professor/faculties to help raise the standard of patient care may be considered.
(AIM 8 and 8.1)

5. The Committee was made aware of the original idea of having a linkage between the
AIIMS and the Safdarjung Hospital, with the latter acting as the focus for primary treatment
and a reference for complicated cases to be sent to AIIMS. The Committee feels that the
possibility of such a linkage should continue to be kept in mind and explored because it
would enable an integrated view of cost-effective use of resources and demonstrate as to
how an effective referral system can be developed. (AIM 9)

6, While the intention of the Committee is not to allow the specialisation built up in
Safdarjung to whither away, it emphasises the fact that the facilities in AIIMS and
Safdarjung Hospital, should be complementary and supplementary, to each other and
duplication of facilities be avoided to the extent possible. (AIM 9/2)

7. The Committee has given much thought to the question of closure or discontinuance
of undergraduate education, and links that seem to exist among unbearable overcrowding
levels, undergraduates’ educational needs and constraints on referral status. The Committee
is of the view that the Department must, on balance, and taking a long term view of the
sustainability of high level of competence at AIIMS, relocate the undergraduate seats at an
alternative institutions taking them away from AIIMS. (AIM 10.3)

47



48

8. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that serious thought should be given
to early possibility of doing away with the undergraduate education at AIIMS, more so
because of the need to restore the referral character of the Institute. If overcrowding at
AIIMS is to be tackled effectively, we should not accentuate the problem by provision of
general medical care merely to provide for undergraduate education. (AIM 10.4)

9. There is no coordination among various wings of the Institute. The Committee would
stress the need for a more coherent and integrated command structure within AIIMS
(including its various associated centres) in the interest of efficiency and better patient care.
(Para 11)

10. The Committee recognises the difficulty in evolving such a command structure in an
institution of high competence like AIIMS. The Committee would suggest that the
Governmnet should urgently review how a structure composed of collegiate and interactive
leadership, greater transparent relationships and channels of easy communication between
different levels of faculty , between faculty and students and among various centres and
discipline can be brought about within a year or so. (AIM 11.2)

11. The Committee takes a serious note of a widely shared view that morale of individuals
of AIIMS faculty, is low because of instances of individuals with proximity to high places,
disturbing the evolution of a coherent command structure and creating handicaps to the
evolution of a harmonious collegiate policy and decision making, so urgently needed at
AIIMS. (AIM 11.3)

12. The Committee would recommend the development in the Ministry of an independent
data base of technology developments (and associated unit cost) in medical care, so that
comparative unit cost for hospital procedure and routines at different locations, can be
examined to ensure cost-effective use of resources. In a vast country like India, technological
frontiers and opportunities for state-of-the-art cure in medicine should be dispersed among a
variety of institutions, both public and private, in different parts of India, and regulated
through a framework of coordinated prometion. (AIM 12)

13. The Committee would suggest setting up of an independent technology assessment
group to look at directions of future development in medical science, relevant to our
epidemiological problems. In respect of disciplines available at the Institute and at different
Institutions of excellence all over the country, the group could be asked to suggest a
framework for their future growth path, avoiding needless duplication of facilities in
Government hospitals. In the Committee's view, such an exercise may help avoid duplication
of facilities and wasteful repetitive investment in high cost equipment and facilities which
need to be cost-effectively utilised. (AIM 13)

14. Committee has given serious thought to the propriety of continuing with the
practice of the Health Minister being nominated as the President of the Institute. Recently a
one-man enquiry Committee had come to the conclusion, much to the Committee's dismay,
to make it a formal arrangement under which the Minister could always be ex-officio
President. After careful consideration of all aspects of the matter, the Committee would
unequivocally recommend that the Government should not accept the view of the said


49

enquiry committee and, if possible, formally terminate the arrangement under which the
Health Minister and Health Secretary are appointed as Members of the Institute’s Board.
Unless such changes in policy are made, it is not possible to ensure autonomy of the
Institute in practice. (AIM 14.4 & 14.5)

15. An appropriately eminent person drawn from the profession, can be appointed as
Member of the Institute Body and liter nominated as President, as has been done in IIMS,
ITs and Chitra Tirunal Institute at Trivandrum. Advantage of such a course would find
their respective roles distinct, without either undue government interference or without the
Institute abdicating its responsibility. (AIM 14.3)

16. The Committee emphasi the need for (a) providing more beds in the
Gynaecology and Obstetrics wards; (b) expanding modernising the Nursery; (c) replacing the
over-used and old equipments and (d) encouraging research and training in the Department.
(AIM 15.1)

17. Increasing incidence of diabetics and stress related diseases like hypertension due
mainly to changing life style and high level of pollution, number of persons having renal
problem is going up on alarming rate. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to
expand/strengthen Nephrology wards and facilities for research and training in the
Department of Renal Sciences at the earliest. (AIM 16)

18. The Committee was informed that, over the years, the expenditure of the Institute
has increased tremendously with.no corresponding increase in the funds. The annual increase
in the budget, in fact, gets neutralised by the existing rate of inflation. The Committee
recommends that the inflation on non-plan expenditure should be taken into consideration
while allocating funds not only to the AIJMS but also to all the Central Government
hospitals. (AIM 17) ‘

POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION
AND RESEARCH (PGIMER), CHANDIGARH

"1, The average number of outdoor patients visiting the OPD is very high,-which affects
the efficiency and quality of services provided by the hospital. In view of this, the
Committee emphasises the need to have a separate OPD and Emergency, with essential
testing facilities etc., away from the main Institute, in order to avoid overcrowding. (PGI 4)

2. The Committee feels that the other remedy could be to strengthen services in the
Medical Colleges and hospitals around it so that rush to the Institute can be contained. The
concerned State Governments, the Committee feels, should display due interest in
developing health facilities in their areas on a priority basis. (PGI 5)

3. The Committee feels that the necessary formalities. and requirements towards
establishing 500 bed hospital in Chandigarh Medical College, which has already been unduly
delayed, should be completed by the Department of Health in consultation with the
concerned Ministries/Departments. Ministry of Finance should make necessary allocations
for the proposed hospital so that it is set up within a reasonable time-schedule. (PGI 6)

4. The Committee is of the view that the number of beds in the Department of
Obstetrics & Gynaecology be increased suitably so that the resulting complications and
inconvenience to patients is avoided. (PGI 7)

5. The Committee is deeply concerned at such a high death rate in the Institute. (PGI 8)



50

6. The Committee expresses its deep concern about vacancies in teaching positions, as
well as in Group ‘C’ and ‘D" posts, remaining unfilled for long periods. The Committee
recommends, that immediate steps should be taken to fill up the vacancies. The Committee
feels that the suggestions of the Director, PGIMER, regarding appointments to all class I
posts by the Institute’s Body and providing more, autonomy to the Director need serious
consideration by the Department. (PGI 9.1)

“1 प16 Gonmited feels that the Department appears to have adopted an indifferent
attitude to the grievances of the faculty members of the College of Nursing: It is surprising
that a proper cadre structure for the: College has never: been planned. The Committee
recommends that the Department should implement all the rélevant recommendations/
directions of various bodies mentioned in para PGI 9.2. Efforts should also be made for
creating adequate posts in the college as recommended by the Nursing Council of India.
(PGI 9.3) पु पु

8. The Committee does not agree with the proposition of allowing private practice and
feels that this suggestion, if implenvented, would give rise to more problems than it intends
to solve. (PGI 10)

9. The Committee recommends that suitable provisions be made in the budget of the
Institute next year for constructing residential quarters for which enough space is available in
the premises of the Institute. (PGI 11)

10. The Committee, strongly recommends provision of adequate Funds and other
facilities at the earliest (i) for upgrading Radiotherapy Department into a Regional Cancer
Centre, (ii) providing a Trauma Centre and (iii) for strengthening the Neuro-surgery Centre.
(PGI 12.1) :

11. The Committee was surprised to learn’ that there were no facilities for Lithotripsy
and MRL in this premier Institute. The Committee feels that the facilities mentioned above
be provided to the Institute early. (PGI 13)

12. The Committee places on record its appreciation of the “Janta Sarais” facilities
provided at the Institute. Charitable Trusts and other such bodies be approached for running
such ‘Sarais’ or ‘Dharmashalas’ and the government should provide necessary facilities/
Concessions in procuring land etc, to the bodies/institutions interested in the matter.
“(PGI 14)

13. The Committee noticed that books particularly the new arrivals, were not properly
displayed. Older books, were found in very bad shape. The Committee feels that most of
them need binding. The Committee feels that there is a need for looking into the reasons for
the Library not attracting good number of readers and improving its working. (PGI 15)

14. The Committee feels that there is urgent need for creating a better understanding
between the authorities and employees of the Institute. It, therefore, emphasises the need
for reviving the JCM urgently. The hospital administration, the Committee feels, needs to be
more flexible and transparent in its functioning. (PGI 16)

15. The points raised by the Resident Doctors (see para 17), the Committee feels,
deserve immediate and sympathetic consideration by the Government. (PGI 17)

16. The Committee feels that the demand of the Institute for more funds for taking up
" new projects appears to be justfied and recommends that the Department should provide the
required amount at an appropriate stage. (PGI 18.2)


3

51

” JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH (JIPMER), PONDICHERRY

1. The Committee feels that adequate facilitiés should be provided in the waiting hall
and steps taken to clean and beautify its campus at the earliest. (JIP 3)

2. The Committee feels that the progress in respect of computerisation is very slow and
needs 10 be expedited. (JIP 4)
_ 3. The Committee was informed that a proposal for providing neuro-surgery centre. and
kidney transplant facilities is pending with the Government. The Committee recommends
that the proposal should be considered and cleared without further delay. (JIP 5)

4. The Committee suggests that extra beds should be provided in Obstetrics and
Gynaecology Departnient on priority basis. (JIP 6)

5. The Committee recommends that construction work of New OPD should be taken up
immediately. (JIP 7)

6. The Committee feels that granting ‘autonomy could be conducive to the progress of
the Institute and there is a need to initiate the process after convincing the employees in this
regard. (JIP 8)

7. The Committee feels that there is an urgeht need for providing adequate number of
quarters for all categories of staff. (JIP 9)

8. Absence of facilities for recreation, such as an Auditorium and infrastructure for
indoor games etc. for students was also brought to the notice of the Committee. The
Committee feels that these facilities should be provided at the earliest. (JIP 10)

.9, The Committee recommends that all-out efforts be made to fill up the existing
vacancies without further delay. (JIP 11)

10. The Committee feels that the suggestion of transfering faculty members from three
Institutions.i.e. LHMC, Maulana Azad Medical College and University College of Medical
Sciences, Delhi, to the JIPMER should be considered in all its aspects and implemented at
the earliest. (JIP 11.1)

11. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for sanctioning these posts and
recommends that the proposal of the SIU needs expeditious disposal. (JIP 11.2)

12. The Committee, recommends that the allocation for the Institute be enhanced
suitably keeping in view the requirements of the Institute. (JIP 12)

ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF PHYSCIAL MEDICINE AND REHABILITATION (AIIPMER),
BOMBAY

1. The Committee found that the Institute was doing a commendable job, particularly in
providing mechanical aids and appliances to the spastic and handicapped péople, including
crippled children. (AIP 2)

2. The Committee notes that, in the ubsence of adequate staff, the services being
provided in the Institute are being affected adversely which needs to be avoided by all
means. The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate steps be taken to create the
required number of posts in all categories and also fill up the posts lying vacant now.
(AIP 3.1)

3. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for providing adequate number of
trained orthopaedic surgeons in the Institute. (AIP 3.2)

4. It was also pointed out to the Committee that the teaching staff of the Institute,



52

specially MSc(OT) and MSc(PT), do not have the corresponding designation nor do they
have the pay-scale equivalent to those in other teaching ‘institutions. The Committee feels
that such a discrimination is not justified and their demands for similar designation and
pay-scale should be considered for immediate implementation. (AIP 3.3)

5. The Committee recommends that the Government should provide adequate
number of quarters for doctors and staff of the Institute. The Committee feels that
keeping some quarters at the disposal of the Director, as is the case in Safdarjung
Hospital; should also be considered. Construction of a residential complex in the
Institute’s premises on the land lying vacant should be given serious thought by the
Department of Health. (AIP 4)

6. The Committee is of the view that the production base of the workshops
manufacturing various appliances/devices for handicapped people, particularly its smithy
section, should be expanded and modernised so as to enuble the Institute to take up the
production of appliances etc. on a large scale and also to market them. It will help the
Institute, the Committee feels, to augment its sources of income. The Committee
recommends that the requirements of the Institute should be assessed and suitable funds
be made available to the Institute for this purpose. (AIP 5.1)

7. The Committee emphasises the need for introducing newer trades and separate
sections in the Vocational Training Workshop. (AIP 6)

8. The Committee is of the opinion that the old buildings in which the workshops
are being run, can be demolished and a multisstoreyed building can be constructed where
some of the Departments can also be shifted. (AIP 7)

9. The Committee recommends that the Department of Health should get the
pending proposal for constructing a building approved from the Planning Comr at
the earliest. Appointing an Architect based in Bombay or taking the help of CPWD,
Bombay, should also be considered. (AIP 7.1)

10. The Committee feels that the stipend being paid to the vocational guidance
trainees is very meagre and, therefore, recommends that it should be increased suitably.
More organisations, such as Indian Oil Corporation, ONGC, Steel Authority of India and
other nationalised banks should be persuaded to contribute for this cause. (AIP 8)

_ 11. The Committee, is of the view that providing adequate facilities to visitors/
attendants of the patients needs a serious consideration by the Department. (AIP 9)

12. The Committee noticed that there is lack of space in almost all the Departments
and there is also a need to modernise and expand its various workshops for which the
Committee feels the allocation would be insufficient. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the budgetary provision for the Institute be raised suitably. (AIP 10.1)

SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI

1. The Committee feels that the. issues mentioned in paras SF 2.3 and 2.4 need
immediate attention in order to provide satisfactory medical care to the patients.

2. The Medical superintendent suggested that the reserved category nurses candidates
may be given an offer of provisional. appointment without holding any formal interview.
They can be regularised after they have served satisfactorily for some time. In view of
shortage of nurses in the hospital, the Committee feels that this suggestion may be
considered by the Ministry for implementation. (SF 3.1)

3.'The Committee emphasises the need to improve the situation at the earliest by (a)
providing more posts in Group C and D and (b) opening avenues of promotion for those


53

stagnating for more than ten years in one scale. The Committee desires that all-out efforts be
made to fill up the vacant posts, in all categories, by taking suitable measures. (SF 3.2)

4. The Committee feels anguished that such an essential facility like Blood Bank has been
suspended and no adequate efforts appear to have been made to revive it. The Committee
therefore strongly recommends that steps be taken to correct the deficiencies pointed out, in
order to restore the recognition of the Blood Bank without any further delay. (SF 3.3)

5. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for strengthening the Cardiology
Department by providing adequate facilities and essential equipments. The Committee
recommends ‘that a Cath Lab should also be provided. (SF 4)

6. There is acute shortage of residential accommodation and hostels in the -hospital for
doctors as well as para-medical staff and nurses. The Committee is alarmed to see the poor
satisfaction level in the case of employees of all categories. The Committee feels that this is a
genuine problem which neéds to be looked into by the Department of Health, in consultation
with the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment. (SF 5)

7. By providing adequate number of dwelling units to the Resident Doctors, the Committee
feels, the quality of patient care would certainly improve. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that a multi-storyed hostel type accommodation for Resident Doctors and Nurses
be constructed at the earliest in the campus of the hospital for which necessary funds be
provided. (SF 5.1)

8. The Committee recommends that the Department of Health should take up the matter
for getting the barracks transferred to the hospital so that multi-storeyed buildings could be
constructed in a phased manner after demolishing them. These multi-storeyed buildings could
house all superspeciality departments, Gyane OT, the CGHS Wing, Library, Auditorium etc.
(SF 6)

9. The Committee also feels that the suggestion of upgrading the Burns and Plastics
Department to the level of an Institute should be considered by the Department of Health for
implementation. The Hospital may, in the meantime, submit a detailed proposal to the
Department of Health in this regard. The Committee, at the same time, feels that the
functioning of the Department, at present, leaves much to be desired and suggests immediate
steps to be taken to improve the. state of affairs as recommended by the Committee. (SF 7)

10. The Committee understands that the Department of Orthopaedics of the hospital had ,
been accorded the status of a National Institute, for which the funds and land were also allotted.
The Committee came to know that no progress has been made in this respect arid it appears that
the proposal has been put into cold storage. While the Committee is not aware of the reasons for
this, it feels that the proposal needs to be revived and completed as early as possible.
(SF 7A)

11. The Committee feels that the allocation of funds for the current: year needs to be
enhanced suitably at an appropriate stage. While doing so, need of the Hospital for constructing
residential accommodation, replacing old equipments and improving other facilities should be
kept in-mind. (SF 8)

DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI

1. The Committee feels that the NDMC plot adjacent to OPD/Casualty of the Hospital,
could be useful keeping in view the acute shortage of space in the hospital. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should take up the matter and make all-out efforts
to acquire the land for the use of the Hospital. (RML 3)

2. The Committee feels that the Department should take up the matter with the President’s

sRS3358


54

Secretariat and the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment to get possession of Lower
Hastings Square for improving hospital services. (RML 4)

3. The Committee feels that the position of residential accommodation in the hospital is
very poor which needs to be improved urgently by\providing sufficient number of houses
from the General Pool of different categories in. the nearby Government colonies. The
possibility of earmarking some flats in the multi-storyéd. bujlding being constructed opposite
the Casualty Wing of the hospital for senior doctors should also be taken up with the
concerned Ministry so that their services dre readily avilable, whenever required, at short
notice. (RML 5.2 and 5.3) ;

4. The Committee emphasises the need for upgrading’ this Burns and Plastics Ward as
the burn patients are highly prone to infections. (RML'6)

5. The upkeep and maintenance of Neurology Ward,, the Committee feels, require’
attention, (RML 7)

6. Following services, the Committee feels, if augmented by providing desired inputs,
would go a long way in further improving the patient care. These services are:

(i) Neurosurgical Services

(ii) Nursing Home Services

(iii) Organised Emergency Services

(iv) Cardiology Services

(v) Hyperbaric Oxygen Chamber (RML 8)

1. In view of the urgent requirements of the hospital for providing new services and
strengthening the existing ones and also for running special services mentioned in para RML
9.1, the Committee is of the opinion that the amount provided would hardly be sufficient. It,
therefore, recommends that more amount should be provided ito this hospital at the.
appropriater stage. (RML 9.1)

LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND ASSOCIATED HOSPITALS

1. The Committee was distressed to see the OTs of General Surgery and Orthopaedics,
Eye and E.N.T. are combined. The Committee is of the view that opening of separate OTs
is the need of the hour in view of fact that a large number of patients are reporting for
operations in these area. The Committee, therefore, suggests that steps should be taken to
separate the OTs and adequate staff may be provided for the purpose. (LH 3)

2. The Committee was told that projects pertaining to provision of an Accident
Emergency and Cancer Centre in the hospital are pending with the Ministry. The Committee
recommends that these proposals should be cleared expeditiously. (LH 4)

3. The Committee was astonished to learn that the Casualty of the hospital was being
run by Junior Residents since 1992 and had no regular staff.

The Committee feels that there should not be any restriction in admission to any of the
wards of the hospital due to shortage of staff/doctors. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that all vacancies in the hospital should be filled up at the earliest and wherever
there is a need to provide more posts of Senior/Junior Residents, these should be created
immediately. (LH 5 & 5.1)

4. The Committee recommends that more posts should be created in Groups ‘C’ and
‘D’ so that employees of this categories are put at par with their counterparts in other
hospitals. (LH 5.2) *


55

5. The Committee feels that grievances of the faculty members in respect of their pay
scales and promotions, as mentioned in para LH 5.3, appear to be genuine and is of the
opinion that the Department should take steps to remove anomalies in their pay scale and
the service rendered by CHS teaching sub-cadre before 1-1-1983 should be considered for
promotion purposes. (LH 5.4) 3

6., The Committee feels that enough security/sanitary staff be provided to the hospital
at the earliest. (LH 6)

7. The Committee feels that since the renovation cost of the old buildings will be much
higher, there is need for construction of multi-storeyed buildings by demolishing the existing
dilapidated structures in a phased manner. (LH 7)

8. The Committee urges the Department to make available sufficient funds to construct
an accident Emergency Block; Operation Theatre Block; Central Sterilization Department;
Radiotherapy — CT Scan Unit; and Maternity Centre at the earliest. (LH 7.1 and 7.2)

9. The Committee feels that there is a need to computerise certain services in the
hospital especially record keeping in the OPD's, and suggests that computerisation be
undertaken soon. (LH 8)

10. The Committee recommends that the posts of OT Technicians should be created
and filled up at the earliest. (LH 9)

11. The Committee feels the necessity of strengthening the existing facilities in the
delivery room and recommends that more obstetrics tables and beds, with adequate staff,
should be provided. (LH 10)

12, The Committee recommends that the services/equipments mentioned in para LH 11
should be provided to the hospital 50 as to make it a premier institution for paediatric care
in the country. (LH 11 and 11.1)

13. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for denial of accommodation to the
hospital from the General Pool which, the Committee was informed, was being given to
employees of other hospitals. It feels that a policy decision in this regard must be: taken
at the earliest and some quarters be provided from the General Pool in the nearby areas.
(LH 12)

14. The Committee feels that the old bungalows, which are presently in the campus,
should be replaced by multi-storeyed residential flats and hostels so that more
accommodation could be provided. (LH 12.1)

15. The Committee was informed by the Medical Superintendent that the hospital lacks
in modern equipments for treating patients and since the hospital is attached to the college,
it requires more funds, the Committee agrees with this plea and feels that the hospital
should be given more funds for creating more facilities and improving the existing ones in
the hospital. (LH 13)

16. The Committee found that the LHMC today is in a very bad shape with no state-of-
the-art equipment and other facilities. This pioneer institution appears to have been
relegated to the last place in terms of facilities and equipments, as compared to the other
medical colleges in the city. In view of the past performance of the Lady Hardinge Medical
College and also it being the only institution for training women doctors and nurses, the
Committee would like to put forth the following suggestions for the active consideration of
the Department so as to restore the past glory of the college:

°



56

(i) Designate Lady Hardinge Medical College for Women as an Institute of National
Importance.

(ii) Support development of highly specialised health care services for women and
children which would also be the national training and research centre in Obstetrics-
Gynaecology and Paediatrics.

(iii) Allocate national level research schemes and projects to the Institute.

(iv) Permit affiliation with well-established medical colleges in the developed countries.
(LH 14 and 14.1)

0-3

naad

3110 sat rT os)

issibsM ogiibwH (98.1 a2:

ont 89800 bite 210!290b menu

10 noitetsbienos 99198 ort 101 encit
1399109 आए 5 «

के



ANNEXURE-I

OPD ATTENDANCE

Name of Hospital 1990 1994
RML 8,94,506 11,97,655
Safdarjung 12,80,100 14,74,723
AIIMS 9,76,391 11,25,717

48


ANNEXURE-IL

STATEMENT

RML Safdarjung

No, of Beds
OPD Attendance
per day
Admission

per Day

Bed Occupancy
Rate

937 1500
3600 6000
120 250

100% 909%

AIIMS LHMC PGIMER JIPMER

865
5895

151

836
2500

120

86%

1077
2600

90

83.9%

860

96.1%

58



ANNEXURE-III

TOTAL NUMBER OF BEDS AT AIIMS HOSPITAL/SPECIALITY CENTRES

S. No. , Name of Speciality Location Present Beds
1. ‘Medicine C-2, D-2 15
2.. Human Nutrition AB-2 10
3, Hameomatology C-2 11

‘4, Endocriology AB-6 21
5. Special Isolation Ward Facility D-1 2
6. Gastroentrology ६ AB-2 24
7. Nephrology including Dialysis C-4, & AB-4 हु 34
-8. Psychiatry C-1, C-5 32
9. Dermatology D-1 30
10. Paediatrics D-5, 0-5, & ८-3 71
11. Radiotheraphy D-6 18
12. Nuclear Medicine C-2 at
13. Surgical Disciplines पु -
(a) General Surgery AB-7, C-7, D-7 96
(b) G.I. Surgery AB-7 10
(c) Kidney Transplant Unit AB-7 A)
14, Dental Surgery C7 4
15. E.N.T. D-4 33
16. Urology (including Lithotripsy4) ८-4 34
17, ९४९१, Surgery AB-S 37
18. Orthopaedics AB-1, & AB-5 49
19. Rehabilitation D-1 5
20. Gynae. and Obst. AB-3, & D-3 85
21. General ICU (8 operational) AB-8 14
22. Emergency Beds C-6, D-6, D-4, aE)
|“ Ab-5 & C-5
23. M.S. Pool C-6, D-6 5
24, E.H.S, incl. Pvt. Wards AB-6, D-1, D-4 & 30
Private Wards,

_ 25. Private Ward Beds . Pvt. Ward Block 54
<* Tora: 865
‘Cohittes

1. Dr. R.P. Centre For Ophthalmic Sciences Gen.+Pvt. Wards 300
2. Institute-Rotary Cancer Hosp. 35
3. Neuro Sciences Centre 180
4, Cardio-Thoracic Centre Gen.+Pvt. Wards 180

Granb TOTAL: 1560

59



ANNEXURE-IV

A.L.I.M.S. HOSPITAL STATISTICS

Preece SSE ea a Ee ee

Year OPD Attendance Casuality OPD Admissions
i Attendance
1984-85 925166 70373 36412
1985-86 960467 74340 37717
1986-87 994548 78274 38039
1987-88 1030568 80083 42052
1988-89 1105125 91480 43966
*1989-90 1019277 97331 43432
1990-91 976391 88452 43305
1991-92 1095712 98414 50576
1992-93 1146023 114142 540013
1993-94 1125717 108894 55110

*Strike in Hospital.

A.LI.M.S. HOSPITAL OPERATION STATISTICS

Year Total ‘ Major Minor
* 1984-85 59473 9432 50041
1985-86 62442 10974 51468
1986-87 61220 11583 49637
1987-88 70985 13058 57927
1988-89 77907 14030 63877
*1989-90 73985 13975 60010
1990-91 65643 12559 53084
1991-92 74006 15345 58661
1992-93 75686 15413 60273
1993-94 75526 15384 60142

“Strike in Hospital.


ANNEXURE-V

RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN 102ND REPORT OF THE ESTIMATES
COMMITTEE, 5TH LOK SABHA, ON AIIMS, NEW DELHI.

SI.
° No.

Para No.

Recommendations

28

51

79

2.108

3.49

6.39

The Committee note that the establishment of Dental and Nursing
Colleges in the All India Institute of Medical Sciences as required under
the AIIMS Act, 1956 has not so far been possible due to financial and
other constraints, The Committee have been informed by the Institute
that there is a need for setting up postgraduate departments in these
subjects because of the strength of the Institute in basic medicial sciences
and clinical sciences related to the oral cavity and the need for advanced
techniques of training for nurses due to the development of highly
specialised cadre of complicated disorders, It has been stated that it may
not be possible to set up postgraduate departments in Dental Science and
nursing for which the Institute had included proposals in the draft Fifth
Plan. The Committee feel that the existing potential in the Institute for
development of postgraduate studies in Dental Science and Nursing
Education should be utilised. The Committee, theretore, would like
Government to review the position so as to enable postagraduate
departments in these subjects to be set up as soon as resources position
improves.

The Committee have earlier suggested the appointment of a Review
Committee for reviewing the progress of the Institute. It would be
desirable if the review Committee evaluates the achievements of the
Rural and Urban Health Service Projects with reference to their impact
on the community and also finds out the impact of the Community
Orientation courses on the students with particular reference to their
motivation for serving the needy segments of the population. The
Committee also recommend that the review should make a special study
of the extent to which the use of less sophisticated aids for diagno 8 and
treatment have enabled students to acquire satisfactory skills consistent
with the minimum standards of medical care required. The Review

Committee should also examine whether the experiments in community -

medicine carried out by the All India Institute of Medical Sciences have
proved beneficial so that these could be extended after effecting
necessary improvements to other noted colleges in the country.

It has been represented to the Committee that medical care in the
hospital lacks human approach especially on the part of the lower
echelon of the medical staff and that most of the complaints against the
hospital arise in the casual department. The Committee are informated
that all complaints are recorded and looked into by a grievances cell and
the Medical Superintendent and that a Hospital Management Board has
been constituted in July, 1975 precisely to improve the services within
the hospital.

133358

61



62

SE
No.

Para No.

Recommendations

80

81

82

83

6.40

6.41

6.42

6.43

6.44

While these are welcome measures, it has to be appreciated that the
patients and their relatives will be very reluctant to lodge oral or written
complaints against the hospital staff. It is, therefore, for the hospital
authorities themselves at the higher level to devise ways and means to
locate the deficiencies in the services provided to the patients and the
behaviour meted out to their relatives and take prompt remedial
measures.

The Committee have no doubt that action taken on the complaints
received from time to time will be investigated by ‘the Hospital
Management Board and that exemplary action will be taken against
those members of the staff who do not show any response or
improvement despite proper re-education.

The Committee further suggest that the hospital administration should
be given adequate and effective disciplinary powers to deal with the
recalcitrant and erring staff members so as to enable them to deal with
disciplinary cases promptly.

The committee need hardly stress that despite all the good work done
by the senior doctors, the reputation of this premier hospital is likely to
suffer if the para-medical and the lower category of staff are not
courteous and attentive to the needs of the patients, with unfailing
patience and sympathy. The Committee therefore recommend that this
aspect of the working of the hospital should be given close attention so
as to bring about perceptible improvements. It would also be desirable if
periodical refresher courses are held for improvying the outlook,
attitudes and thinking of this category of staff particularly. Apart from
lectures, practical demonstrations and film shows depictng the high
standards of patient care required in a model hospital, may also be
helpful in this regard. The Committee would like to stress that service in
the hospital should be patient oriented so that the patient is the focus of
all care and service in the hospital.

It is well-known that the casualty department of a Hospital, as an
important point of contact of the patient and his relatives with the
hospital, requires to be organised as the best service in every hospital,
especially because the patients and their relatives are at that time under
emotional strain and surcharged with suspense and anxiety. The degree
of sympathy, courtesy and promptness which may be shown by the staff
in that Department has a soothing and lasting effect on the patients and
his relatives. It is, therefore, important that the casualty department and
Emergency Wards which are generally manned by junior doctors are
staffed by experienced and competent doctors who would inspire
confidence and put the anxious patients and their relatives at ease. The
Committee recommend that the casualty department of the Institute
Hospital should be organised as a model for other hospitals to follow so
that the patients and their relatives get not only prompt and expert
attention but also sympathetic treatment.

»RS3358


63

Sl.
No.

Para No.

Recommendations

87

99

100

101

6.49

6.50

8.40

8.41

8.42

Medical audit and studies ‘in cost effectiveness and efficiency with
modern techniques of system analysis and operational research are
considered to be important tools of management in a hospital. The
Committee were informed that the Institute had not made extensive
systematic studies in this area.. The Committee during their visit to Jaslok
Hospital, Bombay found that the hospital had introduced, right from its
inception, unit costing with the help of a leading firm of Chartered
Accountants. Norms had been laid down and performance watched
against the norms. The Committee desire that the All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, which is a premier medical Institute of national
importance in the country, should not lag behind in this area. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that in order to achieve an all-round
effciency, medical audit and studi in cost effectiveness should be
introduced at the earliest in the Institute.

The Committee have been informed that studies regarding the

turnover of beds made by the Institute have enabled the Institute to
identify those patients whereby “without any danger to the patient if we
can discharge the patients earlier than what we are doing at present we
will be able to save". The Committee understand that in the Jaslok
Hospital which the Study Group of the Committee visited in March,
1976, the average stay of patients in the hospital is 6-2 days as against 19
days in other hospitals. The Committee would like the All India Institute
of Medical Sciences to evaluate its performance in this matter in the light
of the standard reached by leading hospitals in the country so as to be a
pace setter.

The Committee are glad to note that there is a proposal to create
facilities in the Workshop at the Institute to help other hospitals in Delhi
in the repair of their sophisticated equipment. The Committee desire that
concerted efforts should be made to optimise the utilisation of facilities
available in the workshop not only for the Institute but also for other
sister institutions so as to keep the costly equipment and machinery in
these institutions in working order.

The Committee have been assured that only 2 per cent of the
equipment in the various departments of the Institute has been found to
be out of order. There are certain items of equipment which have been
lying out of order for want of spare parts for which action to import
them is being taken. The Committee would like to emphasise the
desirability of prompt action in this regard so that the costly machinery,
lying out of order are put into commission as early as possible.

The Committee would in this connection refer to the need for a high
standard of maintenance of equipment in a modern hospital. A Study
Group of the Committee which visited Jaslok Hospital, Bombay in
March, 1976 were informed about the high standard of maintenance of
equipment in that Hospital where the schedule of maintenance of



64

Sl.

No,

Para No.

Recommendations

machinery and equipment is strictly enforced and the maintenance
personnel is held responsible for keeping the equipment in order, with
the result that no machine is allowed to go out of order. The Committee
have no doubt that the Institute will study the system of maintenance
obtaining in the other leading hospitals so as to bring out necessary
improvements in their system of maintenance.



a

ANNEXURE-VI

RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN 79TH REPORT OF THE ESTIMATES
COMMITTEE, 8TH LOK SABHA, ON AIIMS, NEW DELHI

1,35 The Committee note that the only other Central Institute of the type of AIIMS is the
Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research which is also located in the North
at Chandigarh and has also a hospital for treatment of inpatients and outpatients. While some
State Governments have established similar institutes, in the opinion of the Committee, these
cannot attain the same level of excellence. For a country of India’s size it is important to have
similar institutions which should be capable of attending to patients with the best and modern
medicines and equipments dispersed so that specialised medical assistance is available to all at
a reasonable cost. It has to be appreciated that vast multitude of the population is poor who
cannot afford to travel to far off places to seek medical treatment. They also note that there is
overcrowding in AIIMS Hospital for which one of the factors may be the influx of patients
from outside areas. The Committee are of the opinion that, to start with, it is absolutely
essential to open either the branches of AIIMS in metropolitan cities of Bombay, Calcutta and
Madras or to open there similar Central Institutes of excellence so as to mitigate the hardships
of poor citizens who are in woeful condition due to lack of resources. Taking into account the
vast population of Calcutta and the abject poverty of the people living there due to which it is
not possible for them to seek Medical treatment in Private Hospital or to travel to far off
places to seek such a treatment, the Committee feel that priority should be given for opening
of another institute or branch of AIIMS at Calcutta.

3.32 The Committee have been informed that sometime delays take place in getting funds
for the projects which result in delay in their execution. They are of the view that steps should
be taken to cut down delays in the sanctioning of projects and release of funds so that there is
no delay in their execution, They also feel that every effort should be made to give
encouragement to young medical scientists. They are of the opinion that the lack of finances
should not stand in their way. In their Action Taken Report (70th report of Seventh Lok
Sabha), this Committee had desired to be apprised of the outcome of the consideration of the
matter which was earlier reported to be with the Scientific Advisory Committee of the
Cabinet. The Committee would like to be apprised of latest position in this regard, and would
urge the Ministry to take effective steps to make the career in medical research 16819
attractive for budding medical scientists who should be given every possible help in research
work,

4,12 The Committee have been informed that many faculty members of the Institute were
permitted to go aboard on the requests of various Ministries to provide technical assistance in
the field of medical education under ITEC programme, for rendering expert advice to other
developing countries at the request of W.H.Q., to attend workshops or seminars, (short
duration course in specialisation) to attend conferences, and for consultancy operations, etc.
The total expenditure on such visits during the period from 1983-84 to 1987-88 was stated to
be around Rs. 13.88 lakhs, The Committee have informed that guidelines have been laid down
by Government for regulating such visits. The Committee would, therefore, like the
Government to undertake an indepth study regarding the visits of faculty members abroad
during the last five years to assess the extent to which the objectives of these visits were
actually achieved and to assess their utility to medical education and research of such studies,
the guidelines could be suitably revised if considered necessary. The Committee recommend
that such a review may be carried out by associating eminent persons in medical field outside
the Institute.

65



66

4.13 While the Committee appreciate that some kind of cross-fertilisation in ideas for
upgradation of skills is essential in the interest of medical education and research there
should be some re-thinking on allowing experts to go abroad for a long period of two years
as they go for thier own benefit and gain, even though the expertise and knowledge has
been imparted to them by the Institute. Moreover, absence of such experts for the period of
2 years is also at great cost of the patient's health. They would like to be apprised of further
developments after the necessary review is undertaken.

5,18 The Committee appreciate the measure/steps taken by the MinistryAnstitute in
the redressal of the grievances of staff and they further hope that the Ministry / AIIMS will
take adequate interest in redressal of genuine grievances of the staff so that thay are
motivated to give better service to the Institute.

6.34 The Committee also feel that an integrated approach and preparation of a master
plan is imperative taking into account the future increase in population in the city and the
influx of outsiders to seek treatment in AIIMS. It is high time that all the aspects of the
problems are discerned right now after taking into account long term view of the issues
involved. While considering the expansion of OPD of AIIMS, the Ministry may also
consider the creation of more hospitals in and around Delhi to find a long term solution of
the problem by constituting an Expert Committee, if so considered necessary. They would
like to be apprised of further developments in this regard.

6.35 They note with dissatisfaction that number of counters opened to attend to the
patient in OPD is totally in-sufficient to cope with the situation and besides wasting a lot of
time of patients it adds to their agony to stand in long queues. Constraints of physical space
also add to the magnitude of the problem. While anticipating further expansion of the OPD
this aspect should be duly taken care of. The Committee are of the view that the attitude of
clerical staff who attend to the patients for preparing their cards, sending them to Doctors
and also tracing their records before being referred to Doctors, needs a radival change.
While their irritational approach may be due to their being over worked it is imperative to
inculcate a sense of service with smile which will go a long way in mitigating the hardships of
patients. They should be made to understand that they are dealing with a class of citizens
who are already suffering and a service with smile will be something precious which they will
cherish in the days to come. Notwithstanding the dedication and devotion of Doctors who
are working under great pressure, sometimes agonies faced due to discourteous behaviour of
clerical staff mar the prestige of such Institutions. While considering favourably the
augmentation of such staff a suitable training should be imparted even by resorting to audio-
visual aids, so that they may be motivated to deal with patients in more pleasant and
courteous manner. Their should be sufficient number of counters with the placard “May 1
help you” to help the vast multitude of them who are illiterates and comes from far off
places and may have language problems, and need to be properly advised.

The Class IV staff posted for such duties should be properly trained and motivated to
attend to patients and to direct them to proper places. AIIMS is a national pride and is a
symbol of national development in the medical field and necessary steps are essential to
ensure that patients are treated with care and are able to get OPD Service with reasonable
promptitude. The Committee also hope that indepth examination which was promised to be
done by an Expert Committee relating to the conversion of AIIMS, New Delhi and PGI,
Chandigarh into referral hospitals would also be undertaking expeditiously. They also
deplore that the Ministry has inordinately delayed such an examination which was
recommended by this Committee in their Seventieth Report presented to the Lok Sabha



67

on 24th April, 1984. They desire that the Ministry should ensure that such delays do not
occur in future.

6.66 The Committee note that there are 24 wings in the AIIMS Hospital housing the
indoor patients and there is an elaborate procedure for the admission in the general ward of
the Hospital. The Committee have been informed that there is heavy demand for the beds
which are stated to be only 816 in the AIIMS Hospital. The strength of the beds falls short
of the desired level with the result that a patient has to wait for quite some time to get
admission and the period of waiting varies from 3 months to more than 2 years depending
upon the nature of illness and the particular department where admission is sought. The
Committee note with desmay that waiting period for admission for surgery in ENT is upto
middle of 1991. The situation is considered to be highly un-satisfactory. The Committee
express great concern over delays in admission on, specialised departments. If the waiting
periods for admission are unduly long, the possibility of diseases becoming chronic or
incurable or proving fatel cannot be ruled out. It is imperative that capacity of indoor’
admission is suitably augmented taking into account the waiting period in different wings. It
is imperative to draw a perspective plan which should also take into account the likely
increase in the number of patients due to increase in population influx of outsiders etc. The
Committee would like the Ministry to undertake the necessary exercise in association with
experts and apprise them of the out-come of the same.

6.71 While the Committee appreciate that open heart/by-pass surgeries are being
performed in the AIIMS, they, however, note that cost of such operations, particularly those
requiring replacement of valves is quite high, which the vast multitude of poor people may
not be able to afford. While they are well aware of the factors due to which such operations
and valve replacements are costly affair, they are of the view that nothing could be more
precious than human life. Therefore, some steps are essential to mitigate the hardships of
patients in indigent circumstances who approach various relief funds/newspapers etc. for
donations. Such a situation must be avoided and a system should be devised under which the
cost of operations including those of replacement of valves is reduced so as to avoid hardship
to such patients. The question of subsidising cost of valves in such cases may also be
considered. The Committee would like to be apprised of suitable steps taken in this regard.

6.81 It is imperative to intensify Casualty and Emergency services in big cities. which , on
account of stress and strain of modern cities, different types of accidents and cardio vascular
and cerebral diseases, are under great pressure and have to attend to large number of
patients than they can normally handle. The Institute has in a written note furnished that
they are not fully satisfied with the Emergency service due to constraints of space and
limited number of available beds.

6.82 In the opinion of the Committee, the AIIMS is a national Institute of prestige and
has wider spectrum of responsibilities in the matter of improvement of health conditions in
the country and they see no reason why with persistent and coordinated efforts it should not
be possible to develop an efficient casualty and emergency set up, well-knit with other
departments of the AIIMS hospital with well laid out procedure and work distribution so
that patients brought in the Casualty and Emergency Ward are treated with examplary
promptitude and given competent treatment worth emulation by other Institutes and
Hospitals in the country. Besides availability of the Doctors to examine patients in critical
conditions, it is also highly desirable to ensure that all life saving drugs and equipments are
in position and no human life is lost due to any slippages in the arrangements. It has to be
ensured that the maintenance of machines and life saving equipment is perfect and they are
in operational use at the time of emergencies. The suitability of arrangements in this regard



‘ 68

should be periodically reviewed at an appropriately higher level so that any deficiencies in
the working of machines etc. and shortages of drugs and injections are made up with
swiftness.

6.91 The Committee note that a large number of relations of patients admitted in the
Hospital from outside are staying on the footpaths nearby the hospital. This is a disgraceful
sight and serious health hazard not only for the attendants but also for other citizens of the
city. The Committee have been informed that present accommodation available in Rajgarhia
Vishram Sadan is not adequate and needs to be augmented. The plan for construction of one
more dormitory to accommodate about 30 more persons has been approved by the NDMC
and for his plan money is also available from savings of Rajgarhia Vishram Sadan. The
Committee hope that the additional accommodation would be constructed soon. They also
note that even after augmentation of accommodation there would not be sufficient
accommodation for the stay of attendants of patients. It is imperative that adequate plans are
made for augmentation of additional accommodation not only taking into account the present
requirement but also after accounting for the future demands in this regard. The Committee
urge the Ministry to draw a plan of action for immediate formulation. Taking into account
the size of the city it does not seem difficult to manage the additional resources by
approaching philanthropist associations.

6.94 Thus, as mentioned above, no Canteeen service is rendered to the patients and their
attendants at the AIIMS. There is cafe, run by the Ladies club in the OPD for the general
public. The Committee deprecate that even though the average number of patients who visit
the AIIMS is on an average more than 50,000 per day and they are generally accompained by
attendants yet there is no satisfactory arrangements for their food and refreshments. As these
persons have on an average wait for one hour per day, it is absolutely essential to make
satisfactory arrangements for their food and refreshments at reasonable price. In PGI,
Chandigarh, there are four canteens run by U.T. Red Cross Society besides 3 juice counters
and one milk supply: counter which are run by Public Sector undertakings. In the Opinion of
the Committee the arrangements for food and refreshment of patients in AIIMS are not only
inadequate but totally unsatisfactory and they desire that the Institute should take immediate
action to provide facilities to patients and their attendants for food and refreshment on the
pattern of those available in the campus of PGI, Chandigarh so as to mitigate the hardships of
such persons most of whom are in indigent circumstances.

6.114 The Committee deprecate the casual approach of the Ministry in dealing with their
earlier recommendation as is reflected in the reply which states that “this has not been
considered feasible so far”. They regret that such a vital issue has been dealt with in such
unsatisfactory manner which is at the cost of human life and deprecate the casual attitude of
the Ministry in this case. The Committee attach the great importance to the implementation of
their recommendations. They urge the Ministry to ensure that such things do not happen in
future. In view of the great spurt in the number of burn cases in big cities, it is imperative to
start such a centre with due expedition. Opening of mobile dispensary to treat such cases
should also be considered. It is also desirable to open special ward with necessary
infrastructure so as to save human lives. Steps are also needed to keep abreast of latest
advancement in developed countries which could be advantegeously utilised to eradicate the
sufferings of humanity.


ANNEXURE-IX

STATISTICAL INFORMATION RELATED TO THE AIIPMER 1994-95
(1) Out-Patient Department:

During the period of report, 8,500 new cases and 7,500 old patients were treated
through special clinics. (Case Conference, Follow-up, Myopathy, Hand, Prosthetic,
Disability, Brace und Scoliosis), The total number of such clinics is 4200,

A total number of 1,527 operations (major and minor) were performed in the Institute.
The performance of various sections is as follows:

(2) Radiology Department:
X-Ray Investigations 4918
(3) Pathology Department:

(a) Investigations in clinical pathology 11,460
(b) Investigations in Bio-chemistry 1,820
(c) Investigations in Micro-biology 2,900
Total number of Pathological Investigations 16,180

(4) In Patient Department:

(a) Indoor patients admission oo

(b) Major Surgery 545
(c) Minor Surgery 982
(5) Physiotherapy Department:
(a) New patients 6040
(b) Old patients 9409
(c) Total Number of treatment units न 190232
(9) E.M.G. and Bio-feed back 488
(e) Average daily attendance 337
(6) Occupational Therapy Department: :
(a) New patients 5049
(b) Old patients 3144
(c) Total Number of treatment units 95674
(d) Total patient’s visit 21761

(7) Prosthetic Workshop:
(a) Total number of executed orders:

(i) Prosthesis 965
ii) Orthosis 1400
(ii)

(b) Total cost of jobs executed Rs. 1.93 Lakhs

State Bank of India subsidy and A.D.I.P. Scheme. (The cost shown is based on prices
fixed in 1965 or so. The actual cost will work out to not less than Rs. 20.00 lakhs).

(8) Vocational Guidance Department:
(a) Number of Patients evaluated 3156

72



ANNEXURE- VIII

JIPMER, PONDICHERRY
Hospital statistics for the period from 1.1.92 to 31.12.94

Particulars 1992 1993 1994

1. Out Patient Department
No. of new patients attended 236965 232665 239196
No. of old patients attended 956833 962990 969222
Total No. of patients attended 1193798 1195655 1208418
Daily average of out-patients* 4020 4053 : 4082
2. In Patient Department
No. of patients admitted 31544 33315 32747
No. of patients treated 31474 33320 32723
No. of deaths 1410 1510 1593
Death percentage 4.5% 4.5% 4.9%
Average stay of in-patients 10 days 10 days 9 days
Bed occupancy rate 96.0% 96.8% 96.5%
Turn over interval 0.5 0.3 0.4
Bed strength including 859 860 860
Paying Beds 64 65 65
Daily average of in-patients 86 91 90
admitted
3. Emergency Department (Casualty)
No. of out-patients attended 83355 90174 95115
Daily average 228 247 261
4. Operations hn
In-patients: Elective 7182 7306 7509
Emergency avs) 2427 3037
Total 9505 9733 10546
Out-patients: Elective | 27972 25828 25897
Emergency 4260 4128 4306
TOTAL 32232 29956 30203
Granpb ToTAL 41737 ; 39689 40749
‘Daily Average of Emergency 6 हा 8
Operations done (In-patients)
Daily Average of Emergency 12 11 12
Operations done (Out- j
patients)
Daily Average of Emergency i 18 ib O18 20

Operations done (Total)

“More than 70% of Patients are from rural arca.

71


13;

Family

(a) No.
(b) No.
(c) No.
(d) No.
(e) No.

70

Welfare

of Vasectomies done

tubectomies done

of Medical terminations of pregnancy
of Uternine Devices incerted

of conventional contraceptives.

133358



SNe)

10.

sks
12)

183358

ANNEXURE-VII

IMPORTANT INFORMATION REGARDING PGIMER, CHANDIGARH
No. of total beds £ 30
Distribution of beds .

(a) Medicine including skin and psychiatry ४ 170
(b) Paediatrics 0 ४ |
(c) Surgery ‘ ४ 204
(d) Orthopaedics 230
(e) Obst. & Gyane 192
(f) Emergency wards, ICU etc. 59+10 in ICU=69
(g) Others : 339
TOTAL: 1077
No. of admissions during the year : 30,496
Total patient day-new borns eelO 38.
Total patient days ; ४ 3,19,004
Average length of stay 1
Bed occupancy rate BEES)
(a) Medicine & its specialities : 9 99.1
(०) Surgery & its specialities A GIS)
(c) Paediatrics and its specialities : 86.0
(d) Obst. & Gynae and its specialities : भ्य्णाड
Bed turnover rate Pd)
OPD
(a) Total attendance (New patients) : 2,31,986
(b) Total attendance (old/new patients) : 4,73,975
(c) Total of new and old ४ 7,05,961
(9) Average No. of out patients per
working day / 32355

No. of minor & major operation
Major : 12305

Minof : 3213.

Death rate 176

Cost of Diet per patient per day:
Gen. Ward : 18-00

Pvt. Ward : 55-00

69


73

(9) Vocational Training Workshop:

51 trainess were admitted and have completed their training. Stipend of Rs. 18,731- was
given to the students.

Number of patients referred through Employment Exchange 1288
(10) ‘Medical Social Work Department:

(a) Old patients 3757

(b) New patients 7454

During this year patients were helped by providing appliances and artificial limbs
subsidies and the ADIP scheme of the Institute in the following manner:

— Number of patients helped through the ADIP scheme of ALIMCO with

100% subsidy 864
50% subsidy. 156
Elbow crutches 180
Wheel chairs 3

(11) Speech Therapy:

(1) Number of patients for Counselling 277
(2) Number of patients evaluation of Speech Problems 277
(3) Number of patients attending Therapy in a year 271
(4) Total Number of Sessions of Therapy patients 658



ANNEXURE-X

HOSPITAL STATISTICS
Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi

1992 1993 1994
1. Total No. of patients 14,34,760 14,66,539 14,74,723
2. Total indoor admissions 80,292 82,621 85,915
3. Net mortality rate 2.9% 3.1% 2.8%
4, Total operations 43,087 45,514 58,805
5. Total deliveries 12,245 15,680 16,952
6. Average bed occupancy 88.2% 88.6% 90.9%
7. Bed turn over rate é 52:5 53.8 56,2
8. Casualty & Emergency Attendance 1,66,440 1,73,957 1,90,831
9. Burns Casualty Attendance 0,002: 5,827 5,652

74


ANNEXURE-XI

STAFF POSITION IN SAFDARJUNG ‘HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI an

The following is the present staff position, sanctioned strength and vacancy position
of the hospital: :

Name of the Post Sanctioned In position Vacant/Extra
Supertime Gr.l. 21 27 6 (Ex)
Specialist Gr.I 29 33 4 (Ex)
C.M.O. 11 24 13
Specialist Gr.II 166 63 103
Sr. Medical Officer 22 40 18
Medical Officer 42 13 29
Resident Doctors : 536 (including $.R./J.R./PG)
Nursing Staff 1190 1035 155
Other Staff

Non-medical Gr.I 30 21 9
Non-medical Gr.B 70 37 33.
Gr. B Non-gazetted 30 26 4
Group ‘C’ 994 959 35

5



ANNEXURE-XIL

POSITION OF RESIDENTIAL ACCOMMODATION IN SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL
VIS-A-VIS ‘STRENGTH OF STAFF IN DIFFERENT GROUPS

Total Staff-4505 Total Qtrs-827 Nurses Hostel Accommo,-212

। Sanctioned Residence Accommo- Percentage of
Strength Provided dation in _ satisfaction
the hostel

Doctors 280 78 Nil 27.86
Others 101 =e Nil _ Nil
Group B (Non-Medical) 70 05 Nil 7.14
Group B & C-Nurses 1181 52 212 22.35
Group ‘C’ Ministerial 171 (Get from general
pool)
Non-Ministerial 1295 166 12.82
Group ‘D’ Ministerial 61 (Get from general
; pool)
Non-Ministerial 1346 526 _ 39.07

76


ANNEXURE-XIII

COMPARATIVE STATEMENT OF THE HOSPITAL STATISTICS

RML Hospital, New Delhi

1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1994

(i) O.P.D. 6,12,403 7,18,562 8,40,148  9,18,537 8,94,506  9,29,975

4 Attendance (2041 /day) (2395 / day) (2800 / day) (3061 / day) (2981 / day) (3100 / day)
(ii) Casualty 70,247 84,334 1,07,823 1,48,732  1,37,929 1,61,114

Attendance (165/day) (231/day) (295/day) (407/day) (377/day) (441/day)

(iii) Admission 27,088... 3,390... 33,560. 44,033 «36,947 + 40,490
(14/day) (99/day) (92/day) (120/day) (101/day) (110/day)

(iv) X-ray /day 220 270 320 374 428 490
(v) Lab test 2,000 2,574 3,148 4,337 4,252 4,286
per day
71

053358


ANNEXURE-XIV
PLAN SHOWING THE POSITION OF N.D.M.C. SCHOOL AT DR. R.M.L. HOSPITAL

। 7 ६10४२७ ६१९५

} ii । SURERI ES ५
- EMERGENGH

: peste = | Lise

RS3358


ANNEXURE-XV
POSITION OF RESIDENTIAL ACCOMMODATION IN RML HOSPITAL

Type & number of ‘No. of officials Satisfaction
quarters available eligible from the (%age Ratio)
in this hospital hospital pool

Type No.

Type I 121 350 34.70
Type Il 114 656 103
Type II 59 ! 510 11.55
Type IV 16 66 ५ 24.2
Type D-IL 7 50 14.0
Type D-I Nil 35 बन्द
Type C-Il Nil 8 =
Type C-I Nil 3 _-

719


ANNEXURE-XVI
KALAWATI .SARAN CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI

I Il Ul IV Vv
Informations for the year 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994
(upto date)
Total Bed strength 314 314 350 350 350
Emergency & Intensive Care 50 50 57 24 57
(Total no. of beds)
Medical Aid provided to
the patients
1, Casualty attendance 34,111 31,004 30,630 30,596 28,258
2. OPD Attendance ;
a) New 94,333 95,579 98,907 96,907. 1,06,909
०) Od 1,57,979  1,42,743 1,83,290 1,36,838  1,62,391
3. Indoor Admissions
a) Patients 23,949 19,803 10107 16,554 16,187
b) New borns 13,997 12,717 10,215 10,101 10,108
4, Operations (Indoor)
a) Major 834 786 693 591 779
०) Minor 1,499 1,495 1,916 1,919 2,161
5. Total No. vaccinations
90७७. 7,025 5,187 4,916 4,587 5,104
Montoux 3,922 4,218 4,117 3,092 7,745
Triple Antigen (D.P.T) 15,142 13,805 13,825 11,706 12,240
Oral Polio 16,267 14,566 13,352 12,311 14,111
Measles 2,723 2,400 2,588 2,289 2,701
Diphtheria & Tetanus 1,213 1,017 978 995 819
(D.T.)
Tetanus Toxoid 61 59 147 175 179
Vitamin A. 2,982 3,134 3,344 6,343 6,343
6. Total OPD Attendance 3102,312.... 23835 2,62,197 2,33,779 — 2,69,300
7. Bed occupancy rate. in
percentage rks) 100.1 76.3 77.4 86.1

80


ANNEXURE-XVII

PRESENT STRENGTH OF SANITARY AND SECURITY STAFF AND ADDITIONAL
REQUIREMENT FOR LHMC & ASSOCIATED HOSPITALS

R.M-L LHMC. Addl. Total K.S.C.H. Addl. Total
Hostels Reqd. Reqd.
Auditorium
& S.K.
Hospital
Bed
strength 929 836 _ a 360 _— ना
A. Sanitary Staff
1. Chief
Sanitary
Supdtt. 1 NIL 2 2 NIL 1 1
2. Sanitary 2 NIL 3 5 NIL ih 1
Supdtt.
3. Caretaker 5 NIL 10 18 1 5 6
4. Supervisors/
Havaldar 10 2 15 17 1 2 3
5. Safai 300  Hospital=189 lll 300 74 25 99
Karamchari College=109 — 109

Total=298 ill 409
B. Security Staff

1. Head 1 1 1 3 NIL 1 1
Security

Officer

2. Asstt. 1 NIL 2 2 NIL 1 1
Security

Officer

3. Internal 43 40 35 75 14 10 24
Security

4. Private 42 Nil at 50 50 NIL 10 10
Security present in §

the process

81 ,



MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY ‘STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

XI
“ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 24th August, 1994 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1, Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

. Shri 0.2, Kohli

. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

8. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

10. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
11. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

12. Dr. Vasant Pawar

13. Shri K.T. Vandayar

14, Shri Inder Jit

15. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

17, Shri Anna Joshi

18. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

19. Shri Ramchandra Dome

20, Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
21, Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary

4, Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer
2. * * *

3. * . के

३७ ०४ (७ + ० ७

4, The Committee then discussed about its future programme, and decided to take up the

*Minutes of I to X mectings of the Committee relate to matters not included in this report.
“**Relate to other matters.

82


following topics for consideration:—
(i) Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992;
(ii) Functioning of Central Government Hospitals and Central Government Health
Scheme;
1) Functioning of Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti and the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan;
and
(iv) Steps for improvement of India’s performance in the International sports
events—functioning of the Sports Authority of India and various sports
federations receiving Government grants.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.

83


XH
TWELFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 7th September, 1994 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

Shri O.P. Kohli

. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
Shri Md. Salim

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

8. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

9. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
10. Dr. Vasant Pawar

11. Prof. P.J. Kurien

12. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

13. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
14. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

15. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

16. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

17. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

18. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

21. Shri Anna Joshi

22. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

23. Shri Brahma Nand Mandal

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
, 3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer
2. > * *

3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following subjects:

MAWERYLN

(i) Functioning of the Central Government Hospitals and the Central Government
Health Scheme; and
(ii)Steps for improvement of India’s performance in the International sports

***Relate to other matters.


85

events—functioning of the Sports Authority of India and various sports federations
receiving Government grants.

3.1 Thereafter, the Committee identified various issues on the above mentioned
subjects and decided that the same may be sent to the concerned Ministries for their
comments, The Committee also finalised the names of individuals/organisations who are to
be invited for tendering oral evidence before the Committee in connection with the above
mentioned subjects.

4. The Committee decided to visit some of the Central Government Hospitals and
Central Government Health Scheme dispensaries situated in Delhi and other parts of the
country to have first hand information about their functioning which would help the
Committee examine their functioning effectively. These visits could be undertaken by
forming small groups of members of the Committee. The Committee authorised the
Chairman to finalise the dates, places to be visited and other details of the visits.

4.1 The Committee ulso authorised the Chairman to approach Hon'ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha, to seek his permission to visit the hospitals outside Delhi.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m. to meet at 11,00 a.m. on Thursday, the
8th September, 1994 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi. i



XVI
“SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 6th October, 1994 in Committee

Room ,‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. ‘

PRESENT ४ हर
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman है *

RAJYA SABIIA .
. Dr. M. Aram ‘vel i

2

3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury *
4. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

5. Shri Md. Salim

6, Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

7. Prof. 1.06: Sanadi z
8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

9, ‘Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

10, Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA /

11, Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

12, Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar यु

13, Dr. Vasant Pawar .
14, Prof. P.J. Kurien

15. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

16. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

17. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
18. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

19, Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Dr. G.L, Kanaujia

21. Shri Anna Joshi

22. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

23. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

24. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

25. Shri Suraj Mandal

. * *

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secreatary

2. Shri. Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer on
के

. *

. * * छः

SN

* * *

5. The Committee then discussed the proposed visit to All India Institute of Medical

*Minutes of XIII to XV meetings relate to maticrs not included in this report.
***Relate to other matters.

86


87

Sciences, Safdarjung Hospital and a C.G.H.S. dispensary on the 8th October, 1994. Some
Members expressed their inability to join the visit and after some discussion the Committee
postponed the visit to a later date.

6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Friday, the
7th October, 1994.



+ XIX
“NINETEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 9.15 a.m. on Wednesday, the 26th October, 1994 in Committee
Room ‘A’ and again at 3.00 p.m. after lunch-break in Committee Room ‘D’ Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4. Shri Md. Salim

5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

6. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
7. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
8. Dr. Vasant Pawar

9. Prof. P.J. Kurien

10. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

11. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
12. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

13. Shri Inder Jit

14. Shri Rambadan

15. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

16. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

17. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

18. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
19. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

20. Shri Anna Joshi

21. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

22. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

23. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

24. Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

३. Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary

4. Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee prior to proceeding to visit the C.G.H.S. dispensaries and the All
India Institute of Medical Sciences for inspection held some discussions. The Committee,

* *

*Minutes of XVII and XVIII mectigs relate to matters not included in this report.
***Relate to other matters.

88


89

then visited two C.G.H.S. dispensaries—one in South Avenue and the other at Curzon
Road (Constitution House). In the dispensaries visited by the Committee, the Committee
members enquired from the patients about the facilities provided to them and sought their
views on further improvement

2.1 In the South Avenue dispensary, the Committee Members came across some
outdated medicines which were brought to the notice of the officers of the Department of
Health, accompanying the Committee. They were also instructed to enquire into this matter
and fix responsibility in that regard. The Committee also found that cleanliness, in general,
was much below standard, particularly in the dispensary in South Avenue. It also noted that
a number of bulbs of the light points were missing. There was no emergency kit in the
dispensary in South Avenue. Further, while the dispensary in South Avenue was using non-
disposable syringes, the dispensary at Curzon Road had disposable ones. The Department of
health officials, accompanying the Committee members, when asked to explain as to why the
dispensary in South Avenue was using non-disposble syringes, could not give any satisfactory
reply.

3. During the visit to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), the
Committee Members enquired about the facilities provided to the patients and ascertained
their views thereon. The Committee visited the O.P.D., the Casualty, Dr. R.P. Centre for
Ophthalmic Sciences, the Neurosciences and the Cardiothoracic Centre. The Committee
found almost all the Departments and Wards extremely crowded. The waiting period for
out-patients was unusually long.

3.1 The Committee held discussions with the Director, Heads of the various Centres
and other Senior Officers, of the AIIMS. The Senior Doctors present, besides Dr. S.K.
Kachker, Director of the Institute, were Dr. Bannerjee, Dr. Dada, Dr. L.M. Nath, Dr.
Wazir and Dr. Basu, Medical Superintendent. and other Senior Officers. The discussions
ranged from shifting of the out-patients and casualty Wing outside the Institute’s premises,
provision of more funds for expansion and strengthening of infrastructural facilities
coordination between the four Centres of the AIIMS,. career planning for Doctors and
employees, treatment of the poor and restoration of status of the Institute as the country’s
top referral body, as it was originally conceived. The Director, AIIMS, informed the
Committee that during 1993-94, 1.7 million patients came to the hospital for treatment while
it was equipped to treat satisfactorily not more than six lakh patients. He added that, over
the years, while the expenses had increased tremendously, there had not been corresponding
increase in the funds made available to the Institute. While in 1977, the Institute was
spending twenty per cent of total expenditure on the treatment of patients, this was now
about five per cent only. The Committee was also apprised of the constraints under which
the Institute was functioning such as inadequate water supply, lack of other infrastructural
facilities and inadequate funds required for immediate replacement of equipments, such as
Cat-Scan etc. The first Cat-Scan was installed in the Institute some-time in 1975 and
therefore it required replacement. The Institute’s proposal for increase in fee from existing
rate of Rupee one to Rupees ten for issue of O.P,D. Card had been pending with the
Ministry for nearly two years.

3.2 The Committee was informed that the Institute was governed by the University Act,
but the same was not being implemented. This has led to erosion of autonomy of the
AIIMS.

4. During the meeting held, after lunch break in Committee Room ‘D’, P.H.A., the
Chairman, in the first instance, brought to the notice of Secretary, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare (Department of Health), about the absence of the representative of the



90

Department of Health during the Committee's visit to C.G.H.S. dispensaries and AIIMS in
morning. The Secretary informed the Committee that the Director-in-charge was to attend
on the Committee. However, he had to go on tour on an urgent official work. Therefore,
Additional Director General of Health Services, was deputed for the purpose,

ise gs * *

51 है Ba LE
6, a * *
Ti लि है *
ons * *

9. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday,
the 8th November, 1994, :
Ta)

“Relate to other matters.


XXII
“TWENTY-SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 3rd January, 1995 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1, Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4, Shri Md. Salim

5. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

7. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
8. Dr. Vasant Pawar

9. Prof. P.J. Kurien

10. Shri Z. M. Kahandole

11. Shri Inder Jit

12. Shri Rambadan

13. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

15. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

17. Shri Anna Joshi

18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

19, Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
20. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
‘2. Shri N. K. Singh, Deputy Director
3. Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

9 * * *

3, $ * *

4. The Chairman informed the Committee that the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha,
had accorded permission to undertake visits to Pondicherry/Madras and Chandigarh in
connection with the consideration of the functioning of C.G.H.S. and Central Government
Hospitals. Two Study Groups would be constituted for this purpose. Study Group I will be
visiting Madras/Pondicherry from 15th to 18th January, 1995 and the Study
Group II will be visiting Chandigarh in the last week of January, 1995. He invited options

*Minutes of XX and XXI mectings relate to matters not included in this report.
**Relate to other matters.

91



92

from the members for being considered on any one of the two Study Groups.

5, ee * *
se * *
5.2 ° * *
53 e * *
Siaase . *
55° * *
56° * * है
Gabo * *
(E86 * * ‘

7..The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday
the 4th January, 1995.

4
yt
“A

*Relate to other matters.



XXIII
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. and again at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 4th January,
1995 in Committee Room ‘E’ Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New. Delhi.

ve

PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri O.P. Kohli

3. Shri Md. Salim

4. Prof. 1.0. Sanadi

5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma

6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

8. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

9. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan

10. Dr. Vasant Pawar

11. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

12. Shri Iswarbhai Khodabhai Chavda

13. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

14. Shri Inder Jit

15. Shri Rambadan

16. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

17. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya

18. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

19. Shri Anna Joshi

20. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

21. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

22. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

23. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

WITNESSES

1. Shri K.D. Gandhi, Convenor,
Central Govt. Health Scheme,
Beneficiaries Welfare Committee.

2. Shri Jugal Kishore,

Area Welfare Officer.

3. Shri Sudarshan Lal Behi, President,
Central Government Employees Residents
Welfare Association, Pushp Vihar

4. Dr. B.B. Bisoi, General Secretary,
Joint Action Council of Service
Doctors Organisations, R.K. Puram,
New Delhi.

5. Shri Ramkrishan, General Secretary,
All India CGHS Employees Association,

V4

93

RS3358



94

Sriniwas Puri, New Delhi.
6. Shri P.N. Kumara, President,
Bharat Pensioners Samaj, Jangpura,
New Delhi.
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee, after some discussions, proceeded tc visit the C.G.H.S dispensary
located at Kali Bari Marg and the Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital.

2.1 In the dispensary the Members enquired from the patients about the facilities provided
to them and sought their views for further improvements. The Committee also observed that
out of four doctors only two were on duty and two were on leave for whom no replacement
had been provided. Disposable syringes were not being used. In the Ayurvedic &
Homoeopathic dispensaries, housed in the same building, the medicines meant for
distribution to patients were found lying uncovered thereby being exposed to dust and
humidity. The Store rooms were also untidy and no dustbins were around. Several rooms
were found locked and the accommodation, though spacious, was not being properly
utilised.

3. During its visit to Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, the Members visited different
Wards/Departments in separate groups and enquired about the facilities provideed to the
patients and ascertained their views thereon.

3.1 The Committee found almost all the Departments/Wards, particularly the O.P.D.
over-crowded. The waiting period for Out-patients was unusually long.

3.2 The Committee held discussions with the Medical Superintendent, Dr. S.P. Aggarwal,
Heads of the various Departments and other senior officers of the Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia
Hospital. The discussion ranged from the shortage of space, further expansion of the
hospital, strengthening of infrastructural facilities, virtual non-existence of residential
accommodation for doctors & Staff, inadequate number of staff particularly of Class 1५ and
V, expansion of the Gynaecology Obstectrics ward of the hospital, provision of residential
accommodation for doctors and employees in the Hospital premises or in the vicinity,
improvement in sanitary condition and lighting arrangements, to various other problems of
the hospital. The Medical Superintendent informed the Committee that there was no
shortage of medicines in the hospital and in case of any emergency one thousand rupees was
always there at the disposal of the doctor in charge of the Emergency/Casulty Ward.

4. The Committee, thereafter, heard the oral evidence of the witnesses mentioned above
in connection with the consideration of functioning of C.G.H.S. and Central Government
Hospitals.

4.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 p.m. to meet again at 10.30 a.m on Thursday
the Sth January, 1995.

IRS3358

Pr)


XXIV
TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the Sth Junuary, 1995 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT

1, Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri O.P. Kohli
3. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
4, Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
5. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
7. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
8. Dr. Vasant Pawar
9, Shri Z.M. Kahandole
10. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
11, Shri Aslam Sher Khan
12. Shri Inder Jit
13. Shri Rambadan
14. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
15. Shri Muhadeepak Singh Shakya
16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
17, Shri Anna Joshi
18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
19, Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
20. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
21. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
WITNESSES
1. Dr. S.K. Kacker,

Director, A.1.1.M.S.
2. Dr. 8, Chakraverty,
Medical Superintendent,
Safdarjung Hospital,
3. Dr. S.P. Agarwal,
Medical Superintendent,
Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital.
4, Dr. C. Anand, Principal & Medical
Superintendent,
Lady Hardinge Medical College &
Smt. Sucheta Kripalani Hospital.
5. Dr. P. Das Gupta,
Drug Controller of. India.
6. Dr. Ramalinga Swamy,
ormer Director, A.1.1.M.S.

95



96

7. Dr. Brigadier R.S. Verma,
Medical Superintendent,
Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre.
8. Dr. Yash Puri, ५
Hospital Consultant.
9. Major General H.S. Oberoi, VSM,
Senior Consultant (Medicine) A.F.M.S.
10. Dr, Nathu Lal, C.M.O.,
S.N. Market.
11, Dr. 0.0. Nayak, ©, Mor
Shahdara.
12. (Dr. 8.1., Restost; (८.)/.0.,
Tilak Nagar.
13. Shri M.S. Dayal, Secretary,
Deptt. of Health,
M/o Health & Family Welfare.
14, Dr. A.K. Mukherji,
Director General Health Services.
15:90, 1१४. Dutta,
Director, C.G.H.S.
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K, Singh, Deputy Director
2. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the witnesses mentioned above in
connection with the consideration of the functioning of C.G.H.S. and Central Govt.
Hospitals.

2.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.

3. The Committee, thereafter, discussed its future programme and ‘decided to meet again
on 30th and 31st January, 1995,

4..The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 p.m.


XXV
TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. and again at 2.30 p.m. on Monday, the 30th January,
1995 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT

1,

Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

SAI AKAYN

. Miss Saroj Khaparde
. Shri O.P. Kohli

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

10,

wi

a:
4.

5:

Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
Prof. P.J. Kurien

» Shri Z.M. Kahandole

. Shri Iswarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

» Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya

५ Dr. G.L. Kanayjia

Shri Anna Joshi ड़

. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

Shri Suraj Mandal

'TNESSES
. Dr. B.N. Sinha, Director General, Railway Health Services.
. Shri S.C. Nagpal, Director and Chief Welfare Officer, Ministry of Personnel, Public

Grievances and Pensions.

Shri M.S. Dayal, Secretary, Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare.

Shri A.K. Mukherjee, Director General Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare.

Shri S.N. Haldhar, Director, C.G.H.S., Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

6.Shri N.C. Dutta, Additional Director, C.G.H.S., Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
SECRETARIAT

३९३ 9०1० ७

Smt. V.S. Rama Devi, Secretary-General
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

97



98

2. The Committee, after some discussions, proceeded to visit C.G.H.S dispensaries No. 13
and No. 35, located in Sarojini Nagar, New Delhi, and also the Safdarjung Hospital.

2.1 In the CGHS dispensary No. 13, the Committee found the cleanliness in and around
the building of the dispensary unsatisfactory. It was explained to the Committee that one
post of Safaiwala had been lying vacant for a long time. The Committee also found that the
stock register in this dispensary was not up-to-date and the stock of medicines distributed,
the balance, was not shown properly. Some old records were found stacked in almirahs for
the last 20 years which were of no use at all. The number of patients when the Committee
visited was surprisingly very low.

2.2 In the dispensary No. 35, located near Sarojini Nagar Market, lot of broken and
condemned furniture were found locked in two separate rooms. The Committee was
informed that these were to be written off by the appropriate authority. The emergency kit
was not available in this dispensary. The cleanliness also was not, satisfactory.

3. The Committee, thereafter, visited the Safdarjung Hospital where the Members were
received by its Medical Superintendent alongwith his senior colleagues. Members of the
Committee visited various wards/wings of the Hospital in different groups accompanied by
the heads of the respective Departments/Wings.

3.1 Members of the Committee, while visiting different Wards/Departments, enquired
about the facilities and services being provided to the patients and ascertained their views
regarding the problems encountered by them. Departments/Wards were found over-.
crowded, waiting period for patients being unusually long.

3.2 Department of Orthopaedics, particularly its O.P.D. was crammed with ‘patients and
there was no space and facilities for waiting patients, some of them sitting/lying on’ the
ground, both in and outside the building. Proper ventilation facility and cleanliness also was
not there.

३.३ Similarly, the O.P.Ds of the Gynaecology and Obstetrics were also very much
crowded and the number of beds in the wards was found to be very 109. Condition of the
nursery was also not satisfactory. Dearth of nursing staff, the Committee was informed, was
one of the main problems hampering the working of the department. *

3.4 In Burns and Plastics, the wards were found with no proper ventilation and lot of dust-.
on windows, etc., particularly in the wards located on ground floor. No outdoor patients
were seen while the Committee visited the wards

3.5 Buildings of certain departments, such as Orthopaedics, Gynaecology and Obstetrics
and Cardiology, were in a dilapidated condition. Some operation theatres also were in a bad
shape and needed substantial renovation. The maintenance of the nurses’ hostels was also
not satisfactory. a

3.6 There was, virtually, no facility for the visitors and the people attending on the
patients, were found squatting in the open space between various wings/blocks of the
hospital.

3.7 The Committee came to know that recognition to the Blood Bank existing in the
hospital had been withdrawn due to lack of staff and facilities required for its upkeep.

3.8 Members of the Committee, after visiting various Wards and Departments, assembled
in the office of the Medical Superintendent for discussions with all sections working in the
Hospital.

3.9 During the discussions, the Medical Superintendent informed the Committee that lack


99

of sufficient number of medical and para-medical staff, adequate powers to the Medical
Superintendent, residential accommodation/host for the doctors and nurses and
coordination between AIIMS and Safdarjung Hospital were some of the major hinderances
in providing adequate and efficient service to the people.

4. The Committee was apprised of the urgent need to have some super-speciality services,
more posts at different levels, recognising Burns and Plastics Department as a separate
institute, recognising the hospital as a teaching hospital, construction of a new Gyane OT,
separate CGHS wing, a library building, an auditorium, Nursing Home and the Department
of Rehabilitation and Physiotherapy at the earliest.

4.1 The Committee, held discussions with the Association of Resident Doctors, Nurses’
Union and the Safdarjung Hospital Workers’ Union on the problems faced by them.

4.2 The Committee then heard the oral evidence of the above-mentioned witnesses in
connection with the consideration of functioning of Central Government Health Scheme and
Central Government Hospitals. :

4.3 A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 p.m. to meet again at 10.30 a.m. on Tuesday,
the 31st January, 1995.


XXVI
TWENTY-SIXTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. and again at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 31st January,
1995 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT R
1, Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

10, Maulana Habibur Rahman Nontani

LOK SABHA

11, Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

12. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

13, Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
14, Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
15. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

16. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

17. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
19. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

20. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
21. Shri Suraj Mandal

WITNESSES

1. Shri Alok Mukhopadhyay,
Executive Director, Voluntary Health
Association of India.

WOIDNAWN

2. Shri R. Srinivasan,
“Former Secretary, Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare.
3. Dr. Harcharan Singh,
Former Health Advisor,
Planning Commission.
4. Dr. D. Banerjee,
Professor (Emeritus), 5
Centre for Social Medicine and Community Health,
Jawaharlal Nehru University.

100


101

5. Dr. Almas Ali,
Member-Secretary,
Voluntary Health Association of India.

6, = * *
ba * के *
8. * कु क्र
. 9, : ' ’
10. * + कु J
कु SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
a 2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
- 3. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer ‘
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the representatiyes of the Voluntary
Health Association and some members of the Independent Commission on Health in India

ih (mentioned as witness 1-5) and ascertained their views and suggestions regarding the
functioning of the Central Government Health Scheme and Central Government Hospitals.
3. ¢ ' [| oe
7 4. A verbatim record of the eyidence was kept.
5. . ’ *
6. * * *
हु 7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m. 5

t

***Relate to other matters.

RS3358

awe



XXVII,
TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. and in continuation from 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the
16th February, 1995 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi. :

PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Miss Saroj Khaparde :
3. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
LOK SABHA

4. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

5. Shri Ishwarbhai KhodabhaiChavda
6. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

7. Shri Inder Jit

8. Shri Rambadan

9. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

10. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
11. Shri Anna Joshi

12. Shri Ramchandra Dome

13. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

SECRETARIAT

1, Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development visited Smt. Sucheta Kripalani Hospital, Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital
and inspected the C.G.H.S. Dispensary, Gole Market No. 1.

3. In the dispensary, the stock register was not found up-to-date, the entries of
medicines distributed and the balance were not being done regularly. The Committee was
informed that the doctors in the dispensary did not have separate consultation rooms. It was
further informed that the dispensary which attends to around 350 patients everyday only-one
nursing staff had been provided. No complaint box was found in the dispensary and no
complaint was made in the register since 1993.

4. In the Sucheta Kripalani Hospital, the Committee was received by Dr. (Mrs.) C.
Anand, Principal and Medical Superintendent alongwith her colleagues. Members of the
Committee visited different wards/departments of Smt. Sucheta Kripalani Hospital and
Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital in separate groups.

5. In Smt. Sucheta Kripalani Hospital, almost all the departments/wards, particularly
Orthopaedics, Gynae and Obstetrics, general surgery and Physiotherapy were found to be

102
3358

*

oe eae

‘Al



103

overcrowded. In most of the wards, particularly in the maternity ward, many patients were
found to be sharing the beds. The Department of Physiotherapy was so short of space that it
was not possible to even walk inside. Equipment installed for exercise, etc. are mostly
archaic. Similarly, equipment in dental also were found to be very old. The operation
theatres in the hospital were found to be in dilapidated condition and their cleanliness also
was not upto the mark. The Committee was astonished to note that the casualty wing of the
hospital was being run by Junior Residents as it did not have regular staff. Two ambulances
which were at the disposal of the hospital were out of order. Sewage system in the hospital
was very old which gets often choked resulting in storage of filthy water at different places.
Water supply was also in a pathetic condition. Broken water taps were found at différent
places

6. Similarly, in Kalawati Saran Children Hospital, every ward specially the nursery was
crammed with babies—more than two sharing a bed. The wards were highly stuffy with no
ventilation at all, not to speak of air-conditioning. Mothers were squatting on the 10017 85
there was no facility for them : “

7. The Committee after going around the hospital, held discussion with the: Medical
Superintendent and various heads of departments/wards in which a graphic account of the
functioning of the hospital and the works done was given by the Medical Superintendent
Lack of enough space, building being very old requiring massive repair, strengthening of
departments like physiotherapy, dental, eye, ENT, improving facilities in Paediatric ’surgery,
accident emergency, ICU, labs., nursery and OTs and the problems of accommodation,
shortage of staff, vacancy in the faculty were some of the main issues that figured during the
discussion

8. The Committee also had discussion with the representative of the
resident doctors’ ciation, nurses’ association and Employees’ Union, regardi
grievances in particular and the problems of the hospital in general.

9. This Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. i pod vault



xi
*ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Tuesday the Ist August, 1995, in Commiittee Rooiti
No. 63, First Floor, Purliatnent House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri P. UpéndraChairman

RAJYA SABHA
- 2, Dr. M. Aram
3. Maulaha Habibur Rahman Nomani
4. Shri V. Hahumantha Rao
5, Shiri Pravat Kumdf Samantaray
6. Shri M.P, Abdiissamad Saiadani
7. Shti Vishnu Kaat Shastri
8. Prof. Rafi Bakhsh Singh Varina
LOK SABHA
9, Dr. Viswandtham Kanithi
10. Dr. Vasant Pawar
11. Shii Bapu Hari Chaure
12. Shri Aslam Sher Khan
13. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
15. Shri Anna Joshi
16. Shri Ramchandra Dome
17. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary .

3. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

4. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary

5. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer
2. . . . .
3. * 4 . *

4. The Committee, then took up for consideration and adoption the draft Report on the
functioning of Central Government Hospitals. The discussion remained inconclusive.

दे 5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. to meet again at 4.00 p.m. on 2nd
August, 1995.

“I to X Minutes on meetings of reconstituted Committee for 1995-96 relate to some other matters.
***Relate to other matters.

104

a
¥



XI
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 2nd August, 1995.in Committee

Root No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT

1

. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

a

०9०39 फ्री

Dr. M. Aram

Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

. Shri O.P. Kohli

Prof. 1.6, Sanadi

. Shti Ashoke Kumar Sen

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

LOK SABHA

. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

+ Shri Inder Jit

» Shri Anna Joshi

. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

. Shri Ramchandra Dome

. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

SECRETARIAT

1
2.
3
4
०]

. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

. Shri 0.0. Sharma, Under Secretary

. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee further considered the draft Report on the functioning of Central

Government Hospitals. The discussions remained inconclusive.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. to meet again at 4.00 p.m. on 3rd

August, 1995,

eo“

105



41 7
*FOURTEENTH, MEETING

The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 9th August, 1995, in Committee
Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4, Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
5. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
LOK SABHA

8. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

9. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
10. Dr. Vasant Pawar

11. Shri Inder Jit

12. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

13. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

15. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

16. Shri Anna Joshi

17. Shri Braja Kishore ‘Tripathy

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

Shri.N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

Shri 0.0. Sharma, Under Secretary

. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer.

weene

2. * * *

3. The Committee, thereafter, further considered the draft Report on the functioning of
Central Government Hospitals and adopted the same.

4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram
Sh. O.P. Kohli and Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma to present to the Rajya Sabha, the
29th, 30th & 3151 Reports on the University Grants Commission (Amendment) Bill, 1995
functioning of Central Government Health Scheme and functioning of Central Government

*Minutes of XIII mecting relate to matters not included in this report.
***Relates to other matter

106



107

Hospitals respectively on the 16th August, 1995. The Committee also authorised Shri Inder
Jit and Dr. Vasant Pawar to lay the said Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the above
mentioned date.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m.



DS =

ee q


Errata to the Thirty-First Report on Functioning of
Centrat Government Hospitals of Standing Comittee on

Human Resource Developmnt,

In the contents, under part I, pt-11 for 'Epilopsy' read
"Epilepsy’.

Page 5 para 10, Line 5 for 'olincis' read 'olinics',

Page 8 para 19,3 first line for "Comittee' read 'Committee'.
Page 12 para 1 line J for ‘eduction’ read ‘education’.
Page 20 para 9 line 5 for ‘Prodcedure' read ‘Procedure’,
Page 21 para % , First Line, for '9k' read '9,2',

Page 29 para 9 line 4 for ‘Insititute' read ‘Institute’.

Page 42 Bepad heading 1 para 5 line 2 for ‘overcroding' read
‘overcrowding’,

Page 43 Broad heading 6 for ‘supperintendents' read 'superintendents',
Page 48 para 8 line :4"for 'tekled' read 'tackled',

Page 48 para 40-tise-3-for—‘Governmet* -read "Government? 77 777 एएए
Page 59 S1.No.3 for ‘Hamsomtology' read ‘Haematology’.
Page 60 heading for 'casuality' read 'casualty'.

Page 60 In 1992-93 for '540013' read '54013'.

Page 61 para 2,108 line 6 for 'Medichal'read ‘Medical’.

Page 61 para 2,108 line 15 for ‘post agraduate' read 'Post graduate’.
Page 61 para 6,39 line 4 for 'informated' read ‘informed’,

Page 62 para 6.43 line 8 for ‘improvying' read ‘improving’.
Line 10, for 'depictng’ read ‘depicting’,

Page 65 para 4,12 line 2 for ‘aboard' read ‘abroad’,

Page 67 para 6.66 line 8 for ‘desmay' read 'dismay' line 12 for
‘fatel' read ‘fatal’,

‘Page 86 S1.No. 1 under Secretariat for ‘Secreatary' read 'Secretary'.
Page 94 para 3 line 2 for ‘Provideed' read 'Provided'.
Page 94 para 3.2 last line for ‘casulty' read 'casvalty'.

Page 95 first line for 'Junvary' read 'January',


mix ७०४३. terit 7?

xs

39३5

29% end 4

22% 5
१२ ३1५६७७२ tot anit tear's