PARLIAMENT
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CH
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED
Review of functioning of 
(NCTE) and initiatives 
of NEP 2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers 
(Prese
(Laid on the Table of 
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SP
 
 
  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HUNDRED AND SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON 
functioning of National Council for Teacher Education 
(NCTE) and initiatives taken to support training of teachers in light 
of NEP 2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers 
 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025)
id on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025
 
  
Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
REPORT NO. 
368 
REPORT  
National Council for Teacher Education 
to support training of teachers in light 
of NEP 2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers  
August, 2025) 
August, 2025) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 

 
PARLIAMENT
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN,
THREE HUNDRED
Review of functioning of National Council for Teacher Education 
(NCTE) and initiatives taken to support training of teachers in light of 
NEP 2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
  August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS
 
HUNDRED AND SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON 
 
 
Review of functioning of National Council for Teacher Education 
(NCTE) and initiatives taken to support training of teachers in light of 
NEP 2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers 
 
 
nted to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
id on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 
 
  
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
SPORTS 
REPORT 
Review of functioning of National Council for Teacher Education 
(NCTE) and initiatives taken to support training of teachers in light of 
NEP 2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers  
 
  

 CONTENTS  
  PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iii)-(v) 
4. REPORT 1-41 
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
42-55 
6. ANNEXURES 56-80 
7. MINUTES 81-87 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1.  Shri Digvijaya Singh    - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev 
4. Dr. Sikander Kumar 
5. Shrimati Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
6. *Shrimati Rekha Sharma 
7. Dr. Bhim Singh 
8. Shri Harbhajan Singh  
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
12. Dr. Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
13. Shrimati Rachna Banerjee 
14. Shrimati Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
15. Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary 
16. Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
17. Prof. Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
18. Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
19. Dr. Hemang Joshi 
20. Shri Amar Sharadrao Kale 
21. Shri Kalipada Saren Kherwal 
22. Adv Dean Kuriakose 
23.  Dr. Sambit Patra 
24.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
25.  Dr. D Purandeswari 
26.  Shri Rajeev Rai 
27. Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
28. Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
29.  Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
30. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
31. Dr. T Sumathy alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
  
*Nominated w.e.f. 23.01.2025 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Director  
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
Shri Ashwani Yadav, Senior Secretariat Assistant  
  
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Sixty Eighth 
Report of the Committee on the " Review of functioning of National Council for Teacher 
Education (NCTE) and initiatives taken to support training of teachers in light of NEP 2020's 
thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers".  
2. The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports, has been examining the subject in light of National Education 
Policy (NEP) 2020 and the current Report is on Review of functioning of National Council 
for Teacher Education (NCTE) and initiatives taken to support training of teachers in light of 
NEP 2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers. The Committee wishes to place on 
record its gratitude to the representatives of the Departments of School Education & Literacy, 
Ministry of Education, National Council of Teachers Education (NCTE), Educationist and 
representatives from Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai (TISS), University of Delhi,   
Civil Society Organisations, National Institute of Advanced Studies, Bangalore, Indira 
Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi and Dr. BR Ambedkar University, Delhi  for 
making submissions, furnishing necessary information/documents and rendering valuable 
assistance to the Committee in its deliberations. 
3. For the facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations of the Committee 
have been presented in bold letters at the end of the Report. 
 
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held 
on the 5th August, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
NEW DELHI 
5th  August, 2025 
Saravana 14, 1947 (Saka) 
  
 
   Shri Digvijaya Singh  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary  
              Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

 
ACRONMYS 
 
 
ABC Academic Bank of Credits 
B. Ed. Bachelor of Education 
B. El. Ed Bachelor of Elementary Education 
BITE Block Institute of Teacher Education 
BRCs Block Resource Centres 
CBCS Choice Based Credit System 
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education 
CPD Continuous Professional Development 
CRCs Cluster Resource Centres 
CSOs Civil Society Organisations 
CTET Central Teacher Eligibility Test 
D.El.Ed Diploma in Elementary Education 
DIET District Institutes for Education and Training 
DIKSHA Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing.  
DoSE&L Department of School Education and Literacy 
ECCE Early Childhood Care and Education 
EWS Economically Weaker Section  
HEI Higher Education Institution 
HR Human Resource 
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IP University Indraprastha University 
ITEP Integrated Teacher Education Programme 
KVS Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan 
M.Ed Master of Education 
                                (iii) 
 

NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training 
NCET National Common Entrance Test 
NCFTE National Curriculum Framework for Teacher Education, 2021 
NCrF National Credit Framework 
NCTE National Council for Teacher Education 
NCTQ National Centre for Teacher Quality 
NDEAR National Digital Education Architecture 
NEP 2020 National Education Policy 2020 
NET National Eligibility Test  
NGOs Non Government Organizations 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NMM National Mission for Mentoring 
NPST National Professional Standards for Teachers  
NPST National Professional Standards for Teachers 
NTA National Testing Agency 
NVs Navodaya Vidyalayas 
NVS Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti 
OBC Other Backward Class 
ODL Open and Distance Learning 
PAB Project Approval Board 
PARs  Performance Appraisal Report 
Ph.D Doctor of Philosophy 
PwD Person with disability  
RIE Regional Institute of Education 
RMSA Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan 
RTE Act, 2009 Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 
SC Scheduled Caste 
                           (iv) 

 
SCERTs State Councils for Educational Research and Training 
SLET State Level Eligibility Test  
SSA Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan  
ST Scheduled Tribe 
SWAYAM Study Webs of Active learning for Young Aspiring Minds 
TEIs Teacher Education Institutions 
TET Teacher Eligibility Test 
TISS Tata Institute of Social Sciences 
UGC University Grants Commission 
UTs Union Territories  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
                                                 REPORT 
Education forms the foundation of any society and it is a major factor in the economic, 
social, and political growth and development of a country. Elementary and School education is 
the cornerstone of personal and societal development, equipping young minds with foundational 
knowledge, critical thinking skills, and social values that shape their future. It fosters intellectual 
growth, encourages curiosity, and prepares students to navigate an ever-evolving world, 
contributing meaningfully to their national and the global economy. In this direction, Elementary 
and school education forms the bedrock of a child's intellectual, social, and emotional 
development, laying the foundation for lifelong learning and success. In the early years, 
elementary education fosters essential skills like reading, writing, and critical thinking, while 
nurturing curiosity and creativity in a structured yet supportive environment. As students 
progress through school, education builds on these fundamentals, equipping them with the 
knowledge, problem-solving abilities, and social values needed to thrive in a complex, rapidly 
changing world. This holistic development not only empowers individuals but also strengthens 
the Nation and drives societal progress. 
1.2 Equally vital is the training of elementary and school teachers, as they are the architects 
of this learning process. Well-trained teachers, equipped with modern pedagogical techniques 
and subject expertise, create engaging and inclusive classrooms that inspire students and address 
diverse learning needs. Ongoing professional development ensures teachers stay updated on 
educational trends and technologies, enabling them to cultivate critical skills like problem-
solving and creativity in students, ultimately strengthening the education system's impact. 
Continuous professional development ensures they remain adept at incorporating new 
educational tools and methodologies, fostering environments where students can develop critical 
thinking, collaboration, and resilience. Effective teacher training ultimately enhances the quality 
of education, ensuring students are prepared for future challenges and opportunities. It is in this 
backdrop, the Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports considered the 
recommendations on Capacity of Building of Teachers contained on National Education Policy 
(NEP), 2020; initiatives taken /to be taken to support teachers' training; and functioning of 
National Council for Teachers' Education (NCTE). 
1.3 The Committee at its meetings held on 20th February and 19th May, 2020 heard the views 
of Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy, Chairman, NCTE and other 
representatives of the Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Education 
along with educationists and representatives of Civil Society Organizations on the subject in 
details. 
1.4 As of now, the guiding document for teachers' education is the National Education Policy 
(NEP), 2020 which consists of two parts. First one is Approach to Teachers' Education which 
comprises of Para 5.22 to Para 5.29. The second part provides for Teachers' Education which 
comprises of Para 15.1 to 15.11. The said Paras contained in NEP 2020 are given as under:- 
 
(a) Approach to Teacher Education  
 
i. Para 5.22- Recognizing that the teachers will require training in high-quality content as well as 
pedagogy, teacher education will gradually be moved by 2030 into multidisciplinary colleges and 

2 
 
universities. As colleges and universities all move towards becoming multidisciplinary, they will 
also aim to house outstanding education departments that offer B.Ed., M.Ed., and Ph.D. degrees 
in education.  
ii. Para 5.23- By 2030, the minimum degree qualification for teaching will be a 4-year integrated 
B.Ed. degree that teaches a range of knowledge content and pedagogy and includes strong 
practicum training in the form of student-teaching at local schools. The 2-year B.Ed. programmes 
will also be offered, by the same multidisciplinary institutions offering the 4-year integrated 
B.Ed., and will be intended only for those who have already obtained Bachelor’s Degrees in other 
specialized subjects. These B.Ed. programmes may also be suitably adapted as 1-year B.Ed. 
programmes, and will be offered only to those who have completed the equivalent of 4-year 
multidisciplinary Bachelor ’s Degrees or who have obtained a Master’s degree in a specialty and 
wish to become a subject teacher in that specialty. All such B.Ed. degrees would be offered only 
by accredited multidisciplinary higher education institutions offering 4-year integrated B.Ed. 
programmes. Multidisciplinary higher education institutions offering the 4-year in-class 
integrated B.Ed. programme and having accreditation for ODL may also offer high-quality B.Ed. 
programmes in blended or ODL mode to students in remote or difficult-to-access locations and 
also to in-service teachers who are aiming to enhance their qualification, with suitable robust 
arrangements for mentoring and for the practicum-training and student-teaching components of 
the programme.  
iii. Para 5.24- All B.Ed. programmes will include training in time-tested as well as the most recent 
techniques in pedagogy, including pedagogy with respect to foundational literacy and numeracy, 
multi-level teaching and evaluation, teaching children with disabilities, teaching children with 
special interests or talents, use of educational technology, and learner-centered and collaborative 
learning. All B.Ed. programmes will include strong practicum training in the form of in-
classroom teaching at local schools. All B.Ed. programmes will also emphasize the practice of the 
Fundamental Duties (Article 51A) of the Indian Constitution along with other Constitutional 
provisions while teaching any subject or performing any activity. It will also appropriately 
integrate environmental awareness and sensitivity towards its conservation and sustainable 
development, so that environment education becomes an integral part of school curricula.  
 
iv. Para 5.25- Special shorter local teacher education programmes will also be available at Block 
Institute of Teacher Education (BITEs), DIETs, or at school complexes themselves for eminent 
local persons who can be hired to teach at schools or school complexes as ‘master instructors’, for 
the purpose of promoting local professions, knowledge, and skills, e.g., local art, music, 
agriculture, business, sports, carpentry, and other vocational crafts.  
v. Para 5.26- Shorter post-B.Ed. certification courses will also be made widely available, at 
multidisciplinary colleges and universities, to teachers who may wish to move into more 
specialized areas of teaching, such as the teaching of students with disabilities, or into leadership 
and management positions in the schooling system, or to move from one stage to another between 
foundational, preparatory, middle, and secondary stages.  
vi. Para 5.27- It is recognized that there may be several pedagogical approaches internationally for 
teaching particular subjects; NCERT will study, research, document, and compile the varied 
international pedagogical approaches for teaching different subjects and make recommendations 
on what can be learnt and assimilated from these approaches into the pedagogies being practiced 
in India.  
vii. Para 5.28- By 2021, a new and comprehensive National Curriculum Framework for Teacher 
Education, NCFTE 2021, will be formulated by the NCTE in consultation with NCERT, based on 
the principles of this National Education Policy 2020. The framework will be developed after 
discussions with all stakeholders including State Governments, relevant Ministries/Departments 
of Central Government and various expert bodies, and will be made available in all regional 
languages. The NCFTE 2021 will also factor in the requirements of teacher education curricula 

3 
 
for vocational education. The NCFTE will thereafter be revised once every 5-10 years by 
reflecting the changes in revised NCFs as well as emerging needs in teacher education.  
viii. Para 5.29- Finally, in order to fully restore the integrity of the teacher education system, stringent 
action will be taken against substandard stand-alone Teacher Education Institutions (TEIs) 
running in the country, including shutting them down, if required. 
 
(b)  Teacher Education  
i. Para 15.1- Teacher education is vital in creating a pool of school teachers that will shape the next 
generation. Teacher preparation is an activity that requires multidisciplinary perspectives and 
knowledge, formation of dispositions and values, and development of practice under the best 
mentors. Teachers must be grounded in Indian values, languages, knowledge, ethos, and 
traditions including tribal traditions, while also being well-versed in the latest advances in 
education and pedagogy.  
ii. Para 15.2- According to the Justice J. S. Verma Commission (2012) constituted by the Supreme 
Court, a majority of stand-alone TEIs - over 10,000 in number are not even attempting serious 
teacher education but are essentially selling degrees for a price. Regulatory efforts so far have 
neither been able to curb the malpractices in the system, nor enforce basic standards for quality, 
and in fact have had the negative effect of curbing the growth of excellence and innovation in the 
sector. The sector and its regulatory system are, therefore, in urgent need of revitalization through 
radical action, in order to raise standards and restore integrity, credibility, efficacy, and high 
quality to the teacher education system.  
iii. Para 15.3- In order to improve and reach the levels of integrity and credibility required to restore 
the prestige of the teaching profession, the Regulatory System shall be empowered to take 
stringent action against substandard and dysfunctional teacher education institutions (TEIs) that 
do not meet basic educational criteria, after giving one year for remedy of the breaches. By 2030, 
only educationally sound, multidisciplinary, and integrated teacher education programmes shall 
be in force.  
iv. Para 15.4- As teacher education requires multidisciplinary inputs, and education in high-quality 
content as well as pedagogy, all teacher education programmes must be conducted within 
composite multidisciplinary institutions. To this end, all multidisciplinary universities and 
colleges - will aim to establish, education departments which, besides carrying out cutting-edge 
research in various aspects of education, will also run B.Ed. programmes, in collaboration with 
other departments such as psychology, philosophy, sociology, neuroscience, Indian languages, 
arts, music, history, literature, physical education, science and mathematics. Moreover, all stand-
alone TEIs will be required to convert to multidisciplinary institutions by 2030, since they will 
have to offer the 4-year integrated teacher preparation programme.  
v. Para 15.5- The 4-year integrated B.Ed. offered by such multidisciplinary HEIs will, by 2030, 
become the minimal degree qualification for school teachers. The 4-year integrated B.Ed. will be 
a dual-major holistic Bachelor’s degree, in Education as well as a specialized subject such as a 
language, history, music, mathematics, computer science, chemistry, economics, art, physical 
education, etc. Beyond the teaching of cutting-edge pedagogy, the teacher education will include 
grounding in sociology, history, science, psychology, early childhood care and education, 
foundational literacy and numeracy, knowledge of India and its values/ethos/art/traditions, and 
more. The HEI offering the 4-year integrated B.Ed. may also run a 2-year B.Ed., for students who 
have already received a Bachelor’s degree in a specialized subject. A 1-year B.Ed. may also be 
offered for candidates who have received a 4-year undergraduate degree in a specialized subject. 

4 
 
Scholarships for meritorious students will be established for the purpose of attracting outstanding 
candidates to the 4-year, 2-year, and 1-year B.Ed. programmes.  
vi. Para 15.6- HEIs offering teacher education programmes will ensure the availability of a range of 
experts in education and related disciplines as well as specialized subjects. Each higher education 
institution will have a network of government and private schools to work closely with, where 
potential teachers will student-teach along with participating in other activities such as 
community service, adult and vocational education, etc.  
vii. Para 15.7- In order to maintain uniform standards for teacher education, the admission to pre-
service teacher preparation programmes shall be through suitable subject and aptitude tests 
conducted by the National Testing Agency (NTA), and shall be standardized keeping in view the 
linguistic and cultural diversity of the country.  
viii. Para 15.8- The faculty profile in Departments of Education will necessarily aim to be diverse and 
but teaching/field/research experience will be highly valued. Faculty with training in areas of 
social sciences that are directly relevant to school education e.g., psychology, child development, 
linguistics, sociology, philosophy, economics, and political science as well as from science 
education, mathematics education, social science education, and language education programmes 
will be attracted and retained in teacher education institutions, to strengthen multidisciplinary 
education of teachers and provide rigour in conceptual development.  
ix. Para 15.9- All fresh Ph.D. entrants, irrespective of discipline, will be required to take credit-based 
courses in teaching/education/pedagogy/writing related to their chosen Ph.D subject during their 
doctoral training period. Exposure to pedagogical practices, designing curriculum, credible 
evaluation systems, communication, and so on will be ensured since many research scholars will 
go on to become faculty or public representatives/communicators of their chosen disciplines. 
Ph.D students will also have a minimum number of hours of actual teaching experience gathered 
through teaching assistantships and other means. Ph.D. programmes at universities around the 
country will be re-oriented for this purpose.  
x. Para 15.10- In-service continuous professional development for college and university teachers 
will continue through the existing institutional arrangements and ongoing initiatives; these will be 
strengthened and substantially expanded to meet the needs of enriched teaching-learning 
processes for quality education. The use of technology platforms such as SWAYAM/DIKSHA 
for online training of teachers will be encouraged, so that standardized training programmes can 
be administered to large numbers of teachers within a short span of time.  
xi. Para 15.11- A National Mission for Mentoring (NMM) shall be established, with a large pool of 
outstanding senior/retired faculty – including those with the ability to teach in Indian languages – 
who would be willing to provide short and long-term mentoring/professional support to 
university/college teachers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
2. National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) and its 
functioning 
 
2.1  The Department has informed that as per provisions of Section 12 of the NCTE Act, 
1993, it shall be the duty of the Council to take all such steps as it may think it fit for ensuring 
planned and coordinated development of teacher education and for the determination and 
maintenance of standards for teacher education and for the purposes of performing its functions 
under this Act. The Council may- 
a) undertake surveys and studies relating to various aspects of teacher education and publish 
the result thereof; 
b) make recommendations to the Central and State Governments, Universities, University 
Grants Commission and recognized institutions in the matter of preparation of suitable 
plans and pro-grammes in the field of teacher education. 
c) co-ordinate and monitor teacher education and its development in the country; 
d) lay down guidelines in respect of minimum qualifications for a person to be employed as 
a teacher in schools or in recognized institutions. 
e) lay down norms for any specified category of courses or trainings in teacher education, 
including the minimum eligibility criteria for admission thereof, and the method of 
selection of candidates, duration of the course, course contents and mode of curriculum; 
f) lay down guidelines for compliance by recognized institutions, for starting new courses 
or training, and for providing physical and instructional facilities, staffing pattern and 
staff qualifications; 
g) lay down standards in respect of examinations leading to teacher education qualifications, 
criteria for admission to such examinations and schemes of courses or training; 
h) lay down guidelines regarding tuition fees and other fees chargeable by recognised 
institutions; 
i) promote and conduct innovation and research in various areas of teacher education and 
disseminate the results thereof; 
j) examine and review periodically the implementation of the norms, guidelines and 
standards laid down by the Council, and to suitably advise the recognised institutions; 
k) evolve suitable performance appraisal systems, norms and mechanisms for enforcing 
accountability on recognised institutions; 
l) formulate schemes for various levels of teacher education and identify recognised 
institutions and set up new institutions for teacher development programmes; 
m) Take all necessary steps to prevent commercialization of teacher education; and  
n) Perform such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government. 
 
2.2  The Committee was further informed that the policies of the National Council for 
Teacher Education (NCTE) are guided by its statutory mandate under the NCTE Act-1993, 
particularly Section 12, which empowers the Council to ensure the planned and coordinated 
development of teacher education and the maintenance of standards. These policies encompass:  
 
(i) Teacher Education Programmes: NCTE lays down norms and standards for all teacher 
education programmes, including duration, curriculum structure, pedagogical content, 
and evaluation methods. Recent reforms, such as the introduction of the four-year 
Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP), are aligned with the NEP 2020’s vision 
of multidisciplinary and stage-specific teacher preparation.  

6 
 
(ii) Qualifications of Teachers: NCTE defines the minimum qualifications for teacher 
educators and school teachers, ensuring consistency and quality across institutions. This 
includes eligibility requirements, academic background, and professional training needed 
for different levels of teaching.  
 
(iii) Training and Curriculum: The Council develops guidelines for course content and 
mode of delivery, integrating contemporary pedagogies, emerging technologies, and 21st-
century skills. It also promotes research and innovation in teacher education and ensures 
vertical academic mobility through integrated and dual-degree structures.  
 
(iv) Institutional Standards and Compliance: NCTE regulates recognised teacher 
education institutions by prescribing norms for infrastructure, staffing patterns, 
instructional facilities, and by instituting mechanisms for regular appraisal, 
accountability, and prevention of commercialization. To align with NEP 2020, the NCTE 
Regulation, 2014 is in the process of revision to incorporate the recommendations 
outlined in Sections 5.22, 5.23, 5.24, 15.1, and 15.5 of the NEP 2020. These proposed 
revisions have introduced a range of integrated teacher education programs, such as the 
4-Year ITEP, ITEP - Physical Education, ITEP - Arts Education, ITEP - Yoga Education, 
and ITEP - Sanskrit Education.  
 
2.3 The NEP 2020 enacts numerous changes in India's Teacher education sector as referred 
in Chapters 4, 5 & 15. Accordingly, major tasks as recommended in NEP 2020 and initiated by 
NCTE are as under: - 
(i) Integrated Teacher Education Programme (Para 15.5 & 5.22): 
ITEP is a 4 year integrated dual major bachelor degree in Education as well as a specialized 
subject in arts, science, physical education etc. The aim is to develop passionate, motivated, 
qualified, professionally trained, and well-prepared teachers. These educators will be capable of 
designing and implementing learning experiences that are developmentally appropriate for 
students at various stages of school education. The ITEP strives to provide prospective teachers 
with the highest quality education in content, pedagogy, values, and practical application. 
Admission for the ITEP is carried out by the National Testing Agency (NTA) through the 
National Common Entrance Test (NCET) last test was held on 29th April, 2025. 
(ii) National Common Entrance Test (Para 15.7): 
In accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the RTE Act, the National 
Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) vide Notification dated 23rd August, 2010 and 29th July, 
2011 laid down the minimum qualifications for a person to be eligible for appointment as a 
teacher for class I to VIII. It had been inter alia provided that one of the essential qualifications 
for a person to be eligible for appointment as a teacher in any of the schools referred to in Clause 
(n) of section 2 of the RTE Act is that he/she should pass the Teacher Eligibility Test (TET) 
which will be conducted by the appropriate Government in accordance with the Guidelines 
framed by the NCTE. Accordingly, NCTE has framed guidelines for conduct of TET by 
appropriate Government which is uploaded at 

7 
 
https://ncte.gov.in/website/TETguidelines.aspx.CTET is conducted by CBSE in accordance with 
the guidelines framed by NCTE. 
(iii) National Professional Standards for Teachers (Para 5.20): 
The National Professional Standards for Teachers (NPST), as envisioned in Para 5.20 of the 
National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, aims to enhance the personal and professional 
development of teachers by providing clear expectations and guidelines for performance 
improvement. It seeks to ensure that all students are taught by passionate, motivated, highly 
qualified, professionally trained, and well-equipped teachers. The NPST defines competencies 
for teachers at various stages/levels and influences aspects of teacher career management, 
including tenure, professional development, salary increases, promotions, and recognition. The 
Department launched the NPST Guiding Document on 09th March, 2024. Braille Version and 
Audio version of NPST Guiding Document were released on 29.07.2024 on the occasion of 4th 
Anniversary of NEP, 2020. 
(iv) National Mission for Mentoring (Para 15.11): 
The National Mission for Mentoring (NMM), as envisaged in Para 15.11 of NEP 2020, aims to 
create a large pool of outstanding professionals willing to provide mentoring to school teachers. 
These potential mentors, regardless of age or position, will contribute towards realizing the 21st-
century developmental goals of the nation. The NMM underlines the importance of both short-
term and long-term mentoring/professional support. It brings an opportunity to leverage cross-
learning among different individuals, leading to their continuous professional development. 
2.4 The Department launched the NMM- the Bluebook on 09th March, 2024. Braille Version 
and Audio version of NMM- the Bluebook were released on 29.07.2024 on the occasion of 4th 
anniversary of NEP, 2020.  
2.5 Performance Appraisal Report (PAR) (Para 15.2 & 5.29): 
In order to ascertain whether the recognized institutions are functioning in accordance with 
the provisions of NCTE Act 1993, norms & standards and guidelines laid down by the Council 
for enforcing accountability on recognized institutions and bringing improvement in the quality 
and service delivery in the teacher education sector across the country in this regard. NCTE has 
decided that the Performance Appraisal Report(s) (PARs) are mandatorily required to be 
submitted year-wise online by all the existing Teacher Education Institutions (TEIs) on the 
NCTE portal. So far PAR has been called as per following details: 
a) PAR-I: Public Notice Dated 22.09.2019 for the Academic Year 2018-2019 
b) PAR-II: Public Notice Dated 29.09.2021 for the Academic Year 2020-2021 
c) PAR-III: Public Notice Dated 09.09.2024 for the Academic Year 2021-2022 and 2022-
2023. 

8 
 
 2.6 In response to a question by the Committee regarding the details of number of sanctioned 
strength and vacancies of teaching, non teaching and adm  inistrative staffs in the NCTE. 
Category-wise/Group-wise, and the steps being taken to fill up the vacancies, the Department has 
informed that the teaching staff is not authorised in the sanctioned strength of NCTE. The details 
of category-wise sanctioned strength, in position and vacant posts as on 15.06.2025 of NCTE are 
as under:- 
Table-1 
Cadre wise 
current 
sanctioned 
strength 
Cadre wise 
in position 
(including 
deputation) 
Cadre wise vacant 
position (including 
deputation) 
Total vacant 
post available 
for recruitment 
A B C A B C A B C A B C 
24 46 53 11 26 28 13 
(54%) 
20 
(43%) 
 
25 
(89%) 
- 13 
 
24 
 
2.7 The Committee observes that as on 15th June, 2025, out of total 24 sanctioned 
strength in Group A in NCTE, there are only 11 Group A officers are in-position including 
the deputationists and 13 posts in Group A are lying vacant. Similarly, out of 46 and 53 
sanctioned strength in Group B and C respectively, only 26 and 28 persons are deployed 
including those on deputation. The Committee further notes that there are 54%, 43% and 
89% vacancies in Group A, B and C posts in NCTE, respectively excluding those officials 
who have been deployed against deputation vacancies. The Committee feels that any 
organisation cannot function properly nor can do justice with the mandate and 
responsibilities, it has been conferred by an Act of Parliament in absence of sufficient man-
power/ human resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department/ NCTE 
to fill up the vacancies in Group A, B and C in a time-bound manner and latest by 31st 
March, 2026 for effective realisation of objectives of NEP, 2020 and teachers' training in 
the country.   
 
2.8 Department/ NCTE has further informed that to mitigate the shortage, temporary 
measures have been taken by employing consultants on short-term contracts. Action for filling 
up of vacant posts have been initiated by NCTE. As informed by the Department/NCTE, the 
details of number of contractual appointments of teaching, non-teaching and administrative staffs 
in the NCTE since 2019 till 15thJune 2025, year-wise, is given as under at Table 2:- 
Table-2 
Details of Contractual appointments in NCTE during the last five years and the 
current year, year wise are as under :- 
 
Particulars No. of appointments (Non teaching) 
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 

9 
 
Contractual 
appointments  
04 -- 03 15 20 34 13 
 
 
2.9  In response to a question regarding the details of number of permanent appointments of 
teaching, non teaching and administrative staff in the NCTE since 2019 till 15thJune 2025, year –
wise, the Department has informed that Nil appointments have been done during the said period 
in NCTE. 
 
2.10 The Committee takes note of the submission of Department/NCTE which states that 
"to mitigate the shortage, temporary measures have been taken by employing consultants 
on short-term contracts." The Committee also takes serious note that no recruitments of 
permanent teaching, non-teaching and administrative staffs have been made by NCTE 
since 2019 till 15th June, 2025. The Committee further observes that number of contractual 
appointments on non-teaching staffs in NCTE is 04 during 2019, Nil during 2020, 03 during 
2021, 15 during 2022, 20 during 2023, 34 during 2024 and 13 in 2025 till 15th June, 2025, 
which shows increasing trend in contractual appointments in NCTE. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Department of School Education and Literacy and NCTE to fill 
up the vacancies at the earliest on permanent/regular basis to ensure Constitutional Rights 
of SC, ST, OBC, EWS and PwD etc.                                                              
 
2.11 In reply to another question asked by the Committee regarding withdrawal of  directives 
given by Secretary, Department of School Education & Literacy for stoppage of recruitment in 
NCTE, in September 2020, during a meeting on NEP, in light of the recommendation of the 
Committee in its 363rd report,   it has been informed that the Department of School Education & 
Literacy vide its letter dated 23.01.2025 has requested NCTE to carry out an assessment about 
requirement of staff at every level and consider implementation of Mission Recruitment (filling 
up of vacancies in various Ministries/ Departments including vacancies in Public Sector 
Undertakings/ Autonomous Bodies, etc. in a mission mode). Necessary follow-up action in this 
matter is being taken by NCTE. 
2.12 The Committee takes note of the letter of the Department dated 23.01.2025 to NCTE 
for carrying out an assessment about requirement of staff at every level and consider 
implementation of Mission Recruitment and appreciates the Department of School 
Education and Literacy for withdrawal of directives of Secretary, DoSEL given in 
September 2020, during a meeting on NEP, for stoppage of recruitment in NCTE. The 
Committee also recommends the Department to take follow-up actions with NCTE in this 
regard and to ensure that all the vacant posts in NCTE are filled up by March, 2026 on 
permanent/regular employment basis instead of contractual or deputation basis to achieve 
the goal of NEP 2020 and teachers' training. 
  

 
In response to a question by the Committee regarding 
for training of teacher’s trainers in the co
details of the provisions of Pre Service teacher education programmes/ training as per NCTE 
Notification 2021 which is as under
In response to another 
training in the country, state wise, it has been informed that 
(NCTQ) has been established at the NCTE headquarters in New Delhi, serving as an NDEAR
compliant integrated digital platform for implementing, 
NMM programmes. Formation of NCTQ is being financially supported by DoSE&L.
 
Views of Educationists and Representatives of Civil Society 
Organizations on the subject:
 
2.13 The Committee also heard the views of Educationists and Representatives 
Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai on the subject. They informed the Committee that
a total of 16,000 TEIs in India. 92% of these are under private self
10 
response to a question by the Committee regarding the details of provisions/ facility 
for training of teacher’s trainers in the country, State-wise, the Department has informed 
rovisions of Pre Service teacher education programmes/ training as per NCTE 
is as under:-                                                           
Table-3 
another question as to how NCTE is utilising technology 
ate wise, it has been informed that National Centre for Teacher Quality 
(NCTQ) has been established at the NCTE headquarters in New Delhi, serving as an NDEAR
compliant integrated digital platform for implementing, monitoring, and analysing NPST and 
NMM programmes. Formation of NCTQ is being financially supported by DoSE&L.
Views of Educationists and Representatives of Civil Society 
Organizations on the subject:- 
The Committee also heard the views of Educationists and Representatives 
Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai on the subject. They informed the Committee that
a total of 16,000 TEIs in India. 92% of these are under private self-financing institutions. Of the 
the details of provisions/ facility Department has informed the rovisions of Pre Service teacher education programmes/ training as per NCTE                                                             
 NCTE is utilising technology for teachers’ National Centre for Teacher Quality (NCTQ) has been established at the NCTE headquarters in New Delhi, serving as an NDEAR-monitoring, and analysing NPST and NMM programmes. Formation of NCTQ is being financially supported by DoSE&L. Views of Educationists and Representatives of Civil Society The Committee also heard the views of Educationists and Representatives from Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai on the subject. They informed the Committee that there are financing institutions. Of the 


11 
 
government run TEIs, around 600 of them are District Institutes of Education and Training 
(DIETs). Since 2014, all TEIs are expected to follow the National Curriculum Framework of 
Teacher Education (NCFTE), which gives a general outline of curriculum. In 2019, NCTE came 
out with a model curriculum for the ITEP. NCTE’s 2025 Regulations expect all TEIs to adhere 
to the model curriculum with autonomy to change 30% of the curriculum, only after NCTE’s 
approval (Sec 4.1).  
2.14 Teacher Education Programmes in India prepare teachers for broad stages and subject 
requirements of school.  Preschool and primary school teachers are generalists and subject 
teachers (TGT) are expected to have under graduate level qualification and BEd. Teacher 
recruitment by states is broadly for:- 
 
i. Pre-School/Nursery Teacher;     
ii. PRT for primary school;  
iii. TGT subject teachers for middle and secondary; 
iv. PGT for senior secondary schools; and 
v. Art, Physical Education, Music, Special Education teachers appointed to work 
across levels. 
Table-4 
Teaching positions/types and teacher education programmes in India 
Current programmes ITEP & proposed BEd  (post +2) 
Level Position Qualification Eligibility Level Details 
Pre 
School 
Pre School 
Teacher 
/Nursery 
teacher 
Diploma in 
Preschool 
education & 
other 
unrecognised 
programmes 
of varying 
lengths etc 
+2 Pre-school 
 
ITEP or BEd 
(foundation) 
Generalist 
teacher 
ITEP PE 
teacher/Art 
teacher/Sanskrit 
teacher/Yoga 
Teacher   1 to 5 Primary D.El.Ed +2 & 1,2 

12 
 
2.15 The representatives of Civil Society and Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) also 
informed the Committee that teacher deployment in the country for the elementary level is 5 
times more than the teachers in secondary level. This holds true for the number of sanctioned 
posts, filled posts and vacant posts. The data for teacher deployment in India for the academic 
year 2023–24 is given below:- 
teacher  
(grades 1 to 
5) 
Generalist 
teacher 
(awarded by 
PU or HSc 
boards) 
 
BElEd 
(awarded by 
Universities) 
3,4,5 ITEP or BEd 
(prep) subject 
teacher/PE/Art/
Yoga/Sanskrit 
6 to 10 ‘Trained 
Graduate 
Teacher’  
(grades 8 to 
10)  
Subject 
Teacher  
B.Ed (awarded 
by 
universities) 
 
 
 
 
BSc-BEd/BA-
BEd 
Under 
graduate 
degree in 
school subject 
 
+2 
6 ,7, 8 ITEP or BEd 
(middle) subject 
teacher/PE/Art/
Yoga/Sanskrit 
9,10 ITEP or BEd 
(secondary) 
subject 
teacher/PE/Art/
Yoga/Sanskrit 
11,12 Post 
Graduate 
Teacher 
(PGT)  
(grades 
11&12)  
subject 
teacher 
BEd (awarded 
by University) 
+ PG prior or 
after BEd 
 
MSc-Ed/MA-
Ed 
 11,12 ITEP or BEd 
(PGT) subject 
teacher/PE/Art/
Yoga/Sanskrit 
1 to 12 PE Teacher 
Art Teacher, 
SplEd 
CPEd/DPEd/B
PEd 
DVA, DPA 
BEdSpl Ed 
   

13 
 
Table-5 
Teacher Deployment in India for the Academic Year 2023–24 
Stage  Sanctioned 
Posts 
Filled 
Posts 
Vacant 
Posts 
Elementary 46,56,000 39,50,000 7,06,000 
Secondary 9,20,000 7,95,000 1,25,000 
Source: Annexure Referred to in Reply To Part (C) And (D) Of Lok Sabha 
Unstarred Question No. 133 dated 4.12.2023. 
[https://educationforallinindia.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/statewise-shortage-
of-teachers-elementary-and-secondary-level-2021-22-to-2023-24-PAB-4-december-
2023-India.pdf] 
 
2.16 The Department has furnished to the Committee the updated details of Sanctioned, In-
position and Vacant posts of teachers during meeting of the Committee held on 7th January, 
2025 which is given as under:- 
 
TABLE-6 
Heads 2023-24 2024-25 
Sanct
ioned 
In-
position 
Vacant % 
Vaca
nt 
Sanction
ed 
In-
position 
Vacant % 
Vaca
nt 
Elementary 48,04,9
08 
40,80,734 7,24,174 15.07 45,46,395 39,73,713 5,72,682 12.60 
Secondary 15,21,2
99 
12,86,325 2,34,974 15.45 24,39,365 20,29,385 4,09,980 16.81 
Total 63,26,2
07 
53,67,059 9,59,148 15.16 69,85,760 60,03,098 9,82,662 14.07 
 
2.17 In a response to a query by the Committee with respect to demand and supply of teachers, 
as to how this new system is going to affect the supply of teachers and how that supply is going 
to satisfy the demand, the Secretary, DoSEL informed on 19th May, 2025 that there is a fair 
amount of vacancies in school system across the country.  Around 10 lakhs is a figure which has 
been mentioned. Out of that, 7.5 lakhs are from the primary sections which is an issue which the 
department is working with the State Governments, because ‘Education’ is under the Concurrent 

14 
 
List and, out of 14.8 lakh schools, Government of India administers just about 3,000 schools. 
Rest of the schools are either in the private sector or they are managed by the State Governments 
or they happen to be aided by the State Governments. So, Department is always taking up this 
matter with the State Governments and encouraging them to make appointments so as to ensure 
that there is a certain PTR maintained in all classrooms. The Secretary also informed the 
Committee that he has taken note of the primary concerns and he will be responding to them. 
2.18 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Secretary, DoSEL that around 
10 lakhs posts of teachers in schools education are lying vacant in the country. The 
Committee also notes that out of 14.8 lakh schools, Government of India administers just 
about 3,000 schools. In this regard, the Committee is constrained to note that level of 
vacancies in Government of India administered schools like Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs), 
Navodaya Vidyalayas (NVs) etc. are also alarming. There are overall 30 to 50% vacancies 
in KVs and NVs also and contractual appointments of teachers are being done inspite of 
repeated recommendation of the Committee to fill-up the vacancies. The Committee, 
therefore, re-iterates its recommendations contained in its 349th and 363rd Reports and 
directs the Department of School Education and Literacy to fill-up vacancies of teachers in 
Government of India administered schools like Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs), Navodaya 
Vidyalayas (NVs) etc. through appointment of regular/permanent teachers instead of 
contractual teachers at the earliest and not later than 31st March, 2026 and apprise the 
Committee in this regard.  
2.19 The Committee also recommends the Department to stop contractual appointments 
of teachers in these schools which adversely impact the overall school education and 
undermines the Constitutional provision of reservation in Government jobs to SC, ST, 
OBC, EWS, PwD etc. 
2.20 The Committee observes that there are around 10 lakhs vacancies of teachers in 
Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) funded schools in various States and there are around 7.5 
lakh vacancies at elementary and primary levels. The Committee notes that there is  no 
improvement in filling up of vacancy positions in these SSA funded schools of the State 
Governments inspite of repeated recommendations of the Committee contained in its 349th 
and 363rd Reports to fill up the vacancies in a time bound manner, rather it is worsening 
day by day due to retirements of teachers and due to absence of a permanent recruitment 

15 
 
policy. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to take up the matter of 
vacancies of teachers in SSA funded schools of the State Governments strongly and 
teachers' salary component of SSA funds of those States which do not comply with the 
directions of the Department to fill up the vacancies with regular/permanent teachers, 
should be kept in abeyance till the respective States comply with the directives of the 
Central Government.  
2.21 The Committee also recommends the Department to take up the issue of 
appointment of teachers on contractual basis which violates the Constitutional provision of 
reservation in Government jobs to SC, ST, OBC, PwD and EWS category. The Committee 
recommends for stoppage of teachers on contractual basis in SSA funded schools. 
2.22 The representatives of the Civil Societies also informed the Committee regarding certain 
concerns with respect to the proposed NCTE 2025 Regulations. The main concerns raised by 
them are as under:- 
a) Hyperspecialisation and segmentation of teacher preparation and labour force: 
(i) Complex teacher education model: The proposed qualification matrix is hyper-
specialised and segmented.  It splits preparation across four school stages and across all 
subject areas, including physical education and arts. This move will make teacher 
education complex and create challenges in recruitment, deployment, and appointment 
policies. 
 
(ii) Early specialisation pressure: Students entering teacher education at the age of 17 or 18 
years will be required to select both a subject and a school stage at the start of the teacher 
preparation programme– this reduces flexibility and prematurely locks their career paths. 
 
(iii) Imbalance in the labour market (teacher supply): Both institutions and students are 
likely to choose (current trends indicate this) secondary-level specialisations because of 
higher status and pay. This will create an imbalance in teacher supply and demand– more 
so for the foundational and preparatory stages. 
 
(iv) Legal complications (recruitment related): The new teachers will be qualified not in 
accordance with the recruitment rules of different states, leading to confusion and locking 
up appointments in litigation. 
 

16 
 
(v) Deployment related complications:  Deployment of hyperspecialised teaches will also 
create complications, leading (a) to inflexibilities in deployment and (b) excess 
requirements of teachers (given subject specialisation in preparatory stage and stage 
specialisation in areas like physical education and arts & crafts education). 
 
(vi) A rigid system: Teachers will be restricted to teaching specific classes or subjects; for 
example– a teacher for class 2 cannot teach class 3, or a science teacher in classes 3-5 
cannot teach class 6–unless they acquire additional training. This will inflate credential 
demands and create opportunities for misuse. 
 
(vii) Siloes within teacher education.  Institutions will prepare teachers as per subject and 
level area, teachers will be prepared in siloes and not interact with other kinds of teachers 
(subject area or level). 
 
(viii) More institutions and teacher educators required: Many more institutions catering to a 
range of subjects and levels, and many more teacher educators with a different set of 
qualifications and expertise will be needed across stages. Currently only 6.13% of the 
existing teacher education institutions offer the M.Ed. program and the geographic spread 
is very uneven. 
 
(ix) Not aligned with NEP: The proposed model departs from NEP, 2020 which encourages 
professional flexibility and integration. 
 
(x) Not aligned with global best practices or the nature of TE practice: The global practice 
is to prepare teachers in broader bands for pre-primary, primary and secondary and not in 
narrow, rigid stages. Teachers benefit from broader understanding of child development 
and becoming adaptive experts, rather than narrow stage-specificity. 
 
b)  The new regulations prescribes curriculum for teacher education programs, leaving 
only about 30% for universities to adapt:-  
 
(i) Moves towards centralisation: This marks a shift towards standardisation, which will not 
meet local needs.   
 
(ii)  Undermines role and strength of Universities: Curriculum development is a core 
academic function of universities, which have established structures and systems in place– 

17 
 
such as Academic Councils and School boards– to plan, review and revise curriculum. 
Also the multidisciplinary expertise that a university can bring into curriculum design will 
be lost.   
 
(iii) Weakens link between research and practice: A fixed, set in place, centrally designed 
curriculum will weaken the essential research-innovation-practice cycle of the universities 
that is much needed in teacher education.  
 
(iv)  Not aligned with NEP 2020: This move runs in contravention to the vision of NEP 2020, 
which recommends a more robust role of the universities in teacher education. While the 
NEP aims to benefit from the academic rigour of the universities by shifting teacher 
education entirely into the system of higher education, the prescriptive NCTE model 
reduces universities to delivery centres with little ownership, and oversight.  Strengthening 
the role of universities in teacher education can enhance quality and improve regulatory 
oversight.  
 
(v)  Not aligned with global best practices: In countries across the world, with robust teacher 
education systems, the universities design their own curricula, helping prepare teachers 
with diverse expertise and skill sets. 
 
2.23 The Committee notes that separate set of teachers for pre-primary and Class 1 &2 
and another set of teachers for class 3, 4 & 5 are not practically feasible due to recruitment 
rules of various States. The Committee feels that two broad levels of teacher education 
should be in place for effective implementation of teacher education i.e.  Pre-Primary/ 
Primary level teachers for pre-primary and primary who can teach all subjects at this stage 
and Middle and Secondary level for subject specific teachers. This approach would allow 
teachers to work across multiple stages and subjects, which will reduce deployment 
inflexibilities and imbalances in demand/supply of teachers. A primary teacher can teach 
classes 1–5 with a focus on foundational skills, while secondary teachers can cover classes 
6–12 with subject expertise. The Committee therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE 
to review the Draft NCTE Regulation, 2025 in view of various concerns regarding 
hyperspecialization and segmentation of teachers' education. 
2.24 The Committee recommends the Department/ NCTE to allow staggered choice for 
students where by students can be allowed to choose their level of specialisation later after 
completing introductory courses and field experience, which will help them make informed 
choices based on their strengths and interests. Further, the Department should also allow 
for both consecutive and concurrent models to thrive, without making ITEP a pre-
requisite/mandatory condition. TEIs should be permitted to apply for recognition to offer 
ITEP at either level, and across a range of liberal disciplines and students should be 

18 
 
allowed to be enrolled in any liberal programme of their choice, with relevance to school 
education curriculum.  
2.25 The Committee recommends that the NCTE should follow UGC’s approach i.e. it 
should provide broad guidelines, credit frameworks, leaving the task of specific curriculum 
design to universities. Besides, Model curricula may be developed and used by Universities 
as a reference, without prescription.  A supportive, non-prescriptive role of the NCTE will 
help strengthen the academic and autonomous functioning of universities and strengthen 
the quality of teacher education. 
2.26 The Committee is of the view that Universities should be given increased flexibility to 
design their Curriculum instead of only 30% flexibility allowed to these Universities. The 
Committee therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to revise the curriculum 
framework to allow universities at least 50% control over designing their teacher education 
curricula, which would enable the institutions to incorporate local needs, multidisciplinary 
perspectives, and research-driven innovations, aligning with NEP 2020’s emphasis on 
university-led teacher education.  
2.27 The Committee observes that the subject of education finds mention in the 
Concurrent List of the Constitution, as the Committee feels that the Department of School 
Education and Literacy should uphold the federal nature of teacher education and it 
should hold extensive, consultative meetings with the State Governments before arriving at 
the any change in the structure of teacher education. The Committee is of the view that the 
Department should work in tandem with the teacher education systems and recruitment 
rules of the different States. 
2.28 The Committee observes that each programme of teacher education has its own 
history and has taken decades to establish its structure, teacher educators, labour-demand 
ratios. The Committee recommends the Department to support growth of good quality 
teacher education programs in autonomous higher education institutions with proven track 
records like B. El. Ed. etc. and withdraw recognition to poor quality teacher education 
institutions and also strengthen faculty of education. It is also recommended to allow 
multiple programmes and models of teacher education and not to shut down successful 
existing programmes. 
2.29 The Committee takes note of the concerns regarding recruitment related legal 
complications and observes that the new teachers will be qualified not in accordance with 
the recruitment rules of the different State Governments which will lead to litigations. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to hold consultations with 
various stakeholders including the State Governments and to review NCTE's Draft 
Regulation, 2025 and align it with the recruitment rules of various States in order to avoid 
litigation. 
  

19 
 
3 Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP) 
 
3.1 The Department has informed the Committee that National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 
proposes significant reforms in teacher education. By the year 2030, NEP-2020 has proposed ITEP 
as premier programme of teacher education in the country. ITEP was launched in the year 2023.  
It is promoting a multi-disciplinary and holistic approach with multiple entry and multiple exit 
options. By 2030, a 4-year Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP) will become the 
minimum qualification required to become a teacher (as per NEP 2020, Para 15.5). This aims to 
establish a unified, multidisciplinary teacher education system aligned with the new school structure 
(5+3+3+4) and focused on 21st-century skills and competencies. The ITEP suggestive curriculum, 
developed by the NCTE, seeks to harmonize national standards with institutional autonomy. A 
suggestive syllabus has been outlined to ensure coherence across institutions, while also allowing 
contextual adaptation. The curriculum framework aligns seamlessly with key national academic 
reforms, including the National Credit Framework (NCrF), Academic Bank of Credits (ABC), and 
the Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) as per UGC Guidelines 2019. 
 
3.2 The 4-year integrated B.Ed. will be a dual-major holistic Bachelor’s degree in Education as 
well as a specialized subject such as a language, history, music, mathematics, computer science, 
chemistry, economics, etc. Beyond the teaching of cutting-edge pedagogy, the teacher education will 
include grounding in sociology, history, science, psychology, early childhood care and education, 
foundational literacy and numeracy, knowledge of India and its values/ethos/art/traditions, and more. 
The higher education institutions offering the 4-year integrated B.Ed. may also run a 2-year B.Ed., 
for students who have already received a Bachelor’s degree in a specialized subject. A one-year 
B.Ed. may also be offered for candidates who have received a four-year undergraduate degree in a 
specialized subject. Scholarships for meritorious students will be established for the purpose of 
attracting outstanding candidates to the 4-year, 2-year, and 1-year B.Ed. programmes. 
 
3.3 Department has further informed that NEP-2020 redefines school curricular structure into 
four developmentally appropriate stages; NCERT has already been working on it to bring out four 
stages of school curriculum.  Foundation stage curriculum has already been brought in and others 
were brought in the year 2023 with teacher education programmes redesigned to align with the 
unique needs of each stage while ensuring coherence across the continuum. The proposed teacher 
education programmes are envisioned to embody the key features of higher education such as multi-
disciplinarity, flexibility and holistic development as articulated in NEP-2020.   
 
3.4 The programme carries a credit load of 160 at the base level, with flexibility for institutions 
to enhance it up to 176 credits. This range accommodates institutional strengths and emphasizes 
multidisciplinary integration, student-centric learning, and reflective teaching practices. ITEP 
Curriculum Framework is placed as Annexure 1. The qualifications required to teach in ITEP 
institutions are specified in the NCTE ITEP Regulations 2021. NCTE-ITEP Regulations 2021 is 
placed as Annexure 2.  
 
3.5 With respect to Current Status of Implementation of ITEP, the Department has further 
informed that up to 2024-25, 64 premier institutions, including 4 IITs, 6 NITs, 2 RIEs, 21 
Central Universities, 18 State Universities and 13 State Government Colleges, have been granted 
recognition to offer the ITEP. For the academic year 2025-26, NCTE has received 763 fresh 
applications, and 765 B.A. B.Ed. are under process of transition. These institutions serve as hubs 
of excellence and innovation, pioneering the integration of ITEP across diverse educational 
ecosystems. The list of Institutions running ITEP is given at Annexure 3.  

20 
 
 
3.6 The Department has further informed that ITEP is being implemented in a phase-wise 
manner, starting from piloting in multidisciplinary HEIs/TEIs and thereby country-wide 
expansion by 2030 as per the timeframe proposed in NEP 2020. In the first phase, ITEP was 
started in 42 institutions; in second phase it was started in 22 institutions; in the third phase 
transition of BA, B.Ed. 765 institutions are in process; in the fourth phase, for the academic year 
2025-26, 763 fresh applications were received; and, in the fifth phase, for the academic year 
2026-27 and NCTE has already opened the portal inviting applications from multidisciplinary 
institutions from 6th May 2025 to 27th May 2025. Now screening criteria has also been 
introduced for processing of applications which is a 10 point qualifying consideration. Status of 
ITEP (year wise) as follows:  
a. 1st Phase Academic Year 2023-24 = 42  
b. 2nd Phase Academic Year 2024-25 = 22  
c. 3rd Phase Academic Year 2025-26 = 765 applications received for transition  
d. 4th Phase Academic Year 2025-26 = 763 Fresh Applications received for ITEP  
e. 5th Phase Academic Year 2026-27 = NCTE portal opened for inviting applications on 
6th May till 27th May 2025 for ITEP.  
 
3.7 Screening criteria has been introduced for processing of applications aiming to grant 
ITEP to quality institutions. Public Notice for the same is placed as Annexure 4. 
 
3.8 The Committee acknowledges the smoother transition from old system of teachers' 
training to new one i.e. ITEP. However, the Committee notes that many institutions, 
particularly private and non-multidisciplinary ones, lack the infrastructure, trained 
faculty, and resources to implement ITEP effectively. The requirement for composite 
institutions offering multidisciplinary programs limits scalability, as not all colleges meet 
this criterion. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department/NCTE should 
establish a phased support system, including grants and training programs, to upgrade 
infrastructure and faculty qualifications in eligible institutions. Further, it should also 
partner with premier institutions like IITs and Central Universities to create model ITEP 
programs that others can emulate. Additionally, a faculty development program focusing 
on interdisciplinary teaching and 21st-century pedagogy should be mandated. 
 
3.9 The Committee observes that as per Para 2.2 of NCTE's Gazette Notification of 
2021 which states that "in a semester, there shall be at least 125 (one hundred and twenty-
five) working days, excluding the period of admissions but including the period of 
examinations." This clause of the said notification is in conflict with the University Grants 
Commission’s (UGC) standard of 14–15 weeks per semester. This discrepancy creates 
scheduling conflicts within universities, disrupting alignment with other programs. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to make ITEP’s academic 
calendar in sync with UGC guidelines to ensure compatibility with university systems. 
NCTE should also collaborate with UGC to standardize semester durations across 
multidisciplinary programs, potentially adopting a 16–18-week semester to balance 
teaching and practicum requirements. 
3.10 The Committee observes that ITEP mandates that programs be offered in 
composite institutions with multidisciplinary academic environments. However, the 
Committee notes that 92% of Teachers Education Institutions (TEIs) are private 

21 
 
institutions. Many public as well as private institutions offering teacher education 
programs lack the infrastructure, faculty expertise, or academic rigour to deliver a truly 
multidisciplinary curriculum, which compromises the quality of education and the 
integration of liberal arts, sciences, and pedagogical training. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends as under:- 
(i) the Department/NCTE should ensure that each district of the country has at least 
one public sector multi-disciplinary quality  Teachers Education Institution 
equipped with sufficient infrastructure, faculty expertise and academic rigour for 
multi-disciplinary training and education under ITEP; 
(ii) the Department/NCTE should implement stricter accreditation criteria for 
composite institutions, ensuring they have robust departments in liberal arts, 
humanities, social sciences, and sciences. Regular audits and inspections by NCTE’s 
Inspection and Visiting Committees should verify the availability of qualified 
faculty and resources; 
(iii) the Department/NCTE should encourage collaborations between smaller 
institutions and reputed multidisciplinary universities including IITs, Central 
Universities etc. to share resources, faculty, and expertise, on the lines of IIT 
Bhubaneswar’s ITEP initiative; and 
(iv) the Department/NCTE should ensure continuous professional development for 
faculty to ensure they are equipped to teach interdisciplinary courses that blend 
subject knowledge with pedagogy. 
3.11 The Committee observes that the ITEP curriculum, while aiming to integrate 
general studies i.e. Mathematics, Sciences, Humanities with professional teacher training, 
lacks clarity on how it differs from existing four-year programs like B.A./B.Sc. B.Ed. or 
B.El.Ed. This ambiguity leads to overlapping content and confusion among stakeholders 
about its unique value. Hence, the Committee recommends that the Department/ NCTE 
should  
(i) develop a clear, modular curriculum framework that balances general education, 
pedagogical training, and practical experience. The curriculum should explicitly 
outline learning outcomes for each stage (Foundational, Preparatory, Middle, 
Secondary) as per NEP 2020’s 5+3+3+4 structure; 
(ii) integrate international benchmarks, such as inquiry-based learning and technology-
enabled teaching, to prepare teachers for 21st-century classrooms which would 
align with ITEP’s aim to adopt global standards; and 
(iii) establish a review committee to periodically update the ITEP curriculum based on 
feedback from educators, students, and schools to ensure relevance and 
effectiveness. 
3.12 The Committee notes that the quality of teacher education programme depends upon 
the quality of institutions. The proliferation of substandard private institution driven by 
commercial interests can significantly undermine the ITEP' s goal and objective of NEP-
2020 to produce high quality teachers, as many institutions prioritize profit over quality. 
The Committee therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to:- 

22 
 
(i) enforce rigorous norms for recognition of ITEP-offering institutions, including 
mandatory compliance with infrastructure, faculty, and curriculum standards. Non-
compliant institutions should face de-recognition; 
(ii) make inspection reports and compliance data publicly available on NCTE’s website 
to ensure accountability and check commercialization; and 
(iii) increase funding for Public Universities and Government Colleges offering ITEP to 
reduce reliance on private institutions and ensure affordable access for students. 
3.13 The Committee observes that ITEP mandates that a significant portion of the 
program, at least 25%, be dedicated to school-based activities and internships. However, 
many institutions lack partnerships with quality schools for internships, leading to 
inconsistent practical training experiences. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department/NCTE to develop partnerships with diverse schools (Government, private, 
rural, urban) to provide varied teaching experiences. NCTE should also create a 
framework for internship evaluation, including mentor feedback and student performance 
metrics. The Committee also recommends to introduce technology-driven simulations and 
micro-teaching modules to supplement real-world internships, especially in institutions 
with limited access to quality schools. Further, NCTE should ensure that internships 
include exposure to inclusive classrooms, addressing diverse learner needs including 
learners' with special needs, gender, disadvantaged section of society etc., as mandated in 
NCTE regulations. 
3.14 The Committee notes that ITEP emphasizes on technology integration. However, a 
number of TEIs lack the infrastructure or trained faculty to incorporate digital tools 
effectively. Additionally, there is insufficient focus on Continuous Professional 
Development (CPD) post-training/education. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department of School Education and Literacy to provide for sufficient grants to State 
Governments and TEIs to develop digital labs and train faculty in using educational 
technologies, such as learning management systems and virtual classrooms etc. The 
Committee also recommends that CPD modules for ITEP graduates, focusing on emerging 
pedagogical trends, technology integration, and inclusive education be introduced on 
mandatory basis. Further, NCTE should collaborate with NCERT to offer online CPD 
courses to ITEP graduates.  
3.15 The Committee feels that success of any teachers' education/training program 
depends largely on the monitoring and evaluation of program outcomes. The Committee 
recommends the Department to evolve robust mechanisms to evaluate ITEP’s effectiveness 
in producing competent teachers and its impact on school education. Also, Department 
should conduct regular studies/audit by third party to assess ITEP graduates’ performance 
in schools, focusing on student outcomes, teaching effectiveness, and retention rates. The 
Committee further recommends that the Department should establish a feedback loop 
involving schools, students, and ITEP graduates to identify gaps and refine the program 
accordingly. A centralized database should be set up to track ITEP outcomes, including 
graduation rates, their employment statistics, and teacher performance for effective 
outcomes. 
3.16 The Committee in its 363rd Report had recommended for convergence of Early 
Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) with primary education and integration of pre-

23 
 
primary/nursery education within Anganwadi centers and schools, with the formal 
primary school system. The Committee feels that Anganwadi worker and helpers should 
also be incorporated under ITEP for their training. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Department to ensure that Anganwadi workers and pre-primary teachers 
are trained with similar standards to provide consistent quality ECCE, potentially 
through joint training programs under ITEP. The Committee also reiterates its 
recommendation contained in 363rd Report for convergence of ECCE with primary 
education. 
 
3.17 The Committee also recommends that linguistic and cultural diversity in 
curriculum, local relevant pedagogies such as folk arts, classical regional literature and 
state level learning practices etc. should be given utmost importance and priority under the 
ITEP and education being a Concurrent-list subject in the Constitution, the State 
Governments should be given sufficient time and autonomy to evaluate its feasibility, cost 
implication and teacher workforce alignment. Further, the Department of School 
Education and Literacy should provide with institutional and financial support to the State 
Governments for upgrading public colleges/TEIs to meet the rigorous norms required for 
ITEP accreditation. 
 
3.18 The Committee recommends that the existing minimum qualification to teach 
elementary education continue to be 12th grade plus a 2-year diploma. The Committee 
observes that requiring teachers to have a four-year degree before teaching 3-year-old 
students is a very high bar, which may be logistically hard to meet and very expensive for 
prospective teachers. The Committee further observes that preschooling will also be 
occurring in Anganwadis, where the eligibility requirements for AWCs are a lot less 
stringent as compared to the four-year ITEP degree. The Committee recommends that the 
qualifications for teaching with elementary education must be developed with this larger 
system in mind. 
  

24 
 
4 Bachelor of Elementary Education (B.EI.Ed) Program  
4.1 The Department has informed the Committee that the  B.El.Ed is a four-year degree 
introduced in 1994–95, limited to teaching only at the elementary level (Classes I–VIII), offered 
by select institutions and it is not aligned with NEP 2020 including new school structure 
(5+3+3+4), credit structure and multiple entry and multiple exit facilities.  
 
Table-7 
 
B.El.Ed. Programme  ITEP  
Follows a single-degree structure & Restricted 
vertical academic mobility  
Out of sync with new school stages proposed 
by NEP 2020  
Dual - Major Degree (Education & Discipline) 
Enhanced academic and disciplinary 
progression.  
Offered in all four stages (Foundational,  
Preparatory, Middle and Secondary) proposed 
by NEP 2020  
Limited disciplinary depth. 8 credits for 2  
papers  
Equal focus on disciplinary components 64  
credits across 16 papers  
High faculty demand  
16 faculty for 50 students  
Rationalized faculty demand 9 faculty for 50  
students  
Even after 3 decades, it remained confined to a 
few colleges in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh (99 
institutions)  
ITEP as premier program, Currently Offered by  
64 Multidisciplinary institutions and 763 
applications received in 4th phase and 765 B.A.  
B.Ed. are under process of transition.  
 
4.2 Department of School Education & Literacy has informed that as on 15th May, 2025, a 
proposal for the discontinuation of the 4-year B.El.Ed. is under consideration. However, the 
Government is yet to take a view in the matter. It is proposed that these programmes should be 
transited into ITEP programme by the year 2026-27. This phrase is a little problematic because it 
says, ‘Discontinuation of the Bachelor of Elementary Education Programme’. This is not 
discontinuation.  This is transition of the existing programme into a futuristic programme. 
Department has further informed that B.El.Ed. follows a single degree structure and is restricted 
vertical academic mobility to the students; out of sync with new school stages which have been 
proposed in NEP-2020, whereas, ITEP is a Dual-Major Degree progrmame having the 
component of education and discipline. It enhances academic and disciplinary progression 
offered for all four stages, foundation stage, preparatory stage, middle stage and secondary stage. 
B.El.Ed. programme has a limited disciplinary depth because it is offering only two papers of 
eight credit or 200 marks. Whereas, ITEP is proposing equal focus on disciplinary components 
by offering 16 papers of four credit each, that makes a total of 64 credit and as per UGC 
guidelines, 48 credit makes one Major where a student can go for vertical mobility. B.El.Ed. is 
high faculty demand programme because it is demanding 16 faculty members for a batch of 50 
students, whereas, in ITEP, Department has tried to accommodate that the faculty requirement 
for each teacher education programme has been rationalized and it has been brought down to 9 at 
par with other teacher education progrmmes in the country. Even after three decades, it remained 
confined to few colleges in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh.   
As per NCTE record, B.El.Ed.is being run in total 99 institutions only and it is struggling 
to expand even after approximately thirty years, whereas, ITEP as a premier programme, is being 
offered by 64 multi-disciplinary institutions; 763 applications have been received in the fourth 
phase and 765 applications of B.A., B.Ed., graduation are under process for which a final call 

25 
 
will be taken very soon. The approach of having stand alone institutions for teacher education 
has been replaced by multi-disciplinary approach in teacher education.  Now, teacher education 
is supposed to be aligned with new school structure, that is, 5+3+3+4 and also to look at the 21st 
century competencies and skills required for school teachers. ITEP curriculum framework, 
developed by NCTE, harmonizes national standards while allowing the institutional flexibility.  
It aligns with national reforms like National Credit Framework, Academic Bank of Credits and 
Choice-Based Credit System (CBCS) model to ensure consistency and adaptability across 
institutions. Credit structure for ITEP is 160 as proposed by NCTE with flexibility for the 
institutions to increase it to 176 credits. This structure supports multi-disciplinary integration, 
student-centric learning and reflective teaching practices, enabling institutions to tailor the 
programme according to their local strength. The flexibility of 30 per cent is also proposed in the 
curriculum structure where local consideration can also be accommodated in the curriculum up 
to 30 per cent as per UGC guidelines of CBCS. 
The third point is ‘Qualification for Teaching ITEP Programme’. In any teacher 
education institution, there are three types of teacher educators.  One is Professor in Education or 
Associate Professor as Head of the Department. For Head of the Department, as per 2021 
regulation, the Post-Graduate Degree in Science, Mathematics, Social Science, Commerce or 
Language along with M.Ed, Ph.D. in education has been proposed because it is a post equivalent 
to Associate Professor. So Ph.D. is essential along with ten years of teaching experience in a 
teacher education institution for Professor and eight years for Associate Professor; any other 
relevant qualification as prescribed by UGC for these categories of posts. Diploma or a Degree in 
Educational Administration or Leadership is desirable. Second is the position for Assistant 
Professor in liberal discipline and pedagogy. Here, the qualifications are Post Graduate degree in 
Science or Mathematics or Social Sciences or languages with minimum 55 per cent marks or its 
equivalent grade. Second qualification added to this is BA degree with minimum 55 per cent 
marks or equivalent grade, National Eligibility Test (NET) or State Level Eligibility Test (SLET) 
by the State or Doctoral degree in Education or in the concerned subject as prescribed by the 
UGC for these categories of posts. Desirable is M.Ed. with specialisation or Ph.D. in Education. 
And, third cadre in teacher education institutions is Assistant Professor in educational studies 
which are popularly known as foundation areas of education. Here, the requirement is Post 
Graduate degree in Education with minimum 55 per cent marks or equivalent grade with NET or 
SLET or Doctorate of Education or any other qualification as prescribed by the UGC. The 
desirable qualification for the same is, Masters Degree in Philosophy of Education, Sociology of 
Education, Psychology of Education primarily. 
 
4.3 The Department has further informed that the Regulations concerning various teacher 
education pathways, including D.El.Ed. and its alignment with NEP 2020 will be addressed in 
subsequent phases by NCTE, ensuring a comprehensive approach to teacher education reform in 
consultation with all the stakeholders.  
 
Views of Educationists and Representatives of Civil Society 
Organizations on ITEP vis-a-vis B.El.Ed 
 
4.4 During presentation/ submission by Educationists and representatives of Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs) before the Committee at its meeting held on 19th May, 2025, it was 
informed that a four year multidisciplinary integrated programme i.e. B.El.Ed was 
conceptualized during 1992-93 and it was started as a course in 1994. However, NCTE was 

26 
 
formed in 1995 by an Act of Parliament to regulate the teacher education. B.El.Ed is an 
integrated four-year teacher education program, which prepares teachers in such a way that they 
do not see a child only as a pot in which Hindi, English or Mathematics has to be filled. It also 
provides training on their political, social aspects, gender, caste and poverty, the factors affecting 
them, so that an effort can be made to teach every child coming to school in such a way that they 
study. It was further informed that as there is a problem of drop-out rate and completion rate, that 
is why this country has considered primary education as a Constitutional Right and B.El.Ed is 
linked to that constitutional right because it prepares an elementary teacher. 
 
4.5 They further submitted before the Committee that in 2018, the Division Bench of Delhi 
High Court had given the decision that B.El.Ed graduates are valid and eligible for PRT and 
TGT appointments and promotions just like D.El.Ed. Recently, the Chandigarh Bench of Punjab 
and Haryana High Court has given the decision that like D.El.Ed, B.El.Ed is also an eligible 
degree for constitutional provision, i.e. for the implementation of RTE. The Supreme Court has 
also repeatedly observed in the D.El.Ed case that the education of a teacher at every stage should 
not be considered the same. The training for a child at the elementary level is very different from 
the training of a student at the secondary or higher secondary level. B.El.Ed is a very focused and 
professional program, whereas in contrast to that, ITEP is a very flexible program. In a survey 
conducted by Delhi University, it has been found that out 777 B.El. Ed graduates, 60 percent of 
B.El.Ed graduates are teaching in primary schools and they are very committed. The Central 
Teacher Eligibility Test (CTET) clearing rate of B.El.Ed graduates is 67 percent, while the 
separate figures of all other programs show that it is not even half of it. CTET is a test for  
teachers' qualification and it finds mention  in the gazette of RTE implementation. ITEP has four 
i.e. ITEP foundational, ITEP preparatory, ITEP middle and ITEP secondary unlike B.El.Ed 
which concentrates on Elementary Education. 
 
4.6 Secondly, B.El.Ed. is a UGC-sanctioned programme, which means that UGC owns this 
programme and  if any Central University wants to run it, then it sanctions posts in universities, 
but the entire structure of ITEP is in self-financing mode. 
 
4.7 Thirdly, that ITEP, which has been announced for foundational and preparatory stage, 
which divides the training of teachers of small children into two parts. The foundational stage is 
in the first 5 years and the preparatory stage that comes after that gives birth to the concept of 
preparation of teachers of class 3rd, 4th and 5th in two different ways. Both these stages of ITEP 
lack continuity and divide the training of education. The foundational program and the 
preparatory program envisage two types of teachers. This is not aligned with the structure of the 
school. The curricular structure is very different from the school structure. Although NEP is 
presenting the information or concept of a curricular structure in a new way, it does not mean 
that teacher training should also be conceptualized in the same way. 
4.8 The Committee observes that ITEP divides teacher training into two distinct 
programs for the foundational stage covering pre-school to Grade 2 and the preparatory 
stage covering Grades 3 to 5. This bifurcation creates two types of teachers with specialized 
training that does not reflect the integrated nature of school structures, where teachers 
often handle multiple grades or overlapping roles. The separation of training lacks 
continuity. The Committee further notes that the rigid division of teacher training into 
foundational and preparatory programs fails to prepare teachers for versatile roles in 
school settings. While NEP 2020 introduces a new curricular structure (5+3+3+4), it 

27 
 
emphasizes a seamless progression in learning. ITEP’s bifurcated training model 
contradicts this by creating artificial distinctions in teacher preparation that do not 
correspond to practical school requirements and the rigid division of teachers' training into 
foundational and preparatory programs fails to prepare teachers for versatile roles in 
school settings. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to integrate 
Foundational and Preparatory Stage Training from pre-school to Grade 5 to ensure 
continuity and also to incorporate cross-stage training modules that equip teachers to 
handle multi-grade classrooms, reflecting the reality of many schools in the country where 
teachers work across grades. 
 
4.9 Fourthly, ITEP's programme is being designed as a dual degree. It is being called BA-B. 
Ed., B.Sc.-B. Ed. and B.Com.-B. Ed., at the foundational stage of preparatory stage. Three types 
of exit options have been given in it. The candidate who has come to study can exit after the first 
year, can exit after the second year or even exit after the third year. If he/she exits after the first 
year, he/she gets a certificate, but he/she would not have studied any pedagogy program, nor 
would he/she have done any course, but would have studied some credit education courses, 
which are in the first and second semesters. The diploma has only two pedagogy programs and 
education courses, while the degree has four pedagogy programs. This kind of degree looks at 
teacher training in a very fragmented way. A drop out or a candidate who exits in the first year or 
second year is not going to become a teacher, he is not going to do that job in any way in that 
whole format of school education, so the expenditure that the Government is making on that 
candidate is meaningless.  
4.10 The Committee takes note of multiple exit options under ITEP and observes that the 
current structure of ITEP, with its fragmented exit options and limited pedagogical focus 
in early years, risks producing under qualified candidates and wasting resources. These 
early exit options do not equip candidates with the necessary skills to serve as teachers, 
rendering them ineffective for employment in school education. Government's expenditure 
on candidates who exit early after first or second or third year, is largely wasted, as these 
individuals are not qualified to teach. They lack practical teaching skills in early exit 
certifications which undermines the program's objective of producing competent 
educators. The Committee, therefore, recommends, that the Department should eliminate 
the first,  second and third year exit options to ensure that candidates gain meaningful 
exposure to pedagogy and teacher training before exiting and also to ensure that ITEP 
aligns with NEP 2020’s emphasis on holistic and rigorous teacher preparation by 
integrating multidisciplinary education with robust pedagogical training across all four 
years. 
4.11 Fifthly, ITEP Course has been made in self-financing mode. The data of the universities 
that have started it shows that for ITEP Course, the fee of NIT, Calicut is Rs 71,786 per annum. 
The fee of Ambedkar University is Rs 66,000 per annum. The fee of University of Delhi is Rs 
64,000 per annum. The fee of Central University of Rajasthan is Rs 71,230 per annum. The fee 
of IP University is Rs 1 lakh per annum. Its fee structure is such that a student has to bear the 
burden of Rs 4 lakh for four years. Hence, there is less demand for this course because most of 
those who want to become teachers come from very rural areas and humble backgrounds and 
they do not have enough finance for such expensive courses. The demand for ITEP course is 
lesser because of biggest financial theory i.e. return on investment. 

28 
 
 
4.12 The Committee observes that ITEP course has been implemented in self-financing 
mode and students from rural and humble backgrounds have to bear around Rupees Four 
Lakh for completion of the course which is not affordable for majority of youth population 
aspiring for ITEP courses. The Committee further observes that Directive Principles of the 
State Policy contained in Part-IV of the Constitution declares the 'State' as a 'Welfare 
State.' The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to implement ITEP on 
public financing mode instead of self-financing mode, so that, students from rural, poor, 
economically and socially backward sections of the society can pursue the ITEP course 
easily and to ensure that Directive Principles of State Policy are given due importance 
while framing the policies regarding teacher training.  
  
4.13 Sixthly, Referring the presentation given by NCTE, the representatives submitted before 
the Committee that it is evident from the data of the courses running in ITEP, only five (05) State 
Universities and Government Colleges have applied for preparatory courses in ITEP, whereas 
only one (01) Government College of Jammu and Kashmir has requested for foundational 
courses in ITEP. Currently, 64 institutions are running 114 ITEP programs. Out of which 99 
programs are of secondary education, 9 programs are of middle education and the remaining 9 
programs are at the foundational and preparatory stage. Demand Imbalance is evident in the data 
presented by NCTE. When these courses come in universities, the universities themselves are not 
interested in running those courses. The biggest reason for this is that these courses are expensive 
and it is becoming a supply-sided program, especially for foundation and preparatory stage. 
There is no demand for it because when a student reaches school with a four-year degree, he/she 
does not get that much pay. 
 
4.14 The Committee notes that only five (05) State Universities and Government Colleges 
have applied for preparatory courses in ITEP, whereas only one (01) Government College 
of Jammu and Kashmir has requested for foundational courses in ITEP, out of  64 
institutions are running 114 programs. Out of the 114 programs being run, 99 programs 
are being run for secondary education, 9 programs are for middle education and the 
remaining 9 programs are being run for the foundational and preparatory stage which 
shows that demand the ITEP course at Foundational and Preparatory stage is abysmally 
very low. Similarly, demand at middle education level is also very poor. The Committee 
further observes that maximum number of children get enrolled at Foundational, 
Preparatory and Middle levels. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to 
assess the demand gap and redress it effectively to ensure potential implementation of 
ITEP 
 
4.15 Seventhly, Section 12 of the NCTE Act, 1993 is responsible for maintaining educational 
standards, 'for setting norms for Teacher Education Programme.' However, the entire program of 
ITEP is being imposed on the universities by the NCTE. The autonomy that the Universities 
have to create their own curricular structure, the space that they had, has been taken away. Only 
30 percent flexibility to the Universities has been given in this regard. Hence, there is need to 
preserve the academic and curricular autonomy of the State Universities and Central Universities 
to run different types of programmes. 
 
4.16 Eighthly, It was also submitted before the Committee that B. El. Ed course is attractive 
for students because they see the academic and professional mobility in this course. Besides, the 

29 
 
industry which is in this case is schools, the organizations which are working in the area of 
education, the curriculum development bodies, the textbook production agencies and 
organizations, etc. have a demand for B. El. Ed students because they found that B. El. Ed 
students have creative, analytical, and have problem solving skills. All these things that have 
been mentioned in the National Policy of Education, 2020.  
 
4.17 Ninthly, the NEP, 2020 mentions about multi-disciplinarity of education. The faculty for 
the B.El.Ed. program comes from multidisciplinary backgrounds. This enables the faculty to 
prepare the students for an interdisciplinary training. This interdisciplinary training is actually 
reflected in the projects that the students do and the kind of complex problems that they are able 
to handle within the school setting. The NEP, 2020 also emphasizes experiential learning as an 
important part of teacher education. The B.El.Ed. program, in its four years, closely brings 
together theory as well as the practice aspects. The practice aspect is built in from the very first 
year of the curriculum, goes on till the four years of the curriculum and is levelled up each year. 
The rigorous internship, the school experience program and the projects that the students do, 
enable a student to identify problems in diverse educational settings and come up with solutions 
for that as an independent teacher.  It is this part of the curriculum and preparation of the 
students that makes B. El. Ed. students so attractive for schools, and it is for this reason that by 
the time the students come to the fourth year of their program, many of them are already placed 
in schools. This is the kind of industry-acceptance of the program. There is such a high demand 
from the schools as well. The elements of multilingual education, mother tongue-based 
education, are all integral to teaching of the B.El.Ed. program. Moreover, importance of 
flexibility of curriculum, digital education, holistic education etc. mentioned in NEP, 2020 are 
also already integral part of B.El.Ed programme. Hence, it is a program which should be 
continued, and the learnings from that should be continued. In fact, it should be amplified and 
replicated in other places also. 
4.18 The Committee notes that the NEP, 2020 emphasizes transformative reforms in 
teacher education, focusing on multidisciplinary education, experiential learning, and 
holistic development. The Bachelor of Elementary Education (B.El.Ed.) program aligns 
closely with these objectives, demonstrating a robust framework for preparing teachers for 
diverse educational settings. The B.El.Ed. program incorporates multilingual education, 
mother tongue-based instruction, digital education, and holistic development, all of which 
are central to NEP 2020’s vision. The Committee further observes that the program’s 
effectiveness is evident in its high demand from schools and many B.El.Ed. students secure 
placements by their fourth year, reflecting the program’s strong reputation and alignment 
with elementary education's needs. The Committee, therefore, recommends for 
continuation of the B.EL.ED program and promotion of the replication of the B.El.Ed. 
program in additional institutions under ITEP. 
4.19 The Committee notes the Department's submission before the Committee that as on 15th 
May, 2025, a proposal for the discontinuation of the 4-year B.El.Ed. is under consideration. 
However, the Government is yet to take a view in the matter and it is proposed that these 
programmes should be transited into ITEP programme by the year 2026-27. Further, the 
representative from the Department also submitted that this is not discontinuation, rather, this is 
transition of the existing programme into a futuristic programme. 
 

30 
 
4.20 The Committee observes that B. El. Ed program is proposed for transition into the 
ITEP because it is limited to elementary level teaching, class I to VIII, offered by less than 
100 institutions. The Committee further notes that B. El. Ed is a specialized four-year 
degree with focus on elementary education pedagogy, a crucial developmental stage for 
children, and it discontinuation based on factors like the number of institutions or 
structural alignment a short-sighted approach that risks dismantling a proven program 
instead of strengthening and expanding it to meet the demand for qualified elementary 
teachers across the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department/ 
NCTE to redress the limitations, if any, under B. El. Ed program by upgrading its 
curriculum and encouraging more institutions to offer it, leveraging its established history 
and expertise in elementary teacher training instead of scraping or discontinuing a 
reputed, well established and internationally acclaimed program like B. El. Ed. which is 
being run effectively for more than 30 years. 
 
4.21 The Committee notes that the B.El.Ed. programme has for decades served as a 
rigorous, research-based, and socially conscious route for training generalist elementary 
school teachers, especially for urban poor and rural students. Given the diversity of 
educational needs across the country, the Committee recommends the Department to 
consider allowing States to continue offering B. El. Ed. where institutional ecosystems 
support it like State-run universities and women's colleges in certain States across the 
country. The Committee further recommends that the existing faculty and infrastructure 
developed under B. El. Ed. programme over the years to support this programme, 
especially in public-funded women's colleges and SC/ST/minority-serving institutions 
should be preserved. 
 
  

31 
 
5. District Institute of Education and Training (DIETs)  
 
5.1 The Department of School Education and Literacy has informed that the District Institutes of 
Education and Training (DIETs) were envisioned in the National Policy of Education, 1986, and 
were created by the Government of India in the early 1990s to strengthen elementary education and 
support the decentralization of education to the district level. DIETs were conceived as the third 
addition- district level- tier to the support system, which would be closer to the field, and therefore 
more alive to its problems and needs. The core institutional focus of a DIET was Continuous Teacher 
Professional Development, which would directly/indirectly impact on school improvement 
programmes. Subsequently, to address the gap in the continuum between elementary education and 
secondary education, under Samagra Shiksha, DIETs are envisaged as a strong district institution that 
would prepare and support teachers at the school level. Subsequently, a new scheme, Samagra 
Shiksha came into effect from 1st April, 2018 by subsuming the existing centrally sponsored 
schemes of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) and 
Teacher Education (CSSTE). Samagra Shiksha envisages a strong district institution that would 
prepare and support teachers at the school level. Accordingly, to support the universalisation of 
quality education and achieve quality in adult and life-long education, DIETs were visualized as a 
way to infuse the system with the following essential inputs:-  
(i) Provision of Pre-service and In-service Teacher Education Programmes.  
(ii) Organizing District Level Educational Research on issues pertaining to enrollment, retention, 
achievement, gender parity, proficiency and dropouts etc..  
(iii) Facilitating Collaborative Action Research to enable practising teachers to address classroom 
issues.  
(iv) Scouting Innovative Practices of Primary/Upper Primary teachers and disseminating them 
among their colleagues by organizing periodical District Level Seminars and releasing News 
bulletins which carry information on Innovative classroom processes.  
(v) Providing Resource Support to Non-Formal Education Sector by extending DIET expertise in 
developing curriculum and supplementary Learning Materials to adult learners.  
(vi) Designing and developing trainer manuals for Anganwadi workers and for addressing Social 
concerns such as Crisis and Disaster Management, Gender Sensitivity, Leadership Manual 
for School Heads etc.  
 
5.2 Under NEP 2020, the role of DIETs has been re-envisioned to transform them into vibrant 
institutions for high-quality teacher education and continuous professional development of teachers. 
The policy focuses on strengthening the academic and research capabilities of DIETs to make them 
centers of innovation and excellence in teacher education. Furthermore, it emphasizes expanding the 
scope of DIETs to include secondary education, in alignment with the new 5+3+3+4 school structure. 
This aims to create a continuum of teacher training that supports teachers at all levels of the school 
education. The policy calls for greater autonomy and flexibility for DIETs to be able to respond to 
the unique needs and contexts. It emphasizes the need for fostering stronger linkages between DIETs 
and the SCERT, BRC and CRC for effective implementation of policies and programs. DIETs are 
expected to promote research and evidence-based practices, pilot innovative pedagogical approaches, 
develop contextual teaching-learning materials, establish linkages with higher education institutions, 
research institutions, etc. to leverage expertise and resources.  
 
5.3  The Department of School Education & Literacy has informed that at present, there are 748 
districts (As per UDISE+ 2021-22) in the country and there is a DIET sanctioned in 672 of the total 
districts, out of which 613 DIETs are functional. The State/UT-wise details of DIETs sanctioned and 
functional which are given below:-. 

32 
 
TABLE -8 
State/UT wise details of districts, DIETs Sanctioned & Functional, 2023-24 
Sl.No.  State/UT  No. of 
Districts  
DIETs 
Sanctioned  
DIETs 
Functional  
Non-
Functional 
DIETs  
 
1.  
Andaman & 
Nicobar Island  
3  1  1  0  
2.  Andhra Pradesh  13  13  13  0  
3.  
 
Arunachal 
Pradesh  
26  13  11  2  
4.  Assam  35  27  23  4  
5. Bihar  38  38  33  5  
6.  Chandigarh  1  0  0  0  
7.  Chhattisgarh  28  24  19  5  
8. Delhi  13  9  9  0  
9.  DNH and D&D  3  1  1  0  
10. Goa  2  1  1  0  
11. Gujarat  33  34  30  4  
12. Haryana  22  22  21  1  
13. Himachal 
Pradesh  
12  12  12  0  
14.  
 
Jammu & 
Kashmir  
20  20  20  0  
15. Jharkhand  24  24  24  0  
16. Karnataka  35  30  30  0  
17. Kerala  14  14  14  0  
18. Ladakh  2  2  2  0  
19. Lakshadweep  1  1  1  0  
20. Madhya Pradesh  52  52  50  2  
21. Maharashtra  36  35  33  2  
22. Manipur  16  16  9  7  
23. Meghalaya  11  8  7  1  
24. Mizoram  11  10  8  2  
25. Nagaland  11  11  8  3  
26. Odisha  30  30  30  0  
27. Puducherry  4  1  1  0  
28. Punjab  23  22  17  5  
29. Rajasthan  33  33  33  0  
30.  Sikkim  6  4  3  1  
31. Tamil Nadu  37  32  32  0  
32. Telangana  33  14  10  4  
33. Tripura  8  8  4  4  
34. Uttar Pradesh  75  75  70  5  
35. Uttarakhand  13  13  13  0  
36. West Bengal  24  22  20  2  
 Total 748 672  613 59 
 
 
 

33 
 
5.4 DIET of Excellence 
 
The idea of "DIET of Excellence" is to turn all the functional DIETs (District Institutes of 
Education and Training) in the country into district-level educational hubs of innovation and 
excellence. These organizations would be strengthened as centres for curriculum creation, teacher 
preparation, research, and innovation, enhancing elementary, secondary, and senior secondary 
education while assisting decentralization initiatives. A "DIET of Excellence" will focus on 
empowering teachers through in-depth training programmes that improve their topic knowledge, 
pedagogical abilities, and teaching approaches. Additionally, this “DIET of Excellence” will also be 
committed to creating and upgrading curricular frameworks, textbooks, and teaching-learning 
materials to adhere to state or national standards and satisfy the different requirements of students. 
As DIETs traditionally perform studies and action research to investigate successful teaching 
practices and educational initiatives, a “DIET of Excellence” will have research and innovation as 
crucial components that support evidence-based decision-making and ongoing development. “DIET 
of Excellence” will propagate knowledge sharing, resource mobilization, and the exchange of best 
practices and collaboration among universities, schools, government agencies and CSOs. It is 
envisaged that these district-level institutions will be adequately strengthened to become models of 
high-quality education by exemplifying the "DIET of Excellence," through empowering educators 
and improving student learning outcomes. In other words, it will make a substantial contribution to 
the overall development of both students, teachers, schools and the community at large. The aims and 
objectives of DIET of Excellence are as under:- 
 
(i) Providing state-of-the-art classrooms, well-equipped laboratories, and cutting-edge 
digitized library facilities would improve the learning environment; 
(ii) Include the most recent ICT and technology tools to enable creative teaching strategies 
and individualized learning techniques; 
(iii)  Promote use of technology in education to promote a culture of research and practice; 
(iv) Provide teachers with opportunity for continuous professional development so they can 
adjust to contemporary teaching methods;  
(v) Through the use of cutting-edge technology in education, prepare students for a digital 
and knowledge-driven society; 
(vi)  Establish a supportive atmosphere for learning through provision of adequate 
infrastructure and technological resources; and  
(vii) Promote networking and collaboration among those involved in education for the purpose 
of sharing information and mobilizing resources.  
 
5.5 As informed by the Department of School Education & Literacy, there are Six Major Pillars 
of DIETs of Excellence which are given as under:  
 
i) Infrastructure and Resource Support: The creation and upkeep of suitable infrastructure 
facilities is the first major pillar of the DIET of Excellence. The focus will be on offering adequately 
furnished infrastructure, digitized libraries and labs, hi-tech technological resources, and other 
facilities required to establishment of a favorable learning environment. It will also provide 
knowledge, technical tools, and access to educational resources to promote teachers' professional 
development and the adoption of cutting-edge teaching techniques.  
ii) Empowering teachers: The second major pillar of DIETs of Excellence is empowering 
teachers through continuous professional development in the form of specialized training, 

34 
 
workshops, and capacity building programmes. The focus is on enhancing their pedagogical skills, 
subject knowledge, teaching methodologies, competencies required for school leadership and 
management, equipping them to deliver high quality education effectively.  
iii) Research and Evidence-Based Practices: DIETs of Excellence emphasizes research 
studies, pilot projects, and innovative initiatives to identify effective teaching methodologies, 
educational practices, and strategies for addressing local educational challenges. The findings from 
these studies will contribute to evidence-based decision making and overall improvement in the 
education system.  
iv) Inclusive Education and Support: Ensuring inclusive education is another key pillar of 
DIETs of Excellence. They will work towards addressing the needs of diverse learners, including 
students with disabilities and special educational needs. These DIETs will provide support, resources, 
and guidance to create an accessible and equitable learning environment for all students.  
v) Focus on Vocational Education: DIET of Excellence will also prioritize Vocational 
Education programmes by fostering skill development and thorough vocational training programmes 
that promote local professions, knowledge, and skills, e.g., local art, music, agriculture, business, 
sports, carpentry, and other vocational crafts.  
vi) Collaboration and Networking: DIETs of Excellence foster collaboration among 
educational institutions, government agencies, CSOs, community organizations, and industry experts. 
They will create platforms for knowledge sharing, joint initiatives, and resource mobilization to 
enhance the overall quality of education through collective expertise and resources.  
 
5.6 Accordingly, with the aim of re-envisioning teacher training through innovative pedagogy, 
continuous professional development, and ICT integration, DIETs are being developed as vibrant 
Institutes of Excellence under the integrated scheme of school education—Samagra Shiksha. A total 
of 613 functional DIETs across the country will be upgraded in a phased manner over the next five 
years, at an estimated cost of ₹9,195 crore. The initiative began with 125 DIETs in FY 2023–24, with 
an estimated cost of ₹923.20 crore . The list of the same is given at Table-9. In the second phase, 116 
DIETs have been appraised (list at Table-10), and additional DIETs will continue to be appraised as 
proposals are received. 
TABLE -9 
DIETs of Excellence sanctioned for first phase (FY 2023-24) 
Sl. 
No.  
State/UT  DIETs of Excellence  
1.  Andaman & Nicobar  South Andaman  
2.  Andhra Pradesh  Srikakulam  
Vizianagaram 
Kurnool 
3.  Arunachal Pradesh  Dairang  
Roing 
4.  Assam  Barpeta  
Dhemaji  
Jorhat 
Kamrup 
5.  Bihar  Bhojpur  
Gaya 
Muzaffarpur 

35 
 
Samastipur 
Khagaria 
Aurangabad 
6.  Chhattisgarh  Pendra  
  Bemetara 
  Raipur 
  Kanker 
7.  Delhi  Motibagh  
  Rajinder Nagar 
8.  Goa  Alto Porvorim  
9.  Gujarat  Anand  
  Gandhinagar 
  Navsari 
  Vadodara 
  Mahesana 
  Surat 
10.  Haryana  Karnal  
11.  Himachal Pradesh  Shimla  
  Sirmaur 
12.  Jammu and Kashmir  Budgam  
  Kulgam 
13.  Ladakh  Leh  
14.  Jharkhand  Bokaro  
  Nuapada 
  Kandhamal 
24.  Puducherry  Puducherry  
25.  Punjab  Ferozpur  
  Ludhiana 
  Roopnagar 
26.  Rajasthan  Alwar  
  Udaipur 
  Churu 
  Jodhpur 
  Bikaner 
  Kota 
27  Sikkim  Gangtok  
28.  Tamil Nadu  Erode  
  Madurai 
  Pudukottai 
  Salem 
  Tiruchirappali 
  Tirunelveli 
29.  Telangana  Mahabubnagar  
  Khamman 
30.  Tripura  Agartala  

36 
 
31.  Uttar Pradesh  Aligarh  
  Agra 
  Gorakhpur 
  Barabanki 
  Kanpur Dehat 
  Jaunpur 
  Kushinagar 
  Lucknow 
  Meerut 
  Moradabad 
  Muzaffarnagar 
  Prayagraj 
  Varanasi 
32.  Uttarakhand  Dehradun  
  Haridwar  
  Pauri  
  Nainital  
  Udham Singh Nagar  
33.  West Bengal  Purulia  
  Hooghly  
  Malda  
  Uttar Dinajpur  
  Bankura  
 
TABLE -10 
DIETs of Excellence sanctioned for second phase (FY 2025-26) 
Sl. 
No.  
State/UT  DIET  
1  Andhra Pradesh  DIET, Guntur  
  DIET, Nellore  
  DIET, Vishakhapattnam  
2  Arunachal Pradesh  DIET, Changlang  
  DIET, Papumpare 
3  Assam  DIET, Goalpara  
  DIET, Kokarajhar  
  DIET, Morigaon  
  DIET, Nalbari  
  DIET, Tinsukia 
4  Bihar  DIET, Begusarai  
  DIET, Bhagalpur  
  DIET, Buxar  
  DIET, Lakhisarai  
  DIET, Nawada  
  DIET, Sitamarhi  

37 
 
  DIET, Vaishali  
5  Chhattisgarh  DIET Bastar  
  DIET Bijapur  
  DIET Durg  
  DIET Mahasamund  
6  Delhi  DIET North (Daryaganj)  
  DIET South West B 
(Ghumanhera) 
7  Gujarat  DIET, Amreli  
  DIET, Kachchh (Bhuj)  
  DIET, Patan  
  DIET, Sunder Nagar  
  DIET, Valsad  
  DIET, Idar (Sabar 
Kantha)  
8  Haryana  DIET, Fatehabad  
  DIET, Jhajjar  
  DIET, Jind  
  DIET, Mahendragarh  
9  Himachal Pradesh  DIET, Kangra  
  DIET, Hamirpur 
10  Jammu & Kashmir  DIET, Kathua  
  DIET, Kupwara  
  DIET, Poonch  
  DIET, Rajauri  
11  Jharkhand  DIET, Dumka  
  DIET, Hazaribag  
  DIET, Ranchi  
  DIET, Pashchimi 
Singhbhum  
12  Ladakh  DIET, Kargil  
13  Madhya Pradesh  DIET, Balaghat  
  DIET, Damoh  
  DIET, Narsimhapur  
  DIET, Panna  
  DIET, Satana  
  DIET, Shahdol  
  DIET, Shajapur  
  DIET, Ujjain  
  DIET, Umaria  
  DIET, Vidisha  
14  Maharashtra  DIET, Ahmadnagar  
  DIET, Panvel  
  DIET, Buldana  
  DIET, Dhule  
  DIET, Jalgaon  
  DIET, Latur  

38 
 
  DIET, Nagpur  
15  Manipur  DIET, Bishnupur  
  DIET, Chandel 
16  Meghalaya  DIET, West Khasi Hills  
17  Mizoram  DIET, Serchhip  
  DIET, Saiha 
18  Nagaland  DIET, Mokokchung  
  DIET, Pfutsero, Phek 
19  Odisha  DIET, Jajpur  
  DIET, Keonjhar  
  DIET, Khordha  
  DIET, Nayagarh  
  DIET, Sonepur  
  DIET, Puri  
20  Punjab  DIET, Amritsar, Verka  
  DIET, Fatehgarh Sahib 
  DIET, Ahmedpur, 
Mansa 
21  Rajasthan  DIET, Barmer  
  DIET, Bhilwara  
  DIET, Hanumangarh  
  DIET, Jaisalmer  
  DIET, Jhunjhunu  
  DIET, Karauli  
  DIET, Nagaur  
22  Sikkim  DIET, Gyalshing  
23  Tamil Nadu  DIET, Chennai  
  DIET, Cuddalore  
  DIET, Dharmapuri  
  DIET, Dindigul  
  DIET, Tiruvannamalai  
  DIET, Tiruvarur  
  DIET, Virudhu nagar  
24  Telangana  DIET, Karimnagar  
  DIET, Medak 
25  Tripura  DIET, Gomati  
26  Uttar Pradesh  DIET, Azamgarh  
  DIET, Barelliy  
  DIET, Bhadoi  
  DIET, Firozabad  
  DIET, GB Nagar  
  DIET, Ghazipur  
  DIET, Hathras  
  DIET, Kanpur  
  DIET, Kaushambi  
  DIET, Mathura  
  DIET, Pratapgarh  
  DIET, Shrawasti  

39 
 
  DIET, Sultanpur  
  DIET, Unnao  
27  Uttarakhand  DIET, Almora  
  DIET, Chamoli  
  DIET, Pithoragarh  
28  West Bengal  DIET, Birbhum  
  DIET, Dakshin Dinajpur  
  DIET, Jhargram  
  DIET, Murshidabad  
 
5.7 The Committee during its meeting held on 19th May, 2025, desired to know the reasons for 
high cost for upgradation of DIETs during second phase whereby lesser number of DIETs (116 only) 
in comparison to first phase have been proposed to be upgraded as DIETs of Excellence. In this 
regard, Secretary, Department of School Education & Literacy informed the Committee that the cap 
for an upgradation of a DIET was Rs. 15 crores.  So, if there are 611 DIETs, the overall budget is 
going to be about Rs. 9,000 crores. For a DIET to qualify under this program, it needs to have 60 
points.  So, based on the kind of infrastructure and Human Resource (HR) it has, it maps itself and 
points are generated. In the first phase, there were some of the best DIETs in the country. They had 
higher number of points. Hence, the amount which they required for their leftover upgradation was 
less.  This year, it has been found that many of the DIETs had just been above 60 points. So, here the 
intervention required in terms of infrastructural upgradation is a little more than what it was required 
in the previous year's DIETs and  that is the reason why the amount this year is more. And, we have 
been encouraging the States that you bring up your DIETs to, at least, 60 points, then only you'll be 
considered for this scheme.  He also assured the Committee to send a detailed reply. However, it is 
still awaited. 
 
5.8 Department has further informed that DIETs have seen some improvement in vacancy positions. 
It was also informed that one of the labs will be dedicated solely to skill education. Each DIET of 
Excellence will also create a model Balvatika, serving as a model for student/ teachers and enabling 
them to roll out Balvatikas in the district. The Department is also looking at residential hostels 
because it was found that a number of DIETs could not conduct trainings that went beyond a certain 
period due to a lack of such facilities. Libraries and resource centres, as well as sports and 
recreational facilities, are also included. It was also informed that a yearly quota is also established so 
that all States are able to improve their DIETs and upgrade them, and the Department has also 
implemented some administrative measures. Some States are able to show a greater number of 
DIETs that meet the benchmarks. 
5.9 The Committee appreciates the upgradation of DIETs into DIETs of Excellence. 
However, the Committee takes note of the submission of the Department of School 
Education & Literacy regarding the variation in DIETs' score which suggests inconsistent 
infrastructure and HR quality across the DIETs. Further, the States are encouraged to 
improve DIETs to meet the 60-point threshold by the Department but the effectiveness of 
this encouragement is unclear. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to 
encourage the State Governments to develop action plans for DIET improvement, with 
incentives for achieving higher scores within a stipulated timeframe. 
5.10 The Committee recommends the Department to prioritize DIETs with scores closer 
to 60 points in earlier phases to balance costs, as higher-scoring DIETs require less 
investment and it should introduce a tiered funding model where DIETs with lower scores 

40 
 
receive additional support for foundational improvements before full upgradation. The 
Committee further recommends that the Department should provide technical assistance to 
States with lower-scoring DIETs to help them reach the 60-point threshold through 
targeted interventions. 
5.11 The Committee feels that the Department should develop a a detailed cost 
estimation framework for each DIET, specifying allocations for infrastructure, ICT 
integration, and HR development to bring uniformity in upgraded DIETs. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Department to implement a real-time monitoring system to 
track DIET upgradation progress, including infrastructure development, ICT integration, 
and training outcomes and to conduct periodic audits by Central teams to ensure funds are 
utilized efficiently and align with the goals of innovative pedagogy and professional 
development. 
5.12 The Committee takes note of the creation of model Balvatikas in each DIET of 
Excellence and appreciates the efforts of the Department in this regard. The Committee 
recommends the Department to ensure completion of model Balvatikas in a time-bound 
manner in each districts of the country. 
5.13 The Committee observes from the submission of the Department that a number of 
DIETs could not conduct trainings due to lack of residential hostel facilities, libraries and 
resource centres. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to equip each 
DIETs of Excellence with residential hostels, libraries and resource centres as well as sports 
and recreational facilities at the earliest and in a time-bound manner. 
5.14 In reply to a question by the Committee regarding details of districts of the country which are 
not equipped with DIET, so far, State-wise and time frame by which DIETs will be set up in all 
districts of the country, state-wise, the Department has informed that at present, there are 613 
functional DIETs in the country as per details placed at Table-8 above. DIETs are under the 
administrative control of the respective State Government/ UT Administration and therefore setting 
up of DIETs come up under their jurisdiction. Based on proposals received from States/UTs there is a 
provision for financial support under Samagra Shiksha for the setting up of new DIETs. 
5.15 The Committee observes that only 613 districts of the country have functional DIETs 
out of total 780 districts in the country. The Committee recommends the Department of 
School Education and Literacy to encourage the State Governments/ UT-Administration to 
set up at least one DIET in each district of State/UT and provide sufficient financial 
assistance to State Governments/ UT-Administrations for setting up of DIETs in each 
district.  
  The Committee also notes that there should be greater clarity on the future of the 
DIETs with the introduction of the ITEP. The Committee notes that the Ministry has spent 
many years and substantial resources for setting up and resourcing these DIETs. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that any future Regulations should protect, preserve 
and empower these DIETs on mandatory basis. 

41 
 
5.16 The Committee notes that there is a significant shortage of both trainers and 
permanent faculty in District Institutes of Education and Training (DIETs) across 
India. Some DIETs are losing their relevance due to shortage of teaching staffs at alarming 
level. This shortage impacts the quality of teacher training and, consequently, the overall 
quality of education in schools. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of 
School Education and Literacy to pursue with the State Governments with respect to the 
recruitment of both trainers and permanent faculty in DIETs in various States on 
permanent basis instead of contractual appointments and ensure that all the States fill the 
vacancies of trainers and permanent faculty in DIETs in a time-bound manner and not 
later than 31st March, 2026. The Committee further recommends the Department to 
provide sufficient funds to State Governments for filling up of these vacancies in a time-
bound manner. 
5.17 The Committee observes that many DIETs lack adequate infrastructure and 
resources, hindering effective training delivery.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of School Education and Literacy 
to allocate additional funds under Samagra Shiksha for upgrading DIET facilities, 
including modern classrooms, computer labs, and audio-visual equipment and ensure 
reliable internet connectivity and access to digital tools to support online and hybrid 
training models. Also, Department should provide low-cost teaching aids and locally 
relevant materials to enhance resource availability at DIETs. 
5.18 The Committee further observes that most of the DIETs operate in isolation, 
limiting their access to expertise and resources.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to ensure handholding and 
collaborations with SCERTs, universities, NGOs, and local education authorities to share 
resources and expertise. Further, the Department should establish formal linkages with 
Block Resource Centres (BRCs) and Cluster Resource Centres (CRCs) to ensure 
grassroots-level support and feedback. Sincere efforts should also be taken to create a 
network of DIETs for sharing best practices and resources, promoting innovation and 
consistency. 
5.19 The Committee observes that some States face acute faculty shortages and 
infrastructure challenges, while some States have made progress. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Department to conduct State-specific audits to identify and 
address regional disparities in DIET functioning, focusing on faculty and infrastructure 
gaps and to allocate additional central funding to under-resourced states to strengthen 
DIETs in those States. The successful models in respect of DIETs should be implemented in 
lagging States and the regions.  
5.20 The Committee observes that there is limited/ineffective evaluation and monitoring 
of the impact of training programs conducted by DIETS. The Committee is of the view that 
the Department should implement robust monitoring and evaluation system to assess the 
impact of training on teaching practices and student outcomes. Periodic evaluation should 
be done to refine training programs based on data-driven insights and feedback 

42 
 
mechanisms involving teachers, students, and district education officers should be 
appointed to ensure training meets practical classroom needs. Department should also 
create a database to track trainee progress and program outcomes, enabling continuous 
improvement.  
5.21 The Committee observes that limited professional development for DIET faculty 
hinders their ability to deliver high-quality training. The Committee recommends the 
Department to ensure annual professional development programs for DIET faculty, 
including Continuous Professional Development (CPD) as proposed by NEP 2020. Further, 
participation in workshops, seminars, and research projects in collaboration with 
universities and research institutions should also be facilitated. Training on educational 
technology should be provided to ensure that faculty at DIETs can effectively integrate 
digital tools into their programs. 
  

43 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
 
Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) and its functioning 
 
1. The Committee observes that as on 15th June, 2025, out of total 24 sanctioned 
strength in Group A in NCTE, there are only 11 Group A officers are in-position including 
the deputationists and 13 posts in Group A are lying vacant. Similarly, out of 46 and 53 
sanctioned strength in Group B and C respectively, only 26 and 28 persons are deployed 
including those on deputation. The Committee further notes that there are 54%, 43% and 
89% vacancies in Group A, B and C posts in NCTE, respectively excluding those officials 
who have been deployed against deputation vacancies. The Committee feels that any 
organisation cannot function properly nor can do justice with the mandate and 
responsibilities, it has been conferred by an Act of Parliament in absence of sufficient man-
power/ human resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department/ NCTE 
to fill up the vacancies in Group A, B and C in a time-bound manner and latest by 31st 
March, 2026 for effective realisation of objectives of NEP, 2020 and teachers' training in 
the country.   
(Para 2.7) 
 
2. The Committee takes note of the submission of Department/NCTE which states that 
"to mitigate the shortage, temporary measures have been taken by employing consultants 
on short-term contracts." The Committee also takes serious note that no recruitments of 
permanent teaching, non-teaching and administrative staffs have been made by NCTE 
since 2019 till 15th June, 2025. The Committee further observes that number of contractual 
appointments on non-teaching staffs in NCTE is 04 during 2019, Nil during 2020, 03 during 
2021, 15 during 2022, 20 during 2023, 34 during 2024 and 13 in 2025 till 15th June, 2025, 
which shows increasing trend in contractual appointments in NCTE. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Department of School Education and Literacy and NCTE to fill 
up the vacancies at the earliest on permanent/regular basis to ensure Constitutional Rights 
of SC, ST, OBC, EWS and PwD etc.                                                              
                                                             
(Para 2.10) 
 
3. The Committee takes note of the letter of the Department dated 23.01.2025 to NCTE 
for carrying out an assessment about requirement of staff at every level and consider 
implementation of Mission Recruitment and appreciates the Department of School 
Education and Literacy for withdrawal of directives of Secretary, DoSEL given in 
September 2020, during a meeting on NEP, for stoppage of recruitment in NCTE. The 
Committee also recommends the Department to take follow-up actions with NCTE in this 
regard and to ensure that all the vacant posts in NCTE are filled up by March, 2026 on 
permanent/regular employment basis instead of contractual or deputation basis to achieve 
the goal of NEP 2020 and teachers' training. 
(Para 2.12) 

44 
 
4. The Committee takes note of the submission of the Secretary, DoSEL that around 
10 lakhs posts of teachers in schools education are lying vacant in the country. The 
Committee also notes that out of 14.8 lakh schools, Government of India administers just 
about 3,000 schools. In this regard, the Committee is constrained to note that level of 
vacancies in Government of India administered schools like Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs), 
Navodaya Vidyalayas (NVs) etc. are also alarming. There are overall 30 to 50% vacancies 
in KVs and NVs also and contractual appointments of teachers are being done inspite of 
repeated recommendation of the Committee to fill-up the vacancies. The Committee, 
therefore, re-iterates its recommendations contained in its 349th and 363rd Reports and 
directs the Department of School Education and Literacy to fill-up vacancies of teachers in 
Government of India administered schools like Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs), Navodaya 
Vidyalayas (NVs) etc. through appointment of regular/permanent teachers instead of 
contractual teachers at the earliest and not later than 31st March, 2026 and apprise the 
Committee in this regard.  
(Para 2.18) 
5. The Committee also recommends the Department to stop contractual appointments 
of teachers in these schools which adversely impact the overall school education and 
undermines the Constitutional provision of reservation in Government jobs to SC, ST, 
OBC, EWS, PwD etc. 
(Para 2.19) 
6. The Committee observes that there are around 10 lakhs vacancies of teachers in 
Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) funded schools in various States and there are around 7.5 
lakh vacancies at elementary and primary levels. The Committee notes that there is  no 
improvement in filling up of vacancy positions in these SSA funded schools of the State 
Governments inspite of repeated recommendations of the Committee contained in its 349th 
and 363rd Reports to fill up the vacancies in a time bound manner, rather it is worsening 
day by day due to retirements of teachers and due to absence of a permanent recruitment 
policy. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to take up the matter of 
vacancies of teachers in SSA funded schools of the State Governments strongly and 
teachers' salary component of SSA funds of those States which do not comply with the 
directions of the Department to fill up the vacancies with regular/permanent teachers, 

45 
 
should be kept in abeyance till the respective States comply with the directives of the 
Central Government.  
(Para 2.20) 
7. The Committee also recommends the Department to take up the issue of 
appointment of teachers on contractual basis which violates the Constitutional provision of 
reservation in Government jobs to SC, ST, OBC, PwD and EWS category. The Committee 
recommends for stoppage of teachers on contractual basis in SSA funded schools. 
(Para 2.21) 
8. The Committee notes that separate set of teachers for pre-primary and Class 1 &2 
and another set of teachers for class 3, 4 & 5 are not practically feasible due to recruitment 
rules of various States. The Committee feels that two broad levels of teacher education 
should be in place for effective implementation of teacher education i.e.  Pre-Primary/ 
Primary level teachers for pre-primary and primary who can teach all subjects at this stage 
and Middle and Secondary level for subject specific teachers. This approach would allow 
teachers to work across multiple stages and subjects, which will reduce deployment 
inflexibilities and imbalances in demand/supply of teachers. A primary teacher can teach 
classes 1–5 with a focus on foundational skills, while secondary teachers can cover classes 
6–12 with subject expertise. The Committee therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE 
to review the Draft NCTE Regulation, 2025 in view of various concerns regarding 
hyperspecialization and segmentation of teachers' education. 
(Para 2.23) 
9. The Committee recommends the Department/ NCTE to allow staggered choice for 
students where by students can be allowed to choose their level of specialisation later after 
completing introductory courses and field experience, which will help them make informed 
choices based on their strengths and interests. Further, the Department should also allow 
for both consecutive and concurrent models to thrive, without making ITEP a pre-
requisite/mandatory condition. TEIs should be permitted to apply for recognition to offer 
ITEP at either level, and across a range of liberal disciplines and students should be 
allowed to be enrolled in any liberal programme of their choice, with relevance to school 
education curriculum.  
(Para 2.24) 
10. The Committee recommends that the NCTE should follow UGC’s approach i.e. it 
should provide broad guidelines, credit frameworks, leaving the task of specific curriculum 
design to universities. Besides, Model curricula may be developed and used by Universities 
as a reference, without prescription.  A supportive, non-prescriptive role of the NCTE will 
help strengthen the academic and autonomous functioning of universities and strengthen 
the quality of teacher education.                                                                                 (Para2.25 ) 

46 
 
11. The Committee is of the view that Universities should be given increased flexibility 
to design their Curriculum instead of only 30% flexibility allowed to these Universities. The 
Committee therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to revise the curriculum 
framework to allow universities at least 50% control over designing their teacher education 
curricula, which would enable the institutions to incorporate local needs, multidisciplinary 
perspectives, and research-driven innovations, aligning with NEP 2020’s emphasis on 
university-led teacher education.  
(Para 2.26) 
12. The Committee observes that the subject of education finds mention in the 
Concurrent List of the Constitution, as the Committee feels that the Department of School 
Education and Literacy should uphold the federal nature of teacher education and it 
should hold extensive, consultative meetings with the State Governments before arriving at 
the any change in the structure of teacher education. The Committee is of the view that the 
Department should work in tandem with the teacher education systems and recruitment 
rules of the different States. 
(Para 2.27) 
13. The Committee observes that each programme of teacher education has its own 
history and has taken decades to establish its structure, teacher educators, labour-demand 
ratios. The Committee recommends the Department to support growth of good quality 
teacher education programs in autonomous higher education institutions with proven track 
records like B. El. Ed. etc. and withdraw recognition to poor quality teacher education 
institutions and also strengthen faculty of education. It is also recommended to allow 
multiple programmes and models of teacher education and not to shut down successful 
existing programmes. 
(Para 2.28) 
14. The Committee takes note of the concerns regarding recruitment related legal 
complications and observes that the new teachers will be qualified not in accordance with 
the recruitment rules of the different State Governments which will lead to litigations. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to hold consultations with 
various stakeholders including the State Governments and to review NCTE's Draft 
Regulation, 2025 and align it with the recruitment rules of various States in order to avoid 
litigation. 
(Para 2.29) 
Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP) 
 
15. The Committee acknowledges the smoother transition from old system of teachers' 
training to new one i.e. ITEP. However, the Committee notes that many institutions, 
particularly private and non-multidisciplinary ones, lack the infrastructure, trained 
faculty, and resources to implement ITEP effectively. The requirement for composite 
institutions offering multidisciplinary programs limits scalability, as not all colleges meet 
this criterion. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department/NCTE should 

47 
 
establish a phased support system, including grants and training programs, to upgrade 
infrastructure and faculty qualifications in eligible institutions. Further, it should also 
partner with premier institutions like IITs and Central Universities to create model ITEP 
programs that others can emulate. Additionally, a faculty development program focusing 
on interdisciplinary teaching and 21st-century pedagogy should be mandated. 
(Para 3.8) 
 
16. The Committee observes that as per Para 2.2 of NCTE's Gazette Notification of 
2021 which states that "in a semester, there shall be at least 125 (one hundred and twenty-
five) working days, excluding the period of admissions but including the period of 
examinations." This clause of the said notification is in conflict with the University Grants 
Commission’s (UGC) standard of 14–15 weeks per semester. This discrepancy creates 
scheduling conflicts within universities, disrupting alignment with other programs. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to make ITEP’s academic 
calendar in sync with UGC guidelines to ensure compatibility with university systems. 
NCTE should also collaborate with UGC to standardize semester durations across 
multidisciplinary programs, potentially adopting a 16–18-week semester to balance 
teaching and practicum requirements. 
(Para 3.9) 
17. The Committee observes that ITEP mandates that programs be offered in 
composite institutions with multidisciplinary academic environments. However, the 
Committee notes that 92% of Teachers Education Institutions (TEIs) are private 
institutions. Many public as well as private institutions offering teacher education 
programs lack the infrastructure, faculty expertise, or academic rigour to deliver a truly 
multidisciplinary curriculum, which compromises the quality of education and the 
integration of liberal arts, sciences, and pedagogical training. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends as under:- 
(v) the Department/NCTE should ensure that each district of the country has at least 
one public sector multi-disciplinary quality  Teachers Education Institution 
equipped with sufficient infrastructure, faculty expertise and academic rigour for 
multi-disciplinary training and education under ITEP; 
(vi) the Department/NCTE should implement stricter accreditation criteria for 
composite institutions, ensuring they have robust departments in liberal arts, 
humanities, social sciences, and sciences. Regular audits and inspections by NCTE’s 
Inspection and Visiting Committees should verify the availability of qualified 
faculty and resources; 
(vii) the Department/NCTE should encourage collaborations between smaller 
institutions and reputed multidisciplinary universities including IITs, Central 
Universities etc. to share resources, faculty, and expertise, on the lines of IIT 
Bhubaneswar’s ITEP initiative; and 
(viii) the Department/NCTE should ensure continuous professional development for 
faculty to ensure they are equipped to teach interdisciplinary courses that blend 
subject knowledge with pedagogy.                                                                  (Para 3.10) 
18. The Committee observes that the ITEP curriculum, while aiming to integrate 
general studies i.e. Mathematics, Sciences, Humanities with professional teacher training, 

48 
 
lacks clarity on how it differs from existing four-year programs like B.A./B.Sc. B.Ed. or 
B.El.Ed. This ambiguity leads to overlapping content and confusion among stakeholders 
about its unique value. Hence, the Committee recommends that the Department/ NCTE 
should  
(i) develop a clear, modular curriculum framework that balances general education, 
pedagogical training, and practical experience. The curriculum should explicitly 
outline learning outcomes for each stage (Foundational, Preparatory, Middle, 
Secondary) as per NEP 2020’s 5+3+3+4 structure; 
(iv) integrate international benchmarks, such as inquiry-based learning and technology-
enabled teaching, to prepare teachers for 21st-century classrooms which would 
align with ITEP’s aim to adopt global standards; and 
(v) establish a review committee to periodically update the ITEP curriculum based on 
feedback from educators, students, and schools to ensure relevance and 
effectiveness. 
(Para 3.11) 
19. The Committee notes that the quality of teacher education programme depends 
upon the quality of institutions. The proliferation of substandard private institution driven 
by commercial interests can significantly undermine the ITEP' s goal and objective of 
NEP-2020 to produce high quality teachers, as many institutions prioritize profit over 
quality. The Committee therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to:- 
(iv) enforce rigorous norms for recognition of ITEP-offering institutions, including 
mandatory compliance with infrastructure, faculty, and curriculum standards. Non-
compliant institutions should face de-recognition; 
(v) make inspection reports and compliance data publicly available on NCTE’s website 
to ensure accountability and check commercialization; and 
(vi) increase funding for Public Universities and Government Colleges offering ITEP to 
reduce reliance on private institutions and ensure affordable access for students. 
(Para 3.12) 
20. The Committee observes that ITEP mandates that a significant portion of the 
program, at least 25%, be dedicated to school-based activities and internships. However, 
many institutions lack partnerships with quality schools for internships, leading to 
inconsistent practical training experiences. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department/NCTE to develop partnerships with diverse schools (Government, private, 
rural, urban) to provide varied teaching experiences. NCTE should also create a 
framework for internship evaluation, including mentor feedback and student performance 
metrics. The Committee also recommends to introduce technology-driven simulations and 
micro-teaching modules to supplement real-world internships, especially in institutions 
with limited access to quality schools. Further, NCTE should ensure that internships 
include exposure to inclusive classrooms, addressing diverse learner needs including 
learners' with special needs, gender, disadvantaged section of society etc., as mandated in 
NCTE regulations. 
(Para 3.13) 

49 
 
21. The Committee notes that ITEP emphasizes on technology integration. However, a 
number of TEIs lack the infrastructure or trained faculty to incorporate digital tools 
effectively. Additionally, there is insufficient focus on Continuous Professional 
Development (CPD) post-training/education. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department of School Education and Literacy to provide for sufficient grants to State 
Governments and TEIs to develop digital labs and train faculty in using educational 
technologies, such as learning management systems and virtual classrooms etc. The 
Committee also recommends that CPD modules for ITEP graduates, focusing on emerging 
pedagogical trends, technology integration, and inclusive education be introduced on 
mandatory basis. Further, NCTE should collaborate with NCERT to offer online CPD 
courses to ITEP graduates.  
(Para 3.14) 
22. The Committee feels that success of any teachers' education/training program 
depends largely on the monitoring and evaluation of program outcomes. The Committee 
recommends the Department to evolve robust mechanisms to evaluate ITEP’s effectiveness 
in producing competent teachers and its impact on school education. Also, Department 
should conduct regular studies/audit by third party to assess ITEP graduates’ performance 
in schools, focusing on student outcomes, teaching effectiveness, and retention rates. The 
Committee further recommends that the Department should establish a feedback loop 
involving schools, students, and ITEP graduates to identify gaps and refine the program 
accordingly. A centralized database should be set up to track ITEP outcomes, including 
graduation rates, their employment statistics, and teacher performance for effective 
outcomes. 
(Para 3.15) 
 
23. The Committee in its 363rd Report had recommended for convergence of Early 
Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) with primary education and integration of pre-
primary/nursery education within Anganwadi centers and schools, with the formal 
primary school system. The Committee feels that Anganwadi worker and helpers should 
also be incorporated under ITEP for their training. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Department to ensure that Anganwadi workers and pre-primary teachers 
are trained with similar standards to provide consistent quality ECCE, potentially 
through joint training programs under ITEP. The Committee also reiterates its 
recommendation contained in 363rd Report for convergence of ECCE with primary 
education. 
(Para 3.16) 
24. The Committee also recommends that linguistic and cultural diversity in 
curriculum, local relevant pedagogies such as folk arts, classical regional literature and 
state level learning practices etc. should be given utmost importance and priority under the 
ITEP and education being a Concurrent-list subject in the Constitution, the State 
Governments should be given sufficient time and autonomy to evaluate its feasibility, cost 
implication and teacher workforce alignment. Further, the Department of School 
Education and Literacy should provide with institutional and financial support to the State 
Governments for upgrading public colleges/TEIs to meet the rigorous norms required for 
ITEP accreditation. 

50 
 
(Para 3.17) 
 
25. The Committee recommends that the existing minimum qualification to teach 
elementary education continue to be 12th grade plus a 2-year diploma. The Committee 
observes that requiring teachers to have a four-year degree before teaching 3-year-old 
students is a very high bar, which may be logistically hard to meet and very expensive for 
prospective teachers. The Committee further observes that pre-schooling will also be 
occurring in Anganwadis, where the eligibility requirements for AWCs are a lot less 
stringent as compared to the four-year ITEP degree. The Committee recommends that the 
qualifications for teaching with elementary education must be developed with this larger 
system in mind. 
(Para 3.18) 
Bachelor of Elementary Education (B.EI.Ed) Program 
26. The Committee observes that ITEP divides teacher training into two distinct 
programs for the foundational stage covering pre-school to Grade 2 and the preparatory 
stage covering Grades 3 to 5. This bifurcation creates two types of teachers with specialized 
training that does not reflect the integrated nature of school structures, where teachers 
often handle multiple grades or overlapping roles. The separation of training lacks 
continuity. The Committee further notes that the rigid division of teacher training into 
foundational and preparatory programs fails to prepare teachers for versatile roles in 
school settings. While NEP 2020 introduces a new curricular structure (5+3+3+4), it 
emphasizes a seamless progression in learning. ITEP’s bifurcated training model 
contradicts this by creating artificial distinctions in teacher preparation that do not 
correspond to practical school requirements and the rigid division of teachers' training into 
foundational and preparatory programs fails to prepare teachers for versatile roles in 
school settings. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to integrate 
Foundational and Preparatory Stage Training from pre-school to Grade 5 to ensure 
continuity and also to incorporate cross-stage training modules that equip teachers to 
handle multi-grade classrooms, reflecting the reality of many schools in the country where 
teachers work across grades. 
(Para 4.8) 
27. The Committee takes note of multiple exit options under ITEP and observes that the 
current structure of ITEP, with its fragmented exit options and limited pedagogical focus 
in early years, risks producing under qualified candidates and wasting resources. These 
early exit options do not equip candidates with the necessary skills to serve as teachers, 
rendering them ineffective for employment in school education. Government's expenditure 
on candidates who exit early after first or second or third year, is largely wasted, as these 
individuals are not qualified to teach. They lack practical teaching skills in early exit 
certifications which undermines the program's objective of producing competent 
educators. The Committee, therefore, recommends, that the Department should eliminate 
the first,  second and third year exit options to ensure that candidates gain meaningful 
exposure to pedagogy and teacher training before exiting and also to ensure that ITEP 
aligns with NEP 2020’s emphasis on holistic and rigorous teacher preparation by 

51 
 
integrating multidisciplinary education with robust pedagogical training across all four 
years. 
(Para 4.10) 
28. The Committee observes that ITEP course has been implemented in self-financing 
mode and students from rural and humble backgrounds have to bear around Rupees Four 
Lakh for completion of the course which is not affordable for majority of youth population 
aspiring for ITEP courses. The Committee further observes that Directive Principles of the 
State Policy contained in Part-IV of the Constitution declares the 'State' as a 'Welfare 
State.' The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to implement ITEP on 
public financing mode instead of self-financing mode, so that, students from rural, poor, 
economically and socially backward sections of the society can pursue the ITEP course 
easily and to ensure that Directive Principles of State Policy are given due importance 
while framing the policies regarding teacher training.  
(Para 4.12) 
 
29. The Committee notes that only five (05) State Universities and Government Colleges 
have applied for preparatory courses in ITEP, whereas only one (01) Government College 
of Jammu and Kashmir has requested for foundational courses in ITEP, out of  64 
institutions are running 114 programs. Out of the 114 programs being run, 99 programs 
are being run for secondary education, 9 programs are for middle education and the 
remaining 9 programs are being run for the foundational and preparatory stage which 
shows that demand the ITEP course at Foundational and Preparatory stage is abysmally 
very low. Similarly, demand at middle education level is also very poor. The Committee 
further observes that maximum number of children get enrolled at Foundational, 
Preparatory and Middle levels. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to 
assess the demand gap and redress it effectively to ensure potential implementation of 
ITEP. 
(Para 4.14) 
30. The Committee notes that the NEP, 2020 emphasizes transformative reforms in 
teacher education, focusing on multidisciplinary education, experiential learning, and 
holistic development. The Bachelor of Elementary Education (B.El.Ed.) program aligns 
closely with these objectives, demonstrating a robust framework for preparing teachers for 
diverse educational settings. The B.El.Ed. program incorporates multilingual education, 
mother tongue-based instruction, digital education, and holistic development, all of which 
are central to NEP 2020’s vision. The Committee further observes that the program’s 
effectiveness is evident in its high demand from schools and many B.El.Ed. students secure 
placements by their fourth year, reflecting the program’s strong reputation and alignment 
with elementary education's needs. The Committee, therefore, recommends for 
continuation of the B.EL.ED program and promotion of the replication of the B.El.Ed. 
program in additional institutions under ITEP. 
(Para 4.18) 
 
31. The Committee observes that B. El. Ed program is proposed for transition into the 
ITEP because it is limited to elementary level teaching, class I to VIII, offered by less than 
100 institutions. The Committee further notes that B. El. Ed is a specialized four-year 

52 
 
degree with focus on elementary education pedagogy, a crucial developmental stage for 
children, and it discontinuation based on factors like the number of institutions or 
structural alignment a short-sighted approach that risks dismantling a proven program 
instead of strengthening and expanding it to meet the demand for qualified elementary 
teachers across the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department/ 
NCTE to redress the limitations, if any, under B. El. Ed program by upgrading its 
curriculum and encouraging more institutions to offer it, leveraging its established history 
and expertise in elementary teacher training instead of scraping or discontinuing a 
reputed, well established and internationally acclaimed program like B. El. Ed. which is 
being run effectively for more than 30 years. 
(Para 4.20) 
 
32. The Committee notes that the B.El.Ed. programme has for decades served as a 
rigorous, research-based, and socially conscious route for training generalist elementary 
school teachers, especially for urban poor and rural students. Given the diversity of 
educational needs across the country, the Committee recommends the Department to 
consider allowing States to continue offering B. El. Ed. where institutional ecosystems 
support it like State-run universities and women's colleges in certain States across the 
country. The Committee further recommends that the existing faculty and infrastructure 
developed under B. El. Ed. programme over the years to support this programme, 
especially in public-funded women's colleges and SC/ST/minority-serving institutions 
should be preserved. 
(Para 4.21) 
District Institute of Education and Training (DIETs) 
33. The Committee appreciates the upgradation of DIETs into DIETs of Excellence. 
However, the Committee takes note of the submission of the Department of School 
Education & Literacy regarding the variation in DIETs' score which suggests inconsistent 
infrastructure and HR quality across the DIETs. Further, the States are encouraged to 
improve DIETs to meet the 60-point threshold by the Department but the effectiveness of 
this encouragement is unclear. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to 
encourage the State Governments to develop action plans for DIET improvement, with 
incentives for achieving higher scores within a stipulated timeframe. 
(Para 5.9) 
34. The Committee recommends the Department to prioritize DIETs with scores closer 
to 60 points in earlier phases to balance costs, as higher-scoring DIETs require less 
investment and it should introduce a tiered funding model where DIETs with lower scores 
receive additional support for foundational improvements before full upgradation. The 
Committee further recommends that the Department should provide technical assistance to 
States with lower-scoring DIETs to help them reach the 60-point threshold through 
targeted interventions. 
(Para 5.10) 

53 
 
35. The Committee feels that the Department should develop a a detailed cost 
estimation framework for each DIET, specifying allocations for infrastructure, ICT 
integration, and HR development to bring uniformity in upgraded DIETs. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Department to implement a real-time monitoring system to 
track DIET upgradation progress, including infrastructure development, ICT integration, 
and training outcomes and to conduct periodic audits by Central teams to ensure funds are 
utilized efficiently and align with the goals of innovative pedagogy and professional 
development. 
(Para 5.11) 
36. The Committee takes note of the creation of model Balvatikas in each DIET of 
Excellence and appreciates the efforts of the Department in this regard. The Committee 
recommends the Department to ensure completion of model Balvatikas in a time-bound 
manner in each districts of the country. 
(Para 5.12) 
37. The Committee observes from the submission of the Department that a number of 
DIETs could not conduct trainings due to lack of residential hostel facilities, libraries and 
resource centres. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to equip each 
DIETs of Excellence with residential hostels, libraries and resource centres as well as sports 
and recreational facilities at the earliest and in a time-bound manner. 
(Para 5.13) 
38. The Committee observes that only 613 districts of the country have functional 
DIETs out of total 780 districts in the country. The Committee recommends the 
Department of School Education and Literacy to encourage the State Governments/ UT-
Administration to set up at least one DIET in each district of State/UT and provide 
sufficient financial assistance to State Governments/ UT-Administrations for setting up of 
DIETs in each district.  
  The Committee also notes that there should be greater clarity on the future of the 
DIETs with the introduction of the ITEP. The Committee notes that the Ministry has spent 
many years and substantial resources for setting up and resourcing these DIETs. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that any future Regulations should protect, preserve 
and empower these DIETs on mandatory basis.                                                        (Para 5.15) 
39. The Committee notes that there is a significant shortage of both trainers and 
permanent faculty in District Institutes of Education and Training (DIETs) across 
India. Some DIETs are losing their relevance due to shortage of teaching staffs at alarming 
level. This shortage impacts the quality of teacher training and, consequently, the overall 
quality of education in schools. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of 
School Education and Literacy to pursue with the State Governments with respect to the 
recruitment of both trainers and permanent faculty in DIETs in various States on 
permanent basis instead of contractual appointments and ensure that all the States fill the 

54 
 
vacancies of trainers and permanent faculty in DIETs in a time-bound manner and not 
later than 31st March, 2026. The Committee further recommends the Department to 
provide sufficient funds to State Governments for filling up of these vacancies in a time-
bound manner. 
(Para 5.16) 
40. The Committee observes that many DIETs lack adequate infrastructure and 
resources, hindering effective training delivery. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Department of School Education and Literacy to allocate additional funds under 
Samagra Shiksha for upgrading DIET facilities, including modern classrooms, computer 
labs, and audio-visual equipment and ensure reliable internet connectivity and access to 
digital tools to support online and hybrid training models. Also, Department should 
provide low-cost teaching aids and locally relevant materials to enhance resource 
availability at DIETs. 
(Para 5.17) 
 
41. The Committee further observes that most of the DIETs operate in isolation, 
limiting their access to expertise and resources.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to ensure handholding and 
collaborations with SCERTs, universities, NGOs, and local education authorities to share 
resources and expertise. Further, the Department should establish formal linkages with 
Block Resource Centres (BRCs) and Cluster Resource Centres (CRCs) to ensure 
grassroots-level support and feedback. Sincere efforts should also be taken to create a 
network of DIETs for sharing best practices and resources, promoting innovation and 
consistency. 
(Para 5.18) 
 
42. The Committee observes that some States face acute faculty shortages and 
infrastructure challenges, while some States have made progress. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Department to conduct State-specific audits to identify and 
address regional disparities in DIET functioning, focusing on faculty and infrastructure 
gaps and to allocate additional central funding to under-resourced states to strengthen 
DIETs in those States. The successful models in respect of DIETs should be implemented in 
lagging States and the regions.  
(Para 5.19) 
43. The Committee observes that there is limited/ineffective evaluation and monitoring 
of the impact of training programs conducted by DIETS. The Committee is of the view that 
the Department should implement robust monitoring and evaluation system to assess the 
impact of training on teaching practices and student outcomes. Periodic evaluation should 
be done to refine training programs based on data-driven insights and feedback 
mechanisms involving teachers, students, and district education officers should be 
appointed to ensure training meets practical classroom needs. Department should also 

55 
 
create a database to track trainee progress and program outcomes, enabling continuous 
improvement.  
(Para 5.20) 
44. The Committee observes that limited professional development for DIET faculty 
hinders their ability to deliver high-quality training. The Committee recommends the 
Department to ensure annual professional development programs for DIET faculty, 
including Continuous Professional Development (CPD) as proposed by NEP 2020. Further, 
participation in workshops, seminars, and research projects in collaboration with 
universities and research institutions should also be facilitated. Training on educational 
technology should be provided to ensure that faculty at DIETs can effectively integrate 
digital tools into their programs. 
(Para 5.21) 
 
********* 

CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK
2.0 CURRICULAR STRUCTURE OF INTEGRATED TEACHER EDUCATION PROGRAMME (ITEP)
22 Annexure I
56

CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK
23
57

10  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [P ART III—SEC.4] 
 
NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TEACHER EDUCATION 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the  22nd October, 2021 
 F. No. NCTE-Regl011/80/2018-MS(Regulation)-HQ.—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-sections 
(1) and (2)  of section 32 of National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993 (73 of 1993),  the National Council for 
Teacher Education hereby makes the following amendments in the National Council for Teacher Education 
(Recognition, Norms and Procedure) Regulations, 2014, namely: - 
1. Short title and Commencement – (1) These regulations may be called the National Council for Teacher 
Education (Recognition, Norms and Procedure) Amendment Regulations, 2021. 
2. They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette. 
3. In the National Council for Teacher Education (Recognition, Norms and Procedure) Regulations, 2014 (herein 
referred to as Principal Regulations) in regulation2 after clause (c) the following clauses shall be inserted namely: - 
“(ca) “multidisciplinary institution” means a duly recognised higher education institution involving several different 
subjects of study/ combining or involving more than one discipline. Multidisciplinary universities and colleges will 
aim to establish education departments, which besides carrying out cutting edge research in various aspects of 
education, will also run Integrated Teacher Education Programme, in collaboration with other departments or field of 
liberal arts or humanities or social sciences or commerce or mathematics, as the case may be, at the time of applying 
for recognition of Integrated Teacher Education Programme.   
(cb) “NEP 2020” means the National Education Policy 2020 which was approved by the Union Cabinet of India on  
29 July 2020.” 
4. In the Principal Regulations, for regulation 9 the following regulation shall be substituted, namely: - 
“9. Norms and standards.- Every institution offering the following programmes shown in the Table shall have to 
comply with the norms and standards for various teacher education programmes as specified in Appendix 1 to 
Appendix 15: 
Sl. 
No.  
Norms and Standards  Appendix No. 
1. Diploma in early childhood education programme leading to Diploma in 
Preschool Education (DPSE)  
Appendix-1 
2. Elementary teacher education programme leading to Diploma in Elementary 
Education (D.El.Ed.)  
Appendix-2 
3. Bachelor of elementary teacher education programme leading to Bachelor of 
Elementary Education (B.El.Ed.) degree.   
Appendix-3 
4. Bachelor of education programme leading to Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) 
degree.  
Appendix-4 
5. Master of education programme leading to Master of Education (M.Ed.) degree.  Appendix-5 
6. Diploma in physical education programme leading to Diploma in Physical 
Education (D.P.Ed.).  
Appendix-6 
7. Bachelor of physical education programme leading to Bachelor of Physical 
Education (B.P.Ed.) degree 
Appendix-7 
8. Mater of physical education programme leading to Master of Physical Education 
(M.P.Ed.) degree 
Appendix-8 
9. Diploma in elementary education programme through Open and Distance 
Learning System leading to Diploma in Elementary Education (D.El.Ed.)  
Appendix-9 
10. Bachelor of Education Programme though Open and Distance Learning System 
leading to Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) degree.  
Appendix-10 
11. Diploma in arts education (Visual Arts) programme leading to Diploma in Arts 
Education (Visual Arts) 
Appendix-11 
12. Diploma in arts education (Performing Arts) programme leading to Diploma in 
Arts Education (performing Arts) 
Appendix-12 
13. Bachelor of education programme (Part Time) leading to Bachelor of Education 
(B.Ed) degree. 
Appendix-13 
14. B.Ed. M.Ed (3 years integrated) programme leading to B.Ed. M.Ed (Integrated) 
degree. 
Appendix-14 
15. Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP) Appendix-15 
                                                                                                                                                                                     ” 
Annexure II
58

[भाग
III—ख᭛ ड 4]
 भारत का राजपᮢ : असाधारण 
 11 
 
5. In the Principal Regulations,- 
(i)  Appendix-13 shall be omitted; 
(ii) Appendix 14 and 15 shall be renumbered as Appendix-13 and    Appendix-14 and after Appendix-13 and 
Appendix 14 as so renumbered the following Appendix shall be inserted, namely: - 
   “APPENDIX-15 
Norms and Standards for Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP)  
1.          Preamble: 
1.1 The teacher must be at the centre of the fundamental reforms in the education system. The ITEP shall be 
offered after Senior Secondary (+2) or its equivalent examination or as per NEP 2020 structure 5+3+3+4 of schooling. 
It integrates everything to empower teachers and help them to do their job as effectively as possible. In addition, the 
integration of disciplinary and professional knowledge caters to the requirement to recruit the very best and brightest 
for  the teaching profession at all levels (5+3+3+4).  
1.2 The ITEP programme emphasizes on preparing teachers as envisaged in Pedagogical and Curricular 
restructuring of school education under NEP 2020. Apart from preparing teachers for the school education system in 
the country, the disciplinary knowledge gained in different subjects would help the student-teachers to gain in-depth 
knowledge in their specific subject(s) which would ensure admission to higher studies in that disciplinary stream and 
for higher professional qualification.  
1.3 The ITEP aims at the dual purpose of providing student teachers disciplinary knowledge along with the 
professional knowledge in an integrated manner. Since the program will be equivalent to an Undergraduate Degree 
(B.Sc./B.A./ B.Com.) and Teacher Education Degree, the curriculum of this program includes different courses and 
activities essential for both the degrees.  
1.4      The ITEP offered by multidisciplinary Higher Education Institutions (hereinafter referred to as ‘HEIs’) will be 
the minimal degree qualification for school teachers. The ITEP will be a dual-major holistic Bachelor’s degree. This 
programme will prepare teachers for the new curricular and pedagogical structure of school education as reconfigured, 
to make it responsive and relevant to the developmental needs and interests of learners at different stages of their 
development, corresponding to the stages like Fundamental, Preparatory, Middle and Secondary guided by the 
5+3+3+4 design. 
1.5 The ITEP shall be in multi and inter disciplinary academic environment and shall be implemented in a phase-
wise manner commencing in a pilot mode. The programme shall permit sharing of existing physical resources of other 
departments of the university/ HEIs. The ownership of ITEP shall lie with the Education Department of the 
multidisciplinary HEIs. All stand-alone Teacher Education Institutions (hereafter referred to as ‘TEIs’) will be 
required to convert into multidisciplinary institutions by 2030 to become eligible to offer the ITEP.  
1.6 The annual performance appraisal report shall be submitted by the HEIs, in the customised format for ITEP 
provisioned by NCTE, within 1 (one) month after completion of the academic year. Inspection shall also be 
conducted, based on a suitable proforma developed by NCTE, which will determine extension/ withdrawal of 
recognition.  
1.7 The time limits prescribed for inviting and processing of applications as provided in sub-regulations (5) and (6) 
of regulation 5 of the principal regulations shall be adhered to. If it is considered necessary, the time limits provided 
under sub-regulations (5) and (6) of regulation 5 may be relaxed after due consideration and after obtaining approval 
of the Central Government.  
1.8 ITEP shall be implemented in a phase wise manner starting from piloting in multidisciplinary HEIS/TEIs and 
thereby country wide expansion as per NEP 2020 timeframe.  
1.9 The exit system shall be applicable in ITEP as finalised in the National Higher Education Qualification 
Framework by UGC aligned with NEP 2020. 
2. Duration and Working Days:   
2.1     Duration:   
The ITEP shall be of four academic years comprising eight semesters including internship (field-based experiences 
and practice teaching). Any student-teacher who is unable to complete any semester or appear in any semester–end 
examination, shall be permitted to complete the programme within a maximum period of six years from the date of 
admission to the programme.   
 
 
59

12  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [P ART III—SEC.4] 
 
2.2     Working Days:  
(a) In a semester, there shall be at least 125 (one hundred and twenty-five) working days, excluding the period of 
admissions but including the period of examinations. 
(b) Total working hours shall be a minimum of 40 (forty) hours to be spread over one week.  
(c) The minimum attendance of student-teachers shall have to be eighty percent in all courses and ninety percent 
for field-based experience or school internship or teaching practice separately.  
3.  Intake, Eligibility, Admission Procedure and Fees:  
3.1 Intake:   
a) The basic unit shall comprise of fifty students each in the programme.  
b) The institution shall be permitted to opt for one or more streams of either Arts Stream or Science Stream or 
Commerce Stream. The institution shall also be permitted to opt for one or more units being appropriate, in 
case the institution is eligible for the same.   
3.2      Eligibility:   
a) Candidates with minimum fifty percent marks in Senior Secondary or plus two examination or its equivalent 
(under 5+3+3+4 pattern) from a recognised board are eligible for admission.    
b) The relaxation in percentage of marks in the Senior Secondary or plus two examination or its equivalent 
examination (under 5+3+3+4 pattern) and in the reservation for Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or Other 
Backward Class or Persons with Disabilities or Economically Weaker Section and any other categories shall be 
as per the rules of the Central Government or State Government or Union Territory Administration, wherever 
applicable.  
3.3      Admission Procedure: 
a) Admission in ITEP shall be through a suitable subject and aptitude test conducted by the National Testing 
Agency (hereinafter referred to as ‘NTA’) and shall be standardized keeping in view the linguistic and cultural 
diversity of the country. 
b) A single nation-wide entrance test called National Common Entrance Test (hereinafter referred to as ‘NCET’) 
will be conducted by NTA for admission to the  4 Year ITEP under the recommendations of NEP 2020. The 
mode of examination shall be online/Computer Based Test (hereinafter referred to as ‘CBT’) in multilingual 
pattern and its score would reflect the relative performance level of the candidate for merit-based selection to 
secure the admission. Scorecard shall be prepared by NTA and admission shall be done through centralised 
online counselling. 
c) At the time of admission to the programme, the candidate must indicate the subjects/discipline (B.A. 
B.Ed./B.Sc. B.Ed./B.Com. B.Ed.). Any change in the choice of subjects shall be made within one month from 
the date of commencement of the programme.  
3.4      Fees:   
The institution shall charge only such fee as may be prescribed by the affiliating body or State Government or 
concerned Universities in accordance with provisions of the National Council for Teacher Education (Guidelines for 
regulation of tuition fees and other fees chargeable by unaided teacher education institutions) Regulations, 2002 and 
shall not charge donations, capitation fee etc. from the students.   
4.  Curriculum and Programme Implementation:   
4.1 The Curriculum and the implementation of the programme shall be based on the Model/Suggestive 
Curriculum developed by NCTE. However, different universities and institutions conducting this programme will be 
allowed upto 30% flexibility while adapting or modifying the Model/Suggestive Curriculum as per local requirements. 
However, NCTE reserves the right to validate any modifications to the Curriculum so adapted or modified at any 
stage, if felt necessary. Within a time span of 90 (ninety) days, curriculum framework and suggestive syllabus shall be 
uploaded on NCTE website for adoption /adaptation by the recognised HEIs/Affiliating body. 
4.2 The HEIs will have to fulfill the following specific requirements for implementation of ITEP:  
(a) Preparing school calendar in which the school internship and other school related practicum are synchronized 
with the academic calendar of the school. 
60

[भाग
III—ख᭛ ड 4]
 भारत का राजपᮢ : असाधारण 
 13 
 (b) Making arrangement, with enough schools, for 18 weeks internship as well as other practicum activities 
required for school engagement. These schools will preferably be government schools and will form the basic 
contact point for all practicum activities and related work throughout the program of study. The state education 
administration should be involved for the allotment of schools to different HEIs. 
(c) Ensuring a coordinating mechanism between schools and HEIs of the region. The Government must ensure a 
rational and reasonable distribution of student-teachers in various schools, in consonance with the school 
calendar, to provide school support and cooperation. 
(d) Developing institutional mechanisms to involve the schoolteachers, of the Internship schools, in processes 
related to school internship. An orientation may be planned with the commencement of the Internship program, 
where faculty from the institute/college/department interacts with school teachers (mentor teachers). 
(e) Ensuring work in the field amounting to a minimum of 6 weeks, spread over several days throughout the 
program. This will include 4 weeks of engagements in different types of schools to develop an integrated 
picture and perception of school and classroom, along with experience of teaching and feedback etc., and a 2 
week program for engagement with the community. 
(f) Initiating and deepening the discourse on education by organizing seminars, debates, lectures and discussion 
groups for student-teachers and faculty. 
(g) Organizing inter-institutional interactions for student-teachers between various colleges on themes of 
educational significance and participation in such events organized in other institutions. 
(h) Adopting a participatory teaching approach to help student-teachers to develop reflective thinking and critical 
questioning in skill-oriented courses. 
(i) Facilitating student-teachers to access quality academic journals and observation records which provide 
opportunities for reflective thinking. 
(j) Maintaining records of planning, observation schedules, feedback and reflective reports prepared by the student 
teachers. 
(k) Providing opportunities for faculty development and organizing academic enrichment programs for the 
professional development of faculty. Faculty shall be encouraged to participate in academic pursuits and pursue 
research, especially in school education. 
4.3 Assessment and Evaluation: - 
The evaluation pattern as per the Suggestive Curriculum Framework developed by NCTE would be followed.  
5.       Staff:  
5.1     Faculty:   
For an intake of one basic unit of fifty students and two units of one hundred students, faculty shall be recruited for the 
curricular areas, with the specified essential and desirable qualifications and specialisation. Additional faculty shall be 
appointed subject to provisions that the faculty requirements for the curricular areas mentioned below are fulfilled.   
 
 
61

14  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [P ART III—SEC.4] 
 
The distribution of minimum faculty across different curricular areas for one unit and two units of 4 Year ITEP for Streams as applicable: 
Sl. 
No. 
Designation Science  Humanities Commerce  
One unit Two units One unit Two units One Unit Two Units 
1. Head of 
Department (in 
the rank of the 
Professor/Asso
ciate Professor 
in Education) 
 
One 
 
2. Assistant 
Professor (in 
Liberal 
Discipline and 
Pedagogy/ 
Educational 
Studies) 
1. Maths    
2. Physics  
3. Chemistry 
4. Zoology/ 
Life 
Sciences/
Bio-Scien 
5. Botany/ 
Life 
Sciences/ 
Bio-
Science 
6. Communi
cative 
Skills in 
English                
7. Communi
cative 
skills in 
MIL/Class
ical Lang.  
8. Education
al Studies  
One 
One 
One 
One 
 
 
 
One 
 
 
 
 
One 
 
 
 
One 
 
 
 
 
Two 
1. Maths    
2. Physics  
3. Chemistry    
4. Zoology/ 
Life 
Sciences/ 
Bio-Science  
5. Botany/ Life 
Sciences/ 
Bio-
Science       
6. Communicat
ive Skills in 
English                
7. Communicat
ive skills in 
MIL/Classic
al Lang. 
8. Educational 
Studies 
Two 
Two 
Two 
Two 
 
 
 
Two 
 
 
 
One 
 
 
One 
 
 
 
Three 
1. History  
2. Geography  
3. Political 
Science  
4. Economics  
5. English/Hindi/
MIL 
6. Communicativ
e Skills in 
English 
7. Communicativ
e skills in 
MIL/Classical 
Languages  
8. Educational 
Studies 
One 
One 
One 
 
One 
One 
 
One 
 
 
One 
 
 
 
Two 
1. History  
2. Geography  
3. Political 
Science  
4. Economics  
5. English/Hi
ndi/MIL 
6. Communic
ative Skills 
in English 
7. Communic
ative skills 
in MIL/ 
Classical 
Languages  
8. Educationa
l Studies 
Two 
Two 
Two 
 
Two 
Two 
 
One 
 
 
One 
 
 
 
 
Three 
1. Accountancy 
2. Business 
Studies 
3. Economics 
4. Informatics 
Practice/ 
Mathematics 
5. English 
/Hindi/MIL 
6. ommunicative 
Skills in 
English 
7. ommunicative 
skills in MIL/ 
Classical 
Languages  
8.  Educational 
Studies 
One 
One 
 
One 
One 
 
 
One 
 
One  
 
 
One 
 
 
 
Two  
1. Accountancy 
2. Business 
Studies 
3. Economics 
4. Informatics 
Practice/Math
ematics   
5. English 
/Hindi/MIL 
6. ommunicative 
Skills in 
English 
7. ommunicative 
skills in MIL/ 
Classical 
Languages  
8. Educational 
Studies 
Two 
Two 
 
Two 
Two  
 
 
Two  
 
One 
 
 
One  
 
 
 
Three  
3. Health     and 
Physical 
Education 
One (Part-time) 
4. Arts Education One (Part-time) 
5. Career 
Guidance and 
Counselling   
One (Part-time) 
62

[भाग
III—ख᭛ ड 4]
 भारत का राजपᮢ : असाधारण 
 15 
 
For additional units over and above two units, the faculty requirement shall be as under: -  
(i)  For three units, the requirement of faculty shall be increased by the exact number of faculty as is prescribed 
for one single unit (except Sl. No. 1,3,4 & 5). For four units, the faculty requirement is exactly double of the 
faculty requirement for two units (except Sl. No. 1,3,4 & 5).   
(ii)  The above is the minimum essential core faculty to be appointed for the programme. However, the services 
of existing faculty in the institution could also be utilized for this teacher education programme if she/he 
possesses the prescribed qualification. Furthermore, any extra number of faculty may be appointed, over 
and above the minimum number prescribed for this programme. 
(iii) Faculty for health and physical education may be shared, if available, in the institution or otherwise may be 
recruited part-time.  
(iv) The Counsellor engaged for the purpose shall either be an Assistant Professor in Education having guidance 
and counselling as one of the papers at Post Graduate level or a part time Counsellor with an appropriate 
qualification in guidance and counselling.  
(v) The programme shall permit sharing of existing physical resources in other Departments of the University or 
College.  
5.2 Qualifications:  
The faculty shall possess the following qualifications: -  
A. Professor in Education or Associate Professor in Education (as Head of the Department):  
(i) Postgraduate degree in Sciences or Mathematics or Social Sciences or Commerce or Languages.  
(ii) M.Ed.   
(iii) Ph.D. in Education  
(iv) Ten years of teaching experience in a teacher education institution for Professor and eight years for 
Associate Professor.  
(v) Any other relevant qualification prescribed by the University Grants Commission for these categories of 
posts. 
Desirable:   
Diploma or Degree in Educational Administration or Leadership.   
B. Assistant Professor –in Liberal Discipline and Pedagogy:  
(i) Post-Graduate degree in Sciences (Physics or Chemistry or Botany or Zoology or Life Sciences or 
Bioscience) or Mathematics or Social Sciences (History or Geography or Political Science or Economics) 
or Languages (English or Modern Indian Languages or Classical Languages) or Commerce allied subjects)  
with minimum fifty-five percent marks or its equivalent grade.  
(ii) B.Ed. degree with minimum fifty-five percent marks or equivalent grade.  
(iii) National Eligibility Test or State Level Eligibility Test or Doctor of Philosophy in Education or in the 
concerned subject as prescribed by the University Grants Commission for these categories of posts. 
Desirable:  
(i) M.Ed. or M.Ed. with Specialisation 
(ii) Ph. D in Education.  
C.      Assistant Professor in Educational Studies:  
(i) Postgraduate degree in Education (M.Ed.)  with minimum fifty-five percent marks or equivalent grade   
(ii) With National Eligibility Test or State Level Eligibility Test or Doctor of Philosophy in Education or any 
other qualification prescribed by University Grants Commission for these categories of posts. 
Desirable:  
(i) Master’s degree in Psychology or Philosophy or Sociology or their allied subjects.  
63

16  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [P ART III—SEC.4] 
 
D. Specialised Courses:  
Physical Education:  
(i) Master of Physical Education (M.P. Ed.) with minimum fifty-five percent marks or its equivalent 
grade  
Art Education:  
(i) Postgraduate degree in Performing or Visual Arts with minimum fifty-five percent marks or its 
equivalent grade.  
5.3      Administrative and Professional Staff:   
(a) Assistant Librarian   -   One  
(b) Computer Lab Assistant  -             One  
(c) Data Entry Operator (DEO)  -             One  
(d) Multi-Tasking Staff (MTS)  -             One   
(e) Other Administrative and professional staff working for existing Departments shall be shared.  
Note:   
1. All the above staff should be shared with existing courses.  
2. The qualifications shall be as prescribed by the State Government or University or affiliating body 
for equivalent posts.  
5.4   Terms and Conditions of Service of Staff: The terms and conditions of service of teaching and non-teaching 
staff including selection procedure, pay band or scale, age of superannuation and other benefits shall be as per the 
policy of the Central Government or State Government or affiliating body or University.  
6.      Infrastructural Facilities:   
The following facilities shall be for one unit. However, for every additional unit the facilities shall increase 
proportionately: -  
6.1   Land and Building:  
(a) The minimum essential space for an institution offering the ITEP includes an administrative wing, 
an academic wing and other amenities. All spaces should be inclusive and have barrier free access.  
(b) The institution shall earmark 3000 sq. mts. (three thousand square metres) of well demarcated land 
for the initial intake of fifty students and 2000 sqm. (two thousand square metres) shall be the 
demarcated built-up area and the remaining space for lawns, playfields etc.    
(c) For every additional unit of fifty students, it shall earmark an additional built up area of 200 sqm. 
(two hundred square metres).  
(d) A minimum number of four toilet blocks shall be earmarked by the Institution, two for students (one 
each for women and men) and two for staff members, including persons with disabilities.  One 
common hand washing station, with four taps, in an open area shall be provided.  
6.2   Instructional Facilities:  
(a) Classrooms: The Institution shall have six earmarked classrooms for one unit with an area of 500 
sq. ft. (five hundred square feet) for each classroom and for two units or more the number of classrooms 
shall be increased proportionately.  
(b) Library:  
(i) The library shall cater to the requirements of the programme and shall have a seating capacity 
for at least fifty persons equipped with minimum 1000 (one thousand) titles and 4000 (four 
thousand) books. These include text and reference books related to all courses of study, 
readings and literature related with the approaches delineated in the programme; educational 
encyclopaedias, electronic publications and digital or online resources and minimum five 
referral professional research journals. The institutions shall create digital library with relevant 
and adequate resource materials.   
(ii) Library resources shall include books and journals published and recommended by NCTE, 
National Council of Educational Research and Training and other statutory bodies, Education 
64

[भाग
III—ख᭛ ड 4]
 भारत का राजपᮢ : असाधारण 
 17 
 
Commission Reports and Policy documents. At least one hundred titles of quality books shall 
be added to the library every year. The library shall have photocopying facility and computer 
with Internet facility for the use of faculty and students.   
(c) Laboratories: Laboratories for Science stream subjects such as Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, 
Zoology and Botany shall be earmarked with facilities and adequate equipment for conducting 
experiments.  In humanities stream, a laboratory for Geography shall be earmarked.  
(d) Activity cum Resource Centre:  
(i) The space so designated shall be used for conducting various activities like craft, educational 
toys, teaching aids and production of teaching and learning materials, etc.  There shall be 
facilities for conducting other activities which give the teacher student a practical experience of 
exposure to experiential learning and use of Information and Communication Technology in 
teaching programmes.  
(ii) This resource centre will be equipped with facilities such as photocopying machine, audio 
video equipment, television, projector etc.  
(iii) A Computer and Language Lab shall be established in this Centre.  
(e) Health and Physical Education Room:  Adequate games and sports equipment for common indoor 
and outdoor games, as well as facilities for yoga education, shall be available.   
(f) Multipurpose Hall: The institution shall have one earmarked hall with seating capacity of 
minimum two hundred seats and minimum total area of 2000 sq. ft (Two thousand square feet). This 
hall shall be equipped for conducting seminars and workshops with installation of an audio-visual 
system.  
(g) Faculty Rooms: For faculty, individual workspaces, functional computers and storage spaces shall 
be provided.  
(h) Administrative Office Space: The institution shall provide adequate working space for the office 
staff, with furniture, storage, and computer facilities.  
(i) Common Room: The institution shall provide at least one common room.  
(j) Store: One room with adequate space for storage shall be provided.  
(k) Functional and appropriate furniture for general and differently able persons in required number for 
instructional and other purposes shall be provided.   
(l) Access to safe drinking water be provided in the institution.  
(m) Effective arrangement be made for regular cleaning of campus, water and toilet facilities, repair and 
replacement of furniture and other equipment.  
(n) Kitchen garden in the institution be developed and maintained by the student-teachers in order to 
learn concepts. 
(o) Rainwater harvesting system and infrastructure for renewable energy such as solar panels for 
electricity.  
(p) Facilities for co curricular activities of choice.  
6.3   The existing physical resources in other Departments or Universities or Colleges can be shared with this 
programme, if it fulfils the requirement of the teacher education programme.  
Desirable:   
(a) Energy efficient building designs (such as bio-climatic architecture, high performing building 
envelop, high performance-controlled ventilation etc.) 
(b) Use of energy efficient equipment and new ways to minimize the dependency on conventional 
sources of energy and waste management disposal system. 
6.4 The institution must adhere to safety guidelines as prescribed by National Disaster Management Authority 
(NDMA).  
7. Managing Committee: The institution shall have a Managing Committee constituted as per the rules of the 
affiliating University or concerned State Government, if any. In the absence of such rules, the institution shall 
65

18  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [P ART III—SEC.4] 
 
constitute a Managing Committee on its own.  The Committee shall comprise of the representatives of the sponsoring 
society or trust, academicians/ educationists, representatives of the affiliating University/Body and of the staff.  
8. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between English and Hindi version of the regulation, the 
regulation in English version shall prevail”. 
(iii) Appendix-16 shall be omitted; 
(iv) Appendix-17 shall be omitted. 
KESANG Y. SHERPA, Member Secy. 
[ADVT.-III/4/Exty./378/2021] 
Note:  The Principal Regulations were published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, dated the 
1st December, 2014, vide notification number F.51-1/2014/NCTE (N&S), dated the 28th November, 2014 
and were last amended vide notification number F.NCTE-Regl0122/8/2020-US (Regulation)-HQ, dated the 
14th October,2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 
ALOK KUMAR
Digitally signed by ALOK KUMAR 
Date: 2021.10.26 21:30:57 +05'30'
66

7037 GI/2022 (1) 
रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99 
  
 
 
xxxGIDHxxx 
xxxGIDExxx 
असाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग III—खण् ड 4  
PART III—Section 4 
प्राजधकार से प्रकाजित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 
अजधसूचना 
नई दिल् ली, 11 अक् तूबर, 2022 
—jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj"kn~ 
vf/kfu;e] 1993 ¼1993 dk 73½ dh /kkjk 12 ds [kaM ¼>½ ds lkFk ifBr /kkjk 32 dh mi&/kkjk ¼2½ ds [kaM ¼r½ }kjk iznÙk 
'fDr;ksa dk iz;ksx djrs gq,] jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj"kn~ ,rn~}kjk jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj"kn~ ¼ekU;rk] ekunaM rFkk 
izfØ;k½ fofu;e] 2014 esa iqu% la'kks/ku djrs gq, fuEufyf[kr fofu;e cukrh gS] vFkkZr~%& 
1- y?kq 'kh"kZd rFkk izorZu -& ¼1½ bu fofu;eksa dks jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj"kn~ ¼ekU;rk] ekunaM rFkk izfØ;k½ 
¼f}rh; la'kks/ku½ fofu;e] 2022 dgk tk,xkA 
¼2½ os ljdkjh jkti= esa muds izdk'ku dh frfFk ls ykxw gksaxsA 
2- jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj"kn~ ¼ekU;rk ekunaM rFkk izfØ;k½ fofu;e] 2014 ¼blds ckn mDr fofu;eksa ds :i esa 
lanfHkZr½ esa] ifjf'k"V 15 esa] fofu;e 5 esa]  
 ¼d½ mi fofu;e 5-1 esa] [kaM ¼v½ ds ckn] fuEufyf[kr [kaM Mkyk tk,xk] vFkkZr~%& 
 ^^¼vi½ fuEufyf[kr laLFkku ,d hd`r v/;kid f'k{kk dk;ZØe ds laca/k esa fdlh vU; laLFkku ;k cgq&fo"k;d 
laLFkku ;k fo'ofo|ky; ds lkFk ladk; lk>k djsaxsA 
  ¼d½ Hkkjrh; izkS|ksfxdh laLFkku; 
  ¼[k½ jk"Vªh; izkS|ksfxdh laLFkku; 
  ¼x½ Hkkjrh; foKku laLFkku rFkk; 
  ¼?k½ Hkkjrh; foKku f'k{kk vkSj vuqla/kku laLFkkuA^^ 
सं.   526] नई दिल्ली, बुधवार, अक् तूबर 19, 2022/आज‍ वन 27, 1944  
No. 526] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 19, 2022/ASVINA 27, 1944  
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-19102022-239741
CG-DL-E-19102022-239741
67

2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART III—SEC.4] 
 ¼[k½ mi&fofu;e 5-2 esa] [kaM ¼[k½ ds ckn] fuEufyf[kr [kaM j[kk tk,xk] vFkkZr~%& 
 
  ¼i½ foKku ¼HkkSfrdh ;k jlk;u foKku ;k ouLifr foKku ;k tho foKku ;k thou foKku ;k tSo 
foKku½ ;k xf.kr ;k lkekftd foKku ¼bfrgkl ;k Hkwxksy ;k jktuhfr foKku ;k vFkZ' kkL=½ ;k Hkk"kk,a 
¼vaxzsth ;k vk/kqfud Hkkjrh; Hkk"kk,a ;k 'kkL=h; Hkk"kk,a ;k okf.kT; ls lEcfU/kr fo"k;½ esa U;wure ipiu 
izfr'kr vadksa ;k blds led{k xzsM ds lkFk LukrdksÙkj mikf/kA 
  ¼ii½ bu Jsf.k;ksa ds inksa ds fy, fo'ofo|ky; vuqnku vk;ksx }kjk fu/kkZf jr jk"Vªh; ik=rk ijh{kk ;k 
jkT; Lrjh; ik=rk ijh{kk ;k f'k{kk esa ;k lacaf/kr fo"k; esa MkWDVj vkWQ fQykWlQh dh mikf/kA 
  ¼i½ ch-,M- ;k ,e-,M- vFkok fo'ks"kKrk ds lkFk ,e-,M- 
  ¼ii½ f'k{kk esa ih,p- MhA^^ 
 
dslkax okbZ- 'ksjik] lnL; lfpo 
[जवज्ञापन-III/4/असा./346/2022-23] 
  
ewy fofu;e Hkkjr ds jkti=] vlk/kkj.k] Hkkx& III] [kaM 4] fnukad 1 fnlacj] 2014 esa vf/klwpuk la[;k ,Q -
51&1@2014@,ulhVhbZ¼,u vkSj ,l½] fnukad 28 uoacj] 2014 dks izdkf'kr gq, Fks vkSj fiNyh ckj vf/klwpuk 
la[;k ,Q-,ulhVhbZ&jsxq-1012@13@2021& fofu;eu vuqHkkx&eq[;ky;] fnukad 05 ebZ] 2022 }kjk la'kksf/kr fd, 
x, FksA 
 
NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TEACHER EDUCATION 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 11th October, 2022 
F. No. NCTE-Regl.022/5/2021-O/o DS(Regulation) -HQ.—In exercise of the pow ers conferred by clause 
(p) of sub-section (2) of section 32 read with clause (i) of section 12 of the National Council for Teacher Education 
Act, 1993 (73 of 1993), the National Council for Teacher Education hereby makes the following regulations further to 
amend the National Council for Teacher Education (Recognition Norms and Procedure) Regulations, 20 14, namely:— 
1. Short title and commencement .-(1)These regulations may be called the National Council for Teacher 
Education (Recognition Norms and Procedure) (Second Amendment) Regulations, 2022. 
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.  
2. In the National Council for Te acher Education (Recognition Norms and Procedure) Regulations, 
2014,(hereinafter referred to  as the said regulations), in Appendix -15, in regulation 5, in sub -regulation 5.1, after 
clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- 
“(vi) In case of I ndian Institute of Technology , National Institute of Technology , Indian Institute of Sci ence 
and Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, the programme shall permit sharing of faculty with 
another institution or multidisciplinary institution or University.” 
3. In the said regulations, in Appendix -15, in regulation 5, in sub-regulation 5.2, after clause (B.) , the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:- 
“BA.  In case the faculty is from  the Indian Institute of Technology, National Institute of Technology, 
Indian Institute of Science and Indian Institute of Science Education and R esearch, the 
qualifications of Assistant Professor –in Liberal Discipline and Pedagogy, shall be as under:  
(i) Post-Graduate degree in Sciences (Physics or Chemistry or Botany or Zoology or Life 
Sciences or Bioscience) or Mathematics or Social Sciences (Histo ry or Geography or Political 
Science or Economics) or Languages (English or Modern Indian Languages or Classical 
Languages) or Commerce allied subjects)  with minimum fifty -five percent marks or its 
equivalent grade.  
68

[भाग III—खण् ड 4] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण 3 
(ii) National Eligibility Test or State Lev el Eligibility Test or Doctor of Philosophy in Education 
or in the concerned subject as prescribed by the University Grants Commission for these 
categories of posts. 
Desirable:  
(i) B.Ed. or M.Ed. or M.Ed. with Specialisation 
(ii) Ph. D in Education.”  
 
KESANG Y. SHERPA, Member Secy. 
[ADVT.-III/4/Exty./346/2022-23] 
Note: 
The Principal regulations were published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, dated the 
1st December, 2014, vide notification number F.51-1/2014/NCTE (N&S), dated the 28 th November, 2014 and 
were last amended vide notification number F. No NCTE-Regl012/13/2021- Reg. Sec. -HQ., dated the  
5th May, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 
ALOK KUMAR
Digitally signed by ALOK KUMAR 
Date: 2022.10.19 16:29:21 +05'30'
69

590 GI/2024 (1) 
 
रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99 
  
 
 
xxxGIDHxxx 
xxxGIDExxx 
असाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग III—खण् ड 4   
PART III—Section 4 
प्राजधकार से प्रकाजित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 
ubZ fnYyh] 25 tuojh] 2024 
—jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj" kn vf/kfu;e] 1993 
¼1993 dk 73½ dh /kkjk 32 dh mi&/kkjk ¼2½ }kjk iznÙk 'kfDr;ksa dk iz;ksx djrs gq, jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj"kn 
,rn~}kjk jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj"kn ¼ekU;rk ekunaM vkSj izfØ;k½ fofu;e] 2014 esa la'kks/ku djus ds fy, fuEufyf[kr 
fofu;e cukrh gS] vFkkZr~%& 
1- y?kq 'kh"kZ vkSj izorZu&¼1½ ;s fofu;e  jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj"kn ¼ekU;rk ekunaM vkSj izfØ;k½ ¼la'kks/ku½ 
fofu;e] 2024 dgyk,axsA 
¼2½ bUgsa 26 vDrwcj] 2021 ls izHkkoh ekuk tk,xkA 
2- jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj"kn ¼ekU;rk ekunaM vkSj izfØ;k½ fofu;e] 2014 ds ifjf'k"V&15 esa vuqPNsn 6 ds ckn] 
fuEufyf[kr vuqPNsn tksM+k tk,xk] vFkkZr~%& 
^^6d- ftu laLFkkuksa dks] fnukad 22 vDrwcj] 2021 dh jkti= vf/klwpuk la[;k ,ulhVhbZ&jsxq011@80@2018&  
,e,l¼fofu;eu½&eq[;ky; }kjk blds gVk, tkus ls iwoZ] gVk, x, ifjf'k"V&13 ds varxZr 4&o"khZ; ,dhd`r ch-,llh-ch-
,M-@ch-,-ch-,M dk;ZØe lapkfyr djus ds fy, ekU;rk iznku dh xbZ gS] og tkjh jgsxh vkSj mUgsa bl 'krZ ds v/khu 
Nk=ksa dks ukekafdr djus dh vuqefr nh tk,xh fd os 'kS{kf.kd l= 2025&2026 dh 'kq#vkr ls igys fnukad 22 v Drwcj] 
2021 ds jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj"kn ¼ekU;rk ek unaM vkSj izfØ;k½ la'kks/ku fofu;e] 2021 ds vuqlkj u, ,dhd`r 
सं.  64] नई दिल्ली, मंगलवार, िनवरी 30, 2024/माघ 10, 1945  
No. 64] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, JANUARY 30, 2024/MAGHA 10, 1945  
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-31012024-251658
CG-DL-E-31012024-251658
70

2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART III—SEC.4] 
v/;kid f'k{kk dk;ZØe esa ifjofrZr gks tk,axsA gVk, x, ifjf'k"V&13 ds varxZr 4&o"khZ; ,dhd`r ch -,llh-ch-,M-@ch-,-
ch-,M dk;ZØe] 'kS{kf.kd l= 2025&2026 ls can dj fn;k tk,xk vkSj gVk, x, ifjf'k"V&13 ds varxZr 4&o"khZ; ,dhd`r 
ch-,llh-ch-,M-@ch-,-ch-,M dk;ZØe lapkfyr djus okys fdlh Hkh ekStwnk laLFkku dks u, nkf[kys djus dh vuqefr ugha 
nh tk,xhA^^ 
[जवज्ञापन-III/4/असा./719/2023-24] 
jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj "kn ¼ekU;rk ekunaM vkSj izfØ;k½ fo fu;e] 2014 ds ifjf'k"V&13 esa 
mfYyf[kr ch-,llh-ch-,M-@ch-,-ch-,M dk;ZØe ds fy, ekunaMksa o ekudksa dks fnukad 22 vDrwcj] 2021 dh vf/klwpuk  
 
 011/80/2018-
  }kjk gVk fn;k x;k Fkk] ftls fnu kad 26 vDrwcj] 2021 dks 
Hkkjr ds jkti=] vlk/kkj.k] Hkkx III, [kaM&4 esa izdkf'kr fd;k x;k FkkA rFkkfi] ftu laLFkkuksa dks mDr ifjf'k"V&13 dks 
gVk, tkus ls iwoZ] blds varxZr igys ls gh jk"Vªh; v/;kid f'k{kk ifj"kn }kjk mDr dk;ZØe ds lapkyu ds fy, ekU;rk 
nh xbZ Fkh] os bls gVk, tkus ds ckn Hkh bls lapkfyr djuk tkjh j[k ldrs FksA 
orZeku vf/klwpuk dks iwoZO;kih :i ls izHkkoh djus ij] fdlh ij izfrdwy izHkko ugha iMs+xk vkSj ;g mu Nk=ksa ds fy, 
ykHkdkjh gksxk] tks gVk, x, ifjf'k"V&13 ds varxZr igys gh ukekadu djk pqds gSa vkSj viuk ikB~;Øe tkjh j[ks gq, gSaA 
fnukad 28 uoacj] 2014 dh vf/klwpuk la[;k ,Q.51-1/2014/,ulhVhbZ ¼,u,aM,l½ }kjk ewy fofu;e] fnukad 01 
fnlacj] 2014 dks Hkkjr ds jkti=] vlk/kkj.k] Hkkx III [kaM&4 esa izdkf'kr fd, x, Fks vkSj fiNyh ckj f nukad 19 
vDrwcj] 2022 dh vf/klwpu k la[;k ,Q. la- ,ulhVhbZ-jsxq022@5@2021&dk;kZy; Mh,l¼fofu;eu½ &eq[;ky; }kjk 
la'kksf/kr fd, x, FksA 
 
NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TEACHER EDUCATION 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 25th January, 2024  
F. No. NCTE-Regl.022/16/2023-Reg.Sec.-HQ.—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (2) of 
section 32 of the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993 (73 of 1993),  the National Counc il for Teacher 
Education hereby makes the following regulations further to amend the National Council for Teacher Education 
(Recognition Norms and Procedure) Regulations, 2014, namely:- 
1. Short title and commencement .-(1)These regulatio ns may be called th e National Council for Teacher 
Education (Recognition Norms and Procedure) (Amendment) Regulations, 2024. 
(2) They shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the 26th October, 2021.  
2. In the National Council for Teacher Education (Recogniti on Norms and Procedure) Regulations, 20 14, in 
Appendix-15, after paragraph 6, the following paragraph shall be inserted, namely:- 
“6A. T he institutions  which have been granted recognition for conducting 4-year Integrated B.Sc.B.Ed./  
B.A.B.Ed. programme  under the omitted  Appendix-13 prior to its omission vide Gazette N otification  
No: NCTE-Regl011/80/2018-MS(Regulation)-HQ, dated the 22 nd October, 2021shall continue and they shall 
be allowed to enroll students subject to the cond ition that they shall transit  to the new Integrated Teacher 
Education Programme  in accordance with the National Council for Teacher Education  (Recognition Norms 
and Procedure) Amendment Regulations, 2021 dated the 22nd October, 2021 before the start of the academic 
session 2025-2026. 4-year Integrated B.Sc.B.Ed./B.A.B.Ed. programme under the omitted Appendix -13 shall 
be discontinued from the academic session 2025 -2026 and no fresh admissions shall be allowed to any of  
the existing institutions conducting 4-year Integrated B.Sc.B.Ed./B .A.B.Ed. programme  under omitted  
Appendix-13.” 
KESANG Y. SHERPA, Member Secy. 
[ADVT.-III/4/Exty./719/2023-24] 
71

[भाग III—खण् ड 4] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण   3 
Explanatory Memorandum:—The Norms and Standards for B.Sc.B.Ed./B.A.B.Ed. programme mentioned 
in Appendix -13 of  the National Council for Teacher E ducation (Recognition Norms and Procedure) 
Regulations, 2014 were omitted vide Notification No: NCTE-Regl011/80/2018-MS (Regulation)-HQ, dated 
the 22 nd October, 2021 published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, dated the 26 th 
October, 2021. However, the institutions  which were already recognis ed under the said Appendix -13 prior to 
its omission by the National Council for Teacher Education for conducting the said programme might have 
continued to offer it after the omission also. 
By giving retrospective effect to the present n otification, no one shall be adversely affected  and it will be beneficial 
for those students who have already enrolled under the omitted Appendix-13 and continuing their course.  
Note:—The Principal regulations were published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part  III, Section 4, dated the 
1st December, 2014, vide notification number F.51-1/2014/NCTE (N&S), dated the 28th November, 2014 and were last 
amended vide notification number F. No. NCTE -Regl022/5/2021-O/o DS(Regulation) -HQ., dated the 19th October, 
2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 
MANOJ 
KUMAR 
VERMA
Digitally signed by MANOJ 
KUMAR VERMA 
Date: 2024.01.31 17:57:41 
+05'30'
72

73  
Annexure-III 
ListofCentral/StateUniversities/InstitutionsincludingIITs,NITs,RIEs,and Government 
Colleges for the Academic Session 2024-25 
S. 
No. 
State Region 
(Territorial 
Jurisdiction) 
Name&AddressoftheHigher 
Education Institutions (HEIs) 
Approved 
Course 
Stages Approved 
Unit(Intake) 
1. HARYANA NRC Chaudhary Devi Lal University, 
Sirsa, Barnala Road, Haryana- 
125055 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit (50 seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
2. PUNJAB NRC Guru Nanak Dev University, G.T. 
Road, Amritsar, Punjab-143005 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit (50 seats) 
B.Com. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit (50 seats) 
3. UTTARAKHAND NRC Department of Education Birla 
CampusHnbGarhwalUniversity 
Srinagar Pauri Garhwal, 
Uttarakhand-246174 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Com. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit (50 seats) 
4. UTTAR PRADESH NRC GautamBuddhaUniversity,Near 
Kasna, Yamuna Expressway, 
Dhanda, Greater Noida Gautam 
Budh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh- 
201312 
B.A. B.Ed. Middle 1Unit (50 seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit (50 seats) 
B.Com. 
B.Ed. 
Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
5. UTTAR PRADESH NRC Institute Of Education 
BundelkhandUniversity,Kanpur 
Road Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh- 
284128 
B.A. B.Ed. Preparatory 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Preparatory 1Unit (50 seats) 
6. DELHI NRC Indira Gandhi National Open 
University,MaidanGarhi,Main 
Ignou Road, Neb Sarai, South 
Delhi, Delhi-110068 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 2Units(100 
seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 2Units(100 
seats) 
B.Com. B.Ed. 
Secondary 2Units(100 
seats) 
7. DELHI NRC SchoolOfEducationStudies,Dr. 
B.R.AmbedkarUniversityDelhi, 
LodhiRoad,Aliganj,South Delhi, 
Delhi-110003 
B.A. B.Ed. Preparatory 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit (50 seats) 
8. HARYANA NRC Central University Of Haryana, 
Jant-Pali,Mahendergarh-Dadri 
Road,Mahindergarh,Haryana- 
123031 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
9. UTTAR PRADESH NRC ALIGARH MUSLIM 
UNIVERSITY,ALIGARH, 
UTTAR PRADESH 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit (50 seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
10. HARYANA NRC DEPARTMENT OF 
EDUCATION, MAHARSHI 
DAYANANDUNIVERSITY, 
ROHTAK,HARYANA 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit (50 seats) 
B.Com. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit (50 seats) 
11. PUNJAB NRC Dr.B R Ambedkar National 
InstituteOfTechnologyLidhranB
idhipur, GT Road Amritsar 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 

74  
S. 
No. 
State Region 
(Territorial 
Jurisdiction) 
Name&AddressoftheHigher 
Education Institutions (HEIs) 
Approved 
Course 
Stages Approved 
Unit(Intake) 
   BYPASS,Jalandhar, Punjab- 
144027 
   
12. UTTARAKHAND NRC KumaunUniversity Sleepy 
Hollow,Nainital,Uttarakhand- 
263001 
B.A. B.Ed. Preparatory 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Preparatory 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Com. 
B.Ed. 
Preparatory 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
13. JAMMUAND 
KASHMIR 
NRC CentralUniversityOfKashmir, 
Tulmullah,Ganderbal,Jammu 
And Kashmir-191131 
B.A. B.Ed. Middle 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
14. JAMMUAND 
KASHMIR 
NRC Government 
CollegeOfEducation,Canal 
Road, Jammu, Jammu 
AndKashmir-180016 
B.A. B.Ed. Preparatory 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.A. B.Ed. Foundational 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
15. DELHI NRC MATASUNDRICOLLEGEFOR 
WOMEN,MataSundriLane,New 
Delhi, 110002 
B.A. B.Ed. Middle 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
16. DELHI NRC SHYAMAPRASADMUKHERJI 
COLLEGEFORWOMEN,North 
Ave,WestPunjabiBagh,Punjabi 
Bagh, Delhi, 110026 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
17. MAHARASHTRA WRC MAHATMAGANDHI 
ANTARRASHTRIYAHINDI 
VISHWAVIDYALAYA, 
GANDHIHILLSWARDHA, 
MAHARASHTRA- 442001 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
18. MADHYA 
PRADESH 
WRC REGIONALINSTITUTEOF 
EDUCATION, BHOPAL, 
SHYAMLAHILLS,BHOPAL, 
MADHYAPRADESH-462002 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 2Units (100 
seats) 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
19. RAJASTHAN WRC REGIONALINSTITUTEOF 
EDUCATION, PUSHKAR 
ROAD,AJMER,RAJASTHAN- 
305004 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 2Units (100 
seats) 
20. MAHARASHTRA WRC SNDTWOMEN'SUNIVERSITY, 
MUMBAI,ERANDWANE, 
KARVE ROAD, HAVELI, 
PUNE, PUNE, 
MAHARASHTRA-411038 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
21. MADHYA 
PRADESH 
WRC DOCTORHARISINGHGOUR 
VISHWAVIDYALAYA, 
UNIVERSITY ROAD OVER 
PATHARIA HILLS, SAGAR, 
MADHYAPRADESH-470003 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Com. 
B.Ed. 
Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
22. MADHYA 
PRADESH 
WRC MAHATMAGANDHI 
CHITRAKOOT GRAMODAYA 
VISHWAVIDYALAYA 
RAJAULA, CHITRAKOOT 
SATNAROAD,MAJHGAWAN, 
SATNA, MADHYA PRADESH- 
485334 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Com. 
B.Ed. 
Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
23. RAJASTHAN WRC CENTRALUNIVERSITY OF 
RAJASTHAN, 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 

75  
S. 
No. 
State Region 
(Territorial 
Jurisdiction) 
Name&AddressoftheHigher 
Education Institutions (HEIs) 
Approved 
Course 
Stages Approved 
Unit(Intake) 
   BANADRSINDRI, NH8, 
BANDARSINDRI, 
KISHANGARH,AJMER, 
RAJASTHAN-305817 
   
24. ODISHA ERC MAHARAJA 
PURNACHANDRA 
AUTONOMOUS COLLEGE, 
TAKHATPUR, NOU ROAD, 
BARIPADA,MAYURBHANJ, 
ODISHA-757003 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
25. ASSAM ERC TYAGBIRHEMBARUAH 
COLLEGE,KARCHANTOLA, 
NADUAR, JAMUGURIHAT, 
SONITPUR, ASSAM -784189 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
26. ASSAM ERC NORTH LAKHIMPUR 
COLLEGE (AUTONOMOUS), 
KHELMATI, NL 
COLassamLEGE 
ROAD,NORTHLAKHIMPUR,A
SSAM- 
787031 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
27. ARUNACHAL 
PRADESH 
ERC RAJIVGANDHIUNIVERSITY, 
DOIMUKH, PAPUMPARA, 
ARUNACHALPRADESH- 
791112 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
28. WEST BENGAL ERC INDIANINSTITUTE OF 
TECHNOLOGYKHARAGPUR 
1, MIDNAPUR, WEST 
BENGAL-721302 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
29. TRIPURA ERC NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF 
TECHNOLOGYJIRANIA,NIT 
ROAD, AGARTALA, WEST 
TRIPURA -799046 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
30. MEGHALAYA ERC KIANGNANGBAH 
GOVERNMENT COLLEGE, 
JOWAI,NH-6,JOWAI,WEST 
JAINTIA HILLS, 
MEGHALAYA-793150 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
31. KERALA SRC CENTRAL UNIVERSITY OF 
KERALA,PERIYA,TEJASWINI 
HILLS, HOSDURG, 
KANHANGAD, KASARAGOD, 
KERALA - 671320 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Com. 
B.Ed. 
Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
32. TELANGANA SRC DEPARTMENT OF 
EDUCATIONANDTRAINING, 
MAULANAAZADNATIONAL 
URDU UNIVERSITY, 
GACHIBOWLI, MANIKONDA 
VILLAGE, RAJENDRA 
NAGAR, HYDERABAD, 
RANGAREDDY,TELANGANA 
–500032 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Com. 
B.Ed. 
Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
33. TAMILNADU SRC CENTRALUNIVERSITY OF 
TAMILNADU,NILAKKUDI, 
NANNILAM,THIRUVARUR, 
TAMIL NADU - 610005 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 

76  
S. 
No. 
State Region 
(Territorial 
Jurisdiction) 
Name&AddressoftheHigher 
Education Institutions (HEIs) 
Approved 
Course 
Stages Approved 
Unit(Intake) 
34. ANDHRA 
PRADESH 
SRC NATIONAL SANSKRIT 
UNIVERSITY,RESERVIOUR 
COLONY, TIRUPATI, 
CHITTOOR, ANDHRA 
PRADESH–517507 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
35. KERALA SRC NATIONALINSTITUTEOF 
TECHNOLOGYCALICUT, 
CHATHAMANGALAM, 
KOZHIKODE, KERALA - 
673601 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
36. PUDUCHERRY SRC SCHOOLOFEDUCATION SJ 
CAMPUS PONDICHERRY 
UNIVERSITY, KALAPET 
REVENUE VILLAGE R 
VENKATRAMAN NAGAR 
SILVER JUBILEE CAMPUS, 
UZHAVARKARAI 
PANCHAYATPUDUCHERRY- 
605014 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
37. TELANGANA SRC NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF 
TECHNOLOGY,HYDERABAD 
HIGHWAY, 
HANUMANKONDA, 
WARANGAL, TELANGANA - 
506004 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
38. PUDUCHERRY SRC NATIONALINSTITUTEOF 
TECHNOLOGY, 
PUDUCHERRY, 
THIRUVETTAKUDY, 
KARAIKAL,PUDUCHERRY– 
609609 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
39. ANDHRA 
PRADESH 
SRC DR. B. R. AMBEDKAR 
UNIVERSITY,ETCHERLA, 
MAINROAD,ETCHERLA, 
SRIKAKULAM, ANDHRA 
PRADESH- 532410 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
40. KARNATAKA SRC NRUPATHUNGAUNIVERSITY 
(FORMERLYGOVERNMENT 
SCIENCE COLLEGE), NT 
ROAD NRUPATHUNGA 
UNIVERSITY,BANGALORE, 
KARNATAKA - 560001 
B.Sc.B. Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
41. TELANGANA SRC GOVERNMENT DEGREE 
COLLEGE, BEHIND CSI 
CHURCH,LUXETTIPET, 
MANCHERIAL,TELANGANA- 
504215 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
42. ODISHA ERC INDIANINSTITUTE OF 
TECHNOLOGY, 
BHUBANESHWAR 
B.Sc.,B.Ed Secondary 1Unit 
(50 seats) 
43. DELHI NRC JesusandMaryCollege, 
UniversityofDelhi,SanMartin 
Marg,Chanakyapuri,Delhi,South 
Delhi, Delhi-110021 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
44. Haryana NRC  B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 

77  
S. 
No. 
State Region 
(Territorial 
Jurisdiction) 
Name&AddressoftheHigher 
Education Institutions (HEIs) 
Approved 
Course 
Stages Approved 
Unit(Intake) 
   Institute of Teacher Training and 
ResearchKurukshetraUniversity, 
Kurukshetra 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
B.Com. 
B.Ed. 
Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
45. Delhi NRC DepartmentofEducation, 
University of Delhi, North 
Campus, University of Delhi, 
ChhatraMarg,33,Delhi,North 
Delhi,Delhi-110007 
B.A. B.Ed Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
46. Chandigarh NRC 
PanjabUniversity,Chandigarh, 
Sector 14, Sector 14, 
Chandigarh, Chandigarh (UT), 
Chandigarh-160014 
B.A. B.Ed Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
Middle 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
Preparatory 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
47. Delhi NRC Guru GobindSinghIndraprastha, 
University,Dwarka,GolfLink 
Road,Delhi,Delhi,Southwest 
Delhi, Delhi110078 
B.A. B.Ed Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
48. Punjab NRC IndianInstituteofTechnology 
Ropar, Rupnagar, Near Bara 
Phool,RoparandShriChamkaur 
Sahib, Rupnagar, 
Ropar/Rupnagar, Punjab140001 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
49. Punjab NRC PunjabiUniversity,Patiala,Arts, 
BlockNo.5,Patiala,Patiala, 
Punjab- 147002 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
50. Haryana NRC GuruJambheshwarUniversityof 
Science and Technology Hisar, 
Hissar, Haryana -125001 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
51. Punjab NRC Central University of Punjab, 
Ghudda,BadalRoad,Bathinda, 
Punjab-151401 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
52. Maharashtra WRC ShivajiUniversity, Kolhapur, 
Maharashtra-416004 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
53. Maharashtra WRC 
Department of Education and 
Extension,Savitribai Phule, Pune 
UniversityKarwar,Nh62NagaurM
aharashtra 
B.A. B.Ed Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
B.Com. 
B.Ed. 
Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
54. Gujarat WRC TheMaharaja Sayajirao 
UniversityofBaroda,Vadodara 
(Baroda), Gujarat-390002 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
55. Jodhpur WRC Indian InstituteofTechnology 
Jodhpur,Nh62,NagaurRoad, 
Karwar, Jodhpur, 
Rajasthan342030 
B.Sc.B.Ed Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
56. MadhyaPradesh WRC CentralSanskritUniversity 
Bhopal Campus, Bag Sevaniya, 
Bhopal,MadhyaPradesh462043 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 2unit 
(100 Seats) 
57. Rajasthan WRC CentralSanskritUniversity, 
GopalpuraBypass,TriveniNagar, 
Jaipur Campus,Rajasthan-302018 
B.A. B.Ed Secondary 2unit 
(100 Seats) 

78  
S. 
No. 
State Region 
(Territorial 
Jurisdiction) 
Name&AddressoftheHigher 
Education Institutions (HEIs) 
Approved 
Course 
Stages Approved 
Unit(Intake) 
58. Chattisgarh WRC 
Institute of Teachers Education, 
Pt. Ravishankar Shukla 
University,AmanakaG.E.Road, 
Raipur – 492010 
B.A. B.Ed Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
B.Com. 
B.Ed 
Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
59. TamilNadu SRC National Institute of Technology, 
Thuvakudi,Tanjavur,MainRoad, 
Thiruverumbur, Trichirappalli, 
Tiruchirappalli, Tamil 
Nadi620015 
B.A. B.Ed Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
60. Kerala SRC CentralSanskritUniversity, 
GuruvayoorCampusAdat, 
Puanattukara, Thrissur, 
Kerala680551 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 2unit 
(100 Seats) 
61. Mizoram ERC 
 
Mizoram University Tanhril, 
Tanhril,Aizawal,Mizoram796004 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
B.Com. 
B.Ed 
Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
62. Meghalaya ERC Northeastern Hill University 
Mawlai, UmshingMawlai, 
Shillong,Shillong,EastKhasi 
Hills, Meghalaya-793022 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
63. Assam ERC ChaiduarCollegeGohpur,Nh15, 
Chaiduar, Gohpur, Biswanath, 
Assam-784168 
B.A. B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
B.Sc.B.Ed. Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
64. ASSAM ERC AssamERC BahonaCollege, 
Mout Gaon Nimati Road 
CharigoanMouza,Jorhat,Assam- 
785101 
B.AB.Ed Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats) 
Middle 1unit 
(50 Seats 
B.ScB.Ed Secondary 1unit 
(50 Seats 
Middle 1unit 
(50 Seats 


Annexure IV
79

80

81 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES

82 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, 
CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS (EWCY&S)  
XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 10:30 
A.M. on Monday, the 19th May, 2025 in Committee Room- ‘3’, Block A, Parliament 
House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Digvijaya Singh  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Dr. Sikander Kumar 
3.  Dr. Bhim Singh 
4. Smt. Rekha Sharma 
 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
6. Smt. Rachna Banerjee 
7. Smt. Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
8. Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary 
9. Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
10. Prof. Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
11. Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
12. Dr. Hemang Joshi 
13. Adv Dean Kuriakose 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Dr. D. Purandeswari 
16. Shri Rajeev Rai 
17. Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
18. Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary                                                                                                                                             
Shri J. K. Mallick, Director 
Smt. A.S. Chakravani, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  

83 
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
 
Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of 
Education 
S.No. NAME DESIGNATION 
1.  Sh. Sanjay Kumar Secretary, SE&L 
2.  Ms. Prachi Pandey Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri Sankha Roy Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Hemant D Sorte Under Secretary 
5.  Professor Pankaj 
Arora 
Chairperson, NCTE 
6.  Mrs. Abhilasha Jha 
Misra 
Member Secretary, NCTE 
7.  Shri D. K. Chaturvedi Academic Advisor, NCTE 
8.  Shri Ravindra Singh Under Secretary, NCTE 
Representatives of Civil Society Organizations 
1. Dr. Latika Gupta Faculty, Dept of Education, 
University of Delhi 
2. Dr. Kanchan,  Faculty, Dept of Education, 
University of Delhi 
3. Dr. Radhika Menon  Faculty, Dept of Elementary 
Education, Mata Sundri College, 
University of Delhi 
4. Ms. Padma Sarangapani 
 
Professor of Education and Chair, 
Centre of Excellence in Teacher 
Education 
Tata Institute of Social 
Sciences, Mumbai  
5. Ms. Mythili Ramchand 
 
Adjunct Professor, National 
Institute of Advanced Studies, 
Bangalore 
6. Shri Ajay Singh 
 
Associate Professor 
Indira Gandhi National Open 
University, New Delhi 
7. Ms. Nidhi Gulati 
 
Professor  
University of Delhi, Delhi 
8. Dr. Manish Jain 
 
Associate Professor 
Dr. BR Ambedkar University, 
Delhi 
 

84 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He, then, informed that the agenda for the meeting was to hear Secretary 
along with other representatives from Department of School Education and Literacy, 
Ministry of Education, NCTE and representatives of Civil Society 
Organisations(CSOs)  on Discontinuation of the Bachelor of Elementary Education (B. 
El. Ed) program; Introduction of Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP) - 
curriculum, qualifications for teaching ITEP, current state of implementation, future 
plans for expansion of ITEP; Policies of National Council for Teacher Education 
(NCTE) Policies for Teacher Education, Qualifications, and Training; and future of D 
El Ed (Diploma in Elementary Education) and District Institute of Education and 
Training (DIETs).  
3. Thereafter, Chairman informed the Committee that background notes had already 
been circulated to all the Members through email and asked that the witnesses be called 
to depose before the Committee.  
(After Secretary along with other senior officials of Department School Education 
and Literacy, Ministry of Education, NCTE and Representatives of Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs) take their seats) 
4. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary along with other representatives of the 
Department of School Education and Literacy and Representatives of Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs) to the meeting of the Committee. He also informed the 
Committee that after the presentation by the Secretary and Representatives of the Civil 
Society Organisations, Members of the Committee may seek clarification one by one. 
Chairman also asked the Secretary to introduce his colleagues and proceed with the 
presentation.  
5.      After introduction, the Secretary and representatives of the Department gave a 
detailed presentation about Introduction of Integrated Teacher Education Programme 
(ITEP) - curriculum, qualifications for teaching ITEP, current state of implementation, 
future plans for expansion of ITEP; Policies of National Council for Teacher Education 
(NCTE) Policies for Teacher Education, Qualifications, and Training; District Institute 
of Education and Training (DIETs); Discontinuation of the Bachelor of Elementary 
Education (B. El. Ed) program; and future of D El Ed (Diploma in Elementary 
Education). 
6.  Thereafter, representatives of Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) made extensive 
presentation on Discontinuation of the Bachelor of Elementary Education (B. El. Ed) 
program; Introduction of Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP) - 
curriculum, qualifications for teaching ITEP, current state of implementation, future 
plans for expansion of ITEP; Policies of National Council for Teacher Education 
(NCTE) Policies for Teacher Education, Qualifications, and Training; and Future of D 

85 
 
El Ed (Diploma in Elementary Education) and District Institute of Education and 
Training (DIETs). 
 
7. The Chairman and Members raised various queries on the above mentioned 
subjects and gave suggestions to the Department. The Secretary, Department of School 
Education and Literacy replied to some of the queries of the Members. With regard to 
queries not answered orally, the Chairman directed the Secretary to send the written 
replies to the Secretariat, as soon as possible but not later than seven days.  
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
8. * * *  
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept. 
10.      The Committee, then, adjourned at 1:33 P.M.  
   
   New Delhi,                                                                                                      J.K. Mallick  
    19th May, 2025                                                                                                  Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Pertains to other matters 

86 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, 
CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
XXIII 
TWENTY THIRD MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 03:00 P.M. on 
Tuesday, the 05th August, 2025 in Committee Room- ‘3’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Digvijaya Singh   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.         Ms. Sushmita Dev 
3.         Dr. Sikander Kumar 
4.         Smt. Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
5.         Dr. Bhim Singh  
6.         Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
7.         Smt. Rekha Sharma 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
8. Dr. Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
9. Smt. Rachna Banerjee 
10. Smt. Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
11. Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary 
12.  Prof. Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
13. Shri Amar Sharadrao Kale 
14. Dr. Sambit Patra 
15. Dr. D. Purandeswari 
16. Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
17. Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
18. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
19. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
20. Dr. T Sumathy Alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Shri J. K. Mallick, Director 
Smt. Sh. Devashish Sen, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
  

87 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
   
 
* * * 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He, 
then, informed that the agenda for the meeting was to consider and adopt ***; (ii) draft 368th Report 
on ‘Review of the functioning of National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) and initiatives 
taken to support training of teachers in the light of NEP 2020’s thrust on capacity building of 
teachers’; and (iii) ***. 
2. The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports one by one and after brief 
discussion, adopted the *** and 368th Reports with certain modifications. The Committee, also, 
authorized Chairman of the Committee, to decide the names of Members for laying/presentation of 
Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha during the ongoing Session of Parliament as 
per their availability during the said Session. The Committee further authorized the 
Chairman/Secretariat to correct patent errors and consequential changes in the said reports.  
(***) 
3. * * * 
4. * * *   
5. * * * 
6. * * *.  
(* * *)  
7. * * *.       
 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept. 
 
9.      The Committee, then, adjourned at 5:55 P.M.  
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                        J.K. Mallick  
5th August, 2025                                                                                                  Director 
 
 
*** Pertains to other matters 