PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 238
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON HUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL ACCREDITATION REGULATORY AUTHORITY
FOR HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2010
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2011/SRAVANA, 1933 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2011/SRAVANA, 1933 (SAKA)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 12  AUGUST, 2011)TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12  AUGUST, 2011)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 12  AUGUST, 2011)TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12  AUGUST, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
NATIONAL ACCREDITATION REGULATORY AUTHORITY
FOR HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2010
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 12 TH AUGUST, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12 TH AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2011/SRA V ANA, 1933 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)-(iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—28
4. N OTE OF DISSENT ................................................................................................................... 29—31
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 32—38
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 39—52
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 53 —111

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2010-11)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Angadi Suresh Chanabasappa
15. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
16. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
17. Shri Rahul Gandhi
18. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
19. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhao
20. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
21. Shri P. Kumar
22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
23. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
24. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
25. Shri Tapas Paul
26. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
27. Shri Ashok Tanwar
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
30. Shri P. Viswanathan
31. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and
Thirty-eighth Report of the Committee on the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for
Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010*.
2. The National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010
was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 3 May, 2010. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation
with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the Bill to the Committee on 13 May, 2010 for examination
and report.
3. The Committee held extensive deliberations with both Government and Private Sector
stakeholders, which included, Chairman UGC, AICTE, V ice-Chancellor, IGNOU, Chairman, National
Board of Accreditation, Director, National Assessment and Accreditation Council, Chairman, Board
of Governors, MCI, Education Promotion Society for India, Indian Council of Universities and
Prof. K.K. Aggarwal, Chancellor, Lingaya’s University in addition to the Department of Higher
Education and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in six sittings held on 20 April, 19 May, 20 & 28 June,
22 July and 8 August, 2011.
5. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied on the following:-
(i) Background Note on the Bill and Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the
Department of Higher Education;
(ii) Presentation made and clarifications given by the Secretary, Department of Higher
Education;
(iii) Feedback received from the Department on the questionnaire and the memoranda of
the stakeholders along with the issues raised by the Members during the course of
the oral evidence of the Secretary; and
(iv) Replies to the questionnaire and feedback received from the stakeholders heard by the
Committee.
6. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 8 August, 2011.
7. One note of dissent given by Shri Pramod Kureel is appended to the Report.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2 dated 3 rd May, 2010.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 47228 dated 13 th May, 2010.

8. For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters at the end of the Report.
OSCAR FERNANDES
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 8, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Sravana 10, 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.
(iv)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions
Bill, 2010 was referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha
on 13 May, 2010 for examination and report.
1.2 The National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions
Bill, 2010 seeks to make provisions for assessment of academic quality of higher educational
institutions, programmes conducted therein and their infrastructure through mandatory accreditation
by independent accreditation agencies and to establish a statutory Authority for the said purpose
and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
1.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as follows:-
“Assessment and accreditation in the higher education, through transparent and informed
external review process, are the effective means of quality assurance in higher education to
provide a common frame of reference for students and others to obtain credible information
on academic quality across institutions thereby assisting student mobility across institutions,
domestic as well as international. Presently, accreditation is voluntary as a result of which
less than one-third of the colleges and less than one-third of all universities have obtained
accreditation. Mandatory accreditation in the higher education would enable the higher
education system in the country to become a part of the global quality assurance system.
Mandatory accreditation in the higher education would require a large number of competent
and reliable accrediting agencies to be recognized, monitored and audited for academic
competence through an independent but accountable institutional mechanism. Such a
mechanism would find acceptability among peer group of international accreditation bodies,
necessary for student and teacher mobility and institutional collaborations, within and
across borders. Consequently, there is need for an autonomous institutional structure with
statutory backing to recognize and regulate competent professional agencies charged with the
task of accreditation.”
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
2.1 As the proposed legislation sought to cover all categories of  higher educational institutions
across the country, the Committee wanted to be enlightened about the consultation process
undertaken by  the Department. The Committee was informed that views of  the State Governments
had been taken into account while finalizing the proposal. The Department stated that the matter
was discussed in a meeting of  the Central Advisory Body on Education (CABE), the highest policy
advisory body on education, held on 31 August, 2009  in which State Education Ministers also
participated. The proposal was circulated in advance to the States for the meeting of  the CABE.
CABE approved the proposal for mandatory accreditation in higher education with the rider that the
proposed law should take into consideration the concerns expressed by  some States with regard
to the autonomy of  the process of  accreditation. It was clarified that the intention of  the proposal
was not only to protect the autonomy of  States but also to ensure accountability of  the
accreditation process. The process of  accreditation as envisaged did not in any way come into
conflict with either the federal structure of  Indian polity or the autonomy of  the institutions
established by  the States. It was further informed that almost all the States had expressed their

2
support for the need to have accreditation, with the State Governments of  Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh and Gujarat separately welcoming the proposal. On a
specific query about concerns expressed by  some States, the Committee was apprised that the
State Governments of  West Bengal and Kerala had expressed some reservations about the
outsourcing/privatization of  agencies for accreditation which would not improve the quality of  our
education system. View of  the State Government of  Odisha was that before having mandatory
accreditation, standards should be achieved for which support for colleges and universities would
be required.
2.2 When asked about the response of  the Central Universities/Deemed Universities/premier
institutions which are mandated to undergo accreditation under the proposed legislation, reply of
the Department was:-
“The UGC has informed that it has not currently approached institutions on  the subject.
However, UGC had, in the past made accreditation mandatory and had accordingly written
to all the universities to go for accreditation by 31/12/2000, duly extending the deadline
twice. In its 462nd meeting held in 2009, the UGC had approved the draft UGC
(Mandatory Assessment and Accreditation of Higher Educational Institutions) Regulations,
2009 which was an attempt to ensure that maximum number of universities apply for
accreditation.”
2.3 On being enquired about the views of private universities/institutions and State universities/
institutions on the issue of proposed mandatory accreditation, Committee’s attention was once again
drawn to the fact that the UGC had not reported any reservation when it had proposed a regulation
for mandatory accreditation. It was also expected that institutions providing high quality of higher
education would welcome such a move as it would help in differentiating their quality vis-á-vis
other types of institutions.
2.4 Lastly, inspite of medical institutions proposed to be bought under the Bill, involvement
of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the consultation process was restricted to the
Minister of Health being the Member of the GoM which approved the draft of the Bill for
Government. Further, no separate consultations were held with MCI, DCI, Nursing Council etc.
due to these bodies coming within the purview of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
It was also clarified that statutory functioning of such bodies was not being curtailed or
interfered with.
2.5 From the above, it is evident that consultation with all the stakeholders, which
should have been ideally the starting point for formulating such a crucial piece of legislation
for quality control of higher education sector in the country remained the least priority
issue for the Department. In principle approval by majority of State Governments in a
meeting of CABE, inspite of its being the highest policy making body cannot be considered
adequate enough. Not only this, very valid reservations of some of the State Governments
failed to receive the required attention. Ideally, further intensive deliberations were
required with the States which the Department failed to undertake.
2.6 The Committee also observes that Central Universities/Deemed Universities/premier
institutions which are to be brought under the proposed legislation have remained
completely out of the consultation process. The Committee can very well understand the
sheer absence of any suggestions/reservations of higher educational institutions in the
private sector, inspite of their being a major stakeholder in such a path-breaking piece of
legislation. The kind of response received from the Department to the specific query clearly
confirms Committee’s apprehension that the Department attaches very little significance to
their viewpoint.

3
2.7 At present, the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) undertakes
institutional accreditation for all higher educational institutions whereas the National Board
of Accreditation undertakes programme accreditation for professional institutions. Ideally,
these two bodies, with their experience and expertise, should have been actively involved in
the formulation of the proposed legislation. However, in their case also, level of consultation
remained confined to one or two meetings.
2.8 In view of the above, the Committee has no option but to conclude that like in the
other recently proposed legislations envisaged to bring about major policy changes in the
higher education sector, the Department has failed to initiate any meaningful dialogue with
the major stakeholders on the present Bill also. The Committee has, therefore, made a
serious effort of reaching out to all concerned so as to make an objective assessment of the
proposed legislation.
III. INTERACTION WITH STAKEHOLDERS
3.1 Before initiating the deliberation process, the Committee decided to seek the views of all
concerned. Accordingly, a Press Release inviting memoranda/suggestions on various provisions of
the Bill was issued on 25 May, 2010. However, not a very encouraging response was received from
the stakeholders. Seven memoranda received on the Bill were forwarded to the Department of
Higher Education for its comments. Feedback received from the Department has been taken note
of by the Committee. In order to have a proper assessment of the various provisions of the
proposed legislation and also to have a better understanding of likely impact of this major policy
initiative on the higher education sector, the Committee held extensive deliberations with various
stakeholders. Besides the Departments of Higher Education and Health and Family Welfare, they
included experts and bodies/organizations representing both Government and private sector. In a
series of meetings, Chairmen, UGC and AICTE, V ice-Chancellor, IGNOU, Chairman, National Board
of Accreditation, Director, National Assessment and Accreditation Council, Chairman, Board of
Governors, MCI, Education Promotion Society for India, Indian Council of Universities and Prof.
K.K. Aggarwal, Chancellor, Lingaya’s University a nd former Vice-Chancellor, Guru Gobind Singh
Indraprastha University, New Delhi appeared before the Committee and gave an idea about their
thinking on the proposed legislation. The Committee also sent detailed questionnaire to all these
stakeholders. This exercise enabled the Committee to examine the Bill and all the allied aspects in
an objective manner. It would not be wrong to conclude that in the absence of a thorough
consultation process with all the stakeholders which should have been mandatory on the
part of the Department, the Committee was left with no other alternative but to take an
initiative in this direction.
3.2 The Secretary, Department of Higher Education in her deposition before the Committee on
20 April, 2011 stated that so far the accreditation or the quality assurance system prevailing in
higher education scheme had been optional and not mandatory. As a result, students and their
guardians did not have a credible mechanism of making up their minds about the quality and
efficiency of the institutions to which they would be admitting their wards. While enactment of the
proposed legislation would give an idea about the exact status of the institutions to students, it
would also help the institutions in knowing about their strengths and inadequacies and taking steps
to overcome the same. The provision for mandatory accreditation would result in:-
– credible information on academic quality;
– common frame of reference on quality;
– inter-institutional (national) mobility of students;
– incentivize achievement of higher standards;

4
– standards measured vis-á-vis the norms laid down by the statutory regulatory authority;
and
– international mobility of students to equivalent programmes.
3.3  The Committee was informed that there were only two bodies namely the National
Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) under UGC and the National Board of Accreditation
(NBA) under AICTE which were accrediting institutions and professional and technical programmes
respectively. However, these bodies inspite of their best efforts and also due to accreditation being
optional had not shown very significant level of achievement. Only 161 universities out of 504
universities and 4371 colleges out of over 28,000 colleges in the country had been accredited
presently. Similarly, out of approximately 17,000 programmes in the technology sector, only 35 per
cent programmes had been accredited so far.
3.4 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that the Expert Bodies/Committees, as
indicated below, have recommended mandatory accreditation to the Government:-
Eleventh Plan Objectives on Accreditation
– introduction of a mandatory accreditation system;
– creation of multiple rating agencies with a body to regulate these rating agencies; and
– department-wise ratings in addition to institutional rating.
National Knowledge Commission
– establish an Independent Regulatory Authority for Higher Education (IRAHE), multiple
accreditation agencies must be licensed by the IRAHE to assess quality; and
– establish independent and multiple accreditation agencies for all professional institutions.
Yashpal Committee
– creation of a single accreditation window for all institutions of higher education;
– NCHER should create norms, procedures and structures for accrediting of universities
and institutions of higher learning; and
– institutions and universities may like to get accreditation from one or more than one
agencies depending on their reputation.
3.5 During the course of deliberations, the Chairman, UGC dwelt at length on the previous
experience of the Commission in formulating regulations on accreditation and their implementation.
He informed the Committee that driven by the consideration of “Quality Higher Education”, the
UGC in 1994 had set up the National Assessment and Accreditation Council with the objective of
making assessment of all the existing universities and colleges. However, after five years, it was
realized that the progress of assessment and accreditation was very slow. Due to the voluntary
nature of accreditation, institutions were not coming forward for assessment and accreditation.
Therefore, on 25 November, 1999, the UGC decided to make accreditation mandatory for all the
Universities. Accordingly, a deadline of 31 December, 2000 was set up for all the Universities to
get themselves accredited. However, inspite of extending the deadline by 31 December, 2001, not
many universities came forward. The subject was again deliberated by UGC in 2008 which decided
to frame regulations in this regard. The UGC in its 462
nd meeting had approved the draft UGC
(Mandatory Assessment and Accreditation of Higher Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2009 in
an attempt to ensure that maximum number of universities applied for accreditation. Committee’s
attention was also drawn to the fact that UGC’s regulations of 2009, even if implemented, would

5
have covered only the universities which were receiving grants from the UGC and most of the
professional colleges and institutions, not being universities, and other institutions not receiving
grants from UGC would have been left out of its purview. The Chairman, UGC was authorized
to fix the date of implementation of the regulations in consultation with the National Assessment
and Accreditation Council and National Board of Accreditation. It was also decided that both these
institutions would draw a roadmap for the purpose of assessing and accrediting all institutions of
higher education.
3.6 The Chairman, UGC emphasized that it would not be practically possible for NAAC and
NBA to accomplish this task on their own. Participation of multiple accreditation agencies was also
required. There was a need to have a national level authority which should be entrusted with the
responsibility of laying down not only the norms and standards of assessment and accreditation but
also supervision of the accrediting agencies. It was also pointed out that a national level resource
institution needed to be set up so as to ensure that all the centres of learning were the centres
of excellence. This could be done only by evolving a mechanism through which it could be
determined that the institutions were modernizing their curricula, actively engaged in imparting
knowledge, promoting research and innovation etc. which were important aspects of higher
education system.
3.7 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that NBA was established as an autonomous
body of AICTE on 7 January, 2010. Prior to that, it existed as an All India Board of AICTE since
1995. Domain of AICTE included the sectors of technology, engineering polytechnics, management,
architecture, pharmacy etc. which involved different courses of study, different deliverables and
different job market. Accordingly, programme-wise accreditation was being undertaken by NBA. It
was also pointed out that there was shortage of faculties/experts who could make assessment of
programmes for accreditation, with only a database of 2800 experts available with AICTE. There
were other problem areas also such as voluntary nature of accreditation, lesser number of
accreditation agencies, time-consumption in assessment and accreditation, complaint redressal
mechanism, non-statutory nature of the scheme which were being faced under the present system.
It was emphasized that in the highly competitive field of higher education, there was a requirement
of more accreditation agencies and an accreditation authority or council with a larger infrastructure
and manpower. In such a scenario, the mechanism envisaged in the Bill was considered to be a
welcome step by the Chairman, AICTE. However, two-three suggestions were made by him for
strengthening the proposed mechanism. Periodic assessment of accrediting agencies was one such
suggestion put forth before the Committee. Secondly, exercise of selection of accreditation agencies
was to be undertaken with all caution. It was also pointed out that expertise available in one field/
specialty can also be made one of the criteria for these agencies. This would lead to agencies
assessing and accrediting programmes/institutions based on their expertise. It was felt that number
of such agencies needed to be limited on the basis of the quality criteria and their performance
level. Creation of such agencies under the Act was considered to be a better option. Lastly,
provisions relating to penalties and offences also needed to be made more rational.
3.8 The Committee also had the opportunity to interact with the Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU. The
first suggestion made by him was that in the formulation of rules/procedures for accreditation,
proactive participation of teachers from all disciplines was required for having fully functional and
well-established system of accreditation in place. It was emphasized that teachers alone could be
the best judge for making an assessment of an institution. This should be the bench-mark for both
government as well as private accreditation agencies. Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact
that most of the Central Universities inspite of being fully funded by the Central Government, had
not undergone assessment and accreditation by NAAC, even after 17 years of its coming into
existence. It was only the affiliated colleges, State and other universities which had undergone
through this process.

6
3.9 Another very pertinent issue raised by the Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU was incorporation of
research component while undertaking assessment and accreditation of a university. It was pointed
out that all over the world, Research Assessment Exercise along with the assessment and
accreditation of a university was undertaken every year and accordingly, RAE count of each
university, each academy, each Professor was put on the website. This RAE count was the criteria
for research grants. Such an inclusion would lead to elimination of many duplicative processes
undertaken while processing research applications by various funding agencies. These research
accreditation credentials could be made the criteria for release of other development grants to
universities both from government and private agencies.
3.10 The Committee was given to understand that the need for a large number of agencies so
as to comply with the mandatory accreditation process can be fulfilled to a great extent by having
the services of well-established institutions/bodies like Quality Council of India, the Indian Academy
of Science, the National Science Academy, the Indian Council for Social Science Research, Indian
Chemical Society and similar engineering academies. The need for having separate bench mark for
professional and subject agencies was also emphasized for having a foolproof and realistic
assessment procedure. Lastly, it was also suggested that annual student satisfaction survey could
also be included, thereby giving accreditation a proper weightage.
3.11 Committee’s interaction with the Chairman, NBA and Director, NAAC enabled it to have an
idea about the working experience at ground level of the two accreditation agencies. Chairman,
NBA outlined the process of assessment of every programme undertaken by a three member expert
team, drawn from a panel of eminent professors, academicians and researchers from IITs,
Universities, Government Engineering Colleges. After a visit of three days, examining all aspects of
programme like organization, academic, teaching-learning process, research content etc. and on a
programme being given 75 per cent marks, it was accredited for five years. For a programme
getting 60 per cent marks, provisional accreditation for two years was given. This had to be finally
certified by the Standing Engineering Evaluation Committee. Appellate mechanism also existed for
institutions not satisfied with the accreditation grading.
3.12 W elcoming the proposed legislation, specially in the present era of globalization, the
Chairman, NBA was of the view that in the initial years, involvement of Government agencies was
essential for the quality assurance of programmes. Another suggestion put forth before the
Committee was that on the pattern of regional offices of AICTE, working domain of NBA could
be expanded by having regional offices.
3.13 Director, NAAC referring to the mandate of NAAC of doing institutional accreditation,
highlighted its accreditation procedure, a combination of self-assessment followed by external peer
review modeled on international standards of 5000 institutions. This exercise of NAAC was having
the support of a well-organized structure and was a mix of innovative and new methodologies, new
protocols and new indicators which were being constantly renewed. NAAC had the support of
around 3000 assessors comprising of Vice-Chancellors, directors, deans, principals, senior
academicians, scientists from institutions of national importance. Not only this, these experts were
fully trained as per the international accreditation demands. It was emphasized that the activities of
NAAC were transparent, available on the website for all concerned. Committee’s attention was also
drawn to international linkages developed by NAAC with 12 countries.
3.14 Committee was also given to understand that experience and expertise of NAAC having
covered more than 5000 institutional including Central Universities, Deemed Universities, medical/
dental colleges, law departments, ordinary management courses, science colleges was much more
than international accreditation bodies which had touched a maximum of only 400 institutions. It
was also informed that through the Internal Quality Assurance Cell of NAAC, 28 States had
established State-level quality assurance cells.

7
3.15 In view of the above, it was strongly advocated that as all the functions as envisaged in
the Bill already being carried out by NAAC, the only exception being giving recognition to agencies,
it was fully equipped to carry out the mandate of Accreditation Authority. However, this proposal
of NAAC was not considered to be a feasible proposition by NBA. It was pointed out that one
single body cannot be the regulator as well as the accreditation agency. It was thereupon clarified
by Director, NAAC that it needed to be transformed into a regulatory authority.
3.16 Committee’s intensive deliberations with NBA and NAAC, the only two existing
agencies involved in the assessment and accreditation of various programmes and
institutions across the country has revealed the crucial role being played by these agencies.
The Committee is aware that with the enactment of the proposed legislation, assessment
and accreditation process is set to become mandatory for the fast growing higher education
sector in the country. In such a scenario, both NBA and NAAC with their vast experience
and expertise, at both national and international level can play a very constructive role. The
Committee, accordingly, is of the view that both these agencies not only should be fully
involved in carrying out the objectives of the Bill but should also act as the guide, mentor
and advisor for the large number of accreditation agencies proposed to be set up across the
country. The Committee would appreciate if all conceivable guidance from NBA and NAAC
is made available to each and every accreditation agency. In the formulation of rules/
regulations also, these two agencies can contribute a lot. The Committee hopes that the
Department would play a pro-active role in this regard.
3.17 Committee’s deliberations would have remained incomplete without the views of
stakeholders representing private sector. The Committee, accordingly, held an exclusive session
with the representatives of the Education Promotion Society for India, Indian Council of
Universities and also Prof. K.K. Aggarwal, Chancellor, Lingaya’s University and former Vice-
Chancellor, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, New Delhi. The Committee was informed
that the institutions representing the Society had undergone both national and international
accreditation. Besides NBA and NAAC at the national level, British accreditation through the
Institute of Engineering Technology and American accreditation through the American Board of
Engineering and Technology was cited as their international exposure. Doubts were, however,
raised about the viability of making accreditation mandatory for all the universities and colleges.
Mandatory condition of accreditation was considered to be an unrealistic and unnecessary
provision, creating hardships for institutions. The other area of concern was linkage of non-
adherence of mandatory accreditation with punishment of imprisonment. This was considered to be
a very drastic provision. Instead, it was suggested that a positive approach like offering of
incentives to institutions opting for accreditation was required. Incentives like recognition, financial
assistance, giving of certificates, only accredited institutions being invited for conferences/seminars
etc. were cited as the likely incentives. Punishment was not considered the right approach. It was
also pointed out that composition of the regulatory authority was required to be made more broad-
based representing various disciplines, States etc.
3.18 Another pertinent issue raised by the Society was the need for keeping the Government
away from the accreditation exercise. It was suggested that like in USA, only professional bodies
should be involved. It was pointed out that for becoming a signatory to Washington Accord,
accreditation process was to be independent and without the control of the Government. This
was upheld by the Knowledge Commission also. Lastly, instead of punishing non-accredited
institutions, giving publicity to their non-accreditation status was considered to be the right
approach. It was contended that with more and more students opting for accredited institutions,
a situation would be reached when institutions would be compelled to get accredited, thereby
improving their infrastructure, teaching-learning process and ultimately benefitting the student
community.

8
3.19 Besides raising the issue of constitutional validity of the Bill, serious reservations about the
penalty provisions, specially those relating to imprisonment were expressed by the representative of
the Indian Council of Universities. It was pointed out that some alternative mechanism needed to
be adopted, otherwise promoters of higher education were likely to be discouraged. Number of
legislative proposals for setting up multiple bodies and multiple laws was not considered
appropriate. Rightful course as suggested by the Council was to have one apex body for education.
3.20 V ery strong objections were raised about the role of the private sector credit- raising
agencies proposed to be involved in the accreditation process in the Bill by the representative of
the Society. It was pointed out that such agencies lacked experience in education and without the
involvement of educationists, accreditation process could not be considered satisfactory. It was,
accordingly, suggested that participation of FICCI, CII, ASSOCHAM could be considered, because
of these bodies being aware about the expectation of recruiters. In addition, professional bodies of
academicians in economics, in social sciences, in psychology, in management, in pharmacy, in
engineering etc. could easily be involved in the accreditation process.
3.21 Sharing his experience of working for both Government and private institutions, Prof. K.K.
Agarwal, Chancellor, Lingaya’s University, apprised the Committee that the two existing
accreditation agencies in the country could achieve only 20 per cent of the target. Lack of speed
and professionalism required for accreditation of such a fast expanding higher education sector was
cited as the main factor responsible for that. He endorsed the setting up of the Regulatory Authority
which itself would not accredit but would be involved in registration of accreditation agencies
which would expedite the process ultimately. It was also suggested by him that instead of having
fly-by-night agencies, involvement of professional institutions like Institution of Engineers,
Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers, Computer Society of India, Institution
of Chemical Engineers which had proved their association with higher education system in the
country for several decades could be considered. Similarly, Chambers/Associations like CII,
ASSOHAM, NASSCOM, FICCI, PHD Chambers could be very befitting accreditation agencies.
3.22 Another g rey area pointed out by Prof. Agrawal was that approval agencies and
accreditation agencies would have to be different and on different parameters. The parameters of
approval and accreditation should be well-defined and needed to be kept separate.
3.23 It was also felt that human interaction needed to be avoided in the accreditation process
by having the student feedback, graduates feedback etc. online. Keeping agriculture education out
of the purview of the Bill was not considered appropriate as it was an umbrella legislation for
accreditation of all categories of higher educational institutions. Lastly, the Committee was
cautioned about accreditation being envisaged even before the start of the admission process. It
was pointed out that when a college or a university was set up, it was on premises and
assumptions, and accreditation at that point of time would rather be counter-productive.
Accreditation should be insisted upon only after two batches had graduated so as to have realistic
parameters for monitoring, Certification of accreditation agencies for ten years was not considered
appropriate. It was suggested that initially, this certification could be for two-three years and based
on the experience gained in the implementation of the Act, this certification period could be
enhanced. It was emphasized that accreditation process should be independent of the Government
as being done internationally.
3.24 The Committee takes note of very valuable suggestions made by the associations/
experts representing private sector in higher education. The Committee is of the view that
role of professional bodies, financial bodies and premier institutions in the accreditation
process as highlighted by these associations is worth consideration and needs to be
incorporated in the Act/rules regulations to be made thereunder. Similarly, all
apprehensions about mandatory accreditation need to be addressed appropriately. The

9
Committee also finds merit in the contention on accreditation process to start only after
two batches had graduated from institutions after being established. Registration of
accreditation agencies only for two-three years initially is also a very practical and sound
advice.
3.25 The Committee agrees with the intent of the Bill which is aimed at raising the
quality of higher education. The Committee also understands that the higher education
system in India is an expanding one with huge disparities among the institutions, norms and
standards for judging academic quality for various disciplines being different, vast difference
of infrastructure facilities between public and private institutions. In this context, the
Committee welcomes that proposed legislation which seeks to set benchmarks/parameters
on which an academic credentials of an institution would not only be assessed but accredited
also, thus raising the overall quality of higher education and standards of higher educational
institutions.
IV. CONSTITUTIONAL V ALIDITY OF THE BILL
4.1 During the course of deliberations, Committee’s attention was drawn towards the Issue of
constitutional validity of the proposed legislation by the Indian Council of Universities. According
to the Council, Parliament was categorically debarred by the Constitution to enact a law for
regulation of universities because the subject regulation of universities’ was specifically excluded
from the legislative powers of Parliament vide Entry 44 of Union List and Entry 32 of the State
List. Entry 44 of Union List reads:- “incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations,
whether trading or not with  objects not confined to one state, but not including Universities.”
Entry 32 of State List reads:-  “incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other
than those  specified in List I  and universities, unincorporated trading, literacy, scientific, religious
and other societies and associations, co-operative societies”.
4.2 It was contended that two entries namely Entry 25 of the Concurrent List and Entry 66
of the Union List were generally referred to justify the power of the Parliament to make law on
matters concerning education. Entry 25 of the concurrent list reads “Education, including
technical education, medical education and universities, subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64,
65 and 66  of List I , vocational and technical training of labour” and Entry 66 of Union List
reads” co-ordination and determination of standards  in institutions for higher education or research
and scientific and technical institutions.”  Thus, inspite of education being a concurrent subject,
power to regulate universities still could not be exercised by Parliament because of Entry 44 which
categorically excluded ‘universities’ from its purview and Entry 66 of Union List gave only a
limited jurisdiction to legislate only for co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions
of higher education.
4.3 When this issue was taken up with the Department, the following clarification was given:-
“This Ministry does not agree that the National Accr editation Regulation Authority for
Higher Educational Institutions, (NARA) Bill, 2010 is unconstitutional.
The Bill has been introduced in Parliament only after examining its constitutionality and
was drafted in consultation with the Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Legislative Department).
The competence of Parliament to legislate on matters concerning coordination and
determination of standards of higher education and research lies with Parliament, by virtue of
Entry 66  of List I (Union List) of the 7
th Schedule of the Constitution. It may be pertinent to
mention that this Entry has remained in the Union List ever since the Constitution came into force
on 26
th January, 1950 and no constitutional amendment transferring this Entry from any other List

10
has ever taken place. The reference about the transfer of education to the Concurrent List from
the State List under the 42nd Amendment r efers to the present Entry 25  in the Concurrent List and
the earlier Entry No.11 in the State List. The said Entry 25 in the Concurrent List reads as under:
“Education including technical education, medical education and universities, subject to the
provision of Entry 63, 64, 65, 66  of List I .”
Therefore, the exercise of powers in respect of any matter concerning education is subject
to the provision of any law made under Entry 66  of List 1 . This has been upheld by the Supreme
Court in various judgments. Reference is made to the first such judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the matter of “Gujarat University Ahmedabad” Vs Krishna Ranganath Mudgaonkar and
others (1963) SCR 112  wherein it was clearly laid down by the Supreme Court that any legislation
made by virtue of the then Entry 11  in the State List would have to yield to any legislation made
under Entry 66 or any regulation made by a body so created under Entry 66 .
The present Bill seeks to establish a regulatory authority to register, monitor and audit the
functioning of accreditation agencies who would be invested with the responsibility of accrediting
higher educational institutions including universities, colleges, institutes, institutions of national
importance and programmes conducted therein. It is, therefore, squarely in the domain of Entry 66
of list I , i.e. “Determination of standards of higher education and research.”
It may also be mentioned that even Universities established by State Legislatures can be
regulated by University Grant commission (UGC) which has been created to sub-serve the purposes
of the said Entry 66.  By way of example, while State Legislatures are competent to establish,
regulated and wind up universities under item 32  of the State List, Supreme Court has upheld that
competence of the UGC to regulate private universities established by State Legislatures in
discharge of the Commission’ s responsibility to coordinate university education [Yashpal & Anr. Vs
State Chhattisgarh & Ors.] AIR 2003.
This comment of ICU is devoid of any merit since after the 42
nd amendment to the
Constitution, the universities and technical and professional educational institutions have been
incorporated in entry 25 of list II and therefore, Parliament has concurrent powers of legislation.
It is also the established position of law that in case of concurrent powers over a particular
subject, if any state law is in conflict with a legislation enacted by Parliament, the State law to
that extent shall be void. Entry 44  is an Entry which empowers the Central Government to
incorporate, regulate and wind up corporations. It does not in any way clash with entry 25  of list
III. The exclusion of universities in entry 44  is only to the extent of subject covered by that
particular entry and does not overwrite entry 25  of list III. Entry 63  of List I again has been
misinterpreted by ICU. This entry was inserted so as to ensure that the three universities established
in pursuance of Article 371E remain within the purview of Central Government for reasons of their
existence before independence and also due to the reason that they are institutions of National
Importance.
In view of the foregoing, the Ministry does not agree with the contention that the National
Accreditation Regulation Authority for Higher Educational Institutions, (NARA) Bill, 2010 is
unconstitutional.”
4.4 The Committee is of the view that reservation of the Indian Council of  Universities
about the constitutional validity of the proposed legislation does not seem to be well placed.
As pointed out by the Department, after insertion of Entry  25 in List III, Parliament is
fully competent to legislate on matters relating to higher education including universities.
One must also not forget that the enactment of a  legislation proposing setting up a
regulatory authority for assessment and accreditation by various agencies is necessary to

11
maintain the  standards of higher  education within the country as well to protect the interest
of students. Assessment and accreditation are the effective means of quality assurance in
higher education  the world over. Having such a mandatory system would go a long way in
facilitating credible information about institutions and in the process assisting student
mobility across institutions, domestic as well as international. In such a scenario, education
being in the Concurrent List, initiative taken by the Department for formulation of a
Central Law aimed at ensuring the quality of higher education should be considered a
welcome step by all concerned.
V. GENERAL ISSUES
Separate Accreditation Procedure/Mechanism for Medical Institutions
5.1 As medical educational institutions were also sought to be covered within the ambit of the
term “higher educational institution” the Committee decided to seek the views of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare and the MCI on the Bill.
5.2 The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, while deposing before the Committee
on 20 June, 2011 informed that there did not exist any assessment and accreditation mechanism
in respect of medical institutions in the country at present. The concept of accreditation was linked
with quality improvement and was, therefore, desirable. At the same time, Committee was also
given to understand that in the case of health education, there was a specific need for continuous
assessment and validation of the institutions offering courses in various disciplines of health,
independent of their accreditation. Every medical college also had an attached hospital and it was
essential that the standards of hospital care were measured as also the standards of teaching.
5.3 On a specific query about the applicability of the proposed legislation on the medical
institutions, the Committee was informed that initially, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had
opined that the education relating to medicine and inter-related fields should be kept outside the
purview of National Assessment and Accreditation Authority. Later, at the time of discussion on the
National Commission for Higher Education and Research and National Commission for Human
Resources for Health, Ministry had agreed that the power to accredit health educational institutions
may remain with a unified accreditation body i.e. the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority
(NARA).
5.4 Committee’s attention was, however, drawn to the following suggestions/concerns of the
Ministry:-
– the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee (NEAC) envisaged under NCHRH
would specify standards, norms and process of evaluation and assessment of institutions
imparting health education and programmes conducted therein. It would also monitor the
functioning of agencies recommended by NCHRH from among the agencies registered
under NARA;
– evaluation and assessment by NEAC would be in consonance with the objectives of the
national health policy and would form a part of the action plan for implementation of
such a policy by NCHRH.
– in the case of health education, there in a need for continuous assessment and validation
of the institutions offering various disciplines of health, independent of their
accreditation under NARA;
– no health institution can be permitted to start any programme without assessment and
evaluation, both in terms of quality and infrastructure by an independent agency;

12
– accreditation process of a health institution can start only after two or three sessions
having been completed; and
– existing statutory regulatory authorities like MCI, DCI and INC would continue to
regulate the irrespective streams in health education and set the norms and standards for
evaluation and assessment of health institutions in their respective fields.
From the above, it is clear that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is of the view
that it would be the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee (NEAC) that would provide the
tools to NARA by specifying standards, norms and process of evaluation and assessment of
institutions imparting health education and programmes conducted therein.
5.5. The Committee observes that medical and health institutions are totally different
from technical institutions, law colleges or other management colleges. Different tools and
techniques are employed to assess and evaluate a medical institution. Therefore, chances of
overlapping and conflict of interests are very much there if the provisions of the proposed
Bill are not properly laid down. The Committee finds that currently, MCI is evaluating and
assessing medical colleges and the Bill also proposes “laying down norms and policies for
assessment of academic quality.” The word assessment could lead to conflict which requires
rethinking. The Committee also takes note of reservation of the Ministry on inclusion of
AIIMS, PGI and JIPMER under the ambit of the Bill. As rightly pointed out by it, they are
the centres of excellence created by the Acts of Parliament and have been kept out of the
purview of even MCI.
5.6 The Committee observes that accreditation of medical education programmes in
developed countries like USA and UK is done by independent accreditation authorities meant
for accreditation/assessment of medical programmes alone. In USA, the accreditation of
programmes leading to the M.D. degree is determined solely by the Liaison Committee on
Medical Education and accreditation of post M.D. medical training programmes is the
responsibility of the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. Likewise, in UK,
the education, professional engagement and quality assurance in health care delivery is
assured by the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence through the Health Profession
and Care Council. The Committee also finds that in both these countries, there is a
separate set up for setting standards of accreditation, recognition of specific accreditation
agencies and eligibility and certification process for Higher Educational Institutions.
5.7 The Committee finds merit in the concerns expressed by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare. The Committee is of the view that the power to accredit a health
educational institution may remain with the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority.
However, the Committee is inclined to agree with the stand of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare about the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee as envisaged
under the National Commission for Human Resources in Health being empowered to specify
standards, norms and process of evaluation and assessment of medical institutions and their
programmes and also monitor the functioning of agencies recommended by NCHRH from
among the agencies registered under NARA. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
specific provisions in the context of medical institutions need to be included in the Bill so
as to take care of specialized nature of medical education and also avoid all aspects of
overlapping and conflict of interests.
Status of Statutory regulatory bodies like UGC, AICTE, Council of Architecture, IGNOU,
MCI, DCI, NCI etc. once this Bill is enacted.
5.8 One of the issues that came up for discussion during the deliberations on the Bill was the
status of some of the regulatory bodies once an overarching body i.e. National Assessment and

13
Accreditation Authority came into being. AICTE was of the view that the proposal would not affect
the position of these regulatory bodies while NAAC opined that these bodies were expected to be
subsumed under the new body i.e. NCHER. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare also
envisaged subsuming of MCI, DCI etc. under its over arching regulatory body for health sector
viz NCHRH with a dual purpose of reforming the current regulatory framework and enhancing the
supply of skilled manpower in health sector.
5.9 On being enquired from the Department on the issue, it replied as under :-
“Statutory functioning of such bodies is not being curtailed or interfered with as such
bodies lay down standards of academic quality as mandated by respective acts. This Act
recognizes the role of the statutory regulatory bodies such as the UGC, AICTE, and
Architecture Council etc. for setting of academic standards in respective fields. A provision
has been incorporated in the proposed legislation that standards of academic quality shall
be as specified by regulations made by the appropriate statutory regulatory Body.
Consequently the regulation of the appropriate Statutory Body would prevail in matters
concerning academic quality. The role of the accrediting agencies would be to accredit the
HE institutions against such academic norms and standards as are laid down by the
Statutory regulatory authorities. Regulation of quality and standards of higher education is
different from the regulation of the quality and standards in respect of processes of
accreditation in order to assess and measure quantity and standards of higher education.
Mandatory accreditation would require multiple agencies. Since accreditation of higher
educational agencies is a developing field, there is scope for establishing, strengthening and
developing organizations with the wherewithal to take up accreditation in due course of
time. State Governments/other regulatory bodies may also establish such agencies. NAAC,
NBA, MCI, DCI, NCI and COA etc. could not only become themselves accreditation
agencies, but could provide the core personnel for the proposed Authority as well. It is also
expected that a number of professional associations such as the Institute of Chartered
Accountants/Institute of Cost and Work Accountants/Council of Architecture and similar
other bodies and non statutory councils (the ICHR, ICPR, ICSSR etc) may enter the field
of accreditation in related sectors.”
5.10 The Committee finds the above response of the Department somewhat contradictory.
While on the one side it has been clarified that UGC, AICTE, COA ar e the statutory bodies
assigned the role of prescribing academic standards in their respective fields, it has also
been suggested that bodies like MCI, DCI, INC, COA etc. could themselves become the
accreditation agencies. The Committee would like to point out that statutory bodies like
UGC, AICTE, COA and MCI, DCI, INC dealing with specialized field of medical education
have a separate role of setting the standards for approval and ensuring their adherence by
the concerned institutions. Accreditation agencies will be concerned with the accreditation of
duly recognized and approved institutions. Approval and accreditation are two distinct
exercises and need to be handled by different entities. However, bodies like NBA, NAAC,
Institute of Chartered Accountants/Institute of Cost and Work Accountants, ICHR, ICPR
and ICSSR etc. can very well become accreditation agencies.
Converting NAAC into the proposed National Assessment and Accreditation Authority.
5.11 A strong case for converting NAAC into the proposed National Assessment and
Accreditation Authority (NARA) was made out during the deliberations. It was observed that NAAC
through its institutional assessment and accreditation work had created awareness in the minds of
the people that standards of higher education have to be enhanced. NAAC had been able to
convince the academicians and stakeholders in the country about the importance of accreditation

14
by following the policy of self-assessment and external peer review as per the international standard
for assessment and accreditation of institutions. With its robust organizational structure, NAAC had
developed new methodologies, protocols and indicators based on national consultative meetings,
workshops and international gatherings. It had a well established procedure also. The success of
NAAC was because of its peers, a collegium of 3000 assessors which included academicians, vice-
chancellors, directors, deans, principals, scientists etc. It was contended that almost all the
functions proposed in the Bill were being carried out by NAAC except giving recognition to
agencies.
5.12 The Department’s reply on the issue was that “NAAC and NBA were autonomous bodies,
“however, they are not and cannot have statutor y authority and status until created by legislation.
Moreover, the way things are visualized in the Bill, these bodies may continue to function as
accreditation agencies but in their new avatar as accreditation agencies registered and authorized
by the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority (NARA) the National Accreditation Regulatory
Authority will be a creature of the impending legislation and mere conversion of an existing
accreditation body may not serve the objectives proposed for NARA.”
5.13 It was further contended that while some experts in accreditation from NAAC and NBA
may be taken on board in the Authority, both NAAC and NBA would continue to function as
accreditation agencies after obtaining certificates of registration from the authority under the Act.
The expertise gained by NAAC and NBA would be crucial during this transition period and
converting them into the Regulatory Authority may not serve the useful purpose.
5.14 The Committee agreeing with the view point of the Department would like to point
out that the professional expertise and vast experience of these two bodies should be
gainfully utilized in every conceivable aspect in the implementation of the proposed
legislation on its being enacted. Both NBA and NAAC can lay down the norms and
guidelines to be followed by the new accreditation agencies and also play the role of mentor
for them.
VI. The Committee makes the following observations/recommendations on some of the
provisions of the Bill.
Clause 2 : Application of Act
6.1 Clause 2 dealing with the application of the Act reads as follows:-
“This Act shall apply to all higher educational institutions other than the higher
educational institutions engaged mainly in agricultural education and research and the
programmes of study conducted therein.”
6.2 The Department has justified the exclusion of agricultural education and research from the
purview of the Bill on the ground that the constitutional mandate puts agriculture education in the
sphere of the State legislature. According to the Department, Item 14 of List II (State List) of the
Constitution which reads “Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, Protection
against pests and prevention of plant diseases” is self-explanatory and the subject of agricultural
education falls in the domain of the State List. It has further contended that Parliament can legislate
on agricultural education only in accordance with the provisions of clause 1 of Article 249 of the
Constitution.
6.3 The Committee would like to point out that the Bill is basically designed to improve
the quality of all higher educational institutions in all the disciplines of higher education
and for that purpose seeks to create a national authority for assessment and accreditation
and setting up of accreditation agencies. Not only Central Universities but also Deemed

15
Universities/premier institutions, private universities/institutions, state universities/
institutions, all IITs/IIMs/NITs etc. are proposed to be covered under the proposed
legislation In other words, it would be an umbrella Bill for accreditation, thereby proving
to be an effective means of quality assurance in higher education sector in the country. In
such a scenario, exclusion of agricultural education and research from the mandatory
process of accreditation can be termed as discriminatory from the point of view of
protection of student interests. The Committee fails to understand the justification for
students opting for agricultural education being deprived of the benefits of mandatory
accreditation as proposed for other streams of education. It is for the Government to find
a way out. The Department should, therefore, take the initiative for coverage of
agricultural education under mandatory accreditation by initiating the exercise of bringing
in the legislation on agricultural education in accordance with the provisions of Article 249
of the Constitution.
VII. CLAUSE 3 : DEFINITIONS
7.1 Clause 3(1) (d) of the Bill defines “appropriate statutory regulatory authority” as:-
“any regulatory authority established under any law for the time being in force, for co-
ordinating or determining or maintaining the standards of higher education.”
7.2 On a specific query regarding reference of existing statutory authorities, such as AICTE
which was a nodal regulatory authority for technical education, missing from the proposed Bill, the
Department clarified that the definition contained in clause 3(1) (d) of the term “appropriate
statutory regulatory authority” read with the definition of “accreditation” in clause 3(1) (b) had a
very wide amplitude and included AICTE and other statutory regulatory authorities not expressly
mentioned. The Committee accepts the clarification given by the Department.
7.3 Clause 3 (1) (j) defines “degree” as “any such degree, as may, with the previous approval
of the Central Government, be specified in this behalf by the University Grants Commission by
notification in the Official Gazette, under section 22  of the University Grants Commission Act,
1956.”
7.4 Keeping in view the proposed coverage of medical institutions under the Bill, the Committee
specifically enquired from the Department regarding mention of nodal Acts dealing with the medical
education, dental education, nursing education etc. It was clarified that in so far the term ‘degree’
was concerned even in respect of degrees such as MBBS/BDS coming under the purview of MCI/
DCI, the nomenclature was governed by section 22 of the UGC Act, 1956. Thus, there was no
conflict with the provisions contained in the Acts of such legislative bodies. The Committee
agrees with the clarification given by the Department.
VIII. Clause 4 : Accreditation to be mandatory
8.1 Clause 4 provides for mandatory accreditation for all higher educational institutions and
every programme conducted therein. It reads as follows:-
“Every higher educational institution and every programme conducted therein shall be
accredited in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made
thereunder and assessment of such accreditation shall be made before such institution starts
the process of admission to such programme;
Provided that a higher educational institution (other than a higher educational institution
engaged mainly in medical education) existing before the commencement of this Act, shall
within a period of three years from the date of commencement, make an application to an

16
accreditation agency for accreditation of such institution or programme conducted therein
under this Act;
Provided further that a higher educational institution engaged mainly in medical education
and existing before the commencement of this Act, shall within a period of jive years from
the date of such commencement, make an application to an accreditation agency for
accreditation of such institution or programme conducted therein under this Act;
Provided also that the accreditation agency, to whom such application for accreditation has
been made by such higher educational institution, shall, within a period of one hundred and
eighty days from the date of such application, undertake and complete accreditation under
this Act;
Provided also that the higher educational institution which has been accredited before the
commencement of this Act by an agency set up by or under any law for the time being in
force, shall be deemed to be accredited under this Act for the period of accreditation by
such agency;
Provided also that in case the higher educational institutions referred to in the first or
second proviso fails, to, make an application for accreditation or obtain accreditation of
such institution or programme conducted therein, within the specified period, such institution
shall, without prejudice to any action that may be initiated by the appropriate statutory
regulatory authority or proceedings under any law for the time bring in force be liable for
penalty under section 41 of this Act.”
8.2 It was pointed out by the Department that the present system of accreditation or the quality
assurance system in higher education scheme was optional and not mandatory. As a result, many
sub-standard institutions had been enrolling students and continuing their operation even on
detection of poor quality on the plea of protection of student interest. Therefore, it was felt that
a transparent prior assessment and periodical accreditation would be a desirable approach for
maintenance of standards in higher education and also for protecting the interests of students and
other stakeholders. Accordingly, an a-priori assessment and accreditation has been proposed. It
was pointed out that nearly 540 universities and over 31,000 colleges existing currently would be
accredited under the proposed Bill within a reasonable period of three years. An extended period
of five years has been provided for medical institutions.
8.3 The Committee noted that two important policy decisions were being effected through the
proposed provision i.e. mandatory accreditation and accreditation even before an institution had
started its admission procedure. The Committee received mixed responses from the stakeholders on
both the issues. While the Government institutions i.e. AICTE, NAAC, NBA and the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare supported the idea of mandatory accreditation, associations/bodies
representing private institutions such as the Education Promotion Society for India and the Indian
Council of Universities were opposed to the entire provision for mandatory accreditation saying that
it would be unrealistic and impractical and would lead to many difficulties. They also opposed the
provision on the ground that stringent punishment/penalties had been proposed in the provision for
an activity which was more of a not-for-profit service.
8.4 Strong reservations were expressed by professional bodies dealing with regulation and
accreditation of universities/institutions and programmes on the proposal for accreditation before
start of the admission procedure issue. According to AICTE and NBA, no admission in a new
institution should be allowed unless the institution was accredited. In contrast, NAAC pointed out
that accreditation was different from recognition, affiliation, audit, quality control etc. It was a
performance evaluation of an HEI and its outcome. Therefore, in NAAC’s opinion, at least two
batches of students should have been graduated from the HEI before its becoming eligible for

17
accreditation. It was also pointed out by NAAC that the number of years for two batches of
students graduating varied for different streams of education like medical, commerce, yoga,
ayurveda, paramedical, management, dental, arts, science, engineering, technology etc.. Prof. K.K.
Aggarwal, Chanceller, Linagaya’s University and former Vice-Chancellor, Guru Gobind Singh
Indraprastha University, New Delhi, expressing strong reservations on the provision stated that
accrediting an institution before it had even started admissions would prove to be counter
productive as institutions would be seeking accreditation at any cost then. The Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare was also of the opinion that start-up health institutions could not be accredited
from day one.
8.5 The Committee observes that voluntary accreditation till now has proved to be very
ineffective with less than one-fifth of colleges and less than one-third of all universities
having obtained accreditation. Financial incentives by way of assistance for accreditation
as introduced by UGC have failed to attract the institutions to come forward for
accreditation. Shortage of faculty and lack of infrastructural facilities have also adversely
impacted the accreditation process. With the rapid expansion of higher education sector,
the situation is bound to deteriorate further. In such a scenario, the Committee strongly
feels that the mandatory nature of accreditation can alone prove to be effective. The
provision would enable an institution to get itself assessed on various parameters such as
academic quality, infrastructure, quality of teaching, learning and research, management
etc by the independent agencies on the norms and standards to be laid down by the
proposed National Assessment and Regulatory Authority. This may also lead to evolving of
uniform norms/benchmarks to which all institutions would be subjected to for assessment
and accreditation which in turn would immensely contribute to the total quality of
education.
8.6 The only area of concern for the Committee has been the provision that requires an
institution to obtain accreditation before it has even started the admission procedure. The
Committee feels that this particular aspect of the provision would lead to impractical and
unrealistic consequences. The Committee strongly feels that an institution cannot be
assessed for its quality unless a few batches/sessions have been completed. Views of experts/
bodies having the experience of accreditation exercise at the ground level in this regard
cannot be ignored. The Committee would also like to point out that to start a fresh
programme or an institution, the process of recognition/permission/affiliation needs to be
made more stringent, so that higher educational institutions can show case their quality
sustenance and enhancement initiatives more effectively during the process of accreditation.
The Committee therefore, recommends that the words “assessment for such accreditation
shall be made before such institution starts the process of admission to such programme
“be replaced by the words “assessment for such accreditation only after two batches of
students have passed out”.
8.7 The Committee further takes note of a situation where an institution which is being
assessed for accreditation after two batches of students have passed out, is not able to get
accreditation for justified reasons. For such cases, the Committee recommends that a viable
mechanism be devised whereby such an institution is given another opportunity to get itself
assessed again. This could be done by giving the institution a reasonable time period to
overcome all its shortcomings so that the interests of the students are safeguarded.
IX. Clause 7 : Qualification for appointment as Chairperson or other member
9.1 Clause 7 which specifies qualification for appointment as Chairperson or other Members
reads as under:-

18
“(1) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as the Chairperson, if such person-
(a) is not less than fifty-five years of age;
(b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate knowledge and experience of at
least twenty-five years in dealing with matters relating to higher education and research;
(c) is, or has been, a Vice Chancellor of any University, or a Head of an institution of
national importance.
(2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Member, if such person-
(a) is not less than fifty-five years of age;
(b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate knowledge and experience of at
least twenty-five years in higher education and research or legal matters.
(3) Out of the four members referred to in section 6, one each shall be chosen from
amongst-
(a) Professors in the field of medical education in any University or an institution of
national importance;
(b) Professors in the field of science or technology in any University or an institution of
national importance;
(c) Professors in the field of social sciences or humanities in any University or an
institution of national importance;
(d) persons having knowledge and experience in legal matters.”
9.2 According to the Department, the present configuration has been proposed to provide equal
representation to science/technology, social sciences, humanities and legal matters. The objective
has been to provide for an odd numbered body.
9.3 Stakeholders heard by the Committee had some reservations on the proposed composition
of the apex accreditation authority and qualification of its members. The Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare was of the view that it was restrictive to limit the appointment of a member from
medical education to a Professor from a University or an institution of national importance. It was
pointed out that many other streams like nursing, pharmacy, para-medics were covered under
health education and large number of institutions were imparting education in their respective fields.
It was, accordingly, suggested that it would be appropriate to have two members representing
health education in the Authority. Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU emphasized that there should be one
member representing exclusively the field of science as once science and technology were
mentioned together, technology was given maximum importance. Fundamental sciences were also
very important and real technology could be developed only on their promotion.
9.4 The five member Accreditation Regulatory Authority was considered to be restrictive by the
Education Promotion Society for India also. It was pointed out that the Authority should be a
broad-based body with 15-20 members representing all the areas, disciplines, States etc.
Appointment of members of the Authority by the Central Government was also objected. It was
suggested that professional bodies should be involved in the constitution of the Authority.
Committee’s attention was also drawn to the fact that humanities and social sciences were under-
represented by having a single member in the Authority, in spite of these disciplines having an over
representation in actual number of students, faculty and institution. Accordingly, two members
representing humanities and social sciences needed to be included in the Authority.

19
9.5 The Committee feels that concerns of different stakeholders about the composition
of the Accreditation Regulatory Authority merit serious consideration. The Committee is
also of the view that the proposed apex body is inadequately represented in terms of
number of members representing various streams, disciplines and State authorities.
Considering the fact that Indian higher educational system is one of the largest and still
expanding one with various institutions and disciplines, an expert body of five persons only
is grossly inadequate. The Committee is also inclined to agree with the observation of
NAAC that academics par excellence, with holistic understanding of the higher education
system in India and abroad with insight and experience, with quality assurance and
enhancement mechanisms as well as assessment and accreditation as members instead of
subject specialists need to be represented in the Authority.
9.6 Not only this, the Committee observes that this small body has been given a vast
mandate as enumerated in clause 16 which includes as many as 13 powers and functions
with some of the crucial powers indicated below:
– to regulate accreditation agencies;
– to lay down norms and policies for assessment of academic quality in higher
educational institutions and programmes;
– to undertake periodical reviews and audit;
– to specify and monitor standards on selection and training of experts;
– to monitor adherence to such norms, guidelines and standards of academic quality
as specified by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority in higher
educational institutions.
With such manifold functions entrusted to the Authority, with possibility of addition of more
functions as indicated in the enabling sub-clause (n) of clause 16(2), it leaves no doubt that
it would be practically impossible for a small body to shoulder the crucial responsibilities.
The Committee would like to point out that engagement of experts by the Authority as per
clause 17 will also fail to facilitate its functioning in the real sense.
9.7 The Committee also observes that in the United States, a federal Committee of 18
members called the National Advisory Committee on Institutional Quality and Integrity is
the advisory body to the US Secretary of Education on setting standards of accreditation,
recognition of specific accrediting agencies and eligibility and certification process for
Higher Educational Institutions. Australia has a centralized national accreditation body,
Australian University Quality Agency which has as members, the education ministers of all
the States/Territories. Thus, the international scenario also indicates that the Accreditation
Regulatory Authority needs to be a broad-based body. The Committee recommends that the
National Accreditation Regulatory Authority has to be a bigger body so as to reflect all the
stakeholders representing diverse fields and in consonance with the vast mandate entrusted
to it. The Committee would like the Department to expand the strength of the Authority
by having additional members as suggested above by different stakeholders. Composition of
the Authority as given in clause 7 may be modified accordingly.
X. Clause 8 : Selection Committee
10.1 Clause 8 which provides for a Selection Committee reads as follows:-
“(1) The Chairman and other Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the Central
Government from a panel of names recommended by a Selection Committee consisting of-

20
(a) Cabinet Secr etary........Chairperson:
(b) Secretary in charge of higher education in the Ministry of Human Resource Development
of the Government of India......Member;
(c) an expert in the field of medical education.......Member;
(d) an expert in the field of agricultural education and research.......Member;
(e) an expert in the field of legal education.......Member;
(f) Chairman, University Grants Commission.......Member.”
10.2 According to the Department, while the Cabinet Secretary would be the Chairperson and the
Secretary in-charge of Higher Education, the member-convenor of the Selection Committee, all
other members (including Chairman, UGC) would be experts. As the administrative and logistic
requirements would need to be looked after by an administrative officer who shall assist the
Committee in that role, Secretary, Higher Education would be most appropriate. Medical education
will be represented by an expert member, in any case.
10.3 It was pointed out by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that the expert
member in the Selection Committee from the field of medical education should be
nominated by it. The Committee finds the suggestion of the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare logical. The Committee is also of the view that the Cabinet Secretary who would
be the Chairperson of the Selection Committee would essentially be the administrative
functionary of the Government and he mayor may not have the requisite academic
eminence. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that this prestigious panel of experts
should be headed by someone of academic eminence having great domain knowledge. The
Committee finds it rather surprising that in spite of agricultural education remaining
outside the purview of the Bill, an expert in the field of agricultural education and research
is proposed to be a member of the Selection Committee. However, the Committee would
have no objection to such an expert being made member of the Selection Committee in the
event of agricultural education being brought under the purview of the Bill. The Committee
also feels that it would have been appropriate if an expert in the field of social sciences/
humanities/science/technology is also appointed as a  member of the Selection Committee.
Composition of the Selection Committee as enumerated in clause 8 may, accordingly, be
modified.
XI. Clause 21 : Eligibility for registration as an accreditation agency
11.1 Clause 21 of the Bill which provides for the eligibility criteria and conditions for an
applicant to be registered as an accreditation agency reads as under:–
“No application for grant of a certificate of registration under section 20 shall be
considered by the Authority, unless the applicant satisfies the following conditions, namely:–
(a) the applicant is:–
(i) a company registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 or a society formed
and registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or a trust formed under the Indian
Trusts Act, 1882 or any other law for the time being in force;
(ii) such company, society or trust is formed or controlled by the Central Government or
a State Government or any authority or board or institution established under any Central
or State Act;
(b) the applicant is a non-profit organization;

21
(c) the applicant has, in its memorandum of association or in the trust deed, specified
accreditation of higher educational institutions as one of is main objects;
(d) the applicant has adequate infrastructure, to enable it to provide accreditation services
in accordance with the provisions of this Act or such infrastructure as may be specified by
regulations;
(e) the applicant and the promoters of the applicant, have professional competence,
financial soundness and general reputation of fairness and integrity to the satisfaction of
the Authority;
(f) the applicant, or its promoters or any member of the governing body of the applicant
or its promoter, is not involved in any legal proceeding connected with any higher
educational institution except in course of any accreditation proceedings carried out in
pursuance of the provisions of this Act and regulations made thereunder;
(g) the applicant, or its promoters, or any director or member, or trustee has, at any time
in the past, not been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude or any economic
offence;
(h) the applicant has, in its employment, persons having adequate professional and other
relevant experience to the satisfaction of the Authority;
(i) the applicant, or any person directly or indirectly connected with the applicant, has in
the past not been:
(i) refused by the Authority a certificate of registration under this Act; or
(ii) subjected to any proceedings for contravention of this Act or of rules or regulations
made thereunder or any other law for the time being in force;
(j) the applicant, in all other respects, is a fit and proper person for the grant of a
certificate;
(k) the applicant conforms to such other conditions as may be specified by regulations.”
11.2 According to the Department, it is not possible to make an assessment about the availability
of agencies other than those engaged at present in the process of accreditation and assessment,
namely, NAAC and NBA. The Bill provides scope for the organizations that may have the capacity
in terms of the eligibility prescribed therein, but may not be engaged in accreditation at present,
to be recognized as accreditation agencies for the purposes of the Bill. The eligibility criteria have
been consciously kept stringent in order to prevent run-of-the-mill organizations or fly by night
operators to take wrongful advantage. Hence the present provision of ‘discovery’ of competent
accreditation agencies was being proposed.
11.3 The Chairman, UGC justifying the provision stated that given a large number of institutions,
existing in the country, it was practically impossible for the two national level bodies i.e. NAAC
& NBA to carry out assessment and accreditation of all the institutions in a fixed time- frame and
therefore there was a need for multiple accreditation agencies. The Chairman, AICTE also stated
that because of less number of accreditation agencies, the entire process of accreditation took a
lot of time. Not only this, both the agencies had limited expert database leading to difficulties and
delays in the accreditation process. Welcoming all the provisions of the clause, the Chairman
AICTE suggested that periodic assessment of accreditation agencies may also be made a necessary
part of the Bill. He also stated that most stringent criteria should be laid down for these prospective
accreditation agencies as they would be setting benchmark standards of higher education
institutions. NAAC proposed that the registered agencies should be given a clear frame-work of

22
operation by considering various aspects such as subjects offered, number of institutions in State/
region etc. Prof K.K. Aggarwal suggested involvement of professional bodies in creating
accreditation agencies so that agencies had their own standing and credibility.
11.4 A number of pertinent issues/concerns were raised by the members of the Committee on
this particular clause of the Bill. These issues/concerns included:–
– number of multiple accreditation agencies that would be required;
– credibility and transparency of the accreditation agencies and the way to ensure that;
– kind of competition that is required to be fostered among the accreditation agencies to
improve their quality;
– multiple accreditation agencies are to be manned by peer groups and people of high
academic quality, what would be the functioning and funding part of these agencies and
how would the cost aspect be met since the Bill itself rules out profitability;
– there may be a situation where private institutions with better infrastructure facilities
may secure top ranking as compared to a public institution with no or less
infrastructure facilities but high academic credentials; and
– what would be the position when an institution seeks multiple accreditation from
multiple accreditation agencies and there is difference in the ratings given by the
accreditation agencies.
11.5 The Committee understands the need for quality based independent accreditation
agencies. However, at the same time, above concerns of the Committee are very crucial as
it is not clear how many agencies are required to be set up and what would be their
functioning mechanism i.e. whether they would be set up discipline-wise, programme-wise or
institution-wise. The Committee also agrees with the observation of the Chairman, AICTE
that there is a need to be careful in selecting an accreditation agency as it cannot be an
open-ended issue and also that the number of agencies based on quality and their own
assessment need to be limited. On the aforesaid concerns being taken up with the
Department, the following clarification was given:-
“companies registered under section 25 of the Company’s Act are not–for–profit
Companies. In order to ensure that the accreditation agencies do not indulge in
unfair practices, sufficient safeguards have been built into the Bill. Firstly, the
National Accreditation Regulatory Authority created under the Act will only grant a
certificate of registration to an agency if it is satisfying all the conditions as
mentioned in clause 20 and 21 of the proposed Bill. The registration can be
suspended/revoked in case of any default by an agency as provided under clause 27.
Secondly, as a matter of abundant caution clause 25 has been inserted, which
prohibits the accreditation agency to do certain thing. Clause 36 of the Bill also
provides for penalties and compensation for violating the code of ethics as prescribed
under clause 29. Clause 37 further provides that a penalty of rupees five lakhs can
be imposed if any agency violates any of the provisions of the Act. Thirdly, in order
also to ensure that the litigation related to accreditation etc. does not take a long
time thereby inconveniencing the educational institutions and students, the matters
related to penalties and compensation etc. will be adjudicated by the State and
National Educational Tribunals and not the regular courts. These and other
safeguards provided under the Bill ensure that no chance is afforded for anyone to
indulge in malpractices.”

23
The Committee, while appreciating the above clarification of the Department, still feels that
to the extent possible, totally private societies and trusts may be avoided in being appointed
as accreditation agencies as many private educational institutions may become such agencies
for self accreditation. The Committee, therefore, would like the Department to take note
of the above concerns and carry out appropriate modifications in the provisions of Act and
also rules/regulations to be made thereunder.
11.6 The Committee observes that evolving quality parameters for higher educational
institutions, that are so diverse in size, form, content, resources and age of institutions, is
the real challenge. The Committee strongly feels that genuine professional bodies
(academics and professional societies in various disciplines) should come forward with a
commitment to ensure quality higher education in the country. The Committee finds that
such a culture is not present in a major way in the country and this could give rise to
pseudo groups coming forward.
11.7 The Committee has been informed that the International Network for Quality
Assurance in Higher Education of which NAAC is a member has brought out “Guidelines
of Good Practice in Quality Assurance”. These guidelines are the work of quality assurance
agencies from over 65 countries dedicated to ensuring that students all over the world have
access to high quality education. The Committee is of the view that these guidelines which
are designed to be used by all Quality Assurance Agencies, whatever their stage of
development can be used as an additional input along with the eligibility criteria prescribed
for accreditation agencies.
XII. Clause 22 : Procedure for grant of certificate
12.1 Clause 22 of the Bill lays down the procedure for grant of certificate as under:–
“(1) The Authority shall, on receipt of the application under section 20 for grant of
certificate of registration, issue a public notice, in such form and manner as may be
specified by regulations, and place the application together with all documents received with
the application, for a period of sixty days from the date of issue of such public notice, on
the website of the Authority.
(2) Any person may, within a period of said sixty days referred to in sub-section (1),  submit
his comments or objections, if any, on the application or part thereof, to the Authority.
(3) The Authority may, within the period of sixty days referred to in sub-section (1),  require
the applicant to furnish such other information or clarification as it may consider necessary.
(4) The Authority may obtain the advice of such experts, as it deems fit, for the specific
purpose of evaluating the competency of the applicant.
(5) The applicant shall, within a period of seven days after making the application under
sub-section (1)  forward a copy of such application with other documents to all State
Governments.
(6) The State Governments shall, within a period of forty-five days after the receipt of the
copy of the application referred to in sub-section (5),  send its recommendations, if any, to
the Authority.
(7) The applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to submit his response on the comments
or objections received under sub-section (2)  or clarifications sought under sub-section (3)
or recommendation made by the State Government, if any, under sub-section (6):

24
Provided that such response shall be submitted within a period of thirty days from the
expiry of the period of sixty days referred to in sub-section (2).
(8) The Authority shall, before granting a certificate of registration under section 23,
conduct a public hearing, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, to consider
all comments or objections or clarifications or recommendations, if any, and the response
of the applicant thereto, including any other matter as the Authority may deem fit for such
consideration.”
12.2 According to the Department, the process for grant of certificate as an accreditation agency
had to be necessarily elaborate and transparent so that only the competent agencies applied for such
certificate and incompetent persons/agencies were discouraged and de-motivated. There was no
reason as to why competent and eligible agencies should find the transparent procedures to be de-
motivating as the Bill provided for reasonable time limits for each step in the procedure. It was
further submitted that in order to make the procedure for granting of certificates inflexible, the
same had been provided in the Bill, rather than being prescribed under rules.
12.3 AICTE and NBA both agreed that there was genuine requirement of most stringent criteria
being laid down for registering an agency as accreditation agency and transparency must be
maintained to remove all doubts. NAAC pointed out that international practices needed to be studied
in this regard.
12.4 Committee’s concern is that only genuine professional bodies should come  forward
to take the responsibility of accreditation agencies which would be in a position to perform
the assigned duties to carry out the academic audit of the higher  educational institutions
as mandated in the proposed legislation. The Committee observes that these accreditation
agencies are being brought into existence to  improve not only the quality of higher
education but also that of the institutions. The Committee would like the concept of
quality being made applicable to every  sphere of the higher education i.e. the faculty,
infrastructure, management, besides  course content, teacher student involvement etc.
Only then,  assessment and  accreditation can prove to be the effective means of quality
assurance in higher education sector. In this context, the Committee would further like
to add that the  methodology of procedure for grant of certificate of registration needs to
be made transparent and public and a reasonable time-frame for the entire process must
be fixed.
XIII. Clause 23 : Grant of certificate of registration
13.1 Clause 23 which provides for issue of certificate of registration reads as under:-
“(1) The Authority shall, as far as practicable within a period of six months from the
receipt of such application, after considering the comments or objections or clarifications
or recommendations under sub-section (8)  of section 22: -
(a) issue a certificate of registration as an accreditation agency, on such terms and
conditions as may be specified in such certificate, subject to the provisions of this Act and
rules and regulations made thereunder; or
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing if such application does not
conform to the provisions of this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder or the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force;
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given an
opportunity of being heard.

25
(2) The Authority shall, while issuing a certificate of registration, approve the documents
referred to in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (2)  of section 20 as such or with such
modifications, as it may deem fit, and thereupon the accreditation agency shall follow the
procedures and conditions so approved in the process of accreditation.
(3) The documents approved under sub-section (2)  shall be considered as an integral part
of the certificate of registration which shall not be modified or altered without the approval
of the Authority.
(4) The Authority may, if it so deems fit, in the certificate of registration granted to an
accreditation agency, limit the area or programme for which such accreditation agency may
exercise its duties and responsibilities of accreditation.
(5) A certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of ten years unless such
certificate is revoked earlier in accordance with the provisions of this Act.”
13.2 It was clarified by the Department that the time-frame of six months prescribed for granting
a certificate of registration to an accreditation agency was reasonably sufficient and would also
cover unforeseen circumstances and situations.
13.3 Stakeholders heard by the Committee had specific observations on this clause which
pertained to time-frame for grant of certificate and number of institutions to be accredited by one
agency. While AICTE considered the time-frame of six months realistic, NAAC desired for a
specific time-frame for grant of registration with well laid protocols. Both AICTE and NAAC
differed on the number of institutions to be accredited by one agency as AICTE opined that it need
not be specified, whereas NAAC thought that it would be better to specify maximum and minimum
number of institutions to be accredited in a given time-frame. Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare was of concerted view that restricting agency by territorial jurisdiction would harm
competitiveness among the agencies. Further, both NAAC and Prof. K.K. Aggarwal expressed the
view that in the beginning an accreditation agency should be certified for three-four years only and
on satisfactory performance, the term of certificate should be extended for ten years.
13.4 The Committee also feels that the time-frame for validity of certificate of
registration to an accrediting agency should be fixed specifically as longer duration may
defeat the very purpose of the objective of the Bill. Granting a certificate of registration
to an accreditation agency for a period of ten years is not reasonable, even though it is
understood that the authority would keep evaluating the performance on such terms and
conditions as specified in the certificate of registration. The Committee recommends that
initially the certificate may be granted for five years and thereafter it could be extended
to ten years. The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 23(5) may be amended
accordingly.
XIV . Clause 31 : Application to Authority on accreditation by accreditation agency
14.1 The clause gives the right to any person aggrieved by the accreditation decided by any
accreditation agency to apply to the Authority for withdrawal of such accreditation or its
modification.
14.2 The Committee finds the above provision to be vague as no details about the
procedure for withdrawal/modifications of accreditation by the Authority on a complaint
made by the aggrieved party have been given. Rule/Regulation making powers are also
silent on this issue. The Committee is of the view that a well-defined grievance redressal
mechanism needs to be in place so as to ensure complete transparency. Rich experience of
NBA and NAAC can prove to be very relevant and of great help in this regard.

26
XV. Clause 38 : Penalty for obstructing or impersonating an officer of Authority
15.1 This clause provides that if a person, without reasonable excuse, resists, obstructs or
attempts to obstruct, impersonate, threaten, intimidate or assault an officer of the Authority or any
person assigned to discharge any function, or in exercising his functions under the proposed
legislation, such person shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
15.2 The Committee observes that penalty proposed under this clause is for offences
which are too vague and general and are liable to be misused. No rules or regulations are
envisaged to be formulated which can prescribe the mechanism for giving effect to this
provision. Besides that, Committee’s attention has also been drawn by clause 44 where-
under no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or the rules
or regulations made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the Authority or any officer
or person authorized by it. Thus, no avenue of clarifying his position seems to be available
to the alleged offender. The Committee is also not aware whether any grievance redressal
mechanism is proposed to be established under the Act or rules/regulations. Chances are
there that there may be valid reasons for taking action as indicated in the clause on the
part of the alleged offender. In such a scenario, principle of natural justice is required to
be there. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that clause 38 may be suitably modified
so as to give an opportunity to the affected party to clarify its position.
XVI. Clause 41 : General provisions relating to offences and fine
16.1 This clause provides that if any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the
contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation or of any rules or regulations made
thereunder, for which no punishment is provided elsewhere in the proposed legislation, such person
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees or with both.
16.2 The Committee was informed that this was an enabling clause that may be used for
unforeseen offences and contraventions and was intended to be a deterrent generally. The
Committee would however, like to point out that the quantum of maximum penalty and
period of imprisonment has been proposed at a higher rate when compared with similar
provisions included in the Bill for specific violations and contraventions. Also, an element
of clarity and transparency also needs to be incorporated. The Committee fully supports the
stringent penal provisions for violation of education laws that protect and promote the
quality of education. However, at the same time, effective mechanism for judicious
enforcement of such provision also needs to be put in place so as to prevent any act of
arbitrariness. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that clause 41 may be suitably
modified and procedure for enforcement of this provision is prescribed through rules/
regulations/guidelines/directives.
XVII. Clause 43 : Offences by society, trust and institutions
17.1 This clause relates to offences committed by a society or trust or agency or institution.
Strong objections were raised to sub-clause (2) of this provision by some stakeholders. It was
pointed out that the Constitution provides special protection to the Government of States to such
an extent that any civil or criminal proceedings pending against a person before any court of law
before taking oath as the Governor of a State, were brought to a halt during the entire term of
his office. However, as per this provision, civil and criminal charges can be levelled against a
Governor of State and he can be put to jail. Most astonishing was the fact that he would be made

27
liable for an act or deed performed in good faith toward discharging of his duties by virtue of his
post of Governor.
17.2 This Committee is in agreement with the objections raised on clause 43(2) and
recommends that Governors should be kept outside the purview of this provision.
XVIII. Clause 45 : Adjudication of penalty
18.1 This Clause provides for adjudication of certain matters by the State Educational Tribunals
and the National Educational Tribunal. It provides that except as otherwise provided in the proposed
legislation, all matters under clause 36, including determination of compensation thereunder shall be
adjudicated by the State Educational Tribunal having jurisdiction. Sub-clause (2) provides that
except as otherwise provided in the proposed legislation, all matters under clause 37, including the
penalties leviable there under shall be adjudicated by the National Educational Tribunal.
18.2 The Committee observes that the Educational Tribunals Bill needs to be amended to
incorporate the provisions relating to adjudication powers given to National and State
Tribunals as mentioned in clauses 36 and 37. Necessary steps may, accordingly, be taken by
the Department in this regard.
XIX. Clause 49 : Power to exempt
19.1 Clause 49 of the Bill which empowers the Central Government to exempt any class or
classes of higher educational institutions from the provisions of the Bill reads as under:-
“If the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the interests
of the general public so to do or for advancement of knowledge, it may, by notification
and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, exempt any class or
classes of higher educational institutions from the operation of all or any of the provisions
of this Act and may, as often as may be necessary, revoke or modify such notification.”
19.2 The Department justified the provision by stating that higher education was unique in its
role in the creation of new knowledge/disciplines for which no standards of quality or statutory
authority may currently existed. It may take time for standards to be evolved and prescribed in
such cases. Therefore, it would be expedient in the public interest to exempt such disciplines/
emerging areas of knowledge at the intersection of disciplines from any or all provisions of the
present Bill.
19.3 It was further clarified that there may be HEIs which either at present, or in the future
served as examples by virtue of their reputation and standing for quality which may be far higher
than the minimum standards prescribed by the statutory regulatory authorities. Indeed a broad
purpose of accreditation was to motivate HEIs to obtain even greater heights in quality and the
proposed clause 49 was intended to be an incentive for attainment of high quality by HEIs.
However, such exemption was circumscribed by the conditionality to be specified in the notification
and was also not a carte-a-balanche as it could be revoked or modified at any time. The clause
was intended to be an incentive for attainment of high quality of HEIs. It was also mentioned that
every decision of the Central Government has to be a well-reasoned decision and subject to public
and parliamentary scrutiny.
19.4 The Committee noted that while the AICTE and the NBA were supportive of the provision,
NAAC and the Education Promotion Society for India raised objections. NAAC opined that all
higher educational institutions needed to be accredited while Education Promotion Society for India
and the Indian Council of Universities termed the provision contradictory, creating two classes of
institutions one that had been accredited and the other that had been exempted by the Department.

28
19.5 The Committee would like to point out that it is not clear for what reason,
prospective students should not get information on quality ratings of a certain class of
institutions. Even if provision of this clause is to be invoked only in exceptional/
circumstances, fact remains that in the absence of any specific criteria/norms/guidelines,
apprehensions are there that the influential persons/institutions may get exemption
certificates easily which would defeat the very purpose of the Bill. The Committee would
also like to point out that our premier institutions are also facing problem of shortage of
qualified and experienced faculty as well as absence of required infrastructure and other
facilities. To exempt such institutions from the proposed legislation will ultimately prove to
be counter-productive only. Therefore, this clause may either be dropped or qualified by
adding specific parameters/norms as to when the Central Government can use this
discretion under rules/regulations to be framed under the proposed legislation.
20. The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
21. The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
22. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amended
additions suggested by it.
23. The Committee would like the Department to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill.

29
To
Shri Oscar Fernandes Ji,
Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Room No. 141, First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi – 110001.
Sub: Observations on The National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher
Educational Institutions Bill, 2010.
Sir,
I do agree for the urgency of finalizing the report on this Bill to be presented in the
Parliament. However, issues raised by the stakeholders with regard to non-competence of the
Central Government in the matters of the universities and certain other concerns as such cannot
be ignored and do need consideration before concluding the observations of the Committee in this
matter.
As this meeting is for adoption of the draft report on this Bill, I would like to invite kind
attention of all the committee members on this matter and also request the Chairman to kindly make
note of the same in the draft report of the Committee on this bill.
1. Universities must be excluded from this Bill in adherence to Constitutional provisions
Subjects of incorporation, regulation and winding up of universities are excluded from the
powers of the Central Government in entry 44 of the Union List. All these subjects of universities
are mentioned in entry 32 of the State List. In view of these constitutional provisions, Central
Government is not competent to enact a law for university matters and thus inclusion of
universities in this Bill for mandatory accreditation is in violation of the constitutional provisions.
It is admissible that education falls under entry 25 in the Concurrent List and thus, both
the Central Government and State Government are empowered to make law on matters concerning
education. But due consideration of entry 44 in Union List and entry 32 in State List is also much
required. When incorporation, regulation and winding up of universities are specifically excluded
29
Pramod Kureel
Member of Parliament - Rajya Sabha
Member
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development Ph. : 09013181203, 09496836660
Consultative Committee of Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment E- mail: pramod.kureel@sansad.nic.in
Ref. No. MP/RS/2011/HRD/-3 Dated : 8/8/2011


30
from the Union List, applicability of this law framed by the Central Government cannot be extended
to any university, unless specifically included in the Union List.
Powers given to the Central Government under entry 66 in Union List for co-ordination and
determination of standards in institutions of higher education, scientific and technical education
cannot be misused to interfere with the powers of the State Government to legislate for matters
concerning universities, especially when the universities are straightway excluded from the law-
making subjects of the Central Government.
If we take note of the provision in this Bill relating to the applicability of this Act, it
provides for application of this Act to all the institutions of higher education other than engaged
in agricultural education and research. In case the Central Government has the power to make law
for any matter of education under Entry 25 in Concurrent List or power for coordination and
determination of standards in all the institutions of higher education, why institutions of agricultural
education and research are excluded by the Ministry of HRD from this Bill. Simply this has been
done because agricultural education and research falls in entry 14 in State List, and thus only State
Legislatures has the competence to make law for their matters.
In the same manner, as incorporation, regulation and winding up of universities are falling
in Entry 32 of State List and simultaneous are excluded from Entry 44 of the Union List, this Bill
cannot be made applicable to the Universities, especially State Universities. In the Supreme Court
judgements referred by the Ministry, observations with regard to Parliament competence have been
made without taking note of Entry 44 of Union List, so we should not base upon those judgements
in this matter.
In view of the above, I strongly recommend that the Universities must be excluded from
this Bill.
2. Provision empowering the Central Government to exempt any institution must be
withdrawn
Central Government should not have discretion to make applicable the provisions of this Bill
to one institution and to exempt the other institution. This proposal of the Ministry is to make the
accreditation mandatory for all the higher educational institutions, then how can the provision for
exemption to any institution can be given that too without defining any criteria for such exemption
and solely at the will of the Central Government. Hence this provision of power to exempt must
be withdrawn.
3. Punishment of imprisonment is too harsh for the so-called accreditation related
offences in this Bill
This Bill provides for punishment of imprisonment of a term that may extend to three
months for obstructing or impersonating an officer of Authority or for providing false information
for accreditation purpose. Punishment of imprisonment for a term extendable upto two years is
proposed for contravention of the provisions of this Bill or of any rules or regulations made
thereunder, for which no punishment is provided elsewhere in this Bill. Punishment of imprisonment
so prescribed for all minor and major wrongdoings in the educational institutions does not make
any sense, rather should be resorted at the end to deal with the institutions found guilty of an
offence repeatedly or may be resorted to deal with the offences of extreme nature having
consequential adverse impacts for the students community at large. All the clauses providing for
punishment of imprisonment thus must be revised accordingly.

31
I hope that your good self and other Committee members would be convinced with my
above views. I once again request the Hon'ble Chairman to kindly incorporate these in the Report
of the Committee, however, in case these are not adopted as it is in the report, I request that the
same may please be made a part of the Report as my dissent note.
Thanking you.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Pramod Kureel)
MP-Rajya Sabha

32
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
I. CONSULTATION PROCESS
It is evident that consultation with all the stakeholders, which should have been
ideally the starting point for formulating such a crucial piece of legislation for quality
control of higher education sector in the country remained the least priority issue for the
Department. In principle approval by majority of State Governments in a meeting of CABE,
inspite of its being the highest policy making body cannot be considered adequate enough.
Not only this, very valid reservations of some of the State Governments failed to receive
the required attention. Ideally, further intensive deliberations were required with the States
which the Department failed to undertake. (Para 2.5)
The Committee also observes that Central Universities/Deemed Universities/premier
institutions which are to be brought under the proposed legislation have remained
completely out of the consultation process. The Committee can very well understand the
sheer absence of any suggestions/reservations of higher educational institutions in the
private sector, inspite of their being a major stakeholder in such a path-breaking piece of
legislation. The kind of response received from the Department to the specific query clearly
confirms Committee’s apprehension that the Department attaches very little significance to
their viewpoint. (Para 2.6)
At present, the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) undertakes
institutional accreditation for all higher educational institutions whereas the National Board
of Accreditation undertakes programme accr editation for professional institutions. Ideally,
these two bodies, with their experience and expertise, should have been actively involved in
the formulation of the proposed legislation. However, in their case also, level of consultation
remained confined to one or two meetings. (Para 2.7)
The Committee has no option but to conclude that like in the other recently
proposed legislations envisaged to bring about major policy changes in the higher education
sector, the Department has failed to initiate any meaningful dialogue with the major
stakeholders on the present Bill also. The Committee has, therefore, made a serious effort
of reaching out to all concerned so as to make an objective assessment of the proposed
legislation. (Para 2.8)
III. INTERACTION WITH STAKEHOLDERS
Committee’s intensive deliberations with NBA and NAAC, the only two existing
agencies involved in the assessment and accreditation of various programmes and
institutions across the country has revealed the crucial role being played by these agencies.
The Committee is aware that with the enactment of the proposed legislation, assessment
and accreditation process is set to become mandatory for the fast growing higher education
sector in the country. In such a scenario, both NBA and NAAC with their vast experience
and expertise, at both national and international level can play a very constructive role. The
Committee, accordingly, is of the view that both these agencies not only should be fully
involved in carrying out the objectives of the Bill but should also act as the guide, mentor
and advisor for the large number of accreditation agencies proposed to be set up across the
32

33
country. The Committee would appreciate if all conceivable guidance from NBA and NAAC
is made available to each and every accreditation agency. In the formulation of rules/
regulations also, these two agencies can contribute a lot. The Committee hopes that the
Department would play a pro-active role in this regard. (Para 3.16)
The Committee takes note of very valuable suggestions made by the associations/
experts representing private sector in higher education. The Committee is of the view that
role of professional bodies, financial bodies and premier institutions in the accreditation
process as highlighted by these associations is worth consideration and needs to be
incorporated in the Act/rules regulations to be made thereunder. Similarly, all
apprehensions about mandatory accreditation need to be addressed appropriately. The
Committee also finds merit in the contention on accreditation process to start only after
two batches had graduated from institutions after being established. Registration of
accreditation agencies only for two-three years initially is also a very practical and sound
advice. (Para 3.24)
The Committee agrees with the intent of the Bill which is aimed at raising the
quality of higher education. The Committee also understands that the higher education
system in India is an expanding one with huge disparities among the institutions, norms and
standards for judging academic quality for various disciplines being different, vast difference
of infrastructure facilities between public and private institutions. In this context, the
Committee welcomes that proposed legislation which seeks to set benchmarks/parameters
on which an academic credentials of an institution would not only be assessed but accredited
also, thus raising the overall quality of higher education and standards of higher educational
institutions. (Para 3.25)
IV. CONSTITUTIONAL V ALIDITY OF THE BILL
The Committee is of the view that reservation of the Indian Council of Universities
about the constitutional validity of the proposed legislation does not seem to be well placed.
As pointed out by the Department, after insertion of Entry 25 in List III, Parliament is
fully competent to legislate on matters relating to higher education including universities.
One must also not forget that the enactment of a legislation proposing setting up a
regulatory authority for assessment and accreditation by various agencies is necessary to
maintain the standards of higher education within the country as well to protect the interest
of students. Assessment and accreditation are the effective means of quality assurance in
higher education the world over. Having such a mandatory system would go a long way in
facilitating credible information about institutions and in the process assisting student
mobility across institutions, domestic as well as international. In such a scenario, education
being in the Concurrent List, initiative taken by the Department for formulation of a
Central Law aimed at ensuring the quality of higher education should be considered a
welcome step by all concerned. (Para 4.4)
V. GENERAL ISSUES
Separate Accreditation Procedure/Mechanism for Medical Institutions
The Committee observes that medical and health institutions are totally different
from technical institutions, law colleges or other management colleges. Different tools and
techniques are employed to assess and evaluate a medical institution. Therefore, chances of
overlapping and conflict of interests are very much there if the provisions of the proposed
Bill are not properly laid down. The Committee finds that currently, MCI is evaluating and
assessing medical colleges and the Bill also proposes “laying down norms and policies for

34
assessment of academic quality .” The word assessment could lead to conflict which requires
rethinking. The Committee also takes note of reservation of the Ministry on inclusion of
AIIMS, PGI and JIPMER under the ambit of the Bill. As rightly pointed out by it, they are
the centres of excellence created by the Acts of Parliament and have been kept out of the
purview of even MCI. (Para 5.5)
The Committee observes that accreditation of medical education programmes in
developed countries like USA and UK is done by independent accreditation authorities meant
for accreditation/assessment of medical programmes alone. In USA, the accreditation of
programmes leading to the M.D. degree is determined solely by the Liaison Committee on
Medical Education and accreditation of post M.D. medical training programmes is the
responsibility of the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. Likewise, in UK,
the education, professional engagement and quality assurance in health care delivery is
assured by the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence through the Health Profession
and Care Council. The Committee also finds that in both these countries, there is a
separate set up for setting standards of accreditation, recognition of specific accreditation
agencies and eligibility and certification process for Higher Educational Institutions.
(Para 5.6)
The Committee is of the view that the power to accredit a health educational
institution may remain with the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority. However, the
Committee is inclined to agree with the stand of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
about the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee as envisaged under the National
Commission for Human Resources in Health being empowered to specify standards, norms
and process of evaluation and assessment of medical institutions and their programmes and
also monitor the functioning of agencies recommended by NCHRH from among the agencies
registered under NARA. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that specific provisions in
the context of medical institutions need to be included in the Bill so as to take care of
specialized nature of medical education and also avoid all aspects of overlapping and conflict
of interests. (Para 5.7)
Status of Statutory regulatory bodies like UGC, AICTE, Council of Architecture, IGNOU,
MCI, DCI, NCI etc. once this Bill is enacted.
The Committee would like to point out that statutory bodies like UGC, AICTE, COA
and MCI, DCI, INC dealing with specialized field of medical education have a separate role
of setting the standards for approval and ensuring their adherence by the concerned
institutions. Accreditation agencies will be concerned with the accreditation of duly
recognized and approved institutions. Approval and accreditation are two distinct exercises
and need to be handled by different entities. However, bodies like NBA, NAAC, Institute of
Chartered Accountants/Institute of Cost and Work Accountants, ICHR, ICPR and ICSSR
etc. can very well become accreditation agencies. (Para 5.10)
Converting NAAC into the proposed National Assessment and Accreditation Authority
The Committee agreeing with the view point of the Department would like to point
out that the professional expertise and vast experience of these two bodies should be
gainfully utilized in every conceivable aspect in the implementation of the proposed
legislation on its being enacted. Both NBA and NAAC can lay down the norms and
guidelines to be followed by the new accreditation agencies and also play the role of mentor
for them. (Para 5.14)

35
VI. THE COMMITTEE MAKES THE FOLLOWING OBSERV ATIONS/
RECOMMENDATIONS ON SOME OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE BILL
Exclusion of agricultural education and research from the mandatory process of
accreditation can be termed as discriminatory from the point of view of protection of
student interests. The Committee fails to understand the justification for students opting
for agricultural education being deprived of the benefits of mandatory accreditation as
proposed for other streams of education. It is for the Government to find a way out. The
Department should, therefore, take the initiative for coverage of agricultural education
under mandatory accreditation by initiating the exercise of bringing in the legislation on
agricultural education in accordance with the provisions of Article 249 of the Constitution.
(Para 6.4)
VIII. CLAUSE 4 : ACCREDITATION TO BE MANDATORY
The Committee observes that voluntary accreditation till now has proved to be very
ineffective with less than one-fifth of colleges and less than one-third of all universities
having obtained accreditation. Financial incentives by way of assistance for accreditation as
introduced by UGC have failed to attract the institutions to come forward for accreditation.
Shortage of faculty and lack of infrastructural facilities have also adversely impacted the
accreditation process. With the rapid expansion of higher education sector, the situation is
bound to deteriorate further. In such a scenario, the Committee strongly feels that the
mandatory nature of accreditation can alone prove to be effective. The provision would
enable an institution to get itself assessed on various parameters such as academic quality,
infrastructure, quality of teaching, learning and research, management etc by the
independent agencies on the norms and standards to be laid down by the proposed National
Assessment and Regulatory Authority. This may also lead to evolving of uniform norms/
benchmarks to which all institutions would be subjected to for assessment and accreditation
which in turn would immensely contribute to the total quality of education. (Para 8.5)
The only area of concern for the Committee has been the provision that requires an
institution to obtain accreditation before it has even started the admission procedure. The
Committee feels that this particular aspect of the provision would lead to impractical and
unrealistic consequences. The Committee strongly feels that an institution cannot be
assessed for its quality unless a few batches/sessions have been completed. Views of experts/
bodies having the experience of accreditation exercise at the ground level in this regard
cannot be ignored. The Committee would also like to point out that to start a fresh
programme or an institution, the process of recognition/permission/affiliation needs to be
made more stringent, so that higher educational institutions can show case their quality
sustenance and enhancement initiatives more effectively during the process of accreditation.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “assessment for such accreditation
shall be made before such institution starts the process of admission to such programme”
be replaced by the words “assessment for such accreditation only after two batches of
students have passed out”. (Para 8.6)
The Committee further takes note of a situation where an institution which is being
assessed for accreditation after two batches of students have passed out, is not able to get
accreditation for justified reasons. For such cases, the Committee recommends that a viable
mechanism be devised whereby such an institution is given another opportunity to get itself
assessed again. This could be done by giving the institution a reasonable time period to
overcome all its shortcomings so that the interests of the students are safeguarded.
(Para 8.7)

36
IX. CLAUSE 7 : QUALIFICATION FOR APPOINTMENT AS CHAIRPERSON OR OTHER
MEMBER
The Committee is also of the view that the proposed apex body is inadequately
represented in terms of number of members representing various streams, disciplines and
State authorities. Considering the fact that Indian higher educational system is one of the
largest and still expanding one with various institutions and disciplines, an expert body of
five persons only is grossly inadequate. The Committee is also inclined to agree with the
observation of NAAC that academics par excellence, with holistic understanding of the
higher education system in India and abroad with insight and experience, with quality
assurance and enhancement mechanisms as well as assessment and accreditation as
members instead of subject specialists need to be represented in the Authority.
(Para 9.5)
The Committee recommends that the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority
has to be a bigger body so as to reflect all the stakeholders representing diverse fields and
in consonance with the vast mandate entrusted to it. The Committee would like the
Department to expand the strength of the Authority by having additional members as
suggested above by different stakeholders. Composition of the Authority as given in
clause 7 may be modified accordingly. (Para 9.7)
X. CLAUSE 8 : SELECTION COMMITTEE
The Committee is also of the view that the Cabinet Secretary who would be the
Chairperson of the Selection Committee would essentially be the administrative functionary
of the Government and he may or may not have the requisite academic eminence.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that this prestigious panel of experts should be
headed by someone of academic eminence having great domain knowledge. The Committee
finds it rather surprising that in spite of agricultural education remaining outside the purview
of the Bill, an expert in the field of agricultural education and research is proposed to be a
member of the Selection Committee. However, the Committee would have no objection to
such an expert being made member of the Selection Committee in the event of agricultural
education being brought under the purview of the Bill. The Committee also feels that it would
have been appropriate if an expert in the field of social sciences/humanities/science/technology
is also appointed as a member of the Selection Committee. Composition of the Selection
Committee as enumerated in clause 8 may, accordingly, be modified. (Para 10.3)
XI. CLAUSE 21 : ELIGIBILITY FOR REGISTRA TION AS AN ACCREDITATION AGENCY
The Committee, feels that to the extent possible, totally private societies and trusts
may be avoided in being appointed as accreditation agencies as many private educational
institutions may become such agencies for self accreditation. The Committee, therefore,
would like the Department to carry out appropriate modifications in the provisions of Act
and also rules/regulations to be made thereunder. (Para 11.5)
The Committee observes that evolving quality parameters for higher educational
institutions, that are so diverse in size, form, content, resources and age of institutions, is
the real challenge. The Committee strongly feels that genuine professional bodies
(academics and professional societies in various disciplines) should come forward with a
commitment to ensure quality higher education in the country. The Committee finds that
such a culture is not present in a major way in the country and this could give rise to
pseudo groups coming forward. (Para 11.6)

37
XII. CLAUSE 22 : PROCED URE FOR GRANT OF CERTIFICATE
The Committee’s concern is that only genuine professional bodies should come
forward to take the responsibility of accreditation agencies which would be in a position to
perform the assigned duties to carry out the academic audit of the higher educational
institutions as mandated in the proposed legislation. The Committee observes that these
accreditation agencies are being brought into existence to improve not only the quality of
higher education but also that of the institutions. The Committee would like the concept of
quality being made applicable to every sphere of the higher education i.e. the faculty,
infrastructure, management, besides course content, teacher student involvement etc. Only
then, assessment and accreditation can prove to be the effective means of quality assurance
in higher education sector. In this context, the Committee would further like to add that
the methodology of procedure for grant of certificate of registration needs to be made
transparent and public and a reasonable time-frame for the entire process must be fixed.
(Para 12.4)
XIII. CLAUSE 23 : GRANT OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION
The Committee also feels that the time-frame for validity of certificate of registration
to an accrediting agency should be fixed specifically as longer duration may defeat the very
purpose of the objective of the Bill. Granting a certificate of registration to an accreditation
agency for a period of ten years is not reasonable, even though it is understood that the
authority would keep evaluating the performance on such terms and conditions as specified
in the certificate of registration. The Committee recommends that initially the certificate may
be granted for five years and, thereafter, it could be extended to ten years. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that clause 23(5) may be amended accordingly. (Para 13.4)
XIV . CLAUSE 31 : APPLICATION TO AUTHORITY ON ACCREDITATION BY
ACCREDITATION AGENCY
The Committee finds the above provision to be vague as no details about the procedure
for withdrawal/modifications of accreditation by the Authority on a complaint made by the
aggrieved party have been given. Rule/Regulation making powers are also silent on this issue.
The Committee is of the view that a well-defined grievance redressal mechanism needs to be
in place so as to ensure complete transparency. Rich experience of NBA and NAAC can prove
to be very relevant and of great help in this regard. (Para 14.2)
XV. CLAUSE 38 : PENALTY FOR OBSTRUCTING OR IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER OF
AUTHORITY
The Committee observes that penalty proposed under this clause is for offences
which are too vague and general and are liable to be misused. No rules or regulations are
envisaged to be formulated which can prescribe the mechanism for giving effect to this
provision. Besides that, Committee’s attention has also been drawn by clause 44 where-
under no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or the rules
or regulations made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the Authority or any officer
or person authorized by it. Thus, no avenue of clarifying his position seems to be available
to the alleged offender. The Committee is also not aware whether any grievance redressal
mechanism is proposed to be established under the Act or rules/regulations. Chances are
there that there may be valid reasons for taking action as indicated in the clause on the
part of the alleged offender. In such a scenario, principle of natural justice is required to
be there. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that clause 38 may be suitably modified
so as to give an opportunity to the affected party to clarify its position. (Para 15.3)

38
XVI. CLAUSE 41 : GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO OFFENCES AND FINE
The Committee fully supports the stringent penal provisions for violation of
education laws that protect and promote the quality of education. However, at the same
time, effective mechanism for judicious enforcement of such provision also needs to be put
in place so as to prevent any act of arbitrariness. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that clause 41 may be suitably modified and procedure for enforcement of this provision is
prescribed through rules/regulations/guidelines/directives. (Para 16.2)
XVII. CLAUSE 43 : OFFENCES BY SOCIETY, TRUST AND INSTITUTIONS
This Committee is in agreement with the objections raised on clause 43 (2) and
recommends that Governors should be kept outside the purview of this provision.
(Para 17.2)
XVIII. CLAUSE 45 : ADJUDICATION OF PENALTY
The Committee observes that the Educational Tribunals Bill needs to be amended to
incorporate the provisions relating to adjudication powers given to National and State
Tribunals as mentioned in clauses 36 and 37. Necessary steps may, accordingly, be taken by
the Department in this regard. (Para 18.2)
XIX. CLAUSE 49 : POWER TO EXEMPT
The Committee would also like to point out that our premier institutions are also
facing problem of shortage of qualified and experienced faculty as well as absence of
required infrastructure and other  facilities. To exempt such institutions from the proposed
legislation will ultimately prove to be counter-productive only. Therefore, this clause may
either be dropped or qualified by adding specific parameters/norms as to when the Central
Government can use this discretion under rules/regulations to be framed under the
proposed legislation. (Para 19.5)

39
MINUTES

XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 20 th
April, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao – in the Chair
2. Shri Prakash Javadekar
3. Shri Rama Jois
4. Shri Pramod Kureel
5. Shri N.K. Singh
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
7. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Kirti Azad
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
13. Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela
14. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
15. Shri P. Kumar
16. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
17. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
18. Shri Ashok Tanwar
19. Shri Joseph Toppo
20. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
21. Shri P. Viswanathan
22. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
23. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
41

42
LIST OF WITNESSES
I. THE NATIONAL ACCREDITATION REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR HIGHER
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION BILL, 2010.
Department of Higher Education Ministry of Human Resource Development
1. Shrimati Vibha Puri Das, Secretary
2. Shri Sunil Kumar, Additional Secretary
3. Shri R.P. Sisodia, Joint Secretary
4. Shrimati Rashmi Chowdhary, Director
5. Shri Upamanyu Basu, Director
6. Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman, UGC
7. Prof. S.S. Mantha, Chairman, AICTE
8. Dr. N.A. Kazmi, Secretary, UGC
9. Dr. (Col.) M.K. Hada, Member Secretary , AICTE
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT, MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
1. Dr. G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary
*** *** *** ***
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. *** *** *** *** ***
3. *** *** *** *** ***
(Lunch break)
4. The Committee then heard the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on the National
Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010. The Secretary
made a detailed power-point presentation highlighting various provisions of the Bill. The Members
raised queries, some of which were replied to by the Secretary. The Committee decided to send
a detailed questionnaire on the Bill to the Department for its written replies.
5. *** *** *** *** ***
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

43
43
XXIII
TWENTY THIRD MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the
19th May, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
3. Shri Prakash Javadekar
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri N.K. Singh
6. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kirti Azad
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
10. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
12. Shri Rahul Gandhi
13. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
14. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
15. Shri P. Kumar
16. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
17. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
18. Shri Tapas Paul
19. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
20. Shri Joseph Toppo
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
LIST OF WITNESSES
THE NATIONAL ACCREDITATION REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR HIGHER
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2010
(I) ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION
(i) Prof. S.S. Mantha, Chairman
(ii) Dr. (Col.) M.K. Hada, Member Secretary

44
(II) INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY
Prof. V .N. Rajasekharan Pillai, Vice-Chancellor
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
2. *** *** ***
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Chairman, AICTE and the Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU on
the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010.
Members raised certain queries, some of which were replied to by the witnesses. The Committee,
thereafter, decided to send questionnaire to AICTE and IGNOU for written replies.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. *** *** ***
6. The meeting was adjourned at 5.05 
P.M. to meet again on 26 th May, 2011.
*** Relates to other matter.

45
XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 20 th
June, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Shri Prakash Javadekar
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Pramod Kureel
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P.K. Biju
7. Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela
8. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
9. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
10. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
11. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
12. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
13. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
14. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
15. Shri Tapas Paul
16. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
17. Shri Joseph Toppo
18. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
19. Shri P. Vishwanathan
LIST OF WITNESSES
NATIONAL ACCREDITATION REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR HIGHER
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2010
I NATIONAL BOARD OF ACCREDITATION
(i) Prof. B.C. Majumdar, Chairman
(ii) Dr. D.K. Paliwal, Member-Secretary
45

46
II NATIONAL ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION COUNCIL
(i) Professor, H.A. Ranganath, Director
(ii) Shri B.S. Madhukar, Deputy Advisor
III MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(i) Shri K. Chandramouli, Secretary
(ii) Shri Keshav Desiraju, Additional Secretary
(iii) Shri Debasish Panda, Joint Secretary
IV BOARD OF GOVERNORS, MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA
Prof. K.K. Talwar, Chairman
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
5. The Committee then heard the views of the Chairman, National Board of Accreditation and
Director, National Assessment and Accreditation Council on the National Accreditation Regulatory
Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010, problem areas, if any, and suggestions on
the same. The Chairman and members raised certain queries some of which were replied to by the
witnesses. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire to them for their response.
(The witnesses then withdrew ).
6. Thereafter, the Committee interacted with the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare and Chairman, Board of Governors, Medical Council of India on the National Regulatory
Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010, problem areas, if any, and suggestions on
the same. The Chairman and members raised certain queries some of which were replied to by the
witnesses. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire to them for their response.
7. V erbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The meeting was adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. to meet again on the 28 th June, 2011.
*** Relates to other matter.

47
47
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the
28th June, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
4. Shri P. K. Biju
5. Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela
6. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
7. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
8. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
9. Shri P. Kumar
10. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
11. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
12. Shri Tapas Paul
13. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
14. Shri Joseph Toppo
15. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
16. Shri P. Vishwanathan
WITNESSES ON THE NATIONAL ACCREDITATIION REGULATORY AUTHORITY
FOR HIGHER EDUCATIONAL  INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2010
I. THE EDUCATIONAL PROMOTION SOCIETY FOR INDIA
(i) Dr. G. Viswanathan, President, Founder & Chancellor, VIT University, VIT
(ii) Dr. H. Chaturvedi, Alternate President & Director, Birla Institute of Management
Technology
(iii) Shri Manohar Chellani, Secretary General
(iv) Dr. G .C. Saxena, Advisor
II. INDIAN COUNCIL OF UNIVERSITIES
(i) Shri Ashok K. Mittal, Chancellor, Lovely Professional University, Punjab
(ii) Dr. V .K. Aggarawal, Chairman, Sunrise University
(iii) Shri Umesh Sharma, Director, Sunrise University
(iv) Shri Kapil Suri, Director, Jodhpur National University, Rajasthan

48
(v) Dr. Balvir S. Tomar, Chancellor, NIMS University
(vi) Shri Y .K. Gupta, Pro Chancellor, Sharda University
(vii) Shri R.D. Kaushik, Director, LPU
III. LINGAYA’S UNIVERSITY
(i) Prof. K.K. Aggarwal, Chancellor, Lingaya’s University and Former Vice-Chancellor of
Indraprastha University
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. *** *** ***
3. The Committee, then, heard the views of the representatives of the Education Promotion
Society for India, Indian Council of Universities and Prof. K.K. Aggarwal, Chancellor of Lingaya’s
University (Former Vice-Chancellor of Indraprastha University) on the various provisions of the
National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010, problems
areas, if any, and suggestions therefor. The Chairman and members raised some queries which
were replied to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire to each of the
organizations for their comments.
(The witnesses then withdrew ).
4. *** *** ***
5. The Committee was adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the
6th July, 2011.
*** Relates to other matter.

49
XXX
THIRTIETH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the
22nd July, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Shri Prakash Javadekar
4. Shri Pramod Kureel
5. Shri N.K. Singh
6. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
7. Shri P.K Biju
8. Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela
9. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
10. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
12. Shri P. Kumar
13. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
14. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
15. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
16. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
17. Shri Joseph Toppo
18. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to ***    ***  and clause-by-clause consideration of the National Accreditation
Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010. ***     ***     ***.
49
*** Relates to other matter.

50
3. *** *** *** *** ***
4. The Committee, then, took up the clause-by-clause consideration of the National
Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010 and directed the
Secretariat to draft a report on the Bill based on the deliberations.
5. The Committee, while taking note of the fact that the deadline for presenting the Report on
the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010 being
31
st July, 2011 and Secretariat requiring some time to draft the Report which may be considered
and adopted by the Committee, decided to seek extension of time from Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha till, 15
th August, 2011. ***          ***          ***          ***.
6. V erbatim record of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

51
51
XXXI
THIRTY FIRST MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the
8th August, 2011 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prakash Javadekar
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri Pramod Kureel
5. Shri N.K. Singh
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
7. Shri P. K. Biju
8. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
9. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
10. Shri P. Kumar
11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
13. Shri Joseph Toppo
14. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. *** *** ***
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft 238 th Report on the National Accreditation
Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010 and adopted the same with few
*** Relates to other matter.

52
modifications. Shri Pramod Kureel, M.P., Rajya Sabha gave a dissent note on the Bill which the
Chairman directed to append to the Report as a minutes of dissent. The Committee also decided
to present the Report in both the Houses of Parliament on Friday, the 12
th August, 2011.
4. V erbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 
P.M.

53
ANNEXURES

AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 54 of 2010
THE NATIONAL ACCREDITATION REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR
HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2010
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Application of Act.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
OBLIGATION  FOR ACCREDITATION  OF HIGHER  EDUCATIONAL  INSTITUTIONS  AND PROGRAMMES
CONDUCTED  THEREIN
4. Accreditation to be mandatory.
CHAPTER III
NATIONAL ACCREDITATION  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY  FOR HIGHER  EDUCATIONAL  INSTITUTIONS
5. Establishment of National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational
Institutions.
6. Composition of Authority.
7. Qualification for appointment as Chairperson or other Member.
8. Selection Committee.
9. Term of office, salaries and allowances of Chairperson and other Members.
10. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and other Members.
11. Prohibition as to holding of office by Chairperson or other Member on ceasing to
be such Chairperson or Members.
12. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases.
13. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
14. Resignation.
15. Staff of Authority.
55

56
CHAPTER IV
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS  OF A UTHORITY
CLAUSES
16. Powers and functions of Authority.
17. Power of Authority to engage experts.
18. Power of audit and inspection by Authority.
CHAPTER V
REGISTRATION  OF ACCREDITATION  AGENCIES
19. Registration of accreditation agency.
20. Application for registration.
21. Eligibility for registration as an accreditation agency.
22. Procedure for grant of certificate.
23. Grant of certificate of registration.
24. Renewal of certificate of registration.
25. Accreditation agency not to do certain things.
26. Amendment to certificate of registration.
27. Suspension or revocation of certificate of registration.
28. Appeal against any order of Authority.
CHAPTER VI
D
UTIES AND OBLIGATIONS  OF ACCREDITA TION AGENCIES
29. Duties and obligations of accreditation agencies
30. Procedure of accreditation by accreditation agency.
31. Application to Authority on accreditation by accreditation agency.
CHAPTER VII
F
INANCE ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
32. Grants by Central Government.
33. National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Education Institutions Fund.
34. Accounts and audit of Authority.
35. Annual report of Authority.
CHAPTER VIII
OFFENCES  AND P ENALTIES
36. Compensation to affected higher educational institution.
37. Penalty in case of contravention.
38. Penalty for obstructing or impersonating an officer of Authority.
39. Punishment for contravening the provision of section 19.

57
40. Punishment for false information.
41. General provisions relating to offences and fine.
42. Offences by companies.
43. Offences by society, trust and institutions.
44. Cognizance of offences.
45. Adjudication of penalty.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
46. Power to call for information.
47. Returns and reports by accreditation agencies.
48. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
49. Power to exempt.
50. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.
51. Bar of jurisdiction.
52. Members and staff of Authority to be public servants.
53. Protection of action taken in good faith.
C
LAUSES
54. Act to have overriding effect.
55. Application of other laws not barred.
56. Power of Central Government to make rules.
57. Power of Authority to make regulations.
58. Laying of rules, regulations and notification.
59. Power to remove difficulties.

AS I NTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 54 of 2010
THE NATIONAL ACCREDITATION REGULATORY AUTHORITY
FOR HIGHER EDUCATIONAL  INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to make provisions for assessment of academic quality of higher
educational institutions, programmes conducted therein and their
infrastructure through mandatory accreditation by independent
accreditation agencies and to establish a statutory Authority for the
said purpose and to provide and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the National Accreditation
Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. This Act shall apply to all higher educational institutions other
than the higher educational institutions engaged mainly in agricultural
education and research and the programmes of study conducted
therein.
3. ( 1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
59
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Application of
Act.
Definitions.

60
(a) “academic quality” means the quality of teaching,
learning and research and consequently their contribution to
enhancement of knowledge and includes physical
infrastructure, human resources (including faculty), administration,
course curricula, admission and assessment procedures,
governance structures, of the higher educational institution;
(b) “accreditation” with its grammatical variations
means the process of quality control in higher education,
whereby, as a result of evaluation or assessment or by any
other scientific method followed by accreditation agencies, a
higher educational institution or any programme conducted
therein is recognised by it as conforming to parameters of
academic quality and benchmarking of such academic quality
determined by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority;
(c) “accreditation agency” means an agency registered
under section 23;
(d) “appropriate statutory regulatory authority” means
any regulatory authority established under any law for the
time being in force, for co-ordinating or determining or
maintaining the standards of higher education;
(e) “Authority” means the National Accreditation
Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions
established under section 5;
(f) “certificate of registration” means the certificate of
registration of an accreditation agency granted under
section 23;
(g) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the
Authority appointed under section 6 of this Act;
(h) “code of ethics” includes integrity, objectivity,
professional competence, professional conduct, avoidance of
conflict of interest, transparency and information disclosure
and such other ethical principles as may be specified by
regulations;
(i) “college” means any institution, whether known as
such or by any other name which provides for a course of
study for obtaining any qualification from a university and
which, in accordance with the rules and regulations of such
university, is recognised as competent to provide for such
course of study and present students undergoing such course
of study for the examination for the award of such
qualification;
(j) “degree” means any such degree, as may, with the
previous approval of the Central Government, be specified in
this behalf by the University Grants Commission, by
notification in the Official Gazette, under section 22 of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956;
3 of 1956.

61
(k) “diploma” means such award, not being a degree,
granted by a higher educational institution certifying that the
recipient has successfully completed a course of study of not
less than nine months duration;
(l) “distance education system” means the distance
education system as defined in clause ( e) of section ( 2) of the
Indira Gandhi National Open University Act, 1985;
(m) “higher educational institution” means an institution
of learning including a university, an institution deemed to be
university, a college, an institute, an institution of national
importance declared as such by an Act of Parliament, or a
constituent unit of such institution, which is imparting
(whether through conduct of regular classes or distance
education system) higher education beyond twelve years of
schooling leading to the award of a degree or diploma;
(n) “institution deemed to be University” means an
institution declared by the Central Government as deemed to
be a university under section 3 of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956;
(o) “Member” means Member of the Authority
appointed under section 6 and includes the Chairperson;
(p) “memorandum of association” means, in case of a
company, such memorandum as defined under sub-section ( 28)
of section 2 of the Companies Act, 1956, or in case of a
society, such memorandum as specified under section 2 of
the Societies Registration Act, 1860;
(q) “National Educational Tribunal” means the National
Educational Tribunal established under the Educational
Tribunals Act, 2010;
(r) “non profit organization” means an organization
being a company registered under section 25 of the
Companies Act, 1956 or a society formed and registered under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or a trust formed under
the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or any other law for the time
being in force, which—
(i) undertakes any venture, profession, vocation
or business without profit motive or gainful objective;
(ii) applies its surplus or other income in promoting
its objects;
(iii) prohibits payment of any of its surplus or
other income to its members, except by way of salaries
or allowances payable for services rendered for
carrying out such venture, profession, vocation or
business;
50 of 1985.
3 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
21 of 1860.
1 of 1956.
21 of 1860.
2 of 1882.

62
(s) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette and the expression “notify” with its cognate
meanings and grammatical variation shall be construed
accordingly;
(t) “programme” means a course or programme of
study leading to the award of a degree or a diploma in a higher
educational institution;
(u) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the
Central Government under this Act;
(v) “regulations” means regulations made by the
Authority under this Act;
(w) “State Educational Tribunal” means a State
Educational Tribunal established under the Educational
Tribunals Act, 2010;
(x) “university” means a university established or
incorporated by or under a Central Act, a Provincial Act or a
State Act, and includes an institution deemed to be university;
(y) “Vice Chancellor” means the Chief Executive of a
university, by whatever name called, and includes a Head of
an institutions of national importance declared as such by an
Act of Parliament.
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act
but defined in the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and not
inconsistent with this Act shall have the meaning respectively
assigned to them in that Act.
CHAPTER II
O
BLIGATION FOR A CCREDITATION OF H IGHER E DUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS  AND P ROGRAMMES  C ONDUCTED  THEREIN
4. Every higher educational institution and every programme
conducted therein shall be accredited in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder
and assessment of such accreditation shall be made before such
institution starts the process of admission to such programme:
Provided that a higher educational institution, (other than a
higher educational institution engaged mainly in medical education)
existing before the commencement of this Act, shall, within a period
of three years from the date of such commencement, make an
application to an accreditation agency for accreditation of such
institution or programme conducted therein under this Act:
Provided further that a higher educational institution engaged
mainly in medical education and existing before the commencement
of this Act, shall, within a period of five years from the date of
such commencement, make an application to an accreditation
agency for accreditation of such institution or programme
conducted therein under this Act:
Accreditation
to be
mandatory.
1 of 1956.

63
Provided also that the accreditation agency, to whom such
application for accreditation has been made by such higher
educational institution, shall, within a period of one hundred and
eighty days from the date of such application, undertake and
complete accreditation under this Act:
Provided also that the higher educational institution which has
been accredited before the commencement of this Act by an agency
setup by or under any law for the time being in force, shall be
deemed to be accredited under this Act for the period of
accreditation by such agency:
Provided also that in case the higher educational institution
referred to in the first or second proviso fails, to, make an
application for accreditation or obtain accreditation of such
institution or programme conducted therein, within the specified
period, such institution shall, without prejudice to any action that
may be initiated by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority or
proceedings under any law for the time being in force be liable for
penalty under section 41 of this Act.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL A CCREDITATION R EGULATORY A UTHORITY  FOR H IGHER
EDUCATIONAL  I NSTITUTIONS
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification,
establish, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority to be
known as “the National Accr editation Regulatory Authority for
Higher Educational Institutions”.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with
power subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to
contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
6. The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and four
other Members, of whom at least one shall be woman, to be
appointed by the Central Government.
7. (1) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as the
Chairperson, if such person—
(a) is not less than fifty-five years of age;
(b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate
knowledge and experience of at least twenty-five years in
dealing with matters relating to higher education and research;
(c) is, or has been, a Vice Chancellor of any University
or a Head of an institution of national importance.
Establishment
of National
Accreditation
Regulatory
Authority for
Higher
Educational
Institution.
Composition
of Authority.
Qualification
for
appointment
as
Chairperson
or other
Member.

64
(2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Member,
if such person—
(a) is not less than fifty-five years of age;
(b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate
knowledge and experience of at least twenty-five years in
higher education and research or legal matters.
(3) Out of the four members referred to in section 6, one
each shall be chosen from amongst—
(a) Professors in the field of medical education in any
University or an institution of national importance;
(b) Professors in the field of science or technology in
any University or an institution of national importance;
(c) Professors in the field of social sciences or
humanities in any University or an institution of national
importance;
(d) persons having knowledge and experience in legal
matters.
8. (1) The Chairperson and other Members of the Authority
shall be appointed by the Central Government from a panel of
names recommended by a Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) Cabinet Secretary.........Chairperson;
(b) Secretary in charge of higher education in the
Ministry of Human Resource Development of the Government
of India.........Member;
(c) an expert in the field of medical
education..........Member;
(d) an expert in the field of agricultural education and
research.........Member;
(e) an expert in the field of legal
education.........Member;
(f) Chairman, University Grants
Commission.........Member.
(2) The Secretary to the Government of India dealing with the
higher education shall be the convenor of the meetings of the
Selection Committee.
(3) The experts in the fields specified in clauses ( c) to ( e) of
sub-section ( 1) shall be nominated, in such manner as may be
prescribed, by the Central Government.
(4) The term of the Selection Committee and the manner of
selection of panel of names shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the
Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the
Selection Committee.
Selection
Committee

65
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1) to ( 5), the
Selection Committee may regulate its own procedure.
9. ( 1) The Chairperson and the other Members of the
Authority shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the
date on which he enters upon his office and shall not be eligible for
re-appointment:
Provided that the Chairperson or the Member shall not hold
office as such after he has attained the age of seventy years.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other
Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
10. (1) The Central Government may remove from office the
Chairperson or any Member, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office,
in any paid employment; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has become physically or mentally incapable of
acting as such Chairperson or other Member; or
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; or
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is
likely to affect prejudicially the exercise of his functions as
such Chairperson or other Member; or
(g) has so abused his position as to render his
continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest; or
(h) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour; or
(i) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 1), the Chairperson
or a Member shall not be removed from his office on the grounds
specified in clause ( f) or clause ( g) or clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1),
except by an order made by the Central Government after an inquiry
made in this behalf in which such Chairperson or such Member has
been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
(3) In the event of inquiry instituted under sub-section ( 2),
the Central Government may suspend such Chairperson or other
Member against whom inquiry has been instituted for a period not
exceeding six months if it consider necessary in public interest.
(4) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the
procedure for the inquiry referred to in sub-section ( 2).
Term of office
salaries and
allowances of
Chairperson and
other Members.
Removal and
suspenstion of
Chairperson and
other Members.

66
11. On ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson or other
Member, as t he case may be, subject to the provisions of this Act,
shall be ineligible, for a period of five years from the date on which
they cease to hold office, for further employment (including as
consultant or expert or otherwise) in any higher educational
institution under the Central Government or a State Government or
any private higher educational institution or in any institution whose
matters had been before such Chairperson or Member.
12. Any Member having any direct or indirect interest,
whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter coming up for
consideration at a meeting of the Authority, shall, as soon as
possible after the relevant circumstances have come to his
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and
such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the
Authority, and the Member shall not take any part in any deliberation
or decision of the Authority with respect to that matter.
13. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid
merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as
a Member of the Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.
14. The Chairperson or a Member of the Authority may, by
notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Central
Government, resign his officer:
Provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall, unless he is
permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the
date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as
his successor enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of
office, whichever is the earliest.
15.  ( 1) The Central Government shall determine the
nature and categories of the officers and other employees
required to assist the Authority in the discharge of its
functions and provide the Authority with such officers and
other employees as it may think fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the Authority shall
discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the
Chairperson.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the
other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and
other employees of the Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Prohibition as
to holding of
office by
Chairperson or
other Member
on ceasing to
be such
Chairperson or
Members.
Vacancies, etc.,
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Authority.
Member not
to participate
in meetings in
certain cases.
Resignation.
Staff of
Authority.

67
CHAPTER IV
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS  OF A UTHORITY
16. ( 1) The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this
Act and rules and regulations made thereunder and regulations made
under any law for the time being in force by the appropriate
statutory regulatory authority, take measures to develop and to
regulate the process of accreditation of higher educational
institutional and programmes conducted therein, and to monitor the
functioning of accreditation agencies.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
provisions, the measures referred to in sub-section ( 1), may, inter
alia, provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) regulate accreditation agencies (registration of the
accreditation agencies);
(b) lay down norms and policies for assessment of
academic quality in higher educational institutions, or of any
programme conducted therein, by accreditation agencies;
(c) undertake periodical review of norms and policies
referred to in clause ( b);
(d) undertake audit and cause to be audited the
adherence to code or ethics including policies on obviating
conflict of interest, disclosure of information, evolving
transparency in processes and procedures of accreditation;
(e) lay down policies for providing information to the
public in regard to all aspects of quality and performance of
higher educational institutions and programmes conducted
therein (including student achievement, faculty availability and
qualifications and research);
(f) specify and monitor standards on selection and
training of experts for the purposes of accreditation by any
accreditation agency;
(g) levy of fees or other charges under this Act;
(h) recommend for improvement of academic quality
while respecting the higher educational institution's
responsibility to set its priorities;
(i) advise the Central Government or any State
Government or the appropriate statutory regulatory authority
on any policy matter concerning accreditation which may be
referred to it;
(j) take measures for development of methodologies of
accreditation in collaboration with accreditation agencies or
universities;
Powers and
functions of
Authority.
67

68
(k) promote research and innovation in assessment and
accreditation;
(l) collect, compile and disseminate information
regarding accreditation of higher educational institutions and
programmes conducted therein to the public including
stakeholders;
(m) monitor adherence to such norms, guidelines and
standards of academic quality, as may be specified under any
law for the time being in force by the appropriate statutory
regulatory authority, in higher educational institutions;
(n) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
17. The Authority may engage, on such fee and remuneration
and for such period as may be prescribed, for discharging its
functions under this Act, such experts having such qualifications
and experience, as may be prescribed.
18. ( 1) The Authority may, at any time, by order in writing,
direct any person (hereinafter referred to in this section as
“Accreditation Audit Committee”) specified in the order to audit or
inspect or inquire into the affairs of any accreditation agency or any
higher educational institution in matters of accreditation and to
report to the Authority on any audit or inspection made by such
Accreditation Audit Committee.
Explanation, — For the purposes of this section, “person” shall
include such experts engaged in the manner provided in section 17.
(2) It shall be the duty of every chief executive or officer or
other employee of the accreditation agency and every chief
executive or teacher or officer or other employee of the higher
educational institution, as the case may be, to produce before the
Accreditation Audit Committee directed under sub-section ( 1), all
such papers and other documents in his custody or power and to
furnish him with any statement and information relating to the
affairs of the accreditation agency or higher educational institution,
as the case may be, as the said Accreditation Audit Committee may
require of him within such time as the said Accreditation Audit
Committee may specify.
(3) The Accreditation Audit Committee, directed to audit or
inspect or inquire under sub-section ( 1), may examine on oath, any
chief executive or officer or other employee of the accreditation
agency in relation to accreditation of any higher educational
institution or programme conducted therein, and may administer
oaths accordingly.
(4) On receipt of any report under sub-section ( 1), the
Authority may, after giving such opportunity to the accreditation
agency to make a representation in connection with the report as,
in the opinion of the Authority, seems reasonable, by order in writing,—
Power of
audit and
inspection by
Authority.
Power of
Authority to
engage
experts.

69
(a) require the accreditation agency, to take such action
in respect of any matter arising out of the report as the
Authority may think fit; or
(b) modify terms and conditions of certificate of
registration as it thinks fit, and terms or conditions so
modified shall be binding upon and be observed by the
accreditation agency and shall be of like force and effect as
if they were contained in the certificate of registration; or
(c) revoke the certificate of registration of the
accreditation agency.
(5) The Authority shall, place the report submitted by the
Accreditation Audit Committee under sub-section ( 1) and the action
taken thereon by the Authority on its website.
CHAPTER V
R
EGISTRATION OF ACCREDITATION AGENCIES
19. No accreditation agency shall, except under and in
accordance with the conditions of a certificate of registration
obtained from the Authority under this Act, and in accordance with
rules and regulations made thereunder, undertake accreditation of
any higher educational institution or any programme conducted
therein:
Provided that any agency set up by or under any law for the
time being in force, which is carrying out the work of accreditation
of higher educational institutions or programmes conducted therein,
on or before the date of commencement of this Act, may continue
to do so until the certificate of registration is granted to it by the
Authority under this Act:
Provided further that such agency shall, within a period of
one hundred and eighty days from the date of establishment of the
Authority under this Act, make an application under sub-section ( 1)
of section 20 for registration as an accreditation agency under this
Act:
Provided also that the Authority shall, within a period of one
hundred and twenty days from the date of such application either
issue the certificate of registration or reject the application under
section 23.
20. (1) Every application for registration as an accreditation
agency shall be made to the Authority in such form and manner and
accompanied by such other documents and on payment of such
fees as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Every application under sub-section (l) shall be
accompanied by the following, namely:-
(a) a detailed mechanism for detecting any potential
conflict of interest between the applicant or its employees or
Registration of
accreditation
agency.
Application
for registation.

70
experts and a higher educational institution;
(b) a credible mechanism for transparency in respect of
the financial status and financial dealings of the applicant;
(c) a reliable public information disclosure policy for
accreditation of any higher educational institution or any
programme conducted therein;
(d) complete process and procedure to be followed by
the applicant in the accreditation of any higher educational
institution or any programme conducted therein;
(e) such other documents as may be specified by
regulations.
21. No application for grant of a certificate of registration
under section 20 shall be considered by the Authority, unless the
applicant satisfies the following conditions, namely:—
(a) the applicant is—
(i) a company registered under section 25 of the
Companies Act, 1956 or a society formed and
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or
a trust formed under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or
any other law for the time being in force;
(ii) such company, society or trust is formed or
controlled by the Central Government or a State
Government or any authority or board or institution
established under any Central or State Act;
(b) the applicant is a non-profit organization;
(c) the applicant has, in its memorandum of association
or in the trust deed, specified accreditation of higher
educational, institutions as one of its main objects:
(d) the applicant has adequate infrastructure, to enable
it to provide accreditation services in accordance with the
provisions of this Act or such infrastructure as may be
specified by regulations;
(e) the applicant and the promoters of the applicant
have professional competence, financial soundness and general
reputation of fairness and integrity to the satisfaction of the
Authority;
(f) the applicant, or its promoters, or any member of
the governing body of the applicant or its promoter, is not
involved in any legal proceeding connected with any higher
educational institution except in course of any accreditation
Eligibility for
registration as
an
accreditation
agency.
1 of 1956.
21 of 1860.
2 of 1882.

71
proceedings carried out in pursuance of the provisions of this
Act and regulations made thereunder:
(g) the applicant, or its promoters, or any director, or
member, or trustee has, at any time in the past, not been
convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude or any
economic offence;
(h) the applicant has, in its employment, persons
having adequate professional and other relevant experience to
the satisfaction of the Authority;
(i) the applicant, or any person directly or indirectly
connected with the applicant, has in the past not been—
(i) refused by the Authority a certificate of
registration under this Act; or
(ii ) subjected to any proceedings for
contravention of this Act or of rules or regulations
made thereunder or any other law for the time being in
force;
(j) the applicant, in all other respects, is a fit and
proper person for the grant of a certificate.
(k) the applicant conforms to such other conditions as
may be specified by regulations.
22. ( 1) The Authority shall, on receipt of the application
under section 20 for grant of certificate of registration, issue a
public notice, in such form and manner as may be specified by
regulations, and place the application together with all documents
received with the application, for a period of sixty days from the
date of issue of such public notice, on the website of the Authority.
(2) Any person may, within a period of said sixty days
referred to in sub-section ( 1), submit his comments or objections,
if any, on the application or part thereof, to the Authority.
(3) The Authority may, within the period of sixty days
referred to in sub-section ( 1), require the applicant to furnish such
other information or clarification as it may consider necessary.
(4) The Authority may obtain the advice of such experts, as
it deems fit, for the specific purpose of evaluating the competency
of the applicant.
(5) The applicant shall, within  a period of seven days after
making the application under sub-section ( 1), forward a copy of
such application with other documents to all State Governments.
(6) The State Governments shall, within a period of forty-five
days after the receipt of the copy of the application referred to in
sub-section ( 5), send its recommendations, if any, to the Authority.
(7) The applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to submit
his response on the comments or objections received under sub-
Procedure for
grant of
certificate.

72
section ( 2) or clarifications sought under sub-section ( 3) or
recommendations made by the State Government, if any, under sub-
section ( 6):
Provided that such response shall be submitted within a
period of thirty days from the expiry of the period of sixty days
referred to in sub-section ( 2).
(8) The Authority shall, before granting a certificate of
registration under section 23, conduct a public hearing, in such
manner as may be specified by regulations, to consider all
comments or objections or clarifications or recommendations, if
any, and the response of the applicant thereto, including any other
matter as the Authority may deem fit for such consideration.
23. (1) The Authority shall, as far as practicable within a
period of six months from the receipt of such application, after
considering the comments or objections or clarifications or
recommendations under sub-section ( 8) of section 22, —
(a) issue a certificate of registration as an accreditation
agency, on such terms and conditions as may be specified in
such certificate, subject to the provisions of this Act and rules
and regulations made thereunder; or
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in
writing if such application does not conform to the provisions
of this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder or the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the
applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard.
(2) The Authority shall, while issuing a certificate of
registration, approve the documents referred to in clauses ( a) to ( e)
of sub-section ( 2) of section 20 as such or with such modifications,
as it may deem fit, and thereupon the accreditation agency shall
follow the procedures and conditions so approved in the process of
accreditation.
(3) The documents approved under sub-section ( 2) shall be
considered as an integrat part of the certificate of registration which
shall not be modified or altered without the approval of the
Authority.
(4) The Authority may, if it so deems fit, in the certificate of
registration granted to an accreditation agency, limit the area or
programme for which such accreditation agency may exercise its
duties and responsibilities of accreditation.
(5) A certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of
ten years unless such certificate is revoked earlier in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
Grant of
certificate of
registration.

73
24. ( 1)  A certificate of registration granted under section 23
may, on an application made by the accreditation agency, be
renewed by the Authority for such period and on payment of such
fees as may be specified by regulations.
(2) No application for renewal of the certificate of registration
made under sub-section ( 1) shall be rejected unless the applicant has
been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
25. No accreditation agency shall, without the prior approval
of the Authority effect any change in its ownership, or governing
body or board of trustees, or the memorandum of association or
articles of association or the trust feed.
26. The Authority may, in the public interest or for ensuring
advancement of academic quality, on an application of the
accreditation agency or otherwise, make such alterations and
amendments in the terms and conditions of the certificate of
registration as it thinks fit, in accordance with such procedure as
may be specified by regulations.
27. ( 1) If the Authority, on a complaint or otherwise, and
after making such enquiry as it deems fit, is satisfied that public
interest so requires, it may revoke the certificate of registration in
any of the following case, namely:—
(a) where the accreditation agency, in the opinion of
the Authority, makes wilful or continuous default in any act of
commission or omission as required by or under this Act or
the rules or regulations made thereunder;
(b) where the accreditation agency commits breach of
any of the terms or conditions of the certificate of registration
which is expressly declared by such certificate of registration
to render it liable to revocation;
(c) where the accreditation agency fails, within the
period fixed in this behalf by his certificate of registration, or
any longer period which the Authority may have granted
therefor, to show, to the satisfaction of the Authority, that
such agency is in a position fully and efficiently to discharge
the duties and obligations imposed on it by its certificate of
registration;
(d) where in the opinion of the Authority the financial
position of the Accreditation Agency is such that such
agency is unable fully and efficiently to discharge the duties
and obligations imposed on it by its certificate of registration;
(e) the accreditation agency has ceased to exist.
(2) No certificate of registration shall be revoked under sub-
section ( 1) unless the Authority has given to the accreditation
agency not less than thirty days notice, in writing, stating the
Renewal of
certificate
of
registration.
Accreditation
agency not to
do certain
things.
Amendment
to certificate
of
registration.
Suspension or
revocation of
certificate of
registration.

74
grounds on which it is proposed to revoke the certificate of
registration, and has considered any cause shown by the
accreditation agency within the period of that notice, against the
proposed revocation.
(3) Where in its opinion the public interest so requires or for
ensuring the advancement of academic quality, the Authority may,
on conclusion of the enquiry under sub-section ( 1), suspend the
certificate of registration grnated to the accreditation agency till
such time as a decision on the revocation of such certificate of
registration or otherwise, is taken by the Authority.
(4) Where the Authority revokes a certificate of registration
under this section, it shall serve an order of revocation upon the
accreditations agency and fix a date on which the revocation shall
take effect; and such revocation shall be without prejudice to the
action which may be taken against it under any other law for the
time being in force.
(5) The Authority may, instead of revoking a certificate of
registration under sub-section ( 1), permit it to remain in force
subject to such further terms and conditions as it thinks fit to
impose, and any furhter terms or conditions so imposed shall be
binding upon and be observed by the accreditation agency and shall
be of like force and effect as if they were contained in the
certificate of registration.
(6) The Authority shall publish on its websit any action
initiated under this section and the final decision on the revocation
of the certificate of registration or otherwise together with all
documents and reasons for such decision.
(7) Where the certification of any accreditation agency has
been revoked under sub-section ( 4) on grounds referred to in sub-
section ( 1), the Authority shall, within a period of sixty days from
the date of such revocation, conduct an audit of all the higher
educational institutions accredited by such agency within a period of
one year before the date of such revocation.
(8) The Authority shall, while suspending or revoking a
certificate of registration, take, or cause to be taken, such measures
which may be necessary to protect the interests of students.
28. Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the
Authority under this Chapter or section 31, may prefer an appeal,
against such order to the National Educational Tribunal within a
period of sixty days from the date or the order, in such form and
manner and accompanied with such documents and such fees as
may be prescribed:
Provided that the National Educational Tribunal may entertain
an appeal after the expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is
satisfied that the appellant has sufficient cause for not preferring the
appeal within the period of sixty days.
Appeal
against any
order of
Authority.

75
CHAPTER VI
DUTIES AND O BLIGATIONS OF A CCREDITATION A GENCIES
29. (1) While undertaking accreditation of a higher educational
institution or programme conducted therein, the accreditation agency
shall have regard to following principles in discharging its
obligations for the advancement of knowledge; namely:—
(a) advancement of academic quality;
(b) enabling uniform reference of standards of
academic quality in any class or classes of higher educational
institutions or any one or more programmes conducted
therein;
(c) informing stakeholders (including students and
employers) about the quality of the higher educational
institution or any progmmme conducted therein;
(d) rendering assistance to higher educational
institutions in managing and enhancing their academic quality
working towards the development of explicit intended learning
outcomes:
(c) adherence to such other principles for advancement
of knowledge which may evolve from time to time.
(2) The accreditation agency shall, while undertaking
accreditation of higher educational institutions or any programme
conducted therein, follow the standards in respect of academic
quality specified by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority.
(3) Every accreditation agency shall abide by the code of
ethics.
30. (1) Every accreditation agency shall accredit a higher
educational institution or a programme conducted therein on an
application made to it by such institution in such form and manner,
and on payment of such fees, as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The process and procedure for accreditation of a higher
educational institution of a programme in such institution shall be
such as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The accreditation of a higher education institution or a
programme in such institution shall be done at such intervals and
after such periods as may be specified by the appropriate statutory
regulatory authority.
(4) The accreditation agency shall, while undertaking
accreditation of a higher educational institution or a programme in
such institution, provide an opportunity to the stakeholders in the
higher educational institution, including students and employees, to
submit their views on matters of academic quality.
(5) the accreditation agency shall give a reasonable
opportunity to the higher educational institution to file suggestions or
Duties and
obligations of
acereditation
agencies.
Procedure of
accreditation
by
accreditation
agency.

76
objections, if any, on the draft accreditation prepared by it and shall
take note of such suggestions or objections, if any, while finalizing
the accreditation of such institution or any programme conducted
therein.
(6) The accreditation agency shall publish on its website the
accreditation together with all documents and reasons for such
accreditation.
31. ( 1) Any person, aggrieved by the accreditation decided by
any accreditation agency under this Chapter, may apply to the
Authority for withdrawal of such accreditation or its modification.
(2) The Authority shall take a decision on an application made
under sub-section ( 1) within ninety days.
CHAPTER VIII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
32. The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority
grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may
think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
33. ( 1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the
National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational
Institutions Fund and there shall be credited thereto-
(i) any grants and loans made to the Authority by the
Central Government;
(ii) all fees and charges received by the Authority under
this Act; and
(iii) all sums received by the Authority from such other
sources as may be decided upon by the Central Government.
(2) The fund referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be applied for
meeting—
(i) the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the
Chairperson, other Members, officers and other employees of
the Authority; and
(ii) the expenses of the Authority incurred in the
discharge of its functions and for purposes of this Act.
34. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts
in such form as may be prescribed by Central Government, in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may
Application
to Authority
on
accreditation
by
accreditation
agency.
Grants by
Central
Government.
National
Accreditation
Regulatory
Authority for
Higher
Educational
Institutions
Fund.
Accounts and
audit of
Authority.

77
be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with
such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India any other
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of the
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and
other documents and papers and to inspect any of the office of the
Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person
appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by
the Authority and the Government shall cause the same to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
35. (1) The Authority shall prepare in every year, in such
form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving
a full account of its activities during the previous year, and copies
thereof along with copies of its annual accounts and auditor's report
shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Government
shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
(2) The Authority shall also forward a copy of the annual
report so prepared under sub-section ( 1) to all appropriate statutory
regulatory authorities.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES  AND PENALTIES
36. If an accreditation agency fails to comply with the
obligations referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 29 and the
adherence to the code of ethics referred to in sub-section ( 3) of that
section, without prejudice to any penalty which may be imposed
under this Act, it shall be liable to pay such compensation, to the
higher educational institution for any loss or damages suffered by
such institution, as may be determined by the State Educational
Tribunal:
Provided that before determination of any compensation under
this section, the accreditation agency shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard by the State Educational Tribunal.
37. Any accreditation agency, which contravenes—
(a) any provision of this Act or rules or regulations
made thereunder; or
Annual report
of Authority.
Compensation
to affected
higher
educational
institution.
Penalty in
case of
contravention.

78
(b) the standards specified under any law for the time
being in force by the appropriate statutory regulatory
authority; or
(c) the terms and conditions specified in the certificate
of registration.
Shall, without prejudice to proceeding for prosecution under the
provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force,
be liable to a penalty which may extend to five lakh rupees.
38. If a person, without reasonable excuse, resists, obstructs,
or attempts to obstruct, impersonate, threaten; intimidate or assault
an officer of the Authority or any person assigned to discharge any
function under this Act, or in exercising his functions under this
Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees or with both.
39. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 19 shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with
both.
40. If any person provides any information or produces any
document under this Act, or under any rule or regulation made
thereunder, or delivers an account or statement which is false, and
which he either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe
to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend
to five lakh rupees or with both.
41. If any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or
abets the contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any rules
or regulations made thereunder, for which no punishment is
provided elsewhere in this Act, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees or with both.
42. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by a company, every person who at the time the offence was
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to the company
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this
Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
Penalty for
obstructing or
impersonating
an officer of
Authority.
Punishment
for
contravenes
the provisions
of section 19.
Punishment
for false
information.
General
provisions
relating to
offences and
fine.
Offence by
companies.

79
knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the
part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation ,—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes
a firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in
the firm.
43. ( 1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by a society or trust or agency or institution, every person who at
the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the society or trust or agency or institution for the
conduct of the business of the society or trust or university, as well
as the society or trust or agency or institution, shall be deemed to
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this
Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society
or trust or agency or institution and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable
to any neglect on the part of any governors, vice-chancellor,
directors, committee, trustees, registrar or other officer, such
governors, directors, committee, trustees, registrar or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
44. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence
punishable under this Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder, save on a complaint made by the Authority of any
officer or person authorized by it.
Offence by
soceity trust
and
institution.
Cognizance of
offences.

80
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate shall try any offence
punishable under this Act.
45. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all matters
under section 36 (including determination of compensation
thereunder) shall be adjudicated by the State Educational Tribunal
having jurisdiction.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all matters under
section 37 (including the penalties leviable thereunder) shall be
adjudicated by the National Educational Tribunal.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
46. (1) The Central Government may, by a general or special
order, call upon the Authority to furnish, periodically or as and
when required any information concerning the activities carried on
by the Authority or any accreditation agency or higher educational
institution in matters concerning accreditation, in such form as may
be prescribed, to enable that Government, to carry out the purposes
of this Act.
(2) The Authority may, by a general or special order, call
upon any accreditation agency or higher educational institution to
furnish, periodically or as and when required any information
concerning the activities carried on by such accreditation agency or
institution, in such form as may be specified by regulations, to
enable the Authority, to carry out the purposes of this Act.
47. ( 1) The accreditation agency shall furnish to the Authority
at such time and in such form and manner as may be specified by
regulations or as the Authority may direct, such returns and
statements and such particulars in regard to accreditation of higher
educational institutions by such agency, as the Authority may, from
time to time, require.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
accreditation agency shall, within a period of ninety days after the
end of each financial year, submit to the Authority a report along
with audited statement of accounts ill such form, as may be
specified by regulations, giving a true and full account of its
activities, policy and programmes in regard to accreditation of
higher educational institutions by such agency during the previous
financial year.
Power to call
for
information.
Returns and
reports by
accreditation
agencies.
Adjudication
of penalty.

81
48. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this
Act, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the
performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such
directions on questions of policy, other than those relating to
technical and administrative matters, as the Central Government may
give in writing to it from rime to time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be
given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is
given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a
question is one of policy or not shall be final.
49. If the Central Government is of the opinion that it is
necessary or expedient in the interests of the general public so to
do, or for advancement of knowledge, it may, by notification, and
subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification,
exempt any classes of higher educational institutions from the
operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act and may, as
often as may be necessary, revoke or modify such notification.
50. (1) If at anytime the Central Government is of the
opinion—
(a) that on account of circumstances beyond the
control of the Authority, it is unable to discharge the functions
or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in
complying with direction given by the Central Government
under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or
performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary
in the public interest so to do.
the Central Government may, by notification and for reasons to be
specified therein, supersede the Authority for such period, not
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to
make representations against the proposed supersession and shall
consider representations, if any of the Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1)
superseding the Authority.—
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from
the dare of supersession, vacate their offices as such;
Power to
exempt.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Authority.

82
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or
discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the
Authority is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised
and discharged by the Central Government or such authority
as the Central Government or may specify in this behalf;
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority
shall, until the Authority is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3),
vest in the Central Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession
specified in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government shall reconstitute the Authority by a fresh appointment
of its Chairperson and other Members and in such case any person
who had vacated his office under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) shall
not be deemed to be disqualified for re-appointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued
under sub-section ( 1) and a full report of any action taken under
this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid
before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
51. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit
or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Authority or a
State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal is
empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction
shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any
action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by
or under this Act.
52. The Chairperson and other Members and the officers and
other employees of the Authority shall be deemed to be public
servants within the meaning or section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
53. No suit prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Central Government or against the Chairperson or any
other Member, as the case may be, for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any
rule or regulation made thereunder in the discharge of official duties.
54. Subject to the provisions of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956, the provisions of this Act shall have
overriding effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
55. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force.
3 of 1956.
Bar of
Jurisdiction.
Members and
staff of
Authority to be
public servants.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Application
of other laws
not barred.
45 of 1860.

83
56. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:-
(a) the manner of nomination of experts in the
concerned field of knowledge to the Selection Committee
under sub-section ( 3) of section 8;
(b) the term of Selection Committee and the manner of
selection of panel of names under sub-section ( 4) of section 8;
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other
Members of the Authority under sub-section ( 2) of section 9;
(d) the other disqualifications for removal of the
Chairperson or other Members under clause ( i) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 10;
(e) the procedure for the inquiry under sub-section ( 4)
of section 10;
(f) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other
terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other
employees of the Authority under sub-section ( 3) of section 15;
(g) the other functions which the Authority may
perform under clause (n) of sub-section ( 2) of section 16;
(h) the fees and remuneration payable to, the period,
qualifications and experience of, and the manner in which the
Authority may engage experts under section 17;
(i) the form and manner in which an appeal may be
preferred and the documents to be accompanied with it and
the fees payable therewith under section 28;
(j) the form for maintaining proper accounts and other
relevant records and the annual statement of accounts of the
Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 34;
(k) the form in which, and the time at which, the
annual report of the Authority shall be prepared under section 35;
(l) the information concerning the activities carried on
by the Authority or any accreditation agency or higher
educational institution in matters concerning accreditation to
be furnished to the Central Government under sub-section ( 1)
of section 46;
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.

84
(m) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by rules or in respect of which provision is to
be made by rules.
57. (1) The Authority may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make regulations, consistent with the provision of the Act
and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:-
(a) the code of ethics and such other ethical principles
to be adhered to by an accreditation agency under clause ( h)
of sub-section ( 1) of section 3;
(b) the form and manner in which an application may
be made and the documents to be accompanied with it and
the fee payable therewith under sub-section ( 1) of section 20;
(c) such other documents that an applicant has to
submit along with his application for grant of certificate of
registration as may be specified under clause ( e) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 20;
(d) the infrastructure that an applicant shall possess for
providing accreditation services under clause ( d) of section 21;
(e) the other conditions of eligibility for grant of
certificate of registration under clause ( k) of section 21;
(f) the form and manner in which the public notice may
be issued under sub-section ( 1) of section 22;
(g) the manner of conducting public hearing by the
Authority under sub-section ( 8) of section 22;
(h) the fees payable and the period for which the
certificate of registration granted to an accreditation agency
may be renewed under sub-section ( 1) of section 24;
(i) the procedure for grant of approval in respect of
any change in the ownership structure or the memorandum of
association of an accreditation agency under section 25:
(j) the procedure far making amendment or alteration in
the terms and conditions of the certificate of registration
under section 26:
(k) the form and manner in which an application may
be made for accreditation of any higher education institution
Power of
Authority to
make
regulations.

85
or any programme therein and the documents to be
accompanied with it and the fee payable therewith under sub-
section ( 1) of section 30;
(l) the procedure and process to be followed by the
accreditation agency for accreditation of any higher
educational institution or any programme conducted therein
under sub-section ( 2) of section 30;
(m) the information concerning the activities carried on
by the accreditation agency or the higher educational
institutions to be furnished to the Authority under sub-section ( 1)
of section 46;
(n) the time at which and the form and manner in
which the returns and statements and particulars in regard to
accreditation of higher educational institutions by the
accreditation agency under sub-section ( 1) of section 47;
(o) the form and manner in which the report, along
with audited statement of accounts, giving a true and full
account of activities, policy and programme in regard to
accreditation of higher educational institutions by the
accreditation agency under sub-section ( 2) of section 47;
(p) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by regulation or in respect of which provision is
to be made by regulations.
58. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act and
every notification issued under section 49 shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or regulation or notification, as
the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation
or notification, as the case may be, should not be made or issued,
the rule or regulation or notification, as the case may be, shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or regulation or notification, as the
case may be.
59. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order,
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
Laying of
rules,
regulations
and
notification.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

86
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after
the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

87
87
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Assessment and accreditation in the higher education, through
transparent and informed external review process, are the effective means
of quality assurance in higher education to provide a common frame of
reference for students and others to obtain credible information on
academic quality across institutions thereby assisting student mobility
across institutions, domestic as well as international. Presently,
accreditation is voluntary as a result of which less than one-fifth of the
colleges and less than one-third of all universities have obtained
accreditation. Mandatory accreditation in the higher education would
enable the higher education system in the country to become a part of the
global quality assurance system.
2. Mandatory accreditation in the higher education would require a
large number of competent and reliable accrediting agencies to be
recognised, monitored and audited for academic competence through an
independent but accountable institutional mechanism. Such a mechanism
would find acceptability among peer group of international accreditation
bodies, necessary for student and teacher mobility and institutional
collaborations, within and across borders. Consequently, there is a need
for an autonomous institutional structure with statutory backing to
recognise and regulate competent professional agencies charged with the
task of accreditation.
3. The process of assessment and accreditation in the higher
education is required to be performed by recognised agencies on the basis
of norms and standards of academic quality specified by the concerned
appropriate statutory regulatory authority in the field of knowledge in
higher learning. Registered agencies would accredit higher educational,
institutions through transparent processes and assessment of academic
quality in teaching, learning and research and their contribution to
enhancement of knowledge. The assessment would include physical
infrastructure, human resources (including faculty), administration, course
curricula, admission and assessment procedures, governance structures
including infrastructure and governance structures of the institution.
4. In view of the above, it is proposed to establish a regulatory
authority to register, monitor and audit the functioning of accreditation
agencies which would be invested with the responsibility of accrediting
higher educational institutions including universities, colleges, institutes,
institutions of national importance and programmes conducted therein.
Institutions imparting higher education beyond twelve years of schooling
would be mandatorily accredited. Higher educational institutions engaged
mainly in agricultural education and research have been kept out of the
purview of the proposed legislation.

88
5. The proposed National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for
Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010, inter alia , provides that—
(a) every higher educational institution and every programme
conducted therein shall require accreditation in the manner provided
in the proposed legislation;
(b) the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher
Educational Institutions shall be established by the Central
Government for regulating the process of accreditation which shall
consist of a Chairperson and four other Members, (at least, one of
whom shall be a woman), to be appointed by the Central Government
on the recommendation of a Selection Committee;
(c) the functions of the Authority, inter alia , shall be to
promote the development and regulate the process of accreditation of
higher educational institutions and to register and regulate the working
of accreditation agencies; lay down norms and policies for
assessment of academic quality in higher educational institution or
any programme conducted therein and its periodical review; undertake
audit and monitor the adherence to a Code of Ethics to be observed
by accreditation agencies lay down norms, standards and policies
requiring higher educational institution to provide information to the
public on their performance in regard to all aspects of academic
quality; recommend for improvement of academic quality in higher
educational institutions; advise the Central Government or any State
Government or the statutory regulatory authorities on any policy
matter concerning accreditation which may be referred to it; initiate
measures for development of methodologies of accreditation in
collaboration; promote research and innovation in assessment and
accreditation; collect, compile and disseminate information regarding
accreditation of higher educational institutions for public information
including stakeholders and perform such other functions as may be
prescribed;
(d) the Authority may call for any information and record
from, or undertake audit or inspection of or inquiry into, any higher
educational institution to verify the credibility of accreditation done by
an accreditation agency;
(e) only the registered accreditation agencies shall undertake
accreditation of any higher educational institution or any programme
conducted therein and the accreditation agencies established under
any law for the time being in force continue to function as such till
they are registered by the Authority under the proposed legislation;
(f) the accreditation agency shall have, while undertaking
accreditation of a higher educational institution or programme, regard
to its obligations for advancement of academic quality and inform all
stakeholders including students and employers about the quality of the
higher educational institution or any programme conducted therein;

89
(g) any person aggrieved by accreditation of higher educational
institutions may apply to Authority for withdrawal or modification;
(h) in case, an accreditation agency fails to abide by the Code
of Ethics or other obligations, it shall be liable to pay compensation
for damages to the higher educational institution as may be
determined by the State Educational Tribunal (proposed to be
established under the proposed Educational Tribunals Act, 2010);
(i) if any accreditation agency contravenes any provisions of
the proposed legislation or rules or regulations made thereunder or
standards specified under any law for the time being in force by the
appropriate statutory regulatory authority or the terms and conditions
specified in the certificate of registration shall, without prejudice to
proceedings for prosecution, be liable to a penalty which may extend
to five lakh rupees.
6. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions
contained in the Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI;
The 19th April, 2010. KAPIL SIBAL

90
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2.—This clause provides that the proposed legislation shall
apply to all higher educational institutions other than the higher educational
institutions engaged mainly in agricultural education and research and the
programmes of study conducted therein.
Clause 3.—This clause defines certain words and expressions used
in the proposed legislation.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for mandatory accreditation of
higher educational institutions and programmes conducted therein. It
provides that every higher educational institution and every programme
conducted therein shall be accredited in accordance with the provisions
of the proposed legislation and the rules and regulations made thereunder
and assessment of such accreditation shall be made before such
institution starts the process of admission to such programme. It further
provides that a higher educational institution, other than an institution
engaged mainly in medical education, existing before the commencement
of proposed legislation, shall make an application to an accreditation
agency for accreditation of such institution or programme conducted
therein, within a period of three years from the date of commencement
of the proposed legislation whereas a higher educational institution
engaged mainly in medical education and existing before the
commencement of the proposed legislation shall make such application to
an accreditation agency within a period of five years from the date of
such commencement.
It also provides that the accreditation agency to whom an
application for accreditation has been made by a higher educational
institution, shall undertake and complete accreditation within a period of
one hundred and eighty days from the date of such application. It also
specifies that a higher educational institution which has been accredited
before the commencement of the proposed legislation by an agency set up
by or under any law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to be
accredited under of the proposed legislation for the period of accreditation
by such agency.
It also provides that in case a higher educational institutions
existing at the time of commencement of the proposed legislation fails to
make an application for accreditation or obtain accreditation of the
institution or programme conducted therein within the specified period, the
institution shall, without prejudice to any action that may be initiated by
the appropriate statutory regulatory authority or proceedings under any law
for the time being in force, be liable for penalty specified under clause 41
of the proposed legislation.
90

91
Clause  5.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
establish a National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher
Educational Institutions (hereinafter referred to as the “Authority”) to
exercise the powers conferred upon it under the  proposed legislation. It
further provides that the Authority shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, to
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and
to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued and that its head
office shall be at New Delhi.
Clause 6.—This clause provides that the Authority shall consist of
a Chairperson and four other Members, or whom at least one shall be
woman, to be appointed by the Central Government.
Clause 7.—This clause specifies the qualifications for appointment
as Chairperson or Members of the Authority. Sub-clause (1) provides that
a person shall be qualified to be appointed as the Chairperson of the
Authority, if such person is not less than fifty-five years of age and is of
ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate knowledge and experience
of at least twenty five years in dealing with matters relating to higher
education and research and is, or has been, a Vice Chancellor of any
University, or a Head of an institution of national importance. Sub-clause (2)
provides that a person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Member of
the Authority, if such person is not less than fifty-five years of age and
is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate knowledge and
experience of at least twenty-five years in higher education and research
or legal matters. Sub-clause (3) provides that out of the four other
members, one shall be chosen from amongst Professors in the field of
medical education in any University or an institution of national
importance; one from amongst Professors in the field of science or
technology in any University or an institution of national importance; one
from amongst Professors ill the field of social sciences or humanities in
any University or an institution of national importance and one from
amongst persons having knowledge and experience in legal matters.
Clause 8.—This clause provides for selection of the Chairperson
and other Members of the Authority. Sub-clause (1) provides that the
Selection Committee shall comprise the Cabinet Secretary as its
Chairperson, the Secretary in charge of higher education in the Ministry
of Human Resource Development, the Chairman, University Grants
Commission and three experts, with one each from the fields of medical
education, agricultural education and research and legal education
respectively as its Members. The Selection Committee shall recommend
a panel of names to the Central Government for appointment. Sub-clause (2)
provides that the Secretary in charge of higher education in the Ministry
of Human Resource Development shall be the convenor of the meetings
of the Selection Committee. Sub-clause (3) provides that the three
experts in the fields of education specified in sub-clause (1) shall be
nominated in a manner to be prescribed by rules the Central
Government. Sub-clause (4) provides that the term of the Selection
Committee and the manner of selection of panel of names shall be
prescribed by rules by the Central Government. Sub-clause (5) states

92
that no appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the Authority shall
be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
Sub-clause (6) provides that the Selection Committee may regulate its
own procedure in its deliberations.
Clause 9.—This  clause provides that the Chairperson and Member
of the Authority shall hold office for a term of five years from the date
on which they enter upon office and shall be eligible for reappointment,
but shall not hold office after they have attained the age of seventy years.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other
Members shall be prescribed by rules by the Central Government.
Clause 10.—This c1ause provides the manner of removal of the
Chairperson or a Member of the Authority. The grounds for  removal
include where the Chairperson or a Member has been is an adjudged an
insolvent, has engaged at any time during his term of office in any paid
employment, has been convicted of an offence which in the opinion of the
Central Government involves moral turpitude, has, become physically or
mentally incapable, is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court, has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely
to affect prejudicially the exercise of his functions, has so abused his
position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public
interest, has been guilty of proved misbehavior or has such other
disqualifications as may be prescribed under rules made by the Central
Government. Sub-clause (2) provides that no Chairperson or a Member of
the Authority shall be removed from his office on the grounds specified
in clause ( f) or clause ( g) or clause ( h) of sub-clause ( 1) in this clause,
except by an order made by the Central Government after an inquiry made
in this behalf in which the Chairperson or member has been informed of
the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Sub-clause (3) provides that in the event of inquiry instituted against the
Chairperson or Member, the Central Government may suspend such
Chairperson or  Member against whom inquiry has been instituted for  a
period not exceeding six months if it considers necessary in public
interest. Sub-clause (4) empowers the Central Government to regulate the
procedure for the inquiry.
Clause 11.—This clause provides for the prohibitions as to holding
of offices by Chairperson or Member on ceasing to be such Chairperson
or Member of Authority. The clause specifies that the Chairperson or
Member shall be ineligible for a period of five years from the date on
which they cease to hold office, for further employment, including as
consultant or expert or otherwise, in any higher educational institution
under the Central Government or a State Government or any private higher
educational institution or in any institution whose matters had been before
such Chairperson or Member.
Clause 12.—This clause provides that any Member having any
direct or indirect interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any  matter

93
coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Authority, shall, as soon
as possible after the relevant circumstances, have come to his knowledge,
disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure
shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Authority, and the Member
shall not take any part in any deliberation or decision of the Authority with
respect to that matter. This clause is intended to provide for self-
disclosure of issues in which conflict of interest in respect of the
Chairperson or any  Member that may  arise in the course of performance
of duties by the Authority.
Clause 13.—This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the
Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or any  defect
in the constitution of the Authority or any  defect in the appointment of a
person acting as a Member of the Authority or any  irregularity in the
procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 14.—This clause provides the manner in which the
Chairperson or a Member of the Authority shall resign office. It provides
that the Chairperson or Member may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the Central Government, resign his office and shall, unless he
is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor
enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is
the earliest.
Clause 15.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
determine the nature and categories of the officers and other employees
required to assist the, Authority in the discharge of its functions and
provide the Authority with such officers and other employees as it may
think fit. Sub-clause, (2) provides that the officers and other employees of
the Authority shall discharge their functions under the general
superintendence of the Chairperson of the Tribunal. Sub-clause (3)
empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide for the
salaries and allowances payable and the other terms and conditions of
service of the officers  and other employees of the Authority.
Clause 16.—This clause provides for the powers and functions of
the Authority. It specifies that the Authority shall, subject to the provisions
of the proposed legislation and rules and regulations made thereunder and
regulations made under any  law for the time being in force by the
appropriate statutory regulatory authority, take measures to develop and to
regulate the process of accreditation of higher educational institutions and
programmes conducted therein and monitor the functioning of
accreditation agencies. The measures may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely regulate accreditation agencies including the
registration of the accreditation agencies; lay down norms and policies for
assessment of academic quality in higher educational institutions or of any
programme conducted therein by accreditation agencies; undertake
periodical review of norms and policies; undertake audit and cause to be

94
audited the adherence to code of ethics including policies on obviating
conflict of interest, disclosure of information, evolving transparency in
processes and procedures of accreditation; lay down policies for providing
information to the public in regard to all aspects of quality and
performance of higher educational institutions and programmes conducted
therein including student achievement, faculty availability and qualifications
and research; specify and monitor standards on selection and training of
experts for the purposes of accreditation by any accreditation agency; levy
of fees or other charges recommend for improvement of academic quality
while respecting the higher educational institution’s responsibility to set its
priorities; advise the Central Government or any State Government  or the
appropriate statutory regulatory authority on any policy matter concerning
accreditation which may be referred to it; take measures for development
of methodologies of accreditation in collaboration with accreditation
agencies or universities; promote research and innovation in assessment
and accreditation; collect compile and disseminate information regarding
accreditation of higher educational institution and programmes conducted
therein to the public including stakeholders; monitor adherence to norms,
guidelines and standards of academic quality in higher educational
institutions, as may be specified under any law for the time being in force
by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority and perform such other
functions as may be prescribed by rules by the Central Government..
Clause 17.—This clause provides that the Authority may engage,
on such fee and remuneration and for such period, such experts having
such qualifications and experience, as may be prescribed by rules by the
Central Government, for discharging its functions under the legislation.
Clause  18.—This clause provides for powers of audit and
inspection by Authority. It provides that the Authority may, at any time, by
order in writing, direct any person (hereinafter referred to as
“Accreditation Audit Committee”) specified in  the order, to audit or inspect
or inquire into the affairs of any accreditation agency or any higher
educational institution in matters of accreditation and to report to the
Authority on any audit or inspection made by the Accreditation Audit
Committee. Sub-clause (2) provides that it shall be the duty of every chief
executive or officer or  other employee of the accreditation agency and
every chief executive or teacher or officer or other employee of the higher
education institution, as the case may be, to produce before the
Accreditation Audit Committee, all such papers and other documents in his
custody or power and to furnish him with any statement and information
relating to the affairs of the accreditation agency or higher educational
institution, as the case may be, as the Accreditation Audit Committee may
require of him within such time as the Accreditation Audit Committee may
specify. Sub-cluase (3) provides that the Accreditation Audit Committee,
directed to audit or inspect or inquire, may examine on oath any chief
executive or officer or other employee of the accreditation agency in
relation to accreditation of any higher educational institution or programme
conducted therein, and may administer oaths accordingly. Sub-clause (4)
provides that on receipt of any report by the Accreditation Audit

95
Committee, the Authority may, after giving such opportunity to the
accreditation agency to make a representation in connection with the
report as in the opinion of the Authority seems reasonable, by order in
writing require the accreditation agency to take such action in respect of
any matter arising out of the report as the Authority may think fit; or
modify terms and conditions of certificate or registration as it thinks fit
and the terms or conditions so modified shall be binding upon and be
observed by the accreditation agency and shall be of like force and effect
as if they were contained in the certificate of registration; or revoke the
certificate of registration of the accreditation agency. Sub-clause (5)
provides that the Authority shall, place the report submitted by the
Accreditation Audit Committee and the action taken thereon by the
Authority on its website to ensure transparency in the process.
Clause  19.—This clause provides that no accreditation agency
shall, except under and in accordance with the conditions of a certificate
of registration obtained from the Authority under the proposed legislation
and in accordance with rules and regulations made thereunder, undertake
accreditation of any, higher educational institution or any programme
conducted threin. It further provides that any agency set up by or under
any law for the time being in force, which is carrying out the work of
accreditation of higher educational institutions or programmes conducted
therein, on or before the date of commencement of this Act, my continue
to do so until the certificate of registration is granted to it by the
Authority. It also provides that existing agency carrying out the work of
accreditation, shall make an application for registration as an accreditation
agency under this legislation within a period of one hundred and eighty
days from the date of establishment of the Authority. It also provides that
the Authority shall either issue the certificate of registration or reject the
application within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the date
of such application.
Clause 20.— This clause provides that every application for
registration as an accreditation agency shall be made 10 the Authority in
such form and manner and accompanied by such other documents and on
payment of such fees as may be specified by regulations. Sub-clause (2)
provides that every application shall be accompanied with a detailed
mechanism for detecting any potential conflict of interest between the
applicant or its employees or experts and a higher educational institution,
a credible mechanism for transparency in respect of the financial status
and financial dealings or the applicant, a reliable public information
disclosure policy for accreditation of any higher educational institution or
any programme conducted therein, complete processes and procedures to
be followed by the applicant in the accreditation of any higher educational
institution or any programme conducted therein and such other documents
as may be specified by regulations by the Authority.
Clause 21.—This clause provides for the eligibility criteria and
conditions for an applicant to be registered as an accreditation agency. It
provides that no application for grant of a certificate of registration shall

96
be considered by the Authority, unless the applicant is a non-profit
organization being a company registered under section 25 of the
Companies Act, 1956 or a society formed and registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 or a trust formed under the Indian Trusts
Act, 1882 or any other law for the time being in force and such company,
society or trust is formed or controlled by the Central Government or a
State Government or any authority or board or institution established under
any Centra1 or State Act. It further provides the applicant must satisfy the
following other conditions, namely; that the applicant has, in its
memorandum of association or in the trust deed, specified accreditation of
higher educational institutions as one of its main objects; the applicant has
adequate infrastructure to enable it to provide accreditation services in
accordance with the provisions of the proposed legislation or such
infrastructure as may be specified by regulations by the Authority, the
applicant and the promoters of the applicant have professional
competence, financial soundness and general reputation of fairness and
integrity to the satisfaction of the Authority; the applicant or its promoters
or any member of the governing body of the applicant or its promoter is
not involved in any legal proceeding connected with any higher educational
institution except in course of any accreditation proceedings carried out in
pursuance of the provisions of the proposed legislation and regulations
made thereunder; the applicant or its promoters, or any director, or
member, or trustee has, at any time in the past, not been convicted of any
offence involving moral turpitude of any economic offence; the applicant
has, in its employment, persons having adequate professional and other
relevant experience to the satisfaction of the Authority, the applicant or
any person directly or indirectly connected with the applicant has in the
past not been refused by the Authority a certificate of registration or
subjected to any proceedings for contravention of the proposed legislation
or of rules or regulations made thereunder or any other law for the time
being in force; the applicant in all other respects, is a fit and proper
person for the grant of a certificate and the applicant conforms to such
other conditions as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 22.—This clause provides that the Authority shall, on
receipt of the application for grant of certificate of registration, issue a
public notice in a form and manner as may be specified by regulations
by the Authority, and place the application together with all document
received with the application on the website of the Authority for a period
of sixty days from the date of issue of the public notice. Sub-clause (2)
provides that any person may, submit his comments or objections, if
any, on the application or part thereof, to the Authority within a period
of sixty days from the date of issue of the public notice. Sub-clause (3)
provides that the Authority may require the applicant to furnish such
other information or clarification as it may consider necessary within the
period of sixty days from the date of issue of the public notice. Sub-
clause (4) provides that the Authority may obtain the advice of such
experts, as it deems fit, for the specific purpose of evaluating the
competency of the applicant. Sub-clause (5) mandates that the applicant

97
shall, within a period of seven days after, making, the application,
forward a copy of the application with other documents to all State
Governments and sub-clause (6) requires that the State Governments
shall send its recommendations, if any, to the Authority within a period
of forty-five days after the receipt of the copy of the application. Sub-
clause (7)  provides that the applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to
submit his response on the comments or objections received or
clarifications sought or recommendations made by the State Government,
if any, It also provides that the response shall be submitted by the
applicant within a period of thirty days from the expiry of the period of
sixty days from the date of issue of the public notice. Sub-clause (8)
provides that the Authority shall, before granting a certificate of
registration, conduct a public hearing, in a manner as may specified
by regulations, to consider all comments or objections or clarifications
or recommendations, if any, and the response of the applicant,
including any other matter as the Authority may deem fit for such
consideration.
Clause 23.—This clause provides that the Authority shall as far as
practicable within a period of six months from the receipt of such
application, and after considering the comments or objections or
clarifications or recommendations, issue a certificate of registration as an
accreditation agency on such terms and conditions as may be specified in
such certificate; or reject the application for reasons to be recorded in
writing if such application dose not conform to the provisions of the
proposed 1egislation or rules or regulations made thereunder or the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. It further provides
that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given an
opportunity of being heard. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Authority
shall, while issuing a certificate of registration, approve the documents
submitted by the applicant under clause 19 as such or with such
modifications as it may deem fit, and thereupon the accreditation agency
shall follow the procedures and conditions so approved in its process of
accreditation. Sub-clause (3) provides that the documents so approved
shall be considered as an integral part of the certificate of registration
which shall not be modified or altered without the approval of the
Authority. Sub-clause (4) provides that the Authority may, if it so  deems
fit, in the certificate of registration granted to an accreditation agency,
limit the area or programme for which such accreditation agency may
exercise its duties and responsibilities of accreditation. Sub-clause (5)
provides that a certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of ten
years unless such certificate is revoked earlier in accordance with the
provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 24.—This clause provides that a certificate of registration
may, on an application made by the accreditation agency, be renewed by
the Authority for such period and on payment of such fees as may be
specified by regulations but no application for renewal of the certificate of
registration shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.

98
Clause  25.—This clause provides that no accreditation agency
shall, without the prior approval of the Authority effect any change in its
ownership, or governing body or board of trustees, or the memorandum
of association or articles of association or the trust deed.
Clause 26.—This clause provides that the Authority, may, in the
public interest or for ensuring advancement of academic quality, on an
application of the accreditation agency or otherwise, make such
alternations and amendments in the terms and conditions of the certificate
of registration as it thinks fit, in accordance with the procedure as may
be specified by regulations by the Authority.
Clause 27.—This clause provides for suspension or revocation of
certificate of registration. It provides that if the Authority, on a complaint
or otherwise, and after making such enquiry as it deems fit, is satisfied
that public interest so requires, it may revoke the certificate of registration
where the accreditation agency, in the opinion of the Authority, makes
willful or continuous default in any act of commission or omission as
required by or under the proposed legislation or the  rules or regulations
made thereunder; or where the accreditation agency commits breach of
any of the terms or conditions of the certificate of registration which is
expressly declared by such certificate of registration to render it liable to
revocation or where the accreditation agency fails, within the period fixed
in this behalf by its certificate of registration or any longer period which
the Authority may have granted for the purpose, to show to the
satisfaction of the Authority, that such agency is in a position fully and
efficiently to discharge the duties and obligations imposed on it by its
certificate of registration or where in the opinion of the Authority the
financial position of the accreditation agency is such that such agency is
unable fully and efficiently to discharge the duties and obligations imposed
on it by its certificate of registration or if the accreditation agency has
ceased to exist. Sub-clause (2) provides that no certificate of registration
shall be revoked unless the Authority has given to the accreditation agency
not less than thirty days notice, in writing, stating the grounds on which
it is proposed to revoke the certificate of registration, and has considered
any cause shown by the accreditation agency against the proposed
revocation, Sub-clause (3) requires that where the Authority is of the
opinion that the public interest so requires or for ensuring the
advancement of academic quality, it may, on conclusion of the enquiry
under sub-clause (1), suspend the certificate of registration granted to the
accreditation agency till such time as a decision on the revocation of such
certificate of registration or otherwise, is taken by the Authority, Sub-
clause (4) provides that where the Authority revokes a certificate of
registration, it shall serve an order of revocation upon the accreditation
agency and fix a date on which the revocation shall take effect and the
revocation shall be without prejudice to the action which may be taken
against it in under any other law for the time being in force. Sub-clause
(5) provides that the Authority may, instead of revoking a certificate of
registration, permit it to remain in force subject to such further terms and
conditions as it thinks fit to impose, and any further terms or conditions

99
so imposed shall be binding upon and be observed by the accreditation
agency and shall be of like force and effect as if they were contained in
the certificate of registration. Sub-clause (6) requires the Authority to
publish on its website any action initiated against any accreditation agency
and the final decision on the revocation of the certificate of registration or
otherwise together with all documents and reasons for its decision. Sub-
clause (7) provides that where the certification of any accreditation agency
has been revoked, the Authority shall conduct an audit of all the higher
educational institutions accredited by such agency within a period of one
year before the date of the revocation within a period of  sixty days Sub-
clause (8) requires the Authority to take or cause to be taken measures
which may be necessary to protect the interests of students while
suspending or revoking a certificate of registration.
Clause 28.—This clause provides that any person aggrieved by an
order made by the Authority in respect of an accreditation agency or in
respect of a matter under clause 31 may prefer an appeal against the order
to the National Educational Tribunal both on facts and law, within a period
of sixty days from the date of the order. It further provides that the
National Educational Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of
the period of sixty days, if it is satisfied than the appellant had sufficient
cause for not preferring the appeal within this period.
Clause 29.—This clause specifies the duties and obligations of an
accreditation agency while undertaking accreditation of a higher
educational institution. It provides that the accreditation agency, while
undertaking accreditation of a higher educational institution or programme
conducted therein, shall have regard to following principles in discharging
its obligations for the advancement of knowledge, namely; advancement of
academic quality; enabling uniform reference of standards of academic
quality in any class or classes of higher educational institutions or any one
or more programmes conducted therein; informing stakeholders including
students and employers about the quality of the higher educational
institution or any programme conducted therein rendering assistance to
higher educational institutions in managing an enhancing their academic
quality working towards the development of explicit intended learning
outcomes and adherence to such other principles for advancement of
knowledge which may evolve from time to time. Sub-clause (2) requires
the accreditation agency to follow the standards in respect of academic
quality specified by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority while
undertaking accreditation of higher educational institutions or any
programme conducted therein. Sub-clause (3) requires every accreditation
agency to abide by the code of ethics.
Clause 30.—This clause provides that every accreditation agency
shall accredit a higher educational institution or a programme conducted
therein on an application made to it by the institution in a form and
manner, and on payment of such fees, as may be specified by regulations
by the Authority. Sub-clause (2) provides that the processes and
procedures for accreditation of a higher educational institution or a

100
programme shall be specified by regulations by the Authority. Sub-
clause (3) provides that the accreditation of a higher educational institution
or a programme in such institution shall be done at such intervals and
after such periods as may be specified by the appropriate statutory
regulatory authority. Sub-clause (4) provides that the accreditation agency
shall, while undertaking accreditation of a higher educational institution or
a programme, provide an opportunity, to the stakeholders in the higher
educational institution, including students and employees, to submit their
views on matters of academic quality. Sub-clause (5) requires the
accreditation agency to give a reasonable opportunity to the higher
educational institution to file suggestions or objections, if any, on the draft
accreditation prepared by it and it shall take note of suggestions or
objections received, if any, while finalising the accreditation. Sub-clause (6)
provides that the accreditation agency shall publish on its website the
accreditation together with all documents and reasons for such
accreditation.
Clause 31.—This clause provides that by any person aggrieved
by the accreditation decided by any accreditation agency may apply to
the Authority for withdrawal of such accreditation or its modification
and the Authority shall take a decision on an application within ninety
days.
Clause  32.—This clause provides that the Central Government
may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf,
make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of the
proposed legislation.
Clause 33.—This clause provides for constitution of a Fund to be
called the “National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher
Educational Institution Fund”. It further provides that all grants and loans
made to the Authority by the Central Government; all fees and charges
received by the Authority; and all sums received by the Authority from
such other sources as may be decided upon by the Central Government,
shall be credited into the Fund. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Fund shall
be applied for meeting the salary, allowances and other remuneration of
the Chairperson, other Members, officers and other employees of the
Authority and the expenses of the Authority incurred in the discharge of
its functions and for purposes of the proposed legislation.
Clause 34.—This clause provides that the Authority shall maintain
proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual
statement of accounts in a form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India. The accounts of the Authority shall be audited at specified intervals
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any  expenditure
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority
to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. The Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the

101
same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as
the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the
audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other
documents and papers and to inspect any office of the Authority. The
accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf
together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the
Central Government by the Authority and the Government shall cause the
same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 35.—This clause provides that the Authority shall prepare
every year in a prescribed form and times, an annual report giving a full
account of its activities during the previous year, and copies thereof along
with copies, of its annual accounts and auditor’s report shall be forwarded
to the Central Government and the Government shall cause the same to be
laid before both Houses of Parliament. Sub-clause (2) provides that the
Authority shall also forward a copy of the annual report so prepared to
all appropriate statutory regulatory authorities.
Clause 36.—This clause provides that if an accreditation agency
fails to comply with the obligations referred to sub-clause (l) of clause 29
and the adherence to the code of ethics referred to sub-clause (3) of
clause 29, it shall be liable to pay such compensation, to the higher
educational institution for any loss or damages suffered by such
institution, as may be determined by the State Educational Tribunal without
prejudice to any penalty which may be imposed  under the proposed
legislation. It further provides that before determination of any
compensation, the accreditation agency shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard by the State Educational Tribunal having
jurisdiction over the institution.
Clause 37.—This clause provides for punishment to an
accreditation agency for contravention of the provisions of the proposed
legislation. It provides that an accreditation agency which contravenes any
provision of this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder, or the
standards specified under any law for the time being in force by the
appropriate statutory regulatory authority, or the terms and conditions
specified in the certificate of registration, shall be liable to a penalty which
may extend to five lakh rupees without prejudice to proceeding for
prosecution under the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time
being in force.
Clause 38.—This clause provides that if a person, without
reasonable excuse, resists, obstructs, or attempts to obstruct, impersonate,
threaten, intimidate or assault an officer of the Authority or any person
assigned to, discharge any function, or in exercising his functions under
the proposed legislation, such person shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.

102
Clause 39.—This clause provides that whoever contravenes the
provisions of clause 19 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to five years or with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees or with both.
Clause 40.—This clause provides for Punishment for knowingly
providing false information. It provides that if any person provides any
information or produces any document under the proposed legislation or
under any rule or regulation made thereunder, or delivers an account or
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be
false, or does not believe to be true, such person shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
Clause 41.—This clause provides that if any person contravenes or
attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of the
proposed legislation or of any rules or regulations made thereunder, for
which no punishment, is provided elsewhere in the proposed legislation,
such person shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees or
with both.
Clause 42.—This clause provides that where an offence under the
proposed legislation has been committed by a company, every person who
at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
It further provides that if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence, then such person shall not be
liable to the punishment. It also provides that notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-clause (1), where any offence under the proposed
legislation has been committed by a company and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to, any neglect on the part of director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. It
also explains the expressions “company” and “director” used in this clause.
Clause 43.— This clause provides that where an offence under the
proposed legislation has been committed by a society or trust or agency
or institution, every person who at the time the offence was committed
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the society or trust or agency
or institution for the conduct of the business of the society or trust or
university, as well as the society or trust or agency or institution, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.

103
It further provides that if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence, then such person shall not be
liable to the punishment. It also provides that notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-clause (1), where any offence under the proposed
legislation has been committed by a society or trust or agency or
institution and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of
any governors, vice-chancellor, directors, committee, trustees, registrar or
other officer, such governors, directors, committee, trustees, registrar or
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Claus e 44.—This clause provides that no court shall take
cognizance of any offence under the proposed legislation, except on the
complaint in writing of the person authorised by the Authority and no
court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate
of the first class shall try any offence punishable under the proposed
legislation.
Clause  45.—This clause provides for adjudication of certain
matters by the State Educational Tribunals and the National Educational
Tribunal. It provides that except as otherwise provided in the proposed
legislation, all matters under clause 36, including determination of
compensation thereunder shall be adjudicated by the State Educational
Tribunal having jurisdiction. Sub-clause (2) provides that except as
otherwise provided in the proposed legislation, all matters under clause 37,
including the penalties leviable thereunder shall be adjudicated by the
National Educational Tribunal.
Clause 46.—This clause empowers the Central Government to call
upon the Authority, by a general or special order, to furnish, periodically
or as and when required any information concerning the activities carried
on by the Authority or any accreditation agency or higher educational
institution in matters concerning accreditation, in a prescribed form, to
enable that Government, to carry out the purposes of the proposed
legislation. Sub-clause (2) similarly empowers the Authority to call upon
any accreditation agency or higher educational institution, by a general or
special order, to furnish, periodically or as and when required any
information concerning the activities carried on by such accreditation
agency or institution, in such form as may be specified by regulations,
to enable the Authority, to carry out the purposes of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 47.—This clause provides that the accreditation agency
shall furnish to the Authority at specified times and in specified form and
manner or as the Authority may direct, its returns, statements and
particulars in regard to accreditation of  higher educational institutions, as
the Authority may, from time to time, require. Sub-clause (2) states that
without prejudice to the provisions of  sub-clause (1), the accreditation
agency shall submit to the Authority a report along with audited statement
of accounts in a form specified by regulations, within a period of ninety
days after the end of each financial year, giving a true  and full account

104
of its activities, policy and programmes in regard to accreditation of higher
educational institutions by the agency during the previous financial year.
Clause 48.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
issue directions on questions  of policy. It provides that without prejudice
to the foregoing provisions of the proposed legislation, the Authority shall
be bound by such directions on questions of policy, other than those
relating to technical and administrative matters, in exercise of its powers
or the performance of its functions under the proposed legislation, as the
Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time. It further
provides that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given to it. Sub-
clause (2) provides that the decision of the Central Government on
whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.
Clause 49.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
exempt any class or classes of higher educational institutions from
provisions of the proposed legislation. It provides that if the Central
Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the interests
of the general public so to do, or for advancement of knowledge, it may,
by notification and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the
notification, exempt any class or classes of higher educational institutions
from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act and may,
as often as may be necessary, revoke or modify such notification.
Clause 50.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
supersede the Authority for specified reasons. It provides that if at anytime
the Central Government is of the opinion that on account of circumstances
beyond the control of the Authority, it is unable to discharge the functions
or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of the
proposed legislation or that the Authority has persistently made default in
complying with any direction given by the Central Government under the
proposed legislation or in the discharge of the functions or performance
of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of the proposed
legislation or that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the
public interest so to do, the Central Government may, by notification and
for reasons to be specified therein, supersede the Authority for such
period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification.
It also provides that before issuing any such notification, the Central
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make
representation against the proposed supersession and shall consider
representations, if any, of the Authority. Sub-clause (2) provides that upon
the publication of a notification superseding the Authority, the Chairperson
and other Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their
offices as such and all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of the proposed legislation, be exercised or
discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall be exercised and
discharged by the Central Government or such authority as the Central
Government may specify in this behalf until the Authority is reconstituted
under sub-clause (3), and all properties owned or controlled by the

105
Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted under sub-clause (3),
vest in the Central Government. Sub-clause (3) provides for the
reconstitution of the Authority and states that on or before the expiration
of the period of supersession specified in the notification, the Central
Government shall reconstitute the Authority by a fresh appointment of its
Chairperson and other Members and in such case any person who had
vacated his office at the time of its supersession shall not be deemed to
be disqualified for re-appointment. Sub-clause (4) requires the Central
Government to cause the notification issued for supersession of the
Authority accompanied with a full report of any action taken under this
clause and the circumstances leading to the action, to be laid before each
House of Parliament at the earliest.
Clause 51.—This clause provides bar of jurisdiction of civil court.
It provides that no court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any dispute or
proceeding in respect of any matter which the Authority or the National
Educational Tribunal is empowered by or under the proposed legislation to
determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any
power conferred by or under the proposed legislation.
Clause 52.—This clause provided that the Chairperson, other
Members and the officers and other employees of the Authority shall be
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of Section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.
Clause 53.—This clause seeks to provide protection to the Central
Government, the Chairperson and other Members of the Authority for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance
of the proposed legislation or any rule or regulation made thereunder in the
discharge of official duties.
Clause 54.—This clause provides that subject to the provisions of
the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than
the proposed legislation.
Clause  55.—This clause provides that the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 56.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
make rules, by notification in the Official Gazette, for carrying out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. It further specifies the matter for
which the Central Government may make rules.
Clause 57.—This clause empowers the Authority to make
regulations, by notification in the Official Gazette, for carrying out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. It further specifies the matter for
which the Authority may make regulations.

106
Clause 58.—This clause provides that the every rule made by the
Central Government, every regulation made by the Authority and every
notification issued under clause 49 for supersession of the Authority shall
be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 59.—This clause provides for provisions for removal of
difficulties. It provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central Government, may, by
order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation as may appear
to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty. It further provides that
such order shall be made within a period of two years from the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation. It also provides that every
order made under this clause shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.

107
107
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National
Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institution to
exercise the powers conferred on it by or under the proposed legislation.
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the said Authority shall consist of a
Chairperson and four other Members. Sub-clause (2) of clause 9 of the
Bill provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members
shall be determined by the Central Government by rules made by it. Sub-
clause (1) of clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
determine the nature and categories of officers and other employees
required to assist the said Authority. Sub-clause (3) of said clause provides
that the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the officers and other employees of the said
Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
2. On a representation basis, the recurring annual expenditure on
salary of the Chairperson, Members and officers and other employees of
the Authority and other administrative expenses is estimated to be ten
crore rupees and one-time capital investment is estimated to be about one
crore fifty lakh rupees. The manpower requirement and the total financial
implication in terms of recurring and non-recurring expenditure would
however, be determined after the appointment of the Chairperson and
Members of the proposed Authority. Hence, it would be difficult to work
out the exact expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring at this stage.

108
108
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 56 of the, Bill empowers the Central Government to make,
by notification in the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions
of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect
of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia , include—(a)
the manner of nomination of experts in the concerned field of knowledge
to the Selection Committee under sub-section (3) of section 8; (b) the
term of Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of
names under sub-section (4) of section 8; (c) the salaries and al1owances
payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of, the
Chairperson and other Members of the Authority under sub-section (2) of
section 9; (d) the other disqualifications for removal of the Chairperson or
other Members under clause (i) of sub-section 10;  (e) the procedure for
the inquiry under sub-section (4) of section 10; (f) the salaries and
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the
officers and other employees of the Authority under sub-section (3) of
section 15; (g) the other functions which the Authority may perform under
clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 16; (h) the fees and remuneration
payable to, the period, qualifications and experience of, and the manner in
which the Authority may engage experts under section 17; (i) the form
and manner in which an appeal may be preferred and the documents to
be accompanied with it and the fees payable therewith under section 28;
(j) the form for maintaining proper accounts and other relevant records
and the annual statement of accounts of the Authority under sub-
section (1) of section 34; (k) the form in which, and the time at which,
the annual report of the Authority shall be prepared under section 35; (1)
the information concerning the activities carried on by the Authority or any
accreditation agency or higher educational institution in matters concerning
accreditation to be furnished to the Central Government under sub-section
(1) of section 46; and (m) any other matter which is required to be, or
may be, specified by rules or in respect of which provision is to be made
by rules.
2. Clause 57 of the Bill empowers the National Accreditation
Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions to make, by
notification in the Official Gazette, regulations for carrying out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters
in respect of which such regulations may be made. These matters, inter
alia, include—(a) the code of ethics and such other ethical principles to
be adhered to by an accreditation agency under clause (h) of sub-section
(1) of section 3; (b) the form and manner in which an application may
be made and the documents to be accompanied with it and the fee payable
therewith under sub-section (1) of section 20; (c) such other documents
that an applicant has to submit along with his application for grant of
certificate of registration as may be specified under clause (e) of sub-
section (2) of section 20; (d) the infrastructure that an applicant shall

109
possess for providing accreditation services under clause (d) of section
21; (e) the other conditions of eligibility for grant of certificate of
registration under clause (k) of section 21; (f) the form and manner in
which the public notice may be issued under sub-section (1) of section
22; (g) the manner of conducting public hearing by the Authority under
sub-section (8) of section 22; (h) the fees payable and the period for
which the certificate of registration granted to an accreditation agency
may be renewed under sub-section (1) of section 24; (i) the procedure for
grant of approval in respect of any change in the ownership structure
or the memorandum of association of an accreditation agency under
section 25; (j) the procedure for making amendment or alteration in the
terms and conditions of the certificate of registration under section 26; (k)
the form and manner in which an application may be made for
accreditation of any higher education institution or any programme therein
and the documents to be accompanied with it and the fee payable
therewith under sub-section (1) of section 30; (l) the procedure and
process to be followed by the accreditation agency for accreditation of
any higher educational institution or any programme conducted therein
under sub-section (2) of section 30; (m) the information concerning the
activities carried on by the accreditation agency or the higher educational
institutions to be furnished to the Authority under sub-section (2) of
section 46; (n) the time at which and the form and manner in which the
returns and statements and particulars in regard to accreditation of higher
educational institutions by the accreditation agency under sub-section (1)
of section 47; (o) the form and manner in which the report, along
with audited statement of accounts, giving a true and full account of
activities, policy and programme in regard to accreditation of higher
educational institutions by the accreditation agency under sub-section (2)
of section 47; and (p) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by regulation or in respect of which provision is to be made
by regulations.
3. The rules made by the Central Government under clause 56 and
regulations made by the Authority under clause 57 of the Bill, shall be laid,
as soon as they are made, before both the House of Parliament under
clause 58 of the Bill.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be
made are matter of procedure and administrative detail and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of
legislative powers, therefore, of a normal character.

110
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to make provisions for assessment of academic quality of higher educational institutions,
programmes conducted therein and their infrastructure through mandatory accreditation
by independent accreditation agencies and to establish a statutory Authority for the said
purpose and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development)

111
LOK SABHA
CORRIGENDA
to
THE NATIONAL ACCREDITATION REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR
HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2010
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha]
1. Page 2, line 48,–
for “under of secton”
read “under section”
2. Page 3, line 31, –
for “institutions”
read “institution”
3. Page 21, line 2,–
for “in the higher”
read “in higher”
New Delhi;
April 27, 2010
Vaisakha 7, 1932 (Saka)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.