ARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

ARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTY-FIRST REPORT
ON

THE FUNCTIONING OF
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY,
CALCUTTA

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 03.12.96)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 03.12.96)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December 1996 / Agrahayana 1918 (Saka)

ee eee

|
|



CONTENTS

hi COMMITTEE (i)

y provisions 3

7-11

_ 9 Saunier



OF THE COM
(1996-97)

OMPOSITION
Chairman

randya S. Deo

' ee i Patnaik
4% i umchandra Jichkar
क He Bay NA Sing
के किक <st Kant Shastri
‘re Bakhsh SinghVarma
a $%६ jin Prasad Yadav
कह hvimati) Bharati Ray
a Margabandu
- \ra Nath Ojha

a Mohan Babu

३ ६६. ५] P. Abdussamad Samadani
rok SABHA

Sumitra Mahajan

yal Joshi

Singh
adeepak Singh Shakya
Prakash
jendrasinh Rana
| Divya Singh
"जाता, Abedyanath
एज Lakhan Singh
thary Paragi Lal
(५. Silvera
ishwarbhai K. Chavda
Dutta Meghe
॥ 1. 0. Sanadi
rimati Krishna Bose
; p. ५. Rajeshwar Rao
ii A. Venkatarama Reddy
br. Krupasindhu Bhoi
shri Pawan Diwan
Shri Krishna
Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri S. K. Karvendhan
4). Shri Mukhtar Anees
41. Dr. M. Jagannath
12. Dr. Bali Ram
43, Shri Ranen Barman
44. Shri Surender Singh
35. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Subhash _C Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secre
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

@

{MIT



|

1. the Chairman of the Departmenf-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
४0 Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty-First Report of the Committee on the
*eenal Institute of Homoeopathy under the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
ef Homocopathy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

A Study Group of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
temen Resource Development visited the National Institute of Homoeopathy, Salt Lake
8४. Calcutta on the 11th October, 1996 to make an on the spot Study and also to get first

wed information about the functioning of the National Institute of Homoeopathy. A list of
embers who visited the National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta is enclosed as
Ame xure

3 The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the 27th
Mewember, 1996.

Yew DevHt;

‘ewember 27, 1996. S.B. CHAVAN
<a कारक ंकाककनर पं केंड Chairman,
Agrahayana 6, 1918 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary

Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development.

(iii)


REPORT

seat of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy, (ISM&H), Ministry of
ead Family Welfare. The National Institute of Homoeopathy was established by the

mment of India on 10.12.1975 with the following objectives:—

(i) To promote the growth and development of Homoeopathy;

(i) To produce Graduates and Postgraduates in Homoeopathy;

(ii) To conduct research on various aspects of Homoeopathy;

(४) To provide medical care through Homoeopathy to the suffering humanity; and

(v) To provide services and facilities for research, evaluation, training and
guidance in Homoeopathy. The National Institute of Homoeopathy is
managed by a Governing Body comprising of 15 members (Annexure II). the
President of the Governing Body is the Union Minister for Health and Family
Welfare and the Vice-President is the Minister in-charge of Health and Family
Welfare, Government of West Bengal.

MEETING OF THE GOVERNING BODY

2 The Committee was given to understand that the Governing Body of the Institute
ys not been able to meet for the last three years. Since the Governing Body is the main
Seem for decision-making and review of the work, many issues and problems relating to the
© cient functioning of the Institute have been lying unresolved all these years. Moreover,
जब non-existence of a regular Director in the institute has further worsened the situation.
Pine of the reasons given for not having regular meetings of the Governing Body is that the
छा Minister of Health and Family Welfare who happens to be the ex-officio President of
the National Institute of Homoeopathy, is not able to give time for convening regular
meetings of the Governing Body. In making the Minister of Health as the Chairman of the
Governing Body, the idea must have been to take full advantage of his presence for taking
the decisions on the problems/issues confronting the Institute but the very fact that the
Governing Body has not been able to meet for number of years, has frustrated the very
purpose. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that immediate meeting to resolve
ail pending problems should be called and the Governing Body should also be accordingly
reconstituted.

2.1 The Committee, therefore, feels that the rules and bye-laws of the Institute should
be amended so as to provide for regular and frequent meetings of the Governing Body. The
Committee also feels that since the Minister of Health is busy as a Minister normally the
Minister of Health should not be the Chairman of the Governing Body. The Committee,
therefore, feels that the rules and bye-laws of the Governing Body should be amended so as
to make provision for appointment of a person as Chairman of the Governing Body other
than the Minister of Health. Care should also be taken to appoint a person as Chairman
who is high enough in the hierarchy to take prompt decisions.

2.2 The representatives of the Department of ISM&H admitted that there are a number
of other issues lying pending unresolved for the past many years. This was also because of
the fact that the Department of ISM&H was till recently functioning as a division ‘in the
[merry of Health. This Department did not receive the kind of attention and priority it


2

deserves under the Department of Health. Now since this Department has become an
independent Department, the long pending issues before the NIH, Calcutta like non-holding
of the regular meetings of the Governing Body, filling up of the vacant posts of the teaching
faculty, lower pay-scales, etc. would be given due priority and attention.

2.3. The impression that the Committee got was that the Indian Systems of Medicine is
not getting the attention that it deserves and there is a total neglect of Indian Systems of
Medicine. At present, there is an encouraging trend towards Indian Systems of Medicine
because of the side effects of the allopathic medicines given for getting quick results. Now
since the new Department of Indian Systems of Medicines and Homoeopathy has been
created, the entire approach has to be changed.

2.4 The Department is reported to have already worked out a time-bound programme
which has been duly reflected in the Report of the Working Group submitted to the
Planning Commission. The Committee feels that the state of affairs prevailing in the institute
calls for immediate attention for redressal. As no sincere and dedicated efforts have been
made by the Department to improve the state of affairs, the Committee, therefore,
reiterates that the Department of ISM&H should work out a time-bound programme of two
months to sort out these problems and send a compliance report for the information of the
Committee

गा, CREATION OF PERMANENT POST OF DIRECTOR

3. During the visit, the Committee was also given to understand that due to suspension
of a regular Director in the year 1986 due to certain irregularities, the post of Director 1
manned by officiating Directors. There have been frequent changes in officiating incumbents
also. The matter became further complicated due to stay order given by the Honourable
High Court of Calcutta against the filling up of the post of Director. Now since the stiy
granted by the Hon’ble High Court of Calcutta is reported to have been vacated, the
Committee feels that immediate steps should be taken to fill up the post of Director by «
regular and permanent incumbent without further loss of time.

IV. FACULTY AND STAFF

4. The Committee was given to understand that as against the justification for 63 posts
for teaching faculty, the Institute has a sanctioned strength of 39 posts only. Out of these ४
posts, only 9 posts have been filled up leaving the remaining 30 posts vacant. The work ७
being managed by engaging about 60 part-time teachers. The Committee was informed |!
the Institute had advertised for these posts thrice earlier but due to non-availability |
suitably qualified candidates the same could not be filled up. The Committee was ०७

informed that the low pay-scales which is being offered to the teaching faculty is also one
the reasons for poor response from the suitably qualified candidates. 11 was also informe t+
the Committee that the facilities and the pay-scales being offered to the teaching stall तह
lower than in many other Central and State Government organisations.

4.1 The Committee also feels that unless adequate pay-scales are given to the teacling

faculty or made at least at par with the other Central/State Government organisat
institute will not be able to attract well qualified candidates, leaving the posts vac
the case today. The Committee feels that the qualification required for the various 1९५1
posts should not be reduced in an attempt to fill up the vacant posts. However, the Insti!
should take steps to immediately revise the pay-scales of the faculty members bringin;
at par with the Central/State Governments. The representatives from the Departs!
ISM&H informed the Committee that they are awaiting the recommendations of the ‘th !

६

ii ts



3

re made public, the Department will
of recommenc tions made by the |

as NIH, Calcutta is an \|

dations of the Sth Pay |

nd non-teaching
r he Department of
les of their teac ing staff

as the recommendations @

oon
faculty members on the

of their
he Committee did not agree wit!

ion and has no relevance with the
p by the Government. The pay sczles ६

referred to the Sth Pay Commission at
immediate steps for revising the
e recommendations of the Pay ९

is plea

ke
ry th

may either ००! r allowing

owances
fhe Committee also

s that the Governme 1
paying adequate 10

ors to join me
sts, the Govern

in order to

nmittee also feel
io the Doctors or
ified and competent doct
es filling up the vacant po
५ required. The Committee also feels १
| avenues to the teachers to avoid s
that the Government should not ¥
| wke immediate decisions on these

Institute.
should also sanction the 24

yernment should provide
ion. The Committee
of the Sth Pay

ending issues.

Dob TARY PROVISIONS

that the Institu’

Committee during its visit also noticed te is fully financed by the
being aud

tof India and the ‘accounts of the Institute is ited by the Comptroller &

General. The sanctioned budget for the last three yea are as follows:—

5

Non-pian
(Rs. in Lakhs)
37.00 100.00
39.00 110.00
’ 43.00 110.00
die See 2s

nadequate provisions have been

ate that they are very less

th थे meer
‘i the allocations indic:
“al je and require to be increased to meet the requir
10 of
1. During an on-the-spot study visit of the Institute the Committee observed that the
ance and repairs. The maintenance work

is badly in need of mainten

CPWD is also of a very poor standard. The research programmes of
be suffering due to 980 ity of funds. Even the ambulance of the
t of order. These $ ce of land m about 30 acres

ling of the Institute
12 carried out by the
hi: Institute are reported to
itute was repo d to be ou

ynstruction of

t, is that four

ensuring

quirements of
t funds



ANNEXURE-I

इक MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE WHO VISITED NATIONAL INSTITUTE
OF HOMOEOPATHY, CALCUTTA ON 11TH OCTOBER, 1996

She SB. Chavan—Chairman
Dr M. Aram ad

Perot (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Sh Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof, Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

Shrimati Krishna Bose

Shri Samik Lahiri

Dr. Bali Ram

८: के थे 6 — कक पुल ।



ANNEXURE-II

LIST OF GOVERNING BODY OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY,

CALCUTTA.

1. Hon’ble Minister of Health & F.W., Govt. of India—President.

2. Hon’ble Minister of Health & F.W., Govt. of West Bengal—Vice President.

3.

4. Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser, Ministry of Health & F.W., Govt. of

Addl. Secretary (Health) Min. of Health & F.W., Govt. of India—Vice President II.

India—Member.

5. Secretary, Ministry of Health & F.W., Govt. of West Bengal—Member.
6.

7. Vice Chancellor, Calcutta University—Member.

8.

Adviser in Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health & F.W., Govt. of India—Member.

Three members to be nominated by the President for a period of three years from

amongst the Homoeopaths attached to Homoeopathic Medical College & Hospital or
Research Institutions—Member.

95

Three members to be nominated by the President for a period of three years from

the eminent Homoeopathic Practitioners who have contributed to the development of
tlomoeopathy—Member.

10. Director, NIH—Member-Secretary.


MINUTES



*SEVENTH MEETING

ee | amittce met at 3.00° Foe on Wednesday> the 1ith September, 1996 in
zoom “A Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, ew Delhi.

puyShNt MEMBERS
+B Chavan—Chairman
aly’ SABHA

| Kishore Chandra S- Deo
६ ४. BB. Dutta
4 er mM. Aram
4 or Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
& Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
है. रण (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
» Shei Nagendra Nath Ojha
wo Shri M.P. ‘Abdussamad Samadani

i) Shri Dav Dayal Joshi

12. Shrt Sartaj Singh

13. Shri Rajendra Singh Rana
14. Dr. C- Silvera

5. Shri 1.0. Sanadi

16. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
17. Shri A- Venkatarama Reddy
18. Shri Krishna

19. Shri Shivanand प्र. Koujaigi
20. Shri Samik Lahiri

21. Dr. M. Jagannath

22. Dr. Bali Ram

23. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT
Shri Subhash Ge Jarodia, Director

Shri PPK. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary

2. 16 Committee at the first instance discussed about its future programms. After
some discussion,the Committee identified the following, items, which the Committee feels,

require detailed examination:
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE

pent ea aoa Department of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy

*Minutes of Ist to vith meeting relate tO matters not included in this report.

#**Relats tO other mattcrs-



10

(1) Functioning of :—
(i) National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.

(i) Institute for Post-Graduate Teaching in Ayurveda (Gujarat University), Jam Nagar
(iii) Pharmacopoea Laboratories, Ghaziabad.

(iv) National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta.

(v) National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune.

: * *

The Committee has, however, decided to take up the following ‘initially.
1. Value based education.
2. Vocational education.
3. The problem of drop-outs.
4. Functioning of National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta.

5. Functioning of National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.

3. The Committee then decided to visit Calcutta and Jaipur to make an on the spot visit ~
to the National Institute of Homoeopathy at Calcutta and the National Institute of Ayurveda |
at Jaipur and also to make a detailed examination of the issue of value based educatios
During the visits, the Committee decided to visit some of the reputed Voluntary
Organisations and to hold discussions with them and State Governments on the issue मं
value based education.

4. The Committee further decided to visit Indian Museum, National Library and Net
Memorial Museum at Calcutta and to visit the project sites of Lok Jumbish and Siks!
Projects at Jaipur and also to hold discussions with them. The Committee formed two Studi
Groups, one for visiting Calcutta and the other for Jaipur and Mount Abu. The Chairman मै
the Committee directed that the consent of the Members may be taken for finalising
Study Groups.

5. The Committee decided that the Study Group visiting Calcutta should undertake ४
visit from the 8th to 11th October, 1996 and the Study Group visiting Jaipur and Mount
should visit there from 4th to 8th November, 1996. The Committee authorised its Chair
to finalise the details of the tour programmes and to approach Hon’ble Chairman,
Sabha, for his permission for the visits of the Study Groups to Calcutta, Jaipur and M
Abu.

6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

***Relate to other matters.


vil

किक EIGHTH MEETING

mmittee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 27th November, 1996 in
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

fRPSENT MEMBERS
; ५.७. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
B.B. Dutta
ty. M. Aram
«pr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
pot, Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
jot. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Jiri Nagendra Nath Ojha
shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
LOK SABHA
at Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

shri Rajendrasinh Rana

zati
unt ; Shri Dutta Meghe

sue
Shrimati Krishna Bose

Shri ‘Krishna

1९९४ हु | Shri Samik Lahiri

akan

Stud 18 Dr. Bali Ram

nan SECRETARIAT

ng tl
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

ke the
2. The Committee considered the Draft Forty-ninth Report on the Functioning of

it At

airmai juan Museum, Calcutta, Draft Fiftieth Report on the Netaji Bhawan, Calcutta and Draft

Rajya fy first Report on the functioning of the National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta.

Mour है we Committee, after some discussions, adopted the reports with some minor modifications.
bsence Dr. M. Aram and

Che Committee then, authorised its Chairman and in his 8

[ (Smt.) Bharati Ray to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Krishna Bose
‘in her absence Shri Samik Lahiri to lay the reports in Lok Sabha. The Committee, also
ied that the reports may be laid/presented on 3rd December, 1996 or on a subsequent

ubject to availability of Hindi Version.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M.

il

a