PARLIAMENT OF INDIA ५
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT

DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

{Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2.6.1995)
«(Laid on the Table-of Lok Sabha on 2.61995) ~ «

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

June, 1995/Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)



PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT

DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

{Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2.6.1995)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2.6.1995)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

June, 1995/Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)


EEE:

LEE

\:



|
{
|

ComposITION OF THE COMMITTEE

INTRODUCTION

C6 NEE EWN. ES

Carrer I RG PONE oie gan esos fad soe snooker ange aes ee espe eee पट कर.

Cuapter II + Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the

Government

Cuaprer III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to

pursue in view of the Government's replics ...............-.----------------०-०-----

CuarteR TV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the

Government have not been accepted by the Committee...............:c0000

Cuaprer V _ Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the

‘Governinent are: still awaited ., 2. 25..c.55350..ssckoceestcerscvasey oso + कि कमल teasece

Paces

(iii)
1-8

9—13

14—18

19—23

25


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)
1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
4. Miss Saroj Khaparde
5. Shri O.P. Kohli
6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Md. Salim
9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. 1.6. Sanadi
. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
| 15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
| LOK SABHA
16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran
‘ 18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
| 19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
| 20. Dr. Vasant Pawar
| 21. Prof. P.J. Kurien
| 22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole
| 25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
| 26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar
. Shri Aslam Sher Khan
29. Shri Inder Jit
30. Shri Anna Joshi *
. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
i 34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani
36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
38. Shri Rambadan
39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
41. Shri Ramchandra Dome
42. Shri Ramaashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal
45. Shri Kanshi Ram
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

@

a

8

2

we
Oo


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on
its behalf, present this Twenty Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its 7th Report on “Demands for Grants” (1994-95) of
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Women and Child Develop-
ment).

2. The Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 22nd April, 1994 and
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 1994. Replies of Government on all the
recommendations contained in the report, received from the Deptt. of Women and Child
Development were considered by the Committee and this report was adopted at its sitting
held on 31st May, 1995.

New DELHI; (P. UPENDRA)

31st May, 1995 + Chairman,
Prise aa ana Terr: Ce it Devel t.
9th Iyaistha, 1917 (Saka) ‘ommittee on Human Resource Developmen


CHAPTER-I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Seventh Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development (Department of Women and Child Development) for the
year 1994-95 which was presented to Rajya Sabha on 22.4.94 and laid on the Table of Lok
Sabha on 22.4.94.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: para
3. कै 1६ Sard dry ४3५ 24) <25,:#6७:3॥ 40, 41s

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government's replies: para 1. 2 4. 6, 9, 10, 14, 15, 17, 19, 21, 22, 27, 30, 32,
36, 37, 38, 42.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 11, 12, 16, 20, 28, 29, 33, 34, 35, 39, 43, 44.

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: Nil.

3. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of
its recommendations.

Working Women’s Hostele
Recommendation (Para No. 11)

The Committee is of the view that the though there is acute shortage of working
women’s hostel in the country the Department could not achieve the physical targets. During
1993-94, but ambitious targets have been fixed for 1994-95. The Committee desires that
effective steps should be taken by the Department to achieve the targets set for 1994-95.

Ministry’s reply :

The reason for non-fulfilment of physical target in number of hostels in 1993-94 was the
steep rise in construction costs. However, capacity achievement over 82% and under-
utilisation was more than the BE/RE. To achieve the target of sanctioning of 60 additional
hostels to provide accommodation to 3000 working women during 1994-95 all the State
Governments and Union Territories have already been advised to send the proposals of all
suitable organisations. 50 proposals have already been received and are being processed.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given by the Department and hence
reiterating its recommendation suggests that all-out efforts be made to achieve the physical
target.
Recommendation (Para No. 12) ~

In view of the frequent complaints received about mismanagement of the hostels
receiving grants and assistance from the Government, the Committee felt that there was
need for evolving some system of monitoring so as to control any sort of irregularities in
these hostels. For-this purpose, the Committee recommended that a Government representa-
tive be included on the Board of Management of each of such hostels.

1


Ministry’s reply

“Since inception of the Scheme in 1972-73, 685 hostels for 44,960 working women have
already been sanctioned upto 31.3.1994. It will, thus, not be practicable to nominate a
Member of the Central Government on the Hostel Management Committee of each and
every Hostel. It has already been provided in the scheme that the Hostel Management
Committee shall have a, representative of the State Government/UT Administration and the
Central Social Welfare Board and /or State Social Welfare Advisory Board. The Scheme
also provides for representation of the residents of the hostel. The Hostel Management
Committee is required to meet at least once in three months. The present system seems to
be adequate to handle the situation.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee expresses it isfaction over the present system of monitoring as it
has utterly failed to contain gross mismanagement, irregularities and, victi tion of inmates
rempant in the working women’s hostels. It, therefore, is of the view that an effective
alternative mechanism is required to be evolved by the Government to monitor the

functioning of various hostels.

Atrocities against Women
Recommendation (Para No. 16)

The Committee expresses its concern over the increasing number of cases of atrocities
against women and recommends that Government should conduct some review of these
publicity programmes to find out whether these are sufficient to create a significant impact
on the public mind.

Ministry’s reply

“Owing to the diverse nature of the programmes funded so far, this Deptt. has not so
far carried out any review of the nature suggested by the Committee. However, now since
most of the assistance under the programme is being given for legal literacy programmes,
this Deptt. would consider reviewing these legal literacy programmes in the future.”

Comments of the Committee .

Ever-increasing incidence of atrocities against women, specially in the urban areas, is
not only a matter of serious concern, but also a clear-cut reflection of the fact that the
programme has miserably failed to deliver the goods. Inspite of this, the Department does
not seem to have shown any concern as is obvious in its comments. The Committee is not
happy about this kind of apathetic attitude of the Deptt. and suggests that a periodic
evaluation of the efficacy of all the programmes in general, and this programme is particular,
must be undertaken to achieve the desired result.

Indira Mahila Yojana

Recommendation (Para No. 20)

The Committee expresses its deep concern over the fact that though the scheme was
announced in the President’s Address in 1991, till this date it has not been operationalised.
Ministry’s reply

“The Department has made concerted efforts to get the necessary approval for
launching the Yojana. At present, the EFC Memo on Indira Mahila Yojana (IMY) for 200
blocks in the country is pending with the Planning Commission for its approval.


Comments of the Committee

The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the tardy progress of this scheme
which, although conceived way back in 1991, is yet to take off. The Committee, therefore,
trusts that Government would make all necessary efforts to seek its clearance from the
Planning Commission and launch it at the earliest.

Mahila Samridhi Yojana
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee is of the view that various programmes under the Mahila Samridhi
Yojana are implemented keeping in view the welfare of rural women, whereas, poor women
in urban areas, who are also in need of assistance, are not covered under it. The Committee

recommends that requirements of needy urban women belonging to the weaker sections
should also be kept in mind while framing and implementing schemes for women’s welfare.

Ministry’s reply
“Noted. The Government will review the scheme during the year 1994 and examine
various suggestions being given to strengthen the scheme further.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that the Department should complete the requisite formulities at
the earlies in this regard.

Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 28 & 29)

The main thrust of ICDS programme is on the provision of Anganwadis in every village
and urban slum areas. Generally, there is one Anganwadi for a population of 1000 in rural
areas and urban slum areas and of about 700 in tribal areas, which is run by an Anganwadi
worker, a female voluntary worker and a helper. By the end of 1993, 3120 ICDS projects
were sanctioned which benefited about 1.94 crores children and women. For the year 1994-
95 an outlay of Rs. 426.00 crores has been approved for the ICDS and 200 new projects are
likely to start. The Committee feels that a big portion of the increased outlay is likely to be
absorbed in the increased honorarium to Anganwadi workers. Therefore, the Committee
feels that the amount available for the projected expansion of the scheme to cover new areas
is likely to be insufficient. Of 5239 blocks, 2119 blocks remain to be covered. At the rate, of
200 projects per year, it will take another 10 years for all blocks to be covered. To expedite
the process, any shortfall in the projected expansion by the end of the 8th Plan should be
properly estimated and additional allocations made.

The relative success of the ICDS scheme in improving child health and lowering IMR is
due to its decentralized and popular structure. Probably because of this, ICDS is being
increasingly seen as an umbrella organisation within which other schemes could be
incorporated. Thus early childhood education is now a part of ICDS. There is a new scheme
for adolescent girls; and creches and day care centres are sought to be made a part of ICDS.
Indira Mahila Yojana, in its revised form, will become a component of it. Separate
allocations have been proposed for these schemes by the Department. But the National
Creche Fund has only been notified. Allocation of Rs. 8 crores for Indira Mahila Yojana has
not yet been approved. Therefore, the Committee recommends that until and unless
separate additional allocations have been obtained for these additional components, ICDS
should concentrate on strengthening and expansion its own. structure with whatever
allocations it may get. The proposal to entrust a percentage of ICDS schemes to NGOs
should be properly assessed before it is implemented, since, in the absence of community-
based monitoring arrangements, it would be difficult to ensure accountability of NGOs.


Ministry’s reply

It is proposed to sanction 200 projects during the year 1994-95. In order to sanction 200
projects and to maintain the existing projects, the Plan outlay of Rs. 426 crores has been
approved for the ICDS which is adequate to meet the requirements. However, for
universalisation of ICDS during the 8th Plan period, we would require an additional amount
of Rs. 1166.27 crores in the Central plan and an additional amount of Rs. 1379.96 crores in
the State outlays on nutrition during the Plan period.

As mentioned against Para 28, the outlay provided for 1994-95 would be adequate to
meet the requirement of additional 200 blocks of ICDS project and to maintain the existing
ICDS projects. A number of effective steps including sanction of additional AWCs,
construction of godowns/anganwadi buildings, provision of storage containers have been
taken by the Department for strengthening ICDS scheme directly involvement of NGOs in
directly implementing ICDS projects has been considered vital to strengthening community
participation under the scheme. To ensure that only competent NGOs are entrusted with
such projects. State Governments have been given the discretion to identify competent
NGOs with proven track record.

Comments of the Committee

In view of the prospects of the universalisation of ICDS, the Committee feels that the
financial allocation earmarked for it is not adequate. Therefore, it suggests that allocations
for this scheme should be adequately enhanced. The Committee expresses its concern over
integration of more and more components under umbrella of ICDS without providing
adequate resources for each of them. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that due
consideration should be given to this aspect.

Recommendation (Para Nos. 33 & 34)

The Committee observes that out of the three components of ICDS, namely executive,
workers and recipients, two do not appear to be happy with the service. Therefore,
monitoring system should be strengthened to ensure proper functioning of the ICDS to the
satisfaction of all its components.

The Committee feels that since it is a Central project, public representatives should also
be involved for proper monitoring of the scheme.

Ministry’s reply

The Department has adopted an improve management information system to monitor
the implementation of the ICDS scheme. The Monthly Progress Reports on each aspect of
the Scheme is received by the Department straight from the projects which are analysed with
respect to crucial indicators on a quarterly and half yearly basis. Monitoring system has been
strengthened to reflect the frequency as the delivery of services and gender specific
information of the beneficiaries. In addition to these reports on performance of projects, the
Department is also receiving Quarterly Monitoring Reports on health aspects of the scheme
from the Central Technical Committee. These Quarterly Monitoring Reports are generated
by Central Technical Committee on the basis of Monthly Monitoring Reports received from
Primary Health Centres and analysis is carried out for variable such as provision of
supplementary nutrition, pre-school education, health check-up and referral services, child
and mother mortality, existing status of malnutrition of children, staff position, their recruitment
and vacancy position and immunisation coverage. The State exhibiting poor performance in
respect of any of these indicators are promptly addressed to rectify the suitably by intensifying
efforts and close monitoring. In addition to the existing monitoring system at the Central and
State level, the community based monitoring mechanism has been recently evolved. The States
have been asked to constitute Bal Vikas Mahila Samities at the village, block and district levels
for involvement of elected women representatives of Panchayats in monitoring all the child and
women programme being implemented in their area of jurisdiction.


Comments of the Committee

The Committee notes that the Department has not responded on the ICDS workers
being not happy with the services they are being over burdened with the integration/addition
of new schemes to the ICDS for which they are not being adequately compensated, suggests
that efforts should be made to remove the grievances of the ICDS workers.

Creches/Day Care Centres
Recommendation (Para No. 35)

This scheme was started in 1975 to provide day care services to children in the age
group of 0—5 years of those families whose monthly income does not exceed Rs. 1800 per
month. The scheme is implemented through the Central Social Welfare Board, the Indian
Council for Child Welfare and Bharatiya Adim Jati Sewak Sangh. During the year 1993-94,
a total amount of Rs. 23.05 crores was sanctioned to benefit about 3 lakh children. The
same amount has been allotted in the budgetary provisions for this year. The Committee
reaffirms its earlier observations made in its third report about the Bharatiya Adim Jati
Sewak Sangh regarding the need for conducting an enquiry into the affairs of the Sangh.

Ministry's reply
“During the current financial year a budget provision of Rs. 23.05 crores has been made

under the scheme of Creches and Day Care Centres. An evaluation of the creches
programme by competent professionals is underway.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department has taken the
recommendation in a very casual and cavalier manner by eschewing unequivocal reply on
conducting an enquiry into the affairs of the Bharatiya Adim Jati Sewak Sangh. Many more
cases of malpractices and irregularities in creche programmes being run by Indian Council
for Child Welfare, Central Social Welfare Board, apart from Bharatiya Adim Jati Sewak
Sangh, coming to the fore, has added to the urgency and necessity of such an enquiry.
Although the Committee has been subsequently informed that the inquiry has been initiated,
it underlines the need to expedite the process.

Recommendation (Para No. 39)

It has been observed that since Creche and Day Care Centres are non-expanding
schemes, the budgetary allocation remains stagnant. With escalation of costs, this may cause
maintenance grants to existing centres to dry up. Therefore, even non-plan allocation should
be enhanced. Also, until the National Creche Fund actually starts functioning, some scope
for expansion should be kept in the budgetary allocations under this head, in view of the
urgent need for such centres.

Ministry’s reply

The Department will sanction new creches under National Creche Fund. The National
Creche Fund has been set up. In accordance with Government policy, non-plan expenditure
is to be curtailed as far as possible. The Committee, however, would be happy to know that
the norms of nutrition as well as honorarium of the creche, scheme have been revised
upwards and adequate. provision for this expenditure has been made on the plan side with
the approval of the Planning Commission.


Comments of the Committee

The Committee is happy to note that the National Cultural Fund would start functioning
from this year, however, there may be many areas where NGOs may not be available for
running creches. In such areas where there are creches/day care centres under the old
system, these centres should not be allowed to suffer.

SAARC Decade of Girl Child

Recommendation (Para No. 41)

The Committee notes with concern that the SAARC Decade of the Girl Child, except
for one scheme introduced as a component of ICDS for the adolescent girl, has not found
any reflection in the budget. Schemes to improve the nutritional status of the girl-child and
schemes to prevent their dropping out from schools may be formulated. As for the National
Plan of Action for children, the Committee was informed by the Secretary that there was no
separate allocation for this in the Department’s budget because this plan is to be
implemented by different ministries and departments and Women and Child Development
Department is only the coordinator. Since, however, there is little evidence of such
coordinating activities so far, the Committee is constrained to conclude that this has not
made much headway so far and recommends its speeder planning and implementation.

Ministry’s reply

Government takes note of the concerns expressed by the Standing Committee at the
mere token provision for the National Plan of Action of Girl Child in the budgets of this
Department. We would like to clarify that the implementation of the Plan of Action and the
attainment of goals that have been quantified in the Plan of Action constitute the joint
responsibility of all Ministries/Departments of the Government and the modal Department
of Women and Child Development implementing programmes having a bearing on the girl
child. A token provision has been kept in mind the future need, if any, of introducing
special interventions for filling up critical gaps as and when felt necessary. This plan and the
National Plan of Action for Children would help the Department of Women and Child
Development to coordinate and orchestrate the working of various programmes run different
Ministries/Departments for the purpose of reaching the goals of children and girl children.

The Standing Committee has referred to the need for schemes to improve the
nutritional status of the girl child and-preventing school dropouts. It is submitted that girl
children upto the age of 6 years are already included within the ICDS programme which is
the world’s largest integrated child development programme and the specific problem of
school dropouts amongst girls is addressed through the Adolescent Girl Programme which
covers school dropout adolescent girls in the age group 11—18 years. This Department is
coordinating a special gender disaggregated monitoring of the ICDS Programme, the
programmes of the Department of Education, the programmes of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare and those of the other departments. Government, through the
Department of Education, extends special incentives to the girl children viz. free supply of
text-books, special hostel facilities, scholarships, uniforms, appointment of lady teachers etc.
for coordinating the entire effort, there is an inter-ministerial Coordination Committee under
the Secretary (WCD) at the Central level. We have also advised the State Government to
draw up similar action plans and set up similar State level Coordination Committees.


|
|
|

Comments of the Committee

The Committee observes that the Department in its reply has not given any details of
the schemes/programmes initiated by it. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommen-
dation.

Food & Nutrition Board
Recommendation (Para No. 43)

The Committee observes that the thrust of the policy should be on raising the
nutritional status of the population through ICDS, as well as nutritional education. In this
contest, the Committee recommends revival of the scheme of supply of milk to the under-
nourished school children.

Ministry's reply

The thrust of the policy of Food & Nutrition Board is already on raising nutritional
status of the population through nutritional education. For this purpose, demonstration
programmes are arranged by the field units of FNB and also training is given to housewives
and adolescent girls in nutrition education and preservation of fruits and vegetables.
Integrated Nutrition Education Camps and Orientation Training Courses are organised by
the field units of FNB for the supervisory and grassroot functionaries of different
Departments of State Government concerned with health and nutrition education. The
recommendation regarding supply of milk to school children has been sent to Department of
Educaiton for necessary action.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee finds that the Department in its reply has stated that the recommenda-
tion regarding supply of milk to school children has been sent to the Department of
Education for necessary action. The Committee feels that the Department should see to it
that the scheme of the supply of milk is revived and for this it should pursue the matter with
the Department of Education effectively.

Proliferation of Schemes

Recommendation (Para No. 44)

The Committee feels that, year after year, the focus of attention of the Deptt. keeps on
changing from one scheme to another and there seems to be no long-term perspective.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that instead of framing new schemes every year and
letting the earlier ones to just continue, the Deptt. should concentrate on some major
schemes and work to achieve the targets through suitable action plan.

Ministry’s reply

“Over the years, the Department has formulated policies and programmes dealing with
various aspects of the development of women and children according to changing needs,
imperatives and perspectives. The Department, thus, has a long-term perspective in both the
sectors. In the fields of child development, the Department plays a nodal role in
coordinating the development of children in various sectors, besides implementing its own
programme of Nutrition, Integrated Child Development and Early Childhood Education.
The Department’s continuing focus has been on working as the national machinery for
women, promoting the incorporation of women, as well as for moulding societal attitudes.
Besides this, the Department has a three-pronged approach to Women’s Development
through its own programmes targeted at training and economic empowerment, provision of


8

support services and awareness generation. Thus, the approach is a mix of advocacy and
action. However, as and when the need arises, new activities are taken up by the
Department. For example, the political empowerment of women as a result of 73rd
Constitution Amendment, has opened up possibilities of fundamental and significant
initiatives to be taken jn this field. Similarly, the adoption of National Nutrition Policy in
1993 has resul.ed in 8. greater focus on the issues of nutrition surveillance and preparation of
a Plan of Action cutting across different sections.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is of the view that the Department should devise long term plan
perspectives and concentrate on continuing with them considerably for a longer time so that
their benefits could percolate down to the targeted populace. Conceiving new and new
programmes, year after year, without giving them a practical shape is not a healthy
phenomenon and yields nothing. The reply of the Deptt. does not indicate any specific
action proposed to be taken on its recommendations. The Committee, therefore, reiterates
that the focus of the Department should be on strengthening the on-going schemes and it
should not keep on shifting its priorities.


|
|
|

CHAPTER-II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Para No. Recommendation Reply
1 2 3
Para No. 3 The Committee feels that gender inequality is

one of the important problems all over the
world.

Actual development cannot taken place unless
the Government removes gender bias and
guarantees equal status to women as enshrined
in our Constitution. It is of the view that all
efforts of Government should be towards grea-
ter involvement of women in the national
development process by raising their overall
status—social, economic, legal and political—at
par with that of man. The Department of
Women and Child Development has stated a
number of schemes for the development/wel-
fare of women/children. This Committee has
deliberated only on some of these in relation to
Demands for Grants 1994-95 which are enum-
erated in the following paragraphs, alongwith
the Committee's recommendations/observa-
tions:

Government shares the views expressed by
the Committee’ regarding gender ine-
qualities. All efforts of Government are
being directed towards mainstreaming of
women into the national development pro-
cess by raising their overall status—social,
economic, 1०४७ and political—at par with
that of men,

The Constitution of India not only guaran-
tees equality to women but also empowers
the State to adopt measures of positive
descrimination in favour of women. Several
laws have been enacted to protect women
against social discrimination, violence and
atrocities and also to prevent social evils like
child marriage, dowry, rape, practice of sati
etc.

A National Perspective Plan for Women
(1988—2000) has been formulated as a long
term policy document advocating a holistic
approach for the development of women.
“Shrem Shakti—the Report of the National
Commission on Self-employed Women and
Women in Informal Sector (1988)” examines
the entire gamut of issues facing women in
the unorganised sector and a number of
recommendations for the betterment + of
women in various fields have been made
therewith.

There has been progressive increase in the
Plan outlays of the Depaitment over a
period of four developmental decades. The
outlay of Rs. 4 crores in the First Plan
(1951-56) has gone upto Rs. 20.00 crores in
the Eighth Five Year Plan (1992—97).
The National Commission for Women set up
by the Government has the mandate to
study and monitor all matters relating to the
constitutional and legal safeguards provided
for women, review the existing legislations
to suggest amendments, wherever necessary,
and to look into complaints involving depri-
yation of rights of women. The Government
is also undertaking awareness generation
programmes.



10

3

Para No. 5

Para No. 7

Para No. 8

The Committee observes that as against Rs. 31
crores sanctioned last year for this scheme, only
a token amount of Rs., One lakh has been
earmarked this year. The Committee feels that
unless schemes for the utilisation of sanctioned
money are formulated well in time, setting up
of such funds become infructuous. Therefore, it
recommends that the Department should, with-
out delay, ensure that schemes are firmed up
for proper utilisation of funds.

The Committee notes that there 15 a substantial
increase in the Budget provisions for the Na-
tional Commission for Women for 1994-95, as
compared to 1993-94. Government should en-
sure full utilisation of the Budget of Rs. 2
crores by the Commission.

The Committee recommends that Government
should fulfil the assurance given to the Parlia-
ment by creating the post of Commission for
‘Women’s Rights and all consultations and other
formalities be completed as early as possible.

The Government attaches great importance
to those efforts which trigger changes in
societal attitudes towards women. An inte-
grated media campaign projecting a positive
image of both women and the girl child
through electronic, print and film media is
the most important component of the
Government’s communication strategy. A
large number of TV_ spots, quickies,
documentary films, radio programmes with
positive messages about the girl child and
women, have been produced by the Depart-
ment to undertake publicity and coverage.
With regard to the observation of the Com-
mittee regarding the token provision of Rs. °
One lakh earmarked for this year under the

‘Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK), it is submit-

ted that the Kosh has been set up with a
Corpus Fund of Rs. 31 crores. RMK will
advance loans, through NGOs, to poor and
assetless women. The amounts received back
through refunds of loans, will be ploughed
back into the Corpus Fund. The Kosh will
thus be able to sustain itself without further
grant from the Government. However, a
token provision of Rs. One lakh has been
made in the budget for the current year with
a view to provide for the enhancement of
the Corpus Fund,’ whenever there is a need.
As regards schemes for the proper utilisation
of funds, the Kosh has already finalised its
lending policy and is implementing the
same. Loans are being advanced to poor
women, in the informal sector, through the
intermediation of NGOs, at specified rates
of interest, as per this lending policy. During
the year 1993-94, the Kosh has sanctioned
credit limits to 24 NGOs of an aggregate,
amount of Rs. 439.33 lakhs to extend de-
velopment credit to 37,066 women, on the
pattern/terms specified in the approved
lending policy.

The Department would ensure that the
funds allocated for the year 1994-95 for the
National Commission for Women are fully
utilised.

The recommendations of the Committee
have been taken note of. The proposal for
setting up an office of Commissioner of
Women's Rights is already under considera-
tion of the Government in consultation with
the National Commission for Women
(NCW) and other concerned Ministies / De-
partments.



il

1

2

3

| Para No. 13

Para No. 18

Para No. 23

| Para No. 24

॥
i
है
॥ Para No. 25
|
|

The Committee expresses its concern over the
inadequacy of hostels for working women and
recommends that, taking into consideration the
importance of these hostels, Government
should encourage construction of more such
hostels not only through grants but also by
allotement of land where necessary.

The Committee was informed of training and
other awareness generation programmes under-
taken by the Department. Production of legal
literacy manuals in regional languages and gen-
der sensitization programmes are part of this.
The Committee feels that such programmes
should be extended to the grass root levels.

The Committee notes that significant increase
in allocations for Mahila Samridhi Yojana. The
Committee, however, recommends that there
should be proper monitoring to see that these
funds are properly utilised.

The Committee is of the view that various
programmes under the Mahila Samridhi Yojana
are implemented keeping in view the welfare of
tural women, whereas, poor women in urban
areas, who are also in need of assistance, are
not covered unde: The Committee recom-
mends that requirements of needy urban
women belonging to the weaker sections,
should also be kept in mind while framing and
implementing schemes for women’s welfare.
It is also felt by the Committee that there is not
sufficient awareness among the rural people
regarding the benefits of Mahila Samridhi Yoja-
na. Secondly, the postmasters in the villages
are not fully informed and trained about the
scheme, and there is also dearth of forms. The
need is, therefore, to train postmasters about
the functioning of the scheme and to make the
forms available so as to avoid inconvenience to
the needy.

The subject matter of allotment of land Para No: 13 The Comwalttes, Gxpremes ts:cuncern over the: Ths GRA walier Ol allotecatiot land Eas
under the perview of the State Government
and Union Territories administrations. State
Government and Union Territories have al-
ready been requested to consider the desira-
bility of allotment of land free of cost or at
concessional rates to the voluntary and other
eligible organisations for the purposes of
construction of Hostel Building for Working
Women. However, the Central Government
provides assistance to the extent of 50% of
the cost of land, in addition to 75% of the
cost of construction of the building.

With regard to the suggestion made by the
Committee to extend the programmes of
‘awareness generation and legal literacy man-
ual to the grass root levels, it is submitted
that the education and awareness generation
Programmes are implement through volun-
tary organisations e.g. the schemes of
Awareness generation projects and educa-
tion work for prevention of atrocities against
women is being implemented at the grass
root levels. As regards Legal Literacy Manu-
als, these are already being translated in
regional languages for wide dissemination
through Non-Governmental organisations,
Women Development Corporations, Centres
and State Governments under various
schemes like ICDS, Literacy Mission, Mahi-
la Samakhya etc.

The scheme is implemented. by the Depart-
ment of Posts who is expected to ensure
proper utilisation of funds. The Scheme is
monitored by special Committee of Sec-
retaries and reviewed periodically.

Noted. The Government will review the
scheme during the 1994 and examine various
suggestions being given to strengthen the
scheme further.

The Department of Posts had already
started training of their officers and printing
of forms etc. 1,18,646 officers have been
trained and over 96 lakhs pass books and
over 56 lakhs forms are got printed by the
Postal Department.



12

Para No. 26

Para No. 31

Para No. 40

Para No. 41

There should also be a monthly review of the
progress made under the scheme so as to take
corrective measures.

“With regard to education of adolescent girls,
the Committee recommends that there should
be a scheme to help meritorious girls to pursue
further studies”.

Balwadi Nutrition Programme

The programme was started in 1970-71 to
extend assistance to local vol. orgns. through
their state units for nutritional supplementation
and social and emotional development of chil-
dren attending these Balwadis. There are 5641
Balwadis which benefit about 2.25 lakh children
in the age group of 3-5 years. The budget
provision of 1994-95 is Rs. 9.72 crores. The
allocation for B.N.P. has been increased nomi-
nally due to revised norms.

Therefore, the Committce recommends that
until it is integrated into ICDS, it should not be
starved of funds.

The Committee notes with concern that the
SAARC Decade of the Girl Child, except for
one scheme intruduced as a component of
ICDS for the adolescent girl, has not found any
reflection in the budget. Schemes to improve
the nutritional status of the girl-child and
schemes to prevent their dropping out from
schools may be formulated. As for the National
Plan of Action for children, the Committee was
informed by the Secretary that there was no
separate allocation for this in the Department's
budget because this plan is to be implemented
by different ministries and departments and
Women and Child Development Department is
only the coordinator. Since, however, there is
little evidence of such coordinating activities so
far, the Committee is constrained to conclude
that this has not made much headway so far
and recommends its specder planning and im-
plementation.

At the national level, a High Powered Com-
mittee has been set up in the Planning
Commission which reviews the scheme
periodically. The scheme is also monitored
on a regular basis by a special Committee of
Secretaries. Similarly, at the State and dis-
trict levels review Committees are to review
the scheme.

As this relates to the Deptt. of Education, it
will be sent to that Department for approp-
riate action. :

The higher proposed allocation during 1994-
95 has been provided to meet the revision of
honorarium to Balsevikas/helpers and en-
hanced cost of supplementary nutrition to
the children. The funds allocated during
1994-95 will be released to the organisations
for implementing the BNP till it is integrated
into ICDS.

Government takes note of the concerns
expressed by the Standing Committee at the
mere token provision for the National Plan
of Action of Girl Child in-the budget of this’
Department. We would like to clarify that
the implementation of the plan of Action
and the attainment of goals that have been
quantified in the Plan of Action constitute
the joint responsibility of all Ministries/
Departments of the Government and the
nodal Department of Women and Child
Development implementing programmes
having a bearing on the girl child. A token
provision has been kept keeping in mind the
future need, if any, of introducing special
interventions for filling up critical gaps as
and when felt necessary. This Plan and the
National Plan of Action for Children would
help the Department of Women & Child
Development to coordinate and orchestrate
the working of various programmes run by
different Ministries/Departments for the
purpose of reaching the goals of children
and girl children.



|

13

The Standing Committee has referred to- the
need for Schemes to improve the nutritional
status of the girl child and preventing school
drop-outs. It is submitted that girl children
upto the age of 6 years are already included
within the ICDS programme which is the
World’s largest integrated child development
programme and the specific problem of
school drop-outs amongst girls is addressed
through the Adolescent Girl programme
which covers school drop-out adolecent girls
in the age-group 11-18 years. This Depart-
ment is coordinating a special gender dis-
aggregated monitoring of the ICDS Prog-
ramme, the programmes of the Department
of Education, the programmes of the De-
partment of Health & Family Welfare and
those of the other departments. Govern-
ment, through the Department of Educa-
tion, extends special incentives to the girl
children viz. free supply of text-books, spe-
cial hostel facilities, scholarships, uniforms
appointment of lady teacher etc. For coor-
dinating the entire effort, there is an inter-
Ministerial Coordination Committee under
the Secretary (WCD) at the central level.
We have also advised the State Govern-
ments to draw up similar action plans and

- set up similar State-level coordination com-

(The Comments of the Committee on this
reply may be seen in Chapter I.)



CHAPTER-IL

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOSE NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVT.’S REPLIES

Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

1

2

3

Para No.1 Women and Children who, represent more

than 50% of our population, constitute the two
vulnerable segments of our socicty without
whose upliftment real development cannot take
place. Although total Budget Estimates for
1994-95 in the Central Plan Outlay for women
and child development show an incrcasc of
Rs. 96 crores, as compared to Budget Es-
timates for 1993-94, the increase, as explained
by Secretary (Women & Child Development),
in her oral evidence tendered before the Com-
mittec, is’ mainly on account of World Bank
assistance of Rs. 38 crores to ICDS and an
increase in sanction for Mahila Samridhi Yoja-
na. On all other schemes increase in allocations
for 1994-95 has been only marginal. It is a
matter of concern for the Committee that in
the SAARC Decade of Girl Child and keeping
in view the condition of Indian Women, there
has not been adequate increase in the Budget
allocation for this sector.

Para No. 2 Total budget for 1993-94 (Revised Estimates)

and Budget for 1994-95 (Budget Estimates) are
as follows:

No comments.

No comments.

Major Head Plan

Non-Plan

Total

Revised Budget Revised

Budget

Estimate Estimate Estimate Estimate

1993-94 1994-95 1993-94

1994-95

Revised
Estimate
1993-94

Budget
Estimate
1994-95

Revenue
Capital

Budget
Bureau

570.86 662.00
5.14 _-
for NCD 522.13 609.92

Budget for WD Bureau 53.87 53.61

40.52 43.59

28.04 28.06

10.25 10.25

611.38
5.14
550.17

64.12

705.59

637.98

63.86



15

2

Para
No. 4

Para
No. 6

Para
No. 9

Para
No. 10

Rashtriya Mahila Kosh

To reach the poorest of the poor and assist
women who are unable to utilize formal bank-
ing fi ies but are in need of credit, the
Rashtriya Mahila Kosh was set up in March,
1993 under the Registration of Societies Act,
1869. For this purpose, a Corpus of Rs. 31
crores was sanctioned, to be utilised in a
phased manner.

National Commission for Women and Commis-
sioner for Women’s Rights

The National Commission for Women was set
up as a nodal agency to monitor the enforce-
ment of legal status of women, to review the
existing legislation and suggest amendments
and to liaise with the concerned Ministries,
State Government and NGOs, in order to
spread literacy and create awareness, For this
purpose, an amount of Rs. 1.75 crores in RE
was provided in 1993-94, which has been in-
creased to Rs. 2 crores in the Budget Estimates
for 1994-95,

Hostels for Working Women

To protect young working women in urban
areas from exposure to undesirable and anti-
social elements, financial assistance to the ex-
tent of 50% of the cost of land and 70% of the
cost of building construction is provided to
voluntary organisation. In 1993-94, Rs, 7.00
crores were provided, which has been increased
to Rs. 7.75 crores in the Budget for 1994-95.
This year’s target is to provide assistance to 60
hostels which would benefit about 3000 women.

Details of 1993-94 performance and Budget,
Provision for 1994-95.

(Rs. in Crores

Budget Provisions Achievements
1993-94 1994-95 1993-94

Financial

7.00 7.75 7.18

Physical

50 Hostels 60 Hostcls 30 Hostels
for 2500 for 3000 for 2060
women women women

Para
No. 14

Para
No. 15

The programme was started in 1982 with the
aim of creating public opinion against exploita-
tion of women and atrocities against them. This
objective is sought to be achieved mainly
through programmes, publicity and research
work, as well as holding meetings, conferences,
seminars, exhibitions, etc.

Financial assistance extended in 1993-94 for this
prupose was Rs. 35.00 lakhs and the same
amount has been allocated during 1994-95.

No comments.

No comments.

No comments.

No comments.

No comments.

No comments.



16

2

3

Para
No. 17

Para
No. 19

Para
No. 21

Para
No. 22

The Committee recommends that the amount
sanctioned for the year 1993-94 for legal aid in
cases of atrocities against women should be
increased.

Indira Mahila Yojana

Indira Mahila Yojana, as originally conceived
in 1991 and included in the President's Address
of the year, has four basic components:
(i) Awareness generation (ii) Income genera-
tion (iii) Convergence of inter-sectoral services;
and Integratibn of field cadres of all related
departments in the country.

The Committee was informed by. the
Department that the original draft scheme for
Indira Mahila Yojana contained components of
awareness generation, income generation,
integrated system of delivery, inter-sectoral
services and integration of field cadres of
concerned Departments, with an allotment of
Rs. 1785 crores for the Eighth Plan. The
concerned Departments could not, however,
come to a consensus on integration of cadres
and transfer of schemes from one Ministry to
the other. Subsequently, there was a revised
scheme to cover 200 blocks, with income
generation and awareness _— generation
components (Rs. 78 crores) for the remainder
of the 8th Plan. But this also is yet to be
approved by the Planning Commission. The
provision of Rs. 8 crores in the 1994-95 Budget
may go into the World Bank-aided ICDS
project, if the approval does not come in time.
The committee feels that such a big scheme
should be implemented only when proper
assessment has been made of financial and
infrastructural implications. Duplication of
efforts should be avoided. Whether a single-
widow delivery system would benefit women, in
immensely varied circumstances, has also to be
assessed.

Mahila Samridhi Yojana

This is a new scheme launched on 2nd October
1993 to promote thrift, self-reliance and certain
amount of economic independence among rural
women. It is implemented by the Department
of Posts through the network of 1.32 lakh post
offices in rural areas. An amount of Rs. 10.5
crores was initially sanctioned for the scheme
which has been increased to Rs. 19.89 crores in
the Budgetary provisions for 1994-95.

Additional funds would be sought for expand-
ing legal literacy programmes at the time of
revised estimates for the year 1994-95 to meet
the additional requirements, if any. It is howev-
er pointed that the scheme does not provide for
assistance for legal aid.

No comments.

The Govt. shares the concern of the Committee
on the need for taking expeditious steps for
operationalising the Indira Mahila Yojana. The
final draft on the Yojana, presently under
consideration of the Planning Commission, is
an outcome of serious deliberation continuing
for over three years and has been built up on
the constructive suggestion of the related
central sectoral Ministries, the State Govts. and
the Committee of Secretaries. The Yojana
seeks to empower women through awareness
generation and increased income earning
opportunities thereby leading to the process
where women themselves can orchastrate the
convergence of women specific and women
related services.

No. comments.



17.

Para
No. 27

Para
No. 30

Para
No. 32

Para

Nutrition and Child Development

“The Committee expresses its concern over the
sharp decline in the Plan Budget estimates
under the Head 2235 for Child Welfare. As
against Rs. 43.35 crores in 1993-94, it has gone
down to Rs. 20.17 crores in 1994-95 and
recommends restoration of the allocation to last
year's level”.

With the use of ICDS infrastructure, a
special scheme for adolescent girls has been
formulated, mainly for those who have
been out of schools, to meet their nutri-
tional, educational and recreational needs.

In order to meet the requirement of trained
personnel for implementing the program-
mes for pre-school children, the Bal Sevika
Training Programmes was started in 1961-
62. There are 25 Bal Sevika Training Cen-
tres and each is provided with a sum of Rs.
1,74,7504 to train 50 Bal Sevikas each
year.

The Committee observes that the Secret-
ary, Deptt. of Women and Child Develop-
ment, in her oral evidence tendered before
the Committee, has stated that more im-
portance would be given to setting up
creaches and day care centres but the
demand for grants this year is exactly the
same as that of last year. The Committee
has its doubts as to how this objective
would be achieved with the allocations
remaining static. Further, the Committee
feels that the rate of honorarium provided
to Bal Sevikas in the Social Welfare Board
be increased, as has been done in the case
of Anganwadi Workers.

The reduction in Budget for 1994-95 under
Major Head “2235” is due to the following

reasons:—

(i) Delhi has become UT with Legislature.
Therefore, amount provided for Delhi has
been shifted from Budget head ‘2235’ to

(ii) The provision made during 1993-94 for
National Creche Fund was one time provi-
sion required for setting up the Fund. Since
the Fund has been set up during 1993-94,
only a token provision of Rs. 1 lakh has
been kept during 1994-95.

No comments.

No comments.

There has been little expansion of the
Creche Programme for the last 4 year due
to non-availability of additional funds.
Therefore, the Govt. has formulated a new
Scheme of National Creche Fund 1994 with
a corpus fund of Rs. 19.90 crores to meet
the growing requirements for opening of
creches. The Deptt. will start sanctioning
new creches under the scheme from the
current financial year. Under the scheme
honorarium paid to creche workers has
been raised from Rs. 500 per creche per
month for two creche workers to Rs. 800
per month per creche workers for two
creche workers with effect from 1.4.1993.



18

2

Para
No. 37

Para
No. 38

Para
No. 42

It has been noted that there has been increased
involvement of private sector in setting up
ereches. The Committee fecls that this should
not 1९80 to slackness on the part of Govt. It
was also noted that a National Creche Fund is
being established with a corpus fund of Rs.
19.90 crores which can accept donations and
assistance from other agencics and the private
sector. The Committee recommends that the
Fund should be created expeditiously.

The Committee also expresses its concern over
the Department's failure to make any enhance-
ment in the allocation for the day care centres.

(IV) Food & Nutrition Board

Food & Nutrition Board was established in
1964 for tackling the problem of malnutrition
by imparting nutrition cducation, development
and promoting of nutritious food and cnrich-
ment of foods by way of fortification of milk
with vitamin A and salt with iron.

The Department has 5९1 up a National Creche
Fund with a Corpus Fund of Rs. 19.90 crores.

Duc to paucity of funds, no funds were pro-
vided for the expansion of the programme of
creches and day care centres. Expansion will
now be made under National Creche Fund.

No. comments.



CHAPTER-IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ON WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERN-
MENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Para No. Recommendation Reply
1 2 3
Para The Committee is of the view that though there The reasons for non-fulfilment of physical
No. 11 is acute shortage of working women’s Hostel in target in number of hostels in 1993-94 was the
the country the Department could not achieve steep rise in construction costs. However capac-
the physical targets. During 1993-94, but am- ity achievement over 82% and fund utilisation
bitious targets have been fixed for 1994-95. The was more than the BE/RE. To achieve ‘the
Committee desires that effective steps should target of sanctioning of 60 additional hostels to
be taken by the Department to achicve the provide accommodation to 3000 working
targets set for 1994-95. women during 1994-95 all the state Govern-
ments and Union Territories have already been
advised to send the proposals of all suitable
organisations. 50 proposals have ‘already been
reccived and are being processed.
Para As frequent complaints are reccived about Since inception of the Scheme in 1972-73, 685
No. 12 mismanagement of the hostels recciving grants hostels for 44,960 working women have alrcady
and assistance from the Government the Com- been sanctioned upto 31.3.1994. it will thus
mittee is of the view that there is need for would not be practicable to nominate a
evolving some system of monitoring so as to Member of the Central Government on the
control any sort of irregularitics in these hostels Hostel Management Committee of cach and
for this purpose, the Committee recommends every Hostel. It has already been provided in
that a Government representative be included the scheme that the Hostel Management Com-
on the Board of Management of cach of such mittee shall have a representative of the. State
hostels. Government/UT Administration and the Cent-
ral Social Welfare Board and/or State Social
Welfare Advisory Board. The Scheme also
provides for representation of the residents of
the hostel. The Hostel Management Committee
is required to meet at least once in three
months. The present system scems to be adequ-
ate to handle the situation.
Para “The Committee expresses its deep concern The Department has made concerted ‘efforts to
No. 20 over the fact that though the scheme was get the necessary approval for launching the

announced the President’s Address in 1991, till
this date it has not been opcrationalised.”

Yojana. At present, the EFC Memo on Indira
Mahila Yojana (IMY) for 200 blocks in the
country is pending with planning Commission
for approval.



2

Para
No. 28

Para
No. 29

Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)

The main thrust of ICDS programme is on the
provision of Anganwadis in every village and
urban slum areas. Generally, there is one
Anganwadi for a population of 1000 in rural
areas and urban slum areas and of about 700 in
tribal areas, which is run by an Anganwadi
worker, a female voluntary worker and helper.
By the end of 1993, 3120 ICDS projects were
sanctioned which benefitted about 1.94 crore
children and women. For the year 1994-95 an
outlay of Rs. 426.00 crores has been approved
for the ICDS and 200 new projects are likely to
start. The Committee feels that a big portion of
the increased outlay is likely to be absorbed in
the increased honorarium to Anganwadi work-
ers. Therefore, the Committee feels that the
amount available for the projected expansion of
the scheme to cover new areas is likely to be
insufficient. Of 5239 blocks, 2119 blocks remain
to be covered. At the rate of 200 projects per
year, it will take another 10 years for all blocks
to be covered. To expedite the process, any
shortfall in the projected expansion by the end
of the 8th Plan should be properly estimated
and additional allocations made.

The relative success of the ICDS scheme in
improving child health and lowering IMR is
due to its decentralized and popular structure.
Probably because of this, ICDS is being in-
creasingly seen as an umbrella organisation
within which other schemes could be incorpo-
rated. Thus early childhood education is now a
part of ICDS. There is a new scheme for
adolescent girls; and creches and day care
centres are sought to be made a part of ICDS.
Indira Mahila Yojana, in its revised form, will
become a component of it. Separate allocations
have been proposed for these schemes by the
Department. But the National Creche Fund has
only been notified. Allocation Creche Fund has
only been notified. Allocation of Rs. 8 crores
for Indira Mahila Yojana has not yet been
approved. Therefore, the Committee recom-
mends that until and unless sperate additional
allocations have been obtained for these addi-
tional components, ICDS should concentrate
on strengthening and expansion its own struc-
ture with whatever allocations it may get. The
proposal to entrust a percentage of ICDS
schemes to NGOs should be properly assessed
before it is implemented, since, in the absence
of community-based monitoring arrangements,
it would be difficult to ensure accountability of
NGOs.

It is proposed to sanction 200 projects during
the year 1994-95. In order to sanction 200
projects and to maintain the existing projects,
the plan outlay of Rs. 426 crores has been
approved for the ICDS which is adequate to
meet the requirements. However, for universal-
isation of ICDS during the 8th Plan period, we
would require an additional amount of Rs.
1166.27 crores in the Central Plan and an
additional amount of Rs. 1379.96 crores in the
State outlays on nutrition during the Plan
period.

As mentioned against Para 28, the outlay
provided for 1994-95 would be adequate to
meet the sequirement of additional 200 blocks
of ICDS project and to maintain the existing
ICDS projects. A number of effective steps
including sanction of additional AWCs, con-
struction of godowns/anganwadi buildings, pro-
vision of storage containers have been taken by
the department for strengthening ICDS scheme
directly involvement of NGOs in directly imple-
menting ICDS projects has been considered
vital to strengthening community participation
under the scheme. To ensure that only compe-
tent NGOs are entrusted with such projects,
State Governments have been given the discre-
tion to identify competent NGOs with proven
track record.



21

2

Para
No. 33

Para
No. 34

Para
No. 35

The Committee observes that out of the three
component of ICDS, namely executive, work-
ers and receipients, two do not appear to be
happy with the service. Therefore, monitoring
system should be strengthened to ensure proper
functioning of the ICDS to the satisfaction of
all its components.

The Committee feels that since it is a Central
Project public representatives should also be
involved for proper moitoring of the scheme.

Creches/Day Care Centres

This scheme was started in 1975 to provide day
care services to children in the age group of 0-5
years of those families whose monthly income
does not exceed Rs. 1800 per month. The
scheme is implemented through the Central
Social Welfare Board, the Indian Council for
Child Welfare and Bhartiya Adimjati Sevak
Sangh. During the year 1993-94, a total amount
of Rs. 23.05 crores was sanctioned to benefit
about 3 lakhs children. The same amount has
been allotted in the budgetary provisions for
this year. The Committee reaffirms its earlier
observations made in its Third Report, about
the Bhartiya Adimjati Sevak Sangh regarding
the need for conducting an enquiry into the
affairs of the Sangh.

Comments 33 and 34

The Department has adopted an improve man-
agement information system to monitor the
implementation of the ICDS scheme. The
Monthly Progress Reports on each aspect of
the Scheme is received by the Department
straight from the projects which are analysed
with respect to crucial indicators on a quarterly
and half yearly basis. Monitoring system has
been strengthened to reflect the frequency as
the delivery of services and gender specific
information of the beneficiaries. In addition to
these reports on performance of projects, the
Department is also receiving quarterly Monitor-
ing Reports on health aspects of the scheme
from the Central Technical Committee. These
Quarterly Monitoring Reports are generated by
Central Technical Committee on the basis of
Monthly Monitoring Reports received from
Primary Health Centres and analysis is carried
out for variable such as provision of sup-
plementary nutrition, pre-school education,
health check-up and referral services, child and
mother mortality, existing status of malnutrition
of children, staff position, their recruitment and
vacancy position and immunisation coverage.
The State exhibiting poor performance in re-
spect of any of these indicators are promptly
addressed to rectify the situation’ by intensifying
efforts and close monitoring. In addition to the
existing monitoring system at the Central and
State level, the community based monitoring
mechanism has been recently evolved. The
states have been asked to constitute Bal Vikas
Mahila Samities at the village, block and dis-
trict levels for involvement of elected women
representatives of Panchayats in Monitoring all
the child and women programme being im-
plemented in their area of jurisdiction.

During the current financial year a budget
provision of Rs. 23.05 crores has been made
under the scheme of Creches and Day Care
Centres. An evaluation of the Creche program-
me by competent professionals in underway.



CHAPTER-V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, FINAL REPLIES OF WHICH ARE
STILL AWAITED

—NIL—



MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

शा
*EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 31st May, 1995 in Committee Room
No. 67, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

5. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

8. Dr. Vasant Pawar

9. Shri Inder Jit

10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11, Dr. K.D. Jeswani

12. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

13. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
14, Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
15. Shri Suraj Mandal
SECRETARIAT

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Twenty-Fifth and Twenty-Seventh Reports on the
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations made by the Committee in its
Tenth and Seventh Reports on the Demands for Grants, 1994-95 of the Departments of
Culture and Women and Child Development. After making some modifications, the
Committee adopted the same.

3. The Committee, then adjourned at 4.00 p.m. to meet again on Ist June, 1995.

*Minutes of Ist to VIIth meetings relates to matters not included in this report.

25


B



Brrata to the Twenty-Seventh Report of the Department of
Women & Child Development on the Action Taken by Govt.
on the Recommsndations/Observations contained the Seventh

On page No. (i), S1.No. 42 for ‘Ramaashray' read ‘Ramashray',

On page No. 9, Para No.3 under the head Reply, para 2 line 4
for ‘descrimination’ 2980 ‘discrimination’,

On page Ho.10 para No, 8 under the head reply line 7 for ‘Ministies’
2920 ‘Ministries’,

On page No. 11 para Fo.13 under the head Recommendations last line :
for ‘allotements' read ‘allotment’

On page No.13 = No. 41 under the head Reply, para 2 line 11
*adolecent' read ‘adolescent!

On page No. 16 para no. 21 under the head Recommendations line 22
22 fe ‘widow' read ‘Window!

On page No. 17 para No. 36 under the hear Recomendations line 6
for ‘oreaches' read ‘creches',

On page 20 para No. 28 under the head Recommendations line 2
for ‘Anganwadis' read 'Anganwadi’

On page No. 20 para No. 29 under the head Recommeniations line
15 & 16 delete the words Allocation Creche fund has

only been notified, Line 19 "Sperate' read ‘Separate’.

Onpage No. 21 para No, 33 under the head recomendations line 4
{ge ‘receipients' read ‘recipients’

On page No. 21 para No. 34 under the head recommendations line 5
for ‘Moitoring' 3983 'Honitoring'.

On page No, 21 para No. 3% under the head reply, line 5 for Sin?
zead ‘is’.

On page No, 22 para No. 44, under the head reply line 8 for
‘Departmen’ 2983 ‘Department’.