PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
  
HUNDRED THIRTY NINTH REPORT 
  
ON 
  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2003-2004 (DEMAND NO. 57) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF SECONDARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION 
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT) 
  
  
  
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD  APRIL, 2003) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON  23RD   APRIL, 2003) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2003/VAISAKHA, 1924 (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                    
PREFACE                                                                                                        
REPORT                                                                                                          
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                                               
MINUTES                                                                                                                                                       
             
                                                            COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2003) 
Shri Arjun Singh                           Chairman 
  
MEMBERS 
            RAJYA SABHA 
  
Dr. Abrar Ahmed          
Dr. Akhilesh Das 
Shri B.P. Apte   
Shri Bachani Lekhraj  
Shri Eduardo Faleiro   
Page 1 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik 
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey 
Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi 
Shri R. Sarath Kumar 
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
Shri Mrinal Sen 
Smt. Vanga Geetha 
Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
Shri Ambareesha 
Shri Ramakant Angle 
Shri Kirti Jha Azad 
Shri G. S. Basavaraj 
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria 
Prof. Kailasho Devi 
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit 
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal 
Shri R.L. Jalappa 
Shri Baliram Kashyap 
Shri Brij Lal Khabri 
Shri Samik Lahiri 
Shri Y.G. Mahajan 
Shri  G.Mallikarjunappa 
Dr. Manda Jagannath 
Smt. Nivedita Mane 
Shrimati Jas Kaur Meena 
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 29
th   January, 2003.  
(i) 
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja 
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik 
Smt. Renu Kumari 
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao 
Shri Sunil Dutt 
Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
Dr. N. Venkataswamy 
Smt. Ganti Vijaykumari 
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav 
Shri G.J. Javia 
Shri Ali Mohammed Naik 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
Shri N.K. Sin
gh, Joint Director 
Page 2 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer 
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
** nominated   w.e.f. 7th April, 2003. 
PREFACE 
  
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Hundred thirty-ninth Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand 
No.57) of the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development for the year 2003-2004. 
2.         The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the 
Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development and also 
heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting 
held on 25th March, 2003. 
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on  
22nd April, 2003. 
  
  
REPORT 
I           INTRODUCTION 
Education is a nectar and has been considered a liberating force.    An educated society treads the path of 
rationality, breaks the shackles of ignorance and rigidity and takes the nation to a new high in the comity 
of nations. 
The system of education in India has broadly been divided in two categories: elementary education and 
secondary and higher education.  It has been observed over the years that new initiatives are being taken 
to strengthen school education. Programmes like National Open School (renamed National Institute of 
Open Schooling) are being strengthened to reach out more and more children in distant areas, National 
Council of Educational Research and Training is playing an active role in providing resource support in 
the areas of education research and training at school level.  The Navodaya Vidyalayas have been set up 
with the objective of providing a progressive and forward looking school system in the rural areas. 
Secondary Education  is of  crucial importance to our students  who spend formative years of their life 
here.    The secondary stage of Education   gains more importance as hardly 19% students reach the 
university level of education.   While changes have been made from time to time by the Government, 
fact remains that this stage of education does not lead students anywhere.   In fact, on the other hand, the 
subjects like English, Hindi and mathematics (i.e. modern mathematics) which has been introduced in 
the recent years etc.  are beyond one’s comprehension and on an average parents are not able to support 
their children financially.   These reasons alone have compelled students more so from the vulnerable 
sections of the society to drop out at secondary level only.    There is thus a need to involve the school 
more effectively to prevent drop-outs and reorient the education at this level, may be in the form of 
making it more vocational and need based so that in case of students who are not able to enter the 
university stage, at least the secondary education helps them to stand in the world on their own account. 
More so, vocationalisation of education is the need of the hour as the country faces a paradox of more 
and more number of children at entry level and corresponding flow of students at exit level of secondary 
NEW DELHI 
April 22 , 2003 
Vaisakha  2 , (Saka) 
  
ARJUN SINGH 
 Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on  Human Resource Development
Page 3 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

and university stages with meagre opportunities in the development of one’s career, or, for that matter, 
employment.   
The Special Subject Group appointed by the Prime Minister's Office in its Report on Policy Framework 
for Reforms in Education of  April 2000 has estimated that as per the enrolment figures of 1997-98 two-
third of the eligible population  remains out of the school system and only 270 lakhs are attending 
schools at the secondary level.    
The challenge before the nation is how best to tap the potential of this upcoming workforce and 
gainfully employ them in projects of national importance and provide them a need based system of 
education and keep them away from the world of crime and ignorance and help them become a useful  
citizen of the society. 
II          BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 2.1        During the Tenth Plan, the approved outlay for Secondary & Higher Education is Rs. 13,825.00 
crore. The Planning Commission, while making the annual plan allocations for the year 2001-2002 had 
assured to give due priority to the Education Sector as soon as the funds were available through 
disinvestment. However, instead of additional funds being provided to the Department, the BE 
allocation was reduced at RE stage. Similarly, the projected outlay for 2002-2003 was Rs. 4223.37 
crore, whereas approved Plan allocation was only Rs. 2125.00 crores but this too came down  to Rs. 
1942.33 crore at RE stage. During 2003-2004 the Plan outlay (BE) has been fixed at the level of 
previous year's BE level i.e., at Rs. 2125.00 crore.  Non-Plan allocation for 2003-2004 is Rs. 2832.40 
crore.   
2.2       The Committee was informed that as state funding of the education sector has been inadequate 
and the desired six per cent of the national income could not be set apart for education, the Department 
has decided to constitute the `Bharat Shiksha Kosh' for mobilizing extra-budgetary resources by 
receiving donations/contributions/endowments from individuals and corporates, central and state 
Governments, NRIs and People of Indian Origin (PIO) in order to fill in the gap between actual 
requirement and the available budgetary support.     
2.3       In absence of any authoritative figures the Committee has taken the total outlay (plan and non 
plan) of Rs. 4749 crores and maximum number of students who registered themselves for 2002 
examinations i.e. 530401.    The  total outlay per head comes to Rs. 9345 half of which is non-plan 
expenditure.     The Plan  expenditure per student is thus Rs. 4500/- approximately which includes 
expenditure  on creation of infrastructure, peripheral  or administrative expenditure.   The net available 
per student is thus a pittance.    The Committee, therefore, observes that there is a need to provide more 
funds in this section as this is an investment to secure the future of our young generation.   Government 
must provide at least six percent of the national income to this sector which is much starved of funds.  
2.4     At the same time in many of the schemes/projects, the Committee, has observed  that substantial 
funds are lying with State Governments/NGOs and Utilization Certificates are not forthcoming from 
them for years together.  The Committee does not know whether these funds have been utilized at all.   
The Department must give a serious thought to this aspect and take necessary remedial measures for 
optimum utilisation of funds. 
SECONDARY EDUCATION 
III        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING  
3.1       The National Council of Educational Research and Training  (NCERT) is an apex resource 
organisation to assist and advise the state Governments on matters related to school education.   It 
provides academic and technical support for qualitative improvement of school education.  Programmes 
and activities related to improvement of courses of studies, textual materials, support and ancillary 
materials for enrichment of instructions were undertaken to improve the content and process of 
secondary education and vocationalisation of education.  
3.2       The Committee notes with satisfaction that non-utilisation of funds has declined  from 22.68 per 
cent in 1999-2000 to about zero per cent by 2002-2003.   In fact, the NCERT has asked for more funds 
than Rs.15.05 crore which was allocated to it at RE stage for the financial year 2002-2003.   The 
Committee recommends that the requirement of extra funds by NCERT must be looked into with a view 
Page 4 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

to help the organisation in its pursuits.              
3.3       The Committee notes that NCERT undertakes programmes and activities in relation to 
improvement of courses in vocational education. The developmental programmes/activities in progress 
include norms and standards for accreditation of institutions and programmes of vocational education, 
database for vocational education, software on question bank, competency-based curriculum on agro-
forestry, curriculum for NVQ in the area of transport  service, curriculum and modules in specific areas 
related to the entertainment industry, revision of general foundation course, modernisation of vocational 
curricula in purchasing and store keeping, accounting and auditing, pre-vocational instruction-cum-
practical manual on setting up of a plant clinic, instructional material for selected modules in marine 
fisheries, pre-vocational module in rural marketing, modular vocational course on e-business and course 
on small business management, module on dry cleaning, decorative candle making and instructional 
material for some vocational and pre-vocational courses.  
3.4       The Committee observes that there is need to cover more and more areas in a bid to vocationalise 
the education.   At the same time there is a need to introduce some ‘Earn and Learn’ kind of schemes to 
inculcate the feelings of self-sufficiency among the students.  
3.5       The Committee is of the view that there is a need to tap the vast potential of upcoming force of 
students who generally remain idle during holidays including summer vacation.  Millions of work days 
are just available at the asking with virtually no cost.   If they could be gainfully employed in projects of 
national importance or otherwise it will secure many purposes including out-station visits for students 
which are also a virtual education.   NCERT must give a serious thought to this aspect. 
IV   NATIONAL INSTITUTE OPEN SCHOOLING (NIOS) 
4.1       The National Institute Open Schooling (NIOS) has been pursuing its mission  of reaching the 
unreached by providing opportunities for continuing education to those who have missed opportunities 
to complete school education and developmental education through courses and programmes of general 
education, life enrichment and vocational education from primary to pre-degree level.  As an apex level 
resource organisation in school education through Distance and Open Learning Mode and as a National 
Board of School Education, the NIOS has been (i) developing curricula and self learning materials, (ii) 
organising Personal Contact Programme (PCP) at accredited study centres for enrolled students and (iii) 
examining them for its school level courses.   Steps are being taken to ensure that the NIOS curricula 
inter-alia take care of the children.    Keeping in view the educational needs of its clientele  groups, the 
NIOS has been providing flexibility in selecting academic,  pre-vocational and vocational courses as 
well as in examinations so that a candidate can learn and proceed according to his/her own pace. 
4.2       The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by NIOS in making  available  courses for 
physically, mentally and visually challenged children.   The Committee observes that NIOS must 
endeavour to reach more and more such children  and also try to make its system of education more 
responsive and need based.     
4.3       The Committee is also concerned about the recognition and acceptability of the Certificates and 
Diplomas for employment in both public and private sector.    While NIOS should endeavour to make its 
courses responsive and need based, Government must endeavour to ensure that the certificate and 
Diplomas awarded by NIOS are accepted  by the industry.  
V         KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN 
5.1       KVS was set-up in 1965 as a registered body wholly financed by Government to establish, 
control and manage Kendriya Vidyalayas, the main objectives of which are to meet the educational 
needs of the children of transferable Central Government employees.  The Sangathan administers 843 
Kendriya Vidyalayas located in different parts of the country, out of which 706 Vidyalays are in the 
Defence/Civil Sector and the remaining are under the project sector.  
 5.2         The Committee has been informed that out of 706 Vidyalayas in Defence/Civil Sector, 612 
Vidyalayas are operating from permanent buildings and construction work is in progress in respect of 75 
Vidyalayas.  Besides that, there are still 68 Kendriya Vidyalas in respect of which land is yet to be 
transferred which are in Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, 
New Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Manipur, 
Page 5 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, UP, Uttranchal and 
W. Bengal.  
5.3       The Committee notes with concern the tardy pace of land transfers.   The Committee observes 
that certain transfer cases have been pending for last twenty seven years.     The Committee desires that 
these cases be looked into with a sense of urgency. 
5.4       The Committee has been informed that Government have since decided  not to open new KVs. 
While the rationale behind such a decision is not known to the Committee it feels that it is the 
responsibility of the State to cater to the  requirements of increasing population. Such a decision would 
be inconsistent with the requirements of the people.  The Committee also notes that the KVS intends to 
open some new schools without creating any additional liability on Non-Plan side.     
5.5       The Committee observes from the number of questions raised in the Parliament in the recent 
years that the level of discontentment among staff and teachers of KVS has been very high.   Rather, it 
appears that trade unionism  is  brewing in with the result each and every minute decision of the 
Government is questioned whether it relates to transfers, purchases, decision taken by individual 
authorities or Board.   Something   appears to be amiss somewhere.    The Department must check this 
tendency as the trade unionism  in education sector is not in the overall interest and more so in the case 
of students.   At the same time if a teacher is not contented and satisfied it would only affect the 
students.   The Department must evolve a ‘satisfaction platform’ where the grievances of teachers can be 
redressed. 
VI        NAVODAYA VIDYALAYA SAMITI 
6.1       Navodaya Vidyalaya is an  effort on the part of the Government in the right direction to spread 
the light of education through the length and breadth of the country. Navodaya Vidyalayas aim to 
provide good quality education to the talented children particularly from the rural areas.  At present, 
there are 468 sanctioned and 432 functional JNVs covering as many districts in 34 States/UTs.  During 
Tenth Plan, the Samiti proposes to acquire built up accommodation or construct permanent office 
buildings for its Headquarters Office, ten Regional Offices and 10 training centres.  The Samiti also 
proposes to expand sports activities, computer education programme, vocational courses etc. during 
Tenth Plan.  It is also proposed to start ten schools for gifted children. 
6.2       The Committee observes that out of 94 JNVs to be established during the Ninth Plan, only 80 
could be established.   The Committee feels that the remaining 14 JNVs should be established 
immediately.   As regards the number of students enrolled on 31.3.2002  there is still a gap of 11,191 
students to achieve the  target of 1,51,983 students fixed during the Ninth Plan.   The Committee has 
also been given to understand  that there have been considerable number of drop-outs and the 
Department intended to recoup the drop outs by enrolling more students in Class IX and XI in the 
functional Vidyalayas by the end of Ninth Five Year Plan. 
6.3       The Committee, feels concerned about students who have dropped out.   The Committee also 
notes with concern that the target of constructing 275 Vidyalayas buildings during the Ninth Plan could 
not be achieved.    The building constructed were less by 27 in number.    The Committee, recommends 
that the Department must examine the cases of drop outs as also the non-achievement  of the target of 
construction of buildings and take necessary remedial steps. 
VII      VOCATIONALISATION OF EDUCATION 
7.1     The Department has been implementing a centrally sponsored scheme of vocationalisation of 
secondary education at 10+2 level since 1988 and in its revised format since 1992-93.     The scheme has 
not been a runaway success and acknowledging this, the working group under the chairmanship of 
Director, NCERT, recommended for the establishment of block-level vocational training institutes, 
treating vocational stream at par with other streams of education, appointment of full-time teachers, 
coordination and utilisation of resources with other implementing agencies/departments/ministries, 
development of national vocational qualification of development of  a short-term course and linkages 
with major industrial outfits. 
7.2       The Committee appreciates the proposed changes.   In fact, the system of education developed 
durin
g British period and still being largely  followed aims at producing white collar jobs which are 
Page 6 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

decreasing day by day because of Government's policy of down sizing and right sizing the 
Departments.    The students thus face a bleak future with growing unemployment.    The Committee 
observes there is thus a need to re-orient the system of education by making it more vocational to suit 
the present day situation and at the same time ensure balanced development as envisaged by Mahatma 
Gandhi.   Vocationalisation of the education should ensure that after completing certain level of 
education students can stand in the world on their own.   This would inculcate the sense of self 
sufficiency among students and possibly help in reduction of white collar crimes which are the result of 
one’s hunger and bleak future so far as employment opportunities are concerned.  
7.3       The Committee also desires that the participation of NGOs and voluntary organisations for 
implementation of specific innovative projects for conducting short-term courses should be encouraged 
more vigorously.    The Committee apprehends that grants given to many NGOs are not being utilized 
for the purpose for which these are given to them.   The Committee also apprehends whether the NGOs 
are pursuing the mission for which they have come up.   The Committee, therefore, feels the need for an 
effective monitoring system which can oversee the implementation of the schemes and note the concrete 
achievement, if any, made by the NGOs. 
7.4       The Committee also recommends creation of a data bank on employment and self employment 
status of the student who undergo vocationalisation courses in order to take stock of the contribution  of 
the programme. 
VIII      ACCESS WITH EQUITY 
8.1       This is a new Scheme taken up during Tenth Five Year Plan on the recommendations of the 
Working Group on Secondary Education for Tenth Five Year Plan. Under the Scheme the following 
components are proposed: 
1.         Strengthening of existing, programme of girl's hostels managed by NGOs.  
2.         One time assistance to reputed NGOs, Trusts, Societies and State Governments etc. for,        
setting up Secondary Schools.  
3.         Assist the Secondary and Senior Secondary Schools for opening second shift in  educationally 
backward districts. 
8.2       The component of girl's hostels managed by NGO has already been functional. Under the 
scheme  during the 10th Plan, a provision of  Rs.305 crores has been made under the scheme 'Access 
with Equity' with a budget provision of Rs.18 crores (excluding non lapsable pool of NER) for the year 
2002- 2003.  The Planning Commission has provided an additional amount of Rs.300.00 crores for the 
scheme for Tenth Plan period to be allocated to Educationally Backward States/UTs for opening a 
second shift in selected schools. 
8.3          The Committee notes with satisfaction that the scheme would help in boosting girl's education, 
thereby, reducing the gender gap.  The scheme  would also help in the expansion of infrastructure.    
Much more needs to be done to create infrastructure to cater to the huge influx from elementary 
education level to secondary level.         
8.4        Against a financial target of Rs. 60.00 crore the expenditure incurred amounted to  Rs. 11.78 
crore which works out to only 19.63 per cent.    The utilisation of expenditure is thus far from 
satisfactory and indicates the performance at a snail’s pace.   
8.5       The Committee notes that barring Andhra Pradesh and, to some extent, Karnataka, the 
participation of NGOs in managing girl's Hostels has not been very encouraging.    The Committee 
would like the Department to analyse the reasons for this poor participation and take remedial  steps to 
ensure increasing participation of NGOs in this area.  
IX        INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOOGY IN SCHOOL 
9.1       There are two components of ICT in schools, namely Computer Literacy and Studies in Schools 
(CLASS) and Educational Technology (ET).   Both these schemes has been  merged. 
9.2       Keeping in view the need to expose children to the utility and applications of computers, the 
Department of Electronics, in collaboration with the MHRD, initiated a pilot project called CLASS from 
1984-85 for senior secondary schools. Originally this scheme was started with the supply of computers 
by British Government, namely BBC Micros in 2598 schools all over the country including KVs. Later, 
Page 7 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

during 1993-94, the scheme was modified and introduced as a centrally sponsored scheme. During the 
Eighth Plan Period, the scheme was widened to provide financial grants to institutes, which were 
provided BBC Micros, and also coverage of Government aided secondary/senior secondary schools.  
9.3       The Committee notes that 2598 schools having BBC Micros were covered under the revised 
CLASS scheme during the Eighth Plan for providing instructors, maintenance of hardware, consumables 
and textbooks for students and training of teachers in schools. In addition, 2371 schools were covered 
with new hardware configurations. On the advice of the Ministry of Finance, the Scheme has 
discontinued with effect from Apri1 1999. The scheme was introduced during the financial year 2001-
02. During 2001-02 Computer Education Plans (CEPs) were received from 19 states/UTs and after 
examination by the Project Monitoring and Evaluation Group headed by the Secretary (Secondary and 
Higher Education) an amount of Rs. 74 crore was released to States/UTs to cover 3112 Schools.  
Besides KVS/NVS have been sanctioned Rs. 32.00 crore, out of which Rs. 3.63 crore have been 
released as the first instalment. The KVS/NVS have identified 31 and 33 schools respectively for 
conversion into SMART Schools. 
9.4       The Educational Technology Scheme was initiated in 1972 and seeks to improve utilisation of 
the media through radio and TV for increased access to education. In order to consolidate the efforts 
under the INSAT utilisation programme, achieve larger programme production capabilities within the 
education sector and extend radio/TV coverage to upper primary schools in the country, a revised 
scheme was started in 1987-88. Under this scheme, funds are released to 7 State Institutes of 
Educational Technology (SIET) in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh 
and Kerala.  These SIETs are being funded for producing programmes for the school sector for telecast 
through Doordarshan and Akashvani. The scheme of RCCPs and CTVs has been discontinued during 
the current financial year. The Committee notes that during the financial year 2001-02, under 
Educational Technology Scheme, the audio and video programmes produced by the SIETs on various 
educational themes at various levels of school education is as under:  
  
9.5       During the Ninth Five- Year Plan an amount of Rs.34.83 crore has been released and 3,509 
audio/video programmes produced by the SIETs and CIET. Under this scheme, an amount of Rs. 13.03 
crore was released to provide 29,781 RCCPs and 8,826 CTV s in schools during the Ninth Five- Year 
Plan. However, this Scheme has been discontinued during the current financial year. 
9.6       The Committee notes that under Educational Technology (ET) Scheme the audio programmes, 
51 in number made by the State Institutes of Education Technology (SIET) during the financial year 
2001-2002 have been miserably less than video programmes which are 789 in  number.    Unfortunately 
this situation prevails in spite of the fact that TVs have still not penetrated as deep as radios in India.   
Further the Committee has also taken a serious note of the fact that the Department spent Rs. 34.8357 
crore on 3509 audio/video programme and Rs. 13.0326 crore on procuring 29781 RCCPs and 8826 
CTVs in schools during the Ninth Plan.    All this expenditure amounting to Rs. 47.8683 crore works out 
to  61.6% of the total allocation i.e. 77.70 crores. 
9.7       The Committee has been informed that the Department has impressed upon the  Central Institute 
of educational Technology (CIET) and State Institute of Educational Technology (SIET) to produce 
programmes which could be telecast on the fully dedicated educational channel Gyan Darshan.     
9.8       The Committee is constrained to observe that the funds under audio programmes under 
Educational Technology remained unutilized. 
9.9       The Committee also takes a serious view of under utilisation of the funds under the School 
SIETs video prog. Audio Pro g. 
Pune          277        12 
Orissa          153         - 
Patna          200         - 
H
yderabad          159        39 
Lucknow      Not available    Not available 
Gujarat         -do-      -do- 
Page 8 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

Computer Literacy and Studies in School (CLASS). 
9.10     The Committee has also been given to understand that some schools, particularly, the aided 
schools in the capital have been charging Rs. 100/- per month or even higher for computers.   The total 
amount thus collected from students comes to much more than might have been invested in the purchase 
of computers.   Schools should not be allowed to make profit out of such schemes and what is more bulk 
of time is spent on imparting theoretical lessons and students are not allowed a free hand on computers.   
The Department must look into this and take up the matter with the Directorates of Education. 
9.11     Under the scheme relating to audio programmes and procurement of CTV, the Committee feels 
that there is also a need to produce sufficient number of programmes to cater to the educational needs of 
students.  The Committee recommends that the Department should take up the matter with appropriate 
agencies so as to gear them up for production of adequate number of requisite programmes. 
UNIVERSITY AND HIGHER EDUCATION 
X        UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION 
10.1     An amount of Rs.1630.55 crore has been proposed for UGC both under Plan and Non-Plan for 
the year 2003-2004. While the allocation under Non-Plan has been increased by Rs.13.80 crore as 
compared to the year 2002-2003, the allocation under Plan for 2003-04 in at the same level as  made 
during 2002-2003.  
10.2     Besides the role of giving grants to universities and colleges, UGC also advises Central and State 
Governments on the measures necessary for the development of higher education. It, thus, serves as a 
coordinating body between the Union and the State governments and the institutions of higher learning.   
10.3     In the reporting year 2002-03 (the first year of the Tenth Plan), the UGC had Plan budget 
estimates amounting to Rs. 516.75 crore for five sectors consisting of around 70 schemes/programmes. 
About 45 percent of the Ninth Plan schemes/ programmes have been dropped and 40 new schemes have 
been added for implementation during the Tenth Plan period. The five broad sectors of the Tenth Plan 
are general development of universities and colleges (219 crore Plan budget estimate), enhancing access 
and equity (29.50 crore), promotion of relevant education (70 crore), quality and excellence (99.25 
crore) and strengthening of research (99 crore). Out of the Plan budget estimate for the first year of the 
Tenth Plan, 10 percent of the allocation under each sector/scheme was to be allocated to North-Eastern 
universities and colleges. 
10.4     During the Tenth Plan period, the emphasis and focus would be on development of universities 
and colleges by making available infrastructural facilities, quality and excellence, access and equity with 
quality etc. During the reporting year, various UGC Visiting Committees were reviewing the 
implementation of various higher programmes during the Ninth Plan and assessing the financial 
requirements for the Tenth Plan period. The recommendation report of these Committees would be 
ready by the end of November 2002. Based on their recommendations Plan allocation would be made to 
the universities. 
10.5     It has been stated that the higher education system has seen a 13-fold increase in the number of 
universities and a 26-fold increase in the number of colleges since Independence. There are now 196 
universities, 76 Deemed Universities, five institutions established through state and central legislation, 
and 11 institutes of national importance established through Central legislation, and nearly 13,150 
colleges including around 1600 (12.7 percent) women colleges in the country in addition to the 
unrecognised institutions/foreign universities operating in the higher education sector. 
10.6     At the beginning of 2002-03, the total number of students enrolled in the formal system of 
education in universities and colleges has been 88.21lakh --- 11.66 lakh in university departments and 
76.55 lakh in the affiliated colleges. 
10.7     Eighty-four percent of the total enrolment was concentrated in the three faculties of Arts (46.13 
percent), Science (19.88 percent) and Commerce (17.87 percent) while the remaining 16 percent has 
been absorbed by the professional faculties.  Enrolment at the degree level has been 89 .13 percent 
(78.63lakh), at the Postgraduate level 9.25 percent  (8.16 lakh) and the remaining at the research and 
diploma/certificate levels. About 89.95 percent of all the undergraduate students and 66.02 percent of all 
the postgraduate students were enrolled in the affiliated colleges while remaining in university 
Page 9 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

departments. About 91.15 percent of the total research students were in the university departments. 
10.8       The enrolment of women students at the beginning of the academic year 2002-03 was 35.14 
lakh at all levels, constituting 39.84 percent of the total enrolment. Women's enrolment was the highest 
in Kerala (60 percent) and the lowest in Bihar (23 percent). About 88.25 percent of the total women 
students enrolled has been in the non-professional faculties of Arts, Science and Commerce and the 
remaining 11.75 percent in professional faculties.  The women enrolment was the highest in the faculty 
of engineering and technology (3.75 percent) among various professional faculties. 
10.9     The number of doctoral degrees awarded by the universities (position as on January 2001) was 
11,450. Out of this, the Faculty of Arts had the highest number with 4,330 degrees, followed by the 
Faculty of Science with 3,737 degrees. These two faculties together accounted for 70.43 percent of the 
total number of doctoral degrees awarded. 
10.10   The strength of the teaching faculty in universities and colleges was 0.75 lakh and 3.52 lakh 
respectively, totalling 4.27 lakh in the beginning of the reporting year. Out of 0.75 lakh teachers in 
university departments, 20.22 percent are Professors, 31.53 percent are Readers/ Associate Professors, 
45.78 percent are Senior Lecturers/Lecturers and the rest are Tutors/Demonstrators etc. Out of 3.52 lakh 
in the affiliated colleges, 6.63 percent are Professors, 21.12 percent are Readers and their equivalent, 
66.70 percent are Lecturers and the rest are Teachers/Demonstrators/Teaching Assistants etc. 
10.11   It has been stated that the UGC, since inception, has been providing financial assistance for the 
development of universities and colleges, by making Plan budgetary provision under various 
programmes during different plans including the Ninth and the Tenth Plan. The financial assistance to 
Central and some Deemed Universities and colleges affiliated to Delhi and Banaras Hindu University 
was being provided both under non-Plan and Plan while assistance to state universities and their 
affiliated colleges was being provided only under Plan. During the Ninth Plan period (1997-2002), 
general development assistance to individual universities was based on the outlays determined.  Two-
thirds of the outlay provided was based on the Ninth Plan guidelines and one-third of the outlay was 
based on the performance of the individual university. The universities and colleges may utilize the 
development assistance being provided by the UGC for consolidation of existing infrastructure, for the 
modernisation of teaching, for research and administration and also for extension and outreach activities 
to meet the changing needs and challenges of higher education. 
10.12   Since the reporting year is the first year of the Tenth Plan, the modalities/guidelines for new 
schemes and the revised guidelines for the schemes/programmes of Ninth Plan (which are being 
continued in the Tenth Plan) were being prepared for implementation in universities and colleges. 
10.13   The Committee has been informed that out of 18 Central universities, 16 were being allocated 
development grants while 14 were being allocated maintenance grants in addition to development 
grants. During 2001-02, the UGC provided an amount of Rs. 598.69 crore to meet the maintenance 
expenditure of 14 universities and Rs. 81.31 crore as development assistance to 16 Central universities. 
10.14   Under the UGC Act, the state universities established after 17th June 1972 shall not be eligible to 
receive any grant from the Central Government, UGC or any other organisation receiving funds from the 
Government of India, unless the Commission satisfies itself as per the prescribed norms and procedures, 
that such a university is fit to receive grants. 
10.15   At present, there are 178 state universities. Out of these, the UGC has been making budgetary 
plan allocation for only 110 excluding medical and agricultural universities. However, the other state 
universities are also benefiting from the UGC under various other programmes (like special grants).  
Development grants including grants for specific schemes are provided to all eligible state universities in 
order to facilitate procurement, augmentation and upgradation of infrastructural facilities that were 
normally not available to universities from the state governments or other bodies supporting them. 
During the financial year 2001-02, Plan grants amounting to Rs. 175.62 crore were provided to 123 state 
universities for the purpose of development.  
10.16   The Committee appreciates the efforts of UGC in the field of university and higher education.     
Higher education system has made great strides under the aegis of UGC since independence as there has 
been a 13 fold increase in the number of universities and a 26 fold increase in the number of colleges.   
Page 10 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

Still the fact remains that only 19% of students are able to reach university education.    There is, thus, a 
need to make university and higher education system more need based and responsive to the 
requirement of students so that more students can avail of these opportunities.    
10.17   The Committee observes that UGC have developed a tendency to utilize the funds at the fag end 
of the year.    In the year 2001-2002, UGC could utilize only 72.84 % of its allocated plan funds till 13th 
March, 2002.   However, it reported  full utilisation of entire allocation made to it viz. Rs. 439.78 crore 
for the year 2001-2002 by 31st March, 2002.    The Committee feels that such a trend reveals poor 
planning and inadequate monitoring of the funds allocated to UGC.    The Committee feels that such last 
minute spending defeats the very objective of planned development.   The Committee therefore, 
observes that there should be adequate planning and monitoring to ensure the steady out flow of funds 
through out the year. 
10.18   The Committee is also of the view that UGC should encourage genuine   research activity and 
develop a mechanism for encouragement of only genuine research so that nation can make use of such 
research both commercially and academically.   In fact, R&D sector of our nation continues to be under 
developed.   The Committee feels concerned over this position and desires that it must change for the 
better.    The universities should have inter-disciplinary approach in its research activities which should 
commence from undergraduate stage. 
10.19  The Committee has been given to understand that there are a number of unaccredited universities 
in the country to which UGC does not appear to have given a thought. The UGC must initiate the 
exercise to determine the status of such universities and, if infrastructure available in these universities 
meets the standard requirements laid down in this regard, UGC must initiate steps to bring them to its 
fold.          
XI        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF RURAL INSTITUTES (NCRI) 
11.1     NCRI was set up by the Central Government in October, 1995 at Hyderabad to promote rural 
higher education on the lines of Mahatma Gandhi’s revolutionary ideas on education and to consolidate, 
network and develop institutions engaged in programmes of  Gandhian Basic Education and Nai Talim. 
11.2     The Committee has been informed that though NCRI was established in October 1995, yet it is 
in a formative stage. It has been functioning without a regular Chairman, a regular Member Secretary 
and without any regular staff.  The proposal for creation of post of a regular Chairman has been sent to 
the Cabinet Secretariat for seeking approval from the Cabinet.   A proposal is being processed in the 
Ministry of HRD for obtaining approval of Expenditure Finance Committee for the continuation of 
NCRI in l0th Plan. It, inter-alia, involves creation of 31 posts which are considered the barest minimum 
for undertaking activities of NCRI. 
11.3     The Committee views with concern the indifferent approach adopted to this episode and 
recommends that this be brought to the notice of the Minister and ensure that this unhappy state of 
affairs is brought to an end.  
XII       COMMUNITY POLYTECHNICS 
12.1     The polytechnic, as an institution, is well equipped with physical facilities (lecture rooms, 
workshop, hostels, equipments), which could be used for linking centres of knowledge and skills to rural 
communities. It has qualified and trained faculty, which could scientifically formulate, implement and 
monitor rural-oriented programmes and projects especially where transfer of technology is involved. It 
has large body of student population, which can be of tremendous help in making meaningful 
contributions to rural development given proper directions according to well-conceived plans. 
12.2     The MHRD provides one-time non-recurring grants-in-aid of Rs 7.25 lakh and annual recurring 
grants-in-aid to the maximum of Rs 7 lakh directly to selected AICTE-approved polytechnics whose 
proposals are recommended by the State Directorate of Technical Education.  As on date, there are 675 
community polytechnics in the country, out of which, 111 are running at the women's polytechnics. The 
region-wise distribution of community polytechnics is as under. 
Northern Region         188
Southern Region         243
Eastern Region         99
Page 11 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

  
12.3     The community polytechnic is not different from a normal polytechnic. It is a wing of an existing 
polytechnic mandated to undertake rural/ community development activities through application of 
science and technology in its proximity, using infrastructure existing in polytechnics.  Activities under 
the scheme include: 
-           To ascertain the felt needs of the community through techno-economic job potential survey. 
-           To provide a platform for transfer of appropriate technologies to rural masses for the 
development on scientific lines. 
-           To provide technical/support services to the local community  
-           To train rural youth, women, SCs/STs, minorities, school dropouts and other disadvantaged 
groups of the community in need-based, non-formal courses/skills to enable them to obtain gainful 
employment (self/wage) 
-           To disseminate information and create awareness regarding development programmes for 
creating a problem-solving environment. 
12.4     Each community polytechnic serves through its five Village Extension Centres each covering 
10-12 villages of its proximity and the main centre is established in the premises of the polytechnic 
itself. Each community polytechnic provides training to about 600 rural youth every year. Thus, about 2 
lakh persons receive training every year. There is no age, qualification bar etc. for the trainees. The 
training courses are competency-based. The duration ranges from three to six months. 
12.5     The Scheme of Community Polytechnics has been reviewed twice at the national level. The first 
review was undertaken by the Kalbag Committee in 1987 and the second by the Luther Committee in 
1994. Both the reviews recommended the expansion of the scheme to cover all AICTE-approved 
polytechnics, besides suggesting a multi-skill competency-based training, a special programme for 
women, handicapped, street children and functional linkages with other rural development skills of the 
Central/ State Governments. 
12.6     Since the inception of the scheme to the end of Ninth Plan Period, about 12,00,000 persons have 
been trained in various job-oriented skills and about 52,000 villages have been covered under the 
scheme.   The most popular courses for female participants are as follows: 
(1) Garment making 
(2) Textile printing 
(3) Embroidery 
(4) Food processing 
(5) Secretarial works 
  
12.7     In order to enhance the job potential of the skills provided under the scheme, competency-based 
curriculum in about 135 trades has been prepared.  The testing and certification of level of skills 
acquired by the trainers has also been introduced under collaboration with local industries. 
12.8      The Committee appreciates the rural/community development activities undertaken by 
Community Polytechnics.     The Committee, appreciate the role of Community Polytechnic with a view 
to impart specialized skills to rural populace.    The Committee notes with concern that the number of 
community polytechnics in the eastern region is far less as compared to other regions.    Given the 
poverty and backwardness of the region, the Committee feels that there should be an increase in the 
number of such polytechnics there. 
12.9       The committee notes that  the plan allocation during 2002-2003 has been reduced to Rs.35.00 
crore at RE stage from Rs.63.00 crore at BE due to non submission of Utilisation Certificates by some 
of the Community Polytechnics and also because the revised funding pattern approval for the Tenth Plan 
period could not be obtained. 
12.10   The Committee expresses its serious concern over non-submission of UCs by some of the 
Community Polytechnics.    The Committee observes  that the Department should ensure optimal 
Western Region         145
Total         675
Page 12 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

utilisation of funds by the recipients.    The Department should also ensure that it gets the revised 
funding pattern for the Tenth Plan approved without further loss of time. 
XIII    GENERAL OBSERVATION  
After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Secondary and Higher Education and 
assessing the progress of various programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee 
recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs. 4956.55 crores as sought by the Department of 
Secondary and Higher Education for the year 2003-2004, under Demand No. 57 may be approved.  
 
Page 13 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
  
II          BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
            In absence of any authoritative figures the Committee has taken the total outlay (plan and non 
plan) of Rs. 4749 crores and maximum number of students who registered themselves for 2002 
examinations i.e. 530401.    The  total outlay per head comes to Rs. 9345 half of which is non-plan 
expenditure.     The Plan  expenditure per student is thus Rs. 4500/- approximately which includes 
expenditure  on creation of infrastructure, peripheral  or administrative expenditure.   The net available 
per student is thus a pittance.    The Committee, therefore, observes that there is a need to provide more 
funds in this section as this is an investment to secure the future of our young generation.   Government 
must provide at least six percent of the national income to this sector which is much starved of funds. 
(Para 2.3) 
             At the same time in many of the schemes/projects, the Committee, has observed  that substantial 
funds are lying with State Governments/NGOs and Utilization Certificates are not forthcoming from 
them for years together.  The Committee does not know whether these funds have been utilized at all.   
The Department must give a serious thought to this aspect and take necessary remedial measures for 
optimum utilisation of funds.(Para 2.4) 
SECONDARY EDUCATION 
III        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING  
   The Committee recommends that the requirement of extra funds by NCERT must be looked into with 
a view to help the organisation in its pursuits. (Para 3.2)      
            The Committee observes that there is need to cover more and more areas in a bid to vocationalise 
the education.   At the same time there is a need to introduce some ‘Earn and Learn’ kind of schemes to 
inculcate the feelings of self-sufficiency among the students. (Para 3.4) 
            The Committee is of the view that there is a need to tap the vast potential of upcoming force of 
students who generally remain idle during holidays including summer vacation.  Millions of work days 
are just available at the asking with virtually no cost.   If they could be gainfully employed in projects of 
national importance or otherwise it will secure many purposes including out-station visits for students 
which are also a virtual education.   NCERT must give a serious thought to this aspect.(Para 3.5) 
IV      NATIONAL INSTITUTE OPEN SCHOOLING (NIOS) 
            The Committee observes that NIOS must endeavour to reach more and more such children  and 
also try to make its system of education more responsive and need based.  (Para 4.2) 
            The Committee is also concerned about the recognition and acceptability of the Certificates and 
Diplomas for employment in both public and private sector.    While NIOS should endeavour to make its 
courses responsive and need based, Government must endeavour to ensure that the certificate and 
Diplomas awarded by NIOS are accepted  by the industry. (Para 4.3) 
V         KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN 
The Committee notes with concern the tardy pace of land transfers.   The Committee observes that 
certain transfer cases have been pending for last twenty seven years.     The Committee desires that these 
cases be looked into with a sense of urgency.(Para 5.3) 
The Committee observes from the number of questions raised in the Parliament in the recent years that 
the level of discontentment among staff and teachers of KVS has been very high.   Rather, it appears that 
trade unionism  is  brewing in with the result each and every minute decision of the Government is 
questioned whether it relates to transfers, purchases, decision taken by individual authorities or Board.   
Something   appears to be amiss somewhere.    The Department must check this tendency as the trade 
unionism  in education sector is not in the overall interest and more so in the case of students.   At the 
same time if a teacher is not contented and satisfied it would only affect the students.   The Department 
must evolve a ‘satisfaction platform’ where the grievances of teachers can be redressed. (Para 5.5) 
             The Committee, recommends that the Department must examine the cases of drop outs as also 
the non-achievement  of the target of construction of buildings and take necessary remedial steps.(Para 
6.3) 
Page 14 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

VII      VOCATIONALISATION OF EDUCATION 
The Committee observes there is thus a need to re-orient the system of education by making it more 
vocational to suit the present day situation and at the same time ensure balanced development as 
envisaged by Mahatma Gandhi.   Vocationalisation of the education should ensure that after completing 
certain level of education students can stand in the world on their own.   This would inculcate the sense 
of self sufficiency among students and possibly help in reduction of white collar crimes which are the 
result of one’s hunger and bleak future so far as employment opportunities are concerned. (Para 7.2) 
            The Committee also recommends creation of a data bank on employment and self employment 
status of the student who undergo vocationalisation courses in order to take stock of the contribution  of 
the programme. (Para 7.4) 
VIII      ACCESS WITH EQUITY 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the scheme would help in boosting girl's education, 
thereby, reducing the gender gap.  The scheme  would also help in the expansion of infrastructure.    
Much more needs to be done to create infrastructure to cater to the huge influx from elementary 
education level to secondary level. (Para 8.3)     
             The Committee notes that barring Andhra Pradesh and, to some extent, Karnataka, the 
participation of NGOs in managing girl's Hostels has not been very encouraging.    The Committee 
would like the Department to analyse the reasons for this poor participation and take remedial  steps to 
ensure increasing participation of NGOs in this area.  (Para 8.5) 
IX        INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOOGY IN SCHOOL 
            The Committee is constrained to observe that the funds under audio programmes under 
Educational Technology remained unutilized. (Para 9.8) 
The Committee also takes a serious view of under utilisation of the funds under the School Computer 
Literacy and Studies in School (CLASS). (Para 9.9) 
The Committee has also been given to understand that some schools, particularly, the aided schools in 
the capital have been charging Rs. 100/- per month or even higher for computers.   The total amount 
thus collected from students comes to much more than might have been invested in the purchase of 
computers.   Schools should not be allowed to make profit out of such schemes and what is more bulk of 
time is spent on imparting theoretical lessons and students are not allowed a free hand on computers.   
The Department must look into this and take up the matter with the Directorates of Education. (Paa 
9.10) 
            Under the scheme relating to audio programmes and procurement of CTV, the Committee feels 
that there is also a need to produce sufficient number of programmes to cater to the educational needs of 
students.  The Committee recommends that the Department should take up the matter with appropriate 
agencies so as to gear them up for production of adequate number of requisite programmes. (Para 9.11) 
UNIVERSITY AND HIGHER EDUCATION 
X        UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION 
           The Committee feels that such a trend reveals poor planning and inadequate monitoring of the 
funds allocated to UGC.    The Committee feels that such last minute spending defeats the very objective 
of planned development.   The Committee therefore, observes that there should be adequate planning 
and monitoring to ensure the steady out flow of funds through out the year.  (Para 10.17) 
            The Committee is also of the view that UGC should encourage genuine   research activity and 
develop a mechanism for encouragement of only genuine research so that nation can make use of such 
research both commercially and academically.   In fact, R&D sector of our nation continues to be under 
developed.   The Committee feels concerned over this position and desires that it must change for the 
better.    The universities should have inter-disciplinary approach in its research activities which should 
commence from undergraduate stage. (Para 10.18) 
 The Committee has been given to understand that there are a number of unaccredited universities in the 
country to which UGC does not appear to have given a thought. The UGC must initiate the exercise to 
determine the status of such universities and, if infrastructure available in these universities meets the 
standard requirements laid down in this regard, UGC must initiate steps to bring them to its fold. (Para 
Page 15 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

10.19) 
XI        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF RURAL INSTITUTES (NCRI) 
            The Committee views with concern the indifferent approach adopted to this episode and 
recommends that this be brought to the notice of the Minister and ensure that this unhappy state of 
affairs is brought to an end. (Para 11.3) 
XII       COMMUNITY POLYTECHNICS 
             The Committee appreciates the rural/community development activities undertaken by 
Community Polytechnics.     The Committee, appreciate the role of Community Polytechnic with a view 
to impart specialized skills to rural populace.    The Committee notes with concern that the number of 
community polytechnics in the eastern region is far less as compared to other regions.    Given the 
poverty and backwardness of the region, the Committee feels that there should be an increase in the 
number of such polytechnics there. (Para 12.8) 
            The Committee expresses its serious concern over non-submission of UCs by some of the 
Community Polytechnics.    The Committee observes  that the Department should ensure optimal 
utilisation of funds by the recipients.    The Department should also ensure that it gets the revised 
funding pattern for the Tenth Plan approved without further loss of time. (Para 12.10) 
XIII    GENERAL OBSERVATION  
After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Secondary and Higher Education and 
assessing the progress of various programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee 
recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs. 4956.55 crores as sought by the Department of 
Secondary and Higher Education for the year 2003-2004, under Demand No. 57 may be approved. (Para 
13) 
 
Page 16 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

MINUTES 
VII 
SEVENTH  MEETING 
  
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25th  March, 2003 in Committee Room  `A' 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
   
MEMBERS   PRESENT 
  
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik             in the Chair 
  
            RAJYA SABHA 
  
Dr. Abrar Ahmed          
Shri Bachani Lekhraj  
Prof. R.B.S.Varma 
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey 
Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi 
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
Smt. Vanga Geetha 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal 
Shri Samik Lahiri 
Dr. Manda Jagannath 
Smt. Renu Kumari 
Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
  
WITNESSES 
  
REPRESENTATIVES   OF THE   DEPARTMENT   OF   SECONDARY  AND  HIGHER   
EDUCATION   (MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT) 
             
Shri S.K.  Tripathi, Secretary 
Shri V.S. Pandey, Joint Secretary 
Dr. G.N. Jambhulkar, Dy. Ed. Ad. 
Dr. Arun Nagavekar, Chairman, UGC 
Prof.  R. Natrajan, Chairman, AICTE 
Prof. J.S. Rajput, Director, NCERT 
Shri H.M. Cairae, Commissioner ,KVS 
Prof. N.K. Ambasht, Chairman, NIOS 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer  
Page 17 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
  
In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik presided over the day’s proceedings. 
  
3.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department 
of Secondary and Higher Education and asked the Secretary to make a brief presentation on Demands-
for-Grants (2003-2004) of the Department. The Secretary made a presentation on the activities and 
achievements of the Department of Secondary and Higher Education and briefly explained the 
budgetary allocation on different heads as also the functioning of the Department. The Members then 
sought clarification, which the Secretary and the officials of the Department replied.  
                
The witnesses then withdrew. 
  
3A.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
  
4.         The Committee, then adjourned at 1.20 P.M. to meet again at  11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the  
26th  March, 2003. 
  
XIII 
THIRTEENTH  MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 22
nd  April  2003, in Committee Room  `A' Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
  
MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  
1          Shri Arjun Singh               Chairman 
  
            RAJYA SABHA   
  
Shri Bachani Lekhraj  
Shri Eduardo Faleiro   
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey 
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
  
      LOK SABHA 
  
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria 
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit 
Shri Y.G. Mahajan 
Smt. Nivedita Mane 
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik 
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao 
Shri Sunil Dutt 
Shri .G. J. Javia 
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Page 18 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm

  
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer  
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the 135th to 141st draft Reports on the Demands for 
Grants for 2003-2004 of Departments of Health, Family Welfare, Indian Systems of Medicine and 
Homoeopathy, Elementary Education and Literacy, Secondary and Higher Education, Women and Child 
Development and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and adopted the same after certain 
modifications. 
3.         The Committee decided that the   Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and /laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 23rd April 2003.  The Committee authorized the Chairman, 
and in his absence, Shri Eduardo Faleiro and Shri  Bachani Lekhraj   to present the Reports in the Rajya 
Sabha and Shri Sunil Dutt and Shri G.J. Javia   to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha. 
4.         The Committee, then, adjourned at  4.30 P.M.  
Page 19 of 19139thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report139th.htm