PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2001-2002 (DEMAND NO. 38) OF

THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 24™ APRIL, 2001)
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 24™ APRIL, 2001)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2001/VAISAKHA, 1923 (SAKA,)


»

CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

PREFACE

REPORT

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
MINUTES

PAGES

@-Ci)
(iii)


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(2001-2002)

Shri $.B. Chavan जा

MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Maurice Kujur

Shri Akhilesh Das

Shri Eduardo Faleiro

Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”

Shri Dina Nath Mistra

Prof. R. 8. S. Varma

Shri Bratin Sengupta

Shrimati Kamala Sinha

Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”
Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
Shri Mrinal Sen

Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

Shrimati Jaskaur Meena
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
Shri Ramakant Angle

Shri Kirti Jha Azad

Shri Baliram Kashyap

Shri Ramanand Singh

Shri Dileep Sanghani

Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
Shri G. S. Baswaraj

Shri V. M. Sudheeran
Shrimati Shyama Singh
Shri Sunil Dutt

Shri Ramesh Chennithala
Shri Kantilal Bhuriya

Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Samik Lahiri

Dr. D.V.G. Shankar Rao
Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
Shrimati Renu Kumari

Shri Shivaji Mane

Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Dr. Baliram

@

Chairman


Dr. A.D.K. Jayaseelan

Dr. V. Saroja

Shri Trilochan Kanungo

Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
Shri Vanlal Zawma

Shrimati Kumudini Patnaik

Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao
Dr. S. Venugopal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Director

Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary

Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer
Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer


PREFACE

1, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Hundred Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand No.38)
of the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2001-2002.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the
Department of Health and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the said
Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 27" March, 2001.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
11" April, 2001.

NEw DELHI, S.B. CHAVAN*
April 11,2000. Chairman
Chaitra 21, 1923 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development

(ii)


1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

REPORT

INTRODUCTION

The main objectives of the Department of Health are:-

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(vy)

(vi)

to undertake national programmes of health and to intensify measures for the prevention,
control and eradication of communicable diseases;

to promote education, research and training in various medical disciplines, to reorient the
medical colleges in the delivery of health services in rural areas;

to prevent adulteration of food as well as drugs;

to provide primary health care at the doorsteps of the people and to train the required
number of personnel for this purpose;

to take steps for better implementation of Health Care Programmes for tribal and other
weaker sections of the Society; and

to collaborate with member countries of United Nations and International Agencies like
WHO, UNICEF in matters relating to health promotion.

The Department of Health incurs expenditure either directly or through various institutions and
establishments run by it and by way of grants given to autonomous and voluntary organisations. Grants
to States and Union Territory Administrations are mainly for Centrally Sponsored Health Schemes being
implemented through the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations. They include national
programmes for prevention, control and eradication of diseases.

The Department finances, wholly or substantially, the following autonomous institutions engaged
in patient care and/ or research:

(i)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

All India Institute of Medical Sciences and Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic
Sciences, New Delhi;

Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh;
All India Institute of Speech and Hearing Sciences, Mysore; and

Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi

The Centrally-Sponsored Health Schemes are financed by the Central Government on either 100
percent or 50 per cent basis. The following Schemes are financed by the Central Government on 100 per
cent basis:

0)
(i)
(iii)

National Scheme for Prevention of Visual Impairment and Blindness including Trachoma;
National Leprosy Eradication Programme;

National Guinea-worm Eradication Programme;


(iv) National AIDS Control Programme.

The Schemes on which the expenditure is shared between the Central Government and State
Government on 50:50 basis are:-

(i) National Malaria Eradication Programme (Rural and Urban):
(ii) National Sexually Transmitted Diseases Control Programme;
(0). National 1.8. Control Programme; and

(iv) Kala-Azar Control Programme.

IL _ BUDGETARY ALLOCATION

21 A Budgetary provision of Rs. 2354.25 crores has been made for the Department of Health for
2001-2002. Rs. 1432.74 crores is the Plan component and Rs. 921.51 crores have, been provided under
Non-Plan.

2.2 On a specific query as to the projected requirements of the Department under plan 2001-2002,
the Department clarified that a budgetary provision of Rs. 1450.00 crore (including a component of Rs.
17.26 crore under Capital Head) has been made for 2001-2002 against Rs. 1300.00 crores (including a
component of Rs. 22.14 crore under Capital Head) allocated in BE 2000-2001 reduced to Rs. 1159.64
crore in RE 2000-2001. Although the BE for 2001-2002 shows an increase of Rs. 150 crore as compared
to BE for 2000-2001, there is in fact a decline in the approved outlay of Rs. 1450.00 crore for 2001-2002
vis-a-vis the outlay as projected by the Department, 1.९. Rs. 1600.00 crores. It was further clarified that
the requirements originally proposed for Annual Plan 2001-2002 were keeping in view the Ninth Plan
priorities and likely expenditure. Cut of Rs. 150.00 crore in outlay may, therefore, be restored.

2.3 The Committee has observed that allocations (both plan and non-plan) made during Ninth
Plan are invariably being reduced at the RE stage and even this reduced allocation is not fully
utilised. The Committee has been informed that non-finalisation of the procurement agencies as
well as drug supply orders under the National Anti Malaria Programme and National T.B. Control
Programme has resulted in some shortfall in Plan expenditure during initial years of Ninth Plan.
Besides that, time taken in finalisation of modalities for implementation of new projects can also be
held responsible for this trend of expenditure.

24 The Committee is not fully convinced with the justification given by the Department that
there has been increase in percentage of plan expenditure during the Ninth Plan period. During the
Fourth Year of the Ninth Plan, i.e. 2000-2001, Plan allocation of Rs. 1300.00 crores was reduced to
Rs. 1160.00 crores and anticipated expenditure would be Rs. 1120.00 crore. Fact remains that
allocation including both plan and non-plan component continues to be reduced at the RE stage
and even this reduced allocation is not being fully utilised. Tenth Plan is to commence from 2002-
2003. The Committee is of the view that all procedural formalities for ongoing programmes and
new projects to be taken up in Tenth Plan should be completed by the end of the last year of Ninth
Plan, i.e. 2001-2002 so that there is optimum utilization of allocated funds right from the first year
of Tenth Plan.

Ill. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME(CGHS)

3.1 Rs. 12 crores have been provided under Plan for CGHS for 2001-2002 against an allocation of
Rs. 10 crores in BE 2000-2001 increased to Rs. 10.5 crores at the RE stage. Enhancement in allocation is
proposed to be utilized for provision of new equipments, material and supplies to dispensaries at
Guwahati, Jabalpur and Trivandrum, subject to usual clearances. The Committee finds that during 2000-
2001, utilization position upto 31.12.2000 has not been very encouraging. (Against a plan provision of


Rs. 12.50 crore, both under revenue and capital head, expenditure is only Rs. 4.76 crore). The
Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be initiated in right earnest for obtaining
usual clearances so that funds are utilised to the optimum during 2001-2002.

3.2 During the Ninth Plan. CGHS facilities were to be extended to the cities of Chandigarh, Bhopal
and Shillong alongwith addition of four new Allopathic dispensaries. However, all exercise has been held
up due to the time taken in completion of the procedural formalities/action as given in the SIU Report of
November, 1999 on the Norms study of the CGHS (Allopathic) dispensaries. The Committee notes that
the Department has finally accepted the SIU Report and conveyed its decision to DG (Health Services) on
16" February, 2001. EFC note is to be prepared now. The Committee apprehends that exercise of
creation of additional new posts under CGHS would not be complete during 2001-2002 also which
is the last year of Ninth Plan. The Committee, therefore, strongly, recommends that the
Department should make serious efforts to expedite the creation of posts, essential for expansion of
CGHS network.

3.3 The Department has informed that an Inspection Team has been constitutated for making
surprise visits to various CGHS dispensaries. Sixty surprise checks from September, 2000 to February
2001 have been carried out in Delhi. Five checks were carried out in Kolkata. The Committee finds that
as a result of these inspections, steps have been taken to expedite the supply of medicines etc. The
Committee is, however, of the view that inspection teams should also inter-act with patients visiting
the dispensary to have an idea about the problems being faced by them.

3.4 Last year, the Committee was informed that the Reports of Das Gupta and Roy Choudhary
Committees on formulation of a single comprehensive drug formulary for CGHS and MSO were
reviewed by a Committee under the Chairmanship of DGHS and a fresh Committee was under the
consideration of the Department. The Committee notes that a new Committee under the Chairmanship of
Prof. J.N. Pande of AIIMS has been constituted on 16" November, 2000 which is expected to submit its
report by 30" April, 2001 The Committee feels that the exercise for formulating a single
comprehensive formulary for CGHS and MSO has been dragging on for a very long period. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should ensure that the latest
committee completes the task assigned to it within the scheduled time limit so that a single
comprehensive drug formulary for CGHS and MSO is brought out without any further delay.

IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL

41 The Plan allocation for Safdarjung Hospital for the year 2001-2002 is Rs. 22.00 crores. The
Department has informed that the projected demand for Safdarjung Hospital for 2001-2002 was Rs. 29.93
crores.

4.2. The Committee notes that Plan allocation of Rs. 28.00 crores for Safdarjung Hospital in 2000-
2001 was reduced to Rs. 26.00 crores at the RE stage. The Department has informed that this reduction
was due to the saving in the Salary Head (Plan) due to non-fulfilment of vacant posts during the year.
Besides that, the Central Monitoring Station with monitors for Burns and Plastic Ward costing nearly Rs.
1.20 crores could not be purchased during 2000-2001 as the specifications of requirements were being re-
checked. The Committee observes that the Central Monitoring Station could not be procured during 1999-
2000 due to hike in its price. Procurement of another equipment of Cath. Lab was also held up due to
alleged irregularities.

43 The Committee expresses its serious concern on the declining trend in the utilization of Plan
allocation for Safdarjung Hospital as indicated below:-


(Rs. in Crores)

1999-2000
Be | ह | छः. | Act.
25.93 26.54 20.89
jo 2000-2001
[88 | pr | Act.(upto 13.3.2001)
28.00 | 26.00 20.63

Plan Allocation for 2001-2002 has been further reduced to Rs. 22.00 crores. The Committee
recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts to expedite the procurement of
remaining equipments and also get the vacant posts in Safdarjung Hopsital filled up during 2001-
2002.

4.4 Last year, while commenting on unsatisfactory services being provided by Safdarjung
Hospital, the Committee had observed that the Department should find out ways and means of
maintaining cleanliness in all Govt. Hospitals. The Department has informed that the Employees
Unions have strongly objected to entrusting the work for doing peripheral jobs to private parties.
The Committee strongly feels that the Department is failing in its duty of providing required
services to public by taking shelter behind the stand taken by Employees Unions. The Committee is
of the view that in such a scenario, the Department should resort to strict measures so that
employees are made to carry out the duties assigned to them.

Vv. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHBIA HOSPITAL

5.1 Plan allocation for the Dr. RML hospital, New Delhi has been substantially decreased from Rs.
24.50 crores in 2000-2001 to Rs. 20.00 crores at RE stage. On a specific query as to the reason for
decrease, the Department has replied that the decrease was due to the slow place of expenditure shown by
the Hospital. The Hospital has incurred an expenditure of only Rs. 4.88 crores till October, 2000 and
expenditure figures upto 13.3.2001 are Rs. 14.40 crores. Plan allocation for the Hospital for 2001-2002
is Rs. 21.00 crores. The Committee is of the view that serious efforts need to be made for optimum
utilization of allocated funds within the targetted period.

5.2. The Committee has been commenting on the issue of building up a Trauma Centre at Dr. R.M.L.
Hospital for the last two three years. Last year, the Committee was informed that the work of Trauma
Centre had been entrusted to the Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation and a draft EFC proposal
was likely to be submitted shortly. The progress made during 2000-2001 is that the draft EFC paper has
been submitted by HSCC and is in the process of approval by DGHS/Ministry. In this process, a
memoranduim has been prepared and circulated to the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance
whose comments have since been received. The clarification/reply on the comments of the Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance are being prepared now. The Department has informed that the
time schedule for completion of the project can be indicated only after the approval of EFC. The
Committee is perturbed to observe that although considerable time has passed, the construction
work on the project of a Trauma Centre at Dr. R.M.L. Hospital is yet to start. A number of


formalities still remain to be completed. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the approval
of EFC on the project should be expedited so that construction work on Trauma Centre can start
without any further delay.

VI. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, RANCHI

6.1 The Plan allocation for the Institute in BE 2000-2001 was Rs. 3.00 crores, which has been
substantially increased to Rs. 7.00 crores in BE 2001-2002. The Department has informed that the
reason for additional allocation of funds to the tune of Rs. 4 crores is that CIP, Ranchi proposes to
Procure a number of major machines and equipments i.e. Spiral CT Scan, Colour Doppler, Computer
Server, EEG machine and accessories and Biochemistry and Haemotological Anaalyzer. The Committee
hopes that concerted efforts would be made by CIP, Ranchi so that the exercise of purchasing the
proposed machines and equipments is completed during 2001-2002 thereby avoiding reduction of
allocation at the RE stage.

6.2 The Committee notes that the issue of creation of 260 posts as recommended by IWSU study
conducted for CIP, Ranchi submitted on 16.01.97 is under fresh examination. The Committee finds that
in the meantime a team from the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Surgery (NIMHANS)
sent to CIP, Ranchi on 19 -20" May, 2000 has submitted its detailed recommendations regarding
improvements in infrastructure and staffing on 47 July, 2000. The latest position is that a fresh proposal
which will include recreation of certain posts as well as restructuring of the Staffing Patter is under
preparation.

6.3. IWSU study conducted for CIP, Ranchi had recommended creation of 260 posts as early as
on 16.1.97. The Committee is not able to understand the rationale for having another study
conducted by NIMHANS in May, 2000. The Committee apprehends that this new exercise may lead
to further delay due to a number of procedural formalities which will be started afresh now. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts to
expedite the process of modernization of CIP, Ranchi.

VIL - ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIMS)

TA ‘The All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi is a premier medical institution of the
country.; The Plan allocation for the Institute in BE 2000-2001 was Rs. 91.30 crores, which was reduced
to Rs. 85 crores in RE. On being asked about the reasons for reduction in RE, the Department stated that
this was due to overall resource crunch faced by the Ministry of Health. Plan allocation for 2001-2002
is Rs. 100.00 crores. The Committee notes that the enhanced provision is meant for the creation of
additional wards, labs and ICUs at the Cardiothoracic and Neurosciences Centre, for equipping the organ
retrieval bank, for setting up the Positron Emission Tomography facility and for starting work on the
Apex Trauma Care Centre. The Committee hopes that all the proposed plans and projects would be
carried out during 2001-2002 and allocation meant for the same utilised fully.
|

7.2... Regarding setting up of a Trauma Centre in AIIMS, the Department has replied that the draft EFC
proposal was circulated among the appraising agencies and their observations

have already’ been conveyed to AIIMS on 7" March, 2001. The Institute has now been requested to
incorporate the observations of appraising agencies and send the revised EFC Memo alongwith its
comments thefeon at the earliest for arranging a meeting of the EFC.

7.3 The Committee is concerned to note that despite its earlier observations, पार project for
setting up a Trauma Centre at AIIMS is still at the proposal stage. The Committee, strongly

छा


recommends that the Department should vigorously pursue the matter with AIIMS so that EFC
meeting is held without delay and construction work on the Trauma Centre is started at the
earliest.

Vil. JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION
AND RESEARCH, PONDICHERRY (JIPMER)

8.1. The plan allocation for Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research,
(JIPMER) Pondicherry was Rs. 14.00 crores in BE 2000-2001 which was reduced to Rs. 13.32 crores at
the RE stage, keeping in view the economy instructions, guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance, the
trend of expenditure at that time and also due to the non materialisation of proposals for creation of posts
for the Institute. The Department has further informed that an amount of Rs. 11.00 crores has been
proposed for 2001-2002 due to less demand and reduced requirement of the Institute for the year 2001-
2002.

8.2. The Committee notes that in the light of its observation made last year, a decision has been
taken that while placing requisition for a particular post at JIPMER, it will be stipulated in the
advertisement that first posting of two years will be at JIPMER. The Committee hopes that this
decision may result in reduction in the number of vacant posts at the Institute. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the latest vacancy position at the Institute.

8.3. The Committee views with concern the declining trend in the allocation of funds for
JIPMER. The Committee strongly recommends that situation of vacant posts and non-creation of
required posts should not be allowed to be continued for long in a teaching Institute. The
Department should initiate necessary steps in this direction and get allocated required funds for the

purpose.
x NATIONAL CANCER RESEARCH PROGRAMME

9.1 Plan allocation for National Cancer Control Programme has been enhanced from Rs. 50.00 crores
in B.E. 2000-2001 to Rs. 60.00 crores for 2001-2002. The Department has informed that the additional
amount of Rs. 10.00 crores for 2001-2002 is proposed to be utilised for Grant-in-aid to newly recognized
RCCs, IRCH and for setting up of Cobalt Units etc.

9.2 The Committee notes that the Plan expenditure under the National Cancer Research Programme
since the first year of Ninth Plan has been steadily increasing. In 1997-98, it was Rs. 19.87 crore which is
anticipated to reach Rs. 48.00 crore by the end of 2000-2001. Enhanced Allocation of Rs. 60.00 crores
has been proposed for 2001-2002, the last year of Ninth Plan. The Committee has been informed that
evaluation of the programme has been entrusted to the National Institute of Health and Family
Welfare on 22" November, 2000, The Committee hopes that findings of this evaluation would lead
to strengthening of the National Cancer Research Programme.

9.3 While appreciating the various measures being taken under the National Cancer Research
Programme, the Committee observes that in quite a few states, Regional Cancer Centres have not
been established so far. NE States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Manipur, Tripura and Sikkim are not having a RCC at present. The Committee feels that there is
a need for establishing one: Regional Cancer Centre in NE Region and recommends that action
may be initiated in this direction.


x NATIONAL MALARIA ERADICATION PROGRAMME

10.1. National Malaria Eradication Programme is a category II Centrally Sponsored Scheme on 50.50
Cost sharing basis between the Centre and State Governments. The Central Government on its part
provides drugs, insecticides and larvicides etc. The State Governments meet the operational cost
including salary of the staff, except North Eastern States, which are being provided 100% Central
assistance under the programme since December, 1994.

102 The Committee notes tnat against a total Ninth Plan outlay of Rs.1030.00 crores for National
Malaria Eradication Programme, expenditure incurred upto 2000-2001, i.e. fourth year of Ninth Plan, is

only Rs.676.49 crores. Allocation made is invariably being reduced at RE stage and even this reduced
allocation continues to be under utilised as detailed below:-

‘ar

1998-99

(Rs. in chores)

2000-2001

Proposed allocation for 2001-2002 is only Rs.168.00 crores. It has been informed that this
reduction is mainly due to the financial cut imposed by the Ministry of Finance on the basis of trend of
expenditure under the Programme.

10.3. The Committee has been given to understand that incidence of reported cases of malaria during
the last 4-5 years has shown a declining trend from 3.04 million in 1996 to 1.19 million population in
2000. However, the Committee finds that against a target of coverage of 168.04 million population by
residual insecticidal spray in 1998-99, only 79.26 million population could be covered. The Committee
is constrained to note that instead of there being any improvement in achievement level in 1999-
2000, it has declined — against a target of 171.40 million population targetted, coverage level is only
60.66 million.

10.4 Following constraints have been cited in malaria control: -
- Difficulty in regular malaria surveillance activities due to difficult terrain conditions;
- Staff shortage;
- Vehicle inadequacy for movement of supervisory staff; and
- Frequent shifting of Programme Officers both at State Headquarters and Zonal level.

The Committee has observed that these constraints are being faced for a number of years.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should vigorously pursue this
aspect with the concerned State Governments so as to improve the achievement level of various
physical targets of NMEP.

10.5 In 100 hard core and problematic districts of seven peninsular States, namely Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan, an Enhanced Malaria Control
Project (EMCP) with World Bank support is being implemented since 30" September, 1997. The total


outlay for the Project is Rs.891.04 crores for five years. The Department was specifically asked to clarify
whether utilisation certificates were being submitted in time by the concerned State Governments
whether unspent funds were lying with any of the State Governments. The Committee is, however,
constrained to note that instead of furnishing the information asked for, procedure for release of
funds to District Malaria Control Societies has been explained. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the utilization position of funds by State Governments covered under EMCP.

XL NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME

11.1. The objective of the National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP) was to achieve
elimination of leprosy by the year 2000 A.D. by reducing the case load to less than 1/10,000 population.
The Programme received further boost in 1993-94 with sanction of World Bank assistance of Rs.302
crores for a period of 6 years. Phase I of World Bank Project was completed on 30 September, 2000.

11.2. The Committee has been informed that only 20% of leprosy patients are of infectious type and
with modem Multi Drug Therapy, the patient becomes non-infectious very rapidly. Multi Drug Therapy is
being implemented through District Leprosy Societies. The Department has informed that the World
Bank funded programme which is in its fifth year has reduced the prevalence rate from 24/10000 in 1992
to 4.1/10000 in December, 2000. To give continued thrust to 5 highly endemic States of Bihar, U.P.,
M_P., Orissa and West Bengal and also maintenance of gains in other States, the proposal for 2™ Phase of
World Bank assistance for 3 years is being prepared which is targetted for achieving elimination of
leprosy by the end of year 2003 and for completing the process of integration of leprosy services with
General Health Care.

11.3. Two rounds of Modified Leprosy Elimination Campaign a major initiative under the programme
have been implemented so far. During the first MLEC held in 1998-99, 4.64 lakhs cases and during 2™
MLEC held in 1999-2000, 2.12 lakh new cases were detected. The Committee notes with appreciation
that the Modified Leprosy Elimination Campaigns have provided the pace of acceleration for
achieving elimination by detecting and treating large number of cases even in areas where Multi
Drug Therapy (MDT) services were well implemented in last 15 years. The Committee also
expresses its satisfaction with various measures being taken for medical rehabilitation of leprosy-
cured persons.

XII NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS

12.1 The aim of the National Programme for Control of Blindness launched in 1976 is to reduce the
blindness rate from 1.49% to 0.3% by 2000 A.D. The budget for various service components under this
Programme has been enhanced since 1994-95 after the launching of World Bank Assisted Cataract
Blindness Control Project. Besides that, Danish and WHO assistance is also being provided for
prevention of blindness. Expenditure position has been quite satisfactory. Performance of Cataract
Operations has been steadily increasing from 16 lakhs in 1992-93 to 35 lakhs in 1999-2000. It has been
informed that the States of Gujarat, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Delhi and UTs of
Pondicherry and Chandigarh have attained the Cataract surgery rate of 400 operations per lakh population
required for clearing the backlog of cataract blindness. However, the Committee is constrained to note
that Bihar, Assam and Orissa are among the lowest performing Sta:es having cataract surgery rate
of <200/lakh. A number of Assessment/Facility Surverys have been conducted since 1997 in a large
number of districts in the country. One of the main findings of these surveys is that cataract was still the
leading cause of blindness in 55% of blind persons. In view of the above, the Committee feels that the
Department should closely monitor the implementation of all components of National Programme
for Control of Blindness in all the bad performing States, specially Bihar, Assam and Orissa.


12.2 The Committee notes that 13 districts have been selected in Phase I of the National Survey
on Blindness, results of which are likely to be available by the end of year 2001. The Committee
feels that results when received would help in better implementation of the Programme.

12.3. The Committee is of the view that concerted efforts are required to be made for enhancing
the coverage of eye care services in tribal and other under-served areas. The Committee,
therefore, feels that this exercise should be taken up at the earliest in a time bound Action Plan.

XII NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME

13.1 The Plan allocation for the Programme has been increased from Rs.145.00 crores in BE 2000-
2001 to Rs.180.00 crores in RE 2000-2001. Apart from this, a separate provision of Rs.30 crores has been
kept for the N.E States.

13.2 The Committee is perturbed to note that HIV/AIDS infection has percolated into general
population during the past few years and presently no state remains unaffected. The National AIDS
Control Programme phase II has been launched from 9" November 1999 with the two key objectives
namely to reduce the spread of HIV infection in India and strengthen India’s capacity to respond to the
HIV/AIDS on a long term basis. There has been optimum utilisation of funds allocated for NACP -
against an allocation of Rs.140.00 crores in 1999-2000 - utilisation was Rs.135.27 crores. Similarly, an
expenditure of Rs. 168.69 crores has been incurred upto 13.3.2001 out of Rs.180.00 crores provided in
2000-2001

13.3. The Committee apprehends that very high cost of treatment of HIV/AIDS infection would
be further affected with the advent of new patent regime from 2005. The Committee takes note of
the Department’s stand that the provision for a compulsory licensing for manufacturing of drugs
for public non-commercial use should be secured. The Department is also trying to impress WHO
to use international funding for purchasing patents so that major vaccines and therapeutic drugs
including AIDS come within the public domain.

13.4... At present, 563 NGOs are being funded under the Programme. The Committee observes that
NGOs are being involved as critical partners in the following important thrust areas :-

- Targetted interventions for the high risk and marginalized population;
- School AIDS Education;

- Low cost community care for people living with HIV/AIDS;

- Counselling; and

- Family Health Awareness Campaigns.

Selection of specific NGOs and the release of funds is now being done by the State AIDS Control
Societies. The Committee has been given to understand that the release of central funds directly to State
AIDS Control Societies, instead of chanelising the funds through State Governments has resulted in better
utilisation of funds.

13.5 The Committee has, however, a word of caution. At present, what is a happening is that
that NGOs are concentrated in metropolitan cities and also where State AIDS Control Societies are
functioning well. The Committee strongly feels that the Department should conduct a survey so as
to assess which are the districts where NGO activity is simply not there and take up the matter with
the State Society for attracting NGOs towards this social activity.

13.6 The Committee is of the view that inspite of there being a fool proof procedure for selection
of NGOs under NACP, ground realities in some areas are entirely different. Regular and intensive


monitoring of NGOs is very essential for checking undesirable activities. Stringent measures need
to be taken against blacklisted NGOs. The Committee feels that besides NGOs, the Department
should also explore the possibility of involving some other agency in this area.

13.7... It has come to the notice of the Committee that research being done by Indian Scientists in
this critical area is not receiving the desired support from the Central Government. AIDS kits
developed by some Bangalore Scientists although approved by WHO did not receive recognition of
the Government. The Committee has a feeling that vested interests are coming in the way of
indigenous attempts. Government should provide all possible support, if some genuine research is
there.

XIV NATIONAL TB CONTROL PROGRAMME

14.1 India accounts for nearly one third of Global TB burden and every year has more than 2 million
new cases of TB. Based on the past experience, a Revised Strategy for National TB Control Programme
was evolved by the Government with the aim to achieve a cure rate of over 85% and augmentation of
case finding activities to detect at least 70% estimated cases. This strategy was pilot-tested with SIDA
assistance in 1993-94 on a population of 2.35 million. Since then, in a phased manner till January, 2001 a
population of about 330 million has been covered. With support of DFID and DANIDA, the population
coverage under RNTCP will be increased to about 500 million by 2002. Phase II of the Programme is
under preparation for funding under World Bank for further expansion upto 700 million population.

14.2 The Committee has been informed that achievements under the Programme have been very
good. Detection rate has been 120/10,000 against a target of 135/10,000. The average cure rate has
been 80% against the target of 85%. The Committee notes that due to Government machinery not
being available to the public in many areas, the Department is exploring the possibility of
implementing the programme through private practitioners. A pilot study on distribution of drugs
through private practitioners is being conducted in East Delhi. The Committee is of the view that
the Department should take all precautions before taking such an initiative.

14.3. The Committee finds that inspite of reported coverage of TB Control Programme and

impressive Foreign funding, allocation being made is being invariably reduced at the RE Stage.
Figures related to first four years of Ninth Plan are self revealing -

(Rs. in Crore)

Year BE | [ष्ट |

_|
1997-98 90.00 80.00
1998-99 125.00 | 72.00
1999-2000 | 103.00 95.00
2000-2001 | 125.00 [110.00 | 10.00

14.4... Even the reduced allocation could not be fully-utilised is 1997-98 and 1999-2000. Not only this,
Committee is constrained to observe that whereas achievement level of Physical targets in the first three

10


quarters of 1999-2000 was only about 50%, considerable improvement was reported in the last quarter of
the year as detailed below:-

Targets Ach.upto Dec.1999 | Ach.Upto
| | 31.3.1999
Sputum 48.84.840 24,59,121 40,09,727
Examination
Smear +ve 4,88.480 2,26,551 3,71,521

Position seems to be the same during 2000-2001. About 50% achievement has been reported upto
December. 2000.

14.5 100% requirements of drugs for treatment of Sputumtve cases are supplied by the Ceritre to
District TB Centres of the States. For purchase of drugs for Sputum —ve cases, cash assistance is
provided to the States. The Committee notes that due to lengthy budgetary and procurement procedures,
some states are being released funds on the basis of Utilisation Certificates of the previous year.
Utilisation position in respect of funds allotted to some of the States as indicated below is a cause of
concern.

(Rs. in lakhs)
1999-2000

State Allocation Expenditure
(Bihar | 1054.73 589.92
Gujarat 1203.88 252.68
Karnataka 701.35 315.01
Kerala | 885.69 95.70
Tamil Nadu 660.48 273.15
West Bengal 2083.18 386.94

14.6 The Committee notes that there is an elaborate monitoring set-up under NTCP. Quarterly
Reports of Project areas are regularly analysed by Central TB Division Regular review meetings are being
held both at the State and Central level. Consultants have been hired by WHO to work under the direction
of respective State Governments. The Committee fails to understand that inspite of such an
impressive set up, both physical and financial targets continue to show under achievement level.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that beside analysing reports at the centre and holding of
meetings with project state officials, random surveys/surprise inspections by Central teams are also
very much required. The Committee is of the view that interaction with local public
representatives to the extent possible may result in bringing out ground realities. Department
should explore the possibility in this direction and evolve a more effective monitoring mechanism.


XV. STATE HEALTH SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS

15.1. Health being a state subject, State Governments are primarily, responsible for implementing the
various national Health Programmes. However, due to financial constraints, infrastructure available in the
States is very limited. As a remedy, for supplementing the infrastructure particularly at the first referral
level, State Health Systems Development Projects with the assistance of World Bank have been taken up
in seven States, i.e. in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, West Bengal, Punjab, Orissa, Maharashtra and U.P. at
a total cost of approximately Rs.3914.00 crores from 1995 onwards. Draft projects of Assam, Rajasthan
and Tamil Nadu have been sent to the World Bank on 14.3.2001. Draft proposals from Madhya Pradesh,
Himachal Pradesh and Haryana are likely to be received during 2001-2002, the Committee was
informed.

15.2. While welcoming this initiative, the Committee would like to be apprised about the findings
of assessment of project undertaken in Andhra Pradesh which was launched on 1“ March, 1995 for
a period of 6 % years.

XVI IMPLEMENTATION OF HEALTH PROGRAMMES IN NORTH EAST SECTOR
16.1. Status of various national health programmes in North Eastern States is as follows:-
(a) National Programme for Control Blindness
Despite some improvement in infrastructure, there is still a shortfall of facilities. Against
a release of Rs. 160.02 lakhs as cash grants, expenditure incurred was only Rs. 78.20
lakhs in 1999-2000, Similarly, against Grants-in-aid of Rs. 139 lakhs, District Blindness
Control Societies could utilise only Rs. 98.04 lakhs
(७0) Drug De-Addiction Programme

Out of 104 Drug De-Addiction Centres in the Country, 33 Centres are located in NE
States.

(c) National Malaria Control Programme

NE States contribute 10-12% of total malaria cases in the country. During 1999, NE
States alone contributed 21.08% of total deaths in the country. About Rs. 20.13 crores
have been released by Centre to meet the operational cost upto 3" quarter of 2000-2001/

(9) National AIDS Control Programme

Although a number of activities are being undertaken in NE region, only Rs. 654.12 lakhs
out of Rs, 1162 lakhs allocated to NE States during 2000-2001, have been utilised upto
December, 2000.

16.2. The Committee is of the view that the Department should closely monitor the utilization of
funds under the various health programmes in NE region. Department should also take effective
steps for removing the constraints being faced by NE states which can lead to proper
implementation of all the health programmes being carried out there.

12


XVII HOSPITAL WASTE MANAGEMENT

17.1 Hospital Waste is one of the biggest health hazards that is being faced by every citizen of this
country. The Committee has been informed that 21 State Governments/Union Territories have constituted
Advisory Committees for implementation of Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules,
1998. The extended deadline dated 30.6.2000 to initiate treatment and disposal of bio-medical wastes for
towns with a population of 30 lakhs and above and others having hospitals with 500 beds and more has
already ended. The Committee views with serious concern that the implementation status by the
States/UTs are yet to be received by the Central Pollution Control Board.

17.2. The Committee apprehends that there are very little chances of any progress being made
and conditions of hospitals/nursing homes would continue to be health hazardous. The Central
Government cannot take shelter behind the plea that health is a state subject. Need of the hour is
that Central Government should initiate some effective steps by entering into a meaningful
dialogue with State Governments.

XVII QUALITY CONTROL OF DRUGS

Quality Control of Drugs continues to be a weak area. The Committee observes that there is a
need of taking effective steps both at the Centre and State level for strengthening the Central and State
Drugs Control Organisations. It has been informed that funds are being provided by the Centre for
purchase of equipments by State Drug Testing Labs. Similarly, additional testing equipments are also
being provided to the Central Drug Labs. The Committee is of the view that the Department should
vigorously pursue the maximum utilization of allocated funds by State Governments and prevail upon the
State Govts to strengthen the State structures by providing funds to the extent possible. The Committee
finds that Delhi, Gujarat, Maharashtra, MP, Karnataka and West Bengal are having the maximum
number of vacant posts of Drug Inspectors. The Department should take up the matter with the
concerned State Governments. The Committee is of the view that the proposed establishment of
two new Central Labs at Chandigarh and Hyderabad should be taken up on a priority basis
without any further delay.

XIX NATIONAL ILLNESS ASSISTANCE FUND

The Committee notes that there have been savings in the allocation made under National 11655
Assistance Fund due to non-setting up of the funds by State Governments. and non-receipt of proposals
by State Governments. And also due to lesser release of central assistance than anticipated owing to the
fact that States earlier sanctioned grants-in-aid have not submitted utilization certificates. Grant-in-aid to
State Governments is limited to 50% of the State contribution. Although 15 States have set up Illness
Assistance Fund, lack of resources is one of the reasons for States not contributing to this head. Besides
that, lack of publicity can also be held to be responsible for non-utilisation of funds. The Committee
feels that the Department should make concerted efforts by pursuing with State Governments to
actively implement the scheme of National Illness Assistance Fund. The Committee feels that,
public at large is not aware about the scheme. Efforts should therefore be made both at State and
Central level to give wide publicity to the scheme so that this fund could be fully utilised for the
purpose for which it has been set up.

XX GENERAL
20.1 Regarding amendment of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and approaching a larger Bench of

the Supreme Court so that service rendered by doctors of Government Hospitals/CGHS dispensaries
come within its purview, the Department has replied that such a step would require wide ranging

13


consultations with various Ministries, statutory bodies and interested groups. The Department hag also
replied that since there is no regulatory framework for ensuring standards of hospitals and nursing homes,
steps are being taken to have a framework which could then form the basis of ensuring standards of
treatment, something which is the very basis of accountability under the Consumer Protection Act. In this
direction, two draft Bills on Clinical establishment Minimum Standard and Maintenance of Clinical
Records have been drafted by the Department and State Governments are being consulted in the matter.
The Department is also working on a draft to regulate education, training and practice of para-medical
professions.

20.2 The Committee expresses its strong reservation on the evasive stand being taken by the
Department on such a vital issue Private doctors can be taken to court for any act of negligence on
their part. On the other hand, Government doctors, by being not covered under the Consumer
Protection Act, continue to enjoy a comfortable position at the cost of patients coming under their
treatment. This kind of discriminatory position leads to serious complications in some cases. The
Committee is not convinced with the argument that standards at Government Hospitals being very
low, doctors posted there cannot no be held responsible for their lapses. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates is its earlier recommendation to make necessary amendment in the relevant Section of
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 so as to bring Govt. Doctors within its purview.

20.3 The Committee notes that at present Members of Parliament get reimbursement in respect
of treatment taken in a private recognized hospital as per the package rates prescribed by the
CGHS. The Secretary clarified that full powers of passing bills for reimbursement of medical
treatment in private medical institutions for sitting M.Ps. and have now been given to Lok Sabha
/Rajya Sabha Secretariats. The Committee finds this misleading .

14


OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION

The Committee has observed that allocations (both plan and non-plan) made during Ninth
Plan are invariably being reduced at the RE stage and even this reduced allocation is not fully
utilised. The Committee has been informed that non-finalisation of the procurement agencies as
well as drug supply orders under the National Anti Malaria Programme and National T.B. Control
Programme has resulted in some shortfall in Plan expenditure during initial years of Ninth Plan.
Besides that, time taken in finalisation of modalities for implementation of new projects can also be
held responsible for this trend of expenditure. (Para 2.3)

The Committee is not fully convinced with the justification given by the Department that
there has been increase in percentage of plan expenditure during the Ninth Plan period. During the
Fourth Year of the Ninth Plan, i.e. 2000-2001, Plan allocation of Rs. 1300.00 crores was reduced to
Rs. 1160.00 crores and anticipated expenditure would be Rs. 1120.00 crore. Fact remains that
allocation including both plan and non-plan component continues to be reduced at the RE stage
and even this reduced allocation is not being fully utilised. Tenth Plan is to commence from 2002-
2003. The Committee is of the view that all procedural formalities for ongoing programmes and
new projects to be taken up in Tenth Plan should be completed by the end of the last year of Ninth
Plan, i.e. 2001-2002 so that there is optimum utilization of allocated funds right from the first year
of Tenth Plan. (Para 2.4)

CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME(CGHS)

The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be initiated in right earnest for
obtaining usual clearances so that funds are utilised to the optimum during 2001-2002.(Para 3.1)

The Committee apprehends that exercise of creation of additional new posts under CGHS
would not be complete during 2001-2002 also which is the last year of Ninth Plan. The Committee,
therefore, strongly, recommends that the Department should make serious efforts to expedite the
creation of posts, essential for expansion of CGHS network. (Para 3.2)

The Committee is, however, of the view that inspection teams should also inter-act with
patients visiting the dispensary to have an idea about the problems being faced by them. (Para 3.3)

The Committee feels that the exercise for formulating a single comprehensive formulary for
CGHS and MSO has been dragging on for a very long period. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Department should ensure that the latest committee completes the task
assigned to it within the scheduled time limit so that a single comprehensive drug formulary for
CGHS and MSO is brought out without any further delay. (Para 3.4)

SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL

The Committee expresses its serious concern on the declining trend in the utilization of Plan
allocation for Safdarjung Hospital as indicated below:-

15


ee
fe [me [oncen
Paw es

Plan Allocation for 2001-2002 has been further reduced to Rs. 22.00 crores. The Committee
recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts to expedite the procurement of
remaining equipments and also get the vacant posts in Safdarjung Hopsital filled up during 2001-
2002. (Para 4.3)

Last year, while commenting’ on unsatisfactory services being provided by Safdarjung
Hospital, the Committee had observed that the Department should find out ways and means of
maintaining cleanliness in all Govt. Hospitals. The Department has informed that the Employees
Unions have strongly objected to entrusting the work for doing peripheral jobs to private parties
The Committee strongly feels that the Department is failing in its duty of providing required
services to public by taking shelter behind the stand taken by Employees Unions. The Committee is
of the view that in such a scenario, the-Department should resort to strict measures so that
employees are made to carry out the duties assigned to. them. (Para 4.4)

DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL

The Committee is of the view that serious efforts need to be made for optimum utilization of
allocated funds within the targetted period. (Para 5.1)

The Committee is perturbed to observe that although considerable time has passed, the
construction work on the project of a Trauma Centre at Dr. R.M.L. Hospital is yet to start. A
number of formalities still remain to be completed. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the approval of EFC on the project should be expedited so that construction work on Trauma
Centre can start without any further delay. (Para 5:2)

CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, RANCHI

The Committee hopes that concerted efforts would be made by CIP, Ranchi so that/the
exercise of purchasing the proposed machines and equipments is completed during \2001/2002
thereby avoiding reduction of allocation at the RE stage. (Para 6.1)

IWSU study conducted for CIP, Ranchi had recommended creation of 260 posts as early as
on 16.1.97. The Committee is not able to understand the rationale for having another study
conducted by NIMHANS in May, 2000. The Committee apprehends that this new exercisé may lead
to further delay due to a number of procedural formalities which will be started afresh‘now. , The

16


Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts to
expedite the process of modernization of CIP, Ranchi. (Para 6.3)

ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)

The Committee hopes that all the proposed plans and projects would be carried out during
2001-2002 and allocation meant for the same utilised fully. (Para 7.1)

The Committee is concerned to note that despite its earlier observations, the project for
setting up a Trauma Centre at AIIMS is still at the proposal stage. The Committee, strongly
recommends that the Department should vigorously pursue the matter with AIIMS so that EFC
meeting is held without delay and construction work on the Trauma Centre is started at the
earliest. (Para 7.3)

JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION AND
RESEARCH, PONDICHERRY (JIPMER)

The Committee notes that in the light of its observation made last year, a decision has been
taken that while placing requisition for a particular post at JIPMER, it will be stipulated in the
advertisement that first posting of two years will be at JIPMER. The Committee hopes that this
decision may result in reduction in the number of vacant posts at the Institute. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the latest vacancy position at the Institute. (Para 5.2)

The Committee views with concern the declining trend in the allocation of funds for
JIPMER. The Committee strongly recommends that situation of vacant posts and non-creation of
required posts should not be allowed to be continued for long in a teaching Institute. The
Department should initiate necessary steps in this direction and get allocated required funds for the
purpose. (Para 5.2)

NATIONAL CANCER RESEARCH PROGRAMME

The Committee has been informed that evaluation of the programme has been entrusted to
the National Institute of Health and Family Welfare on 22" November, 2000. The Committee
hopes that findings of this evaluation would lead to strengthening of the National Cancer Research
Programme. (Para 9.2)

While appreciating the various measures being taken under the National Cancer Research
Programme, the Committee observes that in quite a few states, Regional Cancer Centres have not
been established so far. NE States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Manipur, Tripura and Sikkim are not having a RCC at present. The Committee feels that there is
a need for establishing one Regional Cancer Centre in NE Region and recommends that action
may be initiated in this direction. (Para 9.4)

NATIONAL MALARIA ERADICATION PROGRAMME

The Committee is constrained to note that instead of there being any improvement in
achieyement level in 1999-2000, it has declined - against a target of 171.40 million population
targetted, coverage level is only 60.66 million. (Para 10.3)

The Committee has observed that these constraints are being faced for a number of years.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should vigorously pursue this

17


aspect with the concerned State Governments so as to improve the achievement level of various
physical targets of NMEP. (Para 10.4)

The Committee is, however, constrained to note that instead of furnishing the information
asked for, procedure for release of funds to District Malaria Control Societies has been explained.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the utilization position of funds by State
Governments covered under EMCP. (Para 10.5)

NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME

The Committee notes with appreciation that the Modified Leprosy Elimination Campaigns
have provided the pace of acceleration for achieving elimination by detecting and treating large
number of cases even in areas where Multi Drug Therapy (MDT) services were well implemented
in last 15 years. The Committee also expresses its satisfaction with various measures being taken
for medical rehabilitation of leprosy-cured persons. (Para 11.3)

NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS

However, the Committee is constrained to note that Bihar, Assam and Orissa are among the
lowest performing States having cataract surgery rate of <200/lakh. In view of the above, the
Committee feels that the Department should closely monitor the implementation of all components
of National Programme for Control of Blindness in all the bad performing States, specially Bihar,
Assam and Orissa. (Para 12.2)

The Committee notes that 13 districts have been selected in Phase I of the National Survey
on Blindness, results of which are likely to be available by the end of year 2001. The Committee
feels that results when received would help in better implementation of the Programme. (Para 12.2)

The Committee is of the view that concerted efforts are required to be made for enhancing
the coverage of eye care services in tribal and other under-served areas. The Committee,
therefore, feels that this exercise should be taken up at the earliest in a time bound Action Plan.
(Para 12.3)

NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME

The Committee apprehends that very high cost of treatment of HIV/AIDS infection would
be further affected with the advent of new patent regime from 2005. The Committee takes note of
the Department’s stand that the provision for a compulsory licensing for manufacturing of drugs
for public non-commercial use should be secured. The Department is also trying to impress WHO
to use international funding for purchasing patents so that major vaccines arid therapeutic drugs
including AIDS come within the public domain. (Para 13.3)

The Committee has, however, a word of caution. At present, what is a happening is that
that NGOs are concentrated in metropolitan cities and also where State AIDS Control Societies are
functioning well. The Committee strongly feels that the Department should conduct a survey so as
to assess which are the districts where NGO activity is simply not there and take up the matter with
the State Society for attracting NGOs towards this social activity. (Para 13.5)

The Committee is of the view that inspite of there being a fool proof procedure for selection

of NGOs under NACP, ground realities in some areas are entirely different. Regular and intensive
monitoring of NGOs is very essential for checking undesirable activities. Stringent measures need

18


to be taken against blacklisted NGOs. The Committee feels that besides NGOs, the Department
should also explore the possibility of involving some other agency in this area. (Para 13.6)

It has come to the notice of the Conunittee that research being done by Indian Scientists in
this critical area is not receiving the desired support from the Central Government. AIDS kits
developed by some Bangalore Scientists although approved by WHO did not receive recognition of
the Government. The Committee has a feeting that vested interests are coming in the way of
indigenous attempts. Government should provide all possible support, if some genuine research is
there. (Para 13.7)

NATIONAL TB CONTROL PROGRAMME

The Committee has been informed that achievements under the Programme have been very
good. Detection rate has been 120/10,000 against a target of 13$/10,000. The average cure rate has
been 80% against the target of 85%. The Committee notes that due to Government machinery not
being available to the public in many areas, the Department is exploring the possibility of
implementing the programme through private practitioners. A pilot study on distribution of drugs
through private practitioners is being conducted in East Delhi. The Committee is of the view that
the Department should take all precautions before taking such an initiative. (Para 14.2)

The Committee fails to understand that inspite of such an impressive set up, both physical and
financial targets continue to show under achievement level. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that beside analysing reports at the centre and holding of meetings with project state officials,
random surveys/surprise inspections by Central teams are also very much required. The
Committee is of the view that interaction with local public representatives to the extent possible
may result in bringing out ground realities. Department should explore the possibility in this
direction and evolve a more effective monitoring mechanism. (Para 14.6)

STATE HEALTH SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS

While welcoming this initiative, the Committee would like to be apprised about the findings
of assessment of project undertaken in Andhra Pradesh which was launched on 11 March, 1995 for
a period of 6 % years. (Para 15.2)

IMPLEMENTATION OF HEALTH PROGRAMMES IN NORTH EAST SECTOR

16.2. The Committee is of the view that the Department should closely monitor the utilization of
funds under the various health programmes in NE region. Department should also take effective
steps for removing the constraints being faced by NE states which can lead to proper
implementation of all the health programmes being carried out there. (Para 16.2)

HOSPITAL WASTE MANAGEMENT

The Committee views with serious concern that the implementation status by the
States/UTs are yet to be received by the Central Pollution Control Board. (Para 17.1)

The Committee apprehends that there are very little chances of any progress being made
and conditions of hospitals/nursing homes would continue to be health hazardous. The Central
Government cannot take shelter behind the plea that health is a state subject. Need of the hour is
that Central Government should initiate some effective steps by entering into a meaningful dialogue
with State Governments. (Para 17.2)


QUALITY CONTROL OF DRUGS

The Committee finds that Delhi, Gujarat, Maharashtra, MP, Karnataka and West Bengal
are having the maximum number of vacant posts of Drug Inspectors. The Department should take
up the matter with the concerned State Governments. The Committee is of the view that the
proposed establishment of two new Central Labs at Chandigarh and Hyderabad should be taken
up on a priority basis without any further delay. (Para 18)

NATIONAL ILLNESS ASSISTANCE FUND

The Committee feels that the Department should make concerted efforts by pursuing with
State Governments to actively implement the scheme of National Illness Assistance Fund. The
Committee feels that public at large is not aware about the scheme. Efforts should therefore be
made both at State and Central level to give wide publicity to the scheme so that this fund could be
fully utilised for the purpose for which it has been set up. (Para 19)

GENERAL

20.2. The Committee expresses its strong reservation on the evasive stand being taken by the
Department on such a vital issue Private doctors can be taken to court for any act of negligence on
their part. On the other hand, Government doctors, by being not covered under the Consumer
Protection Act, continue to enjoy a comfortable position at the cost of patients coming under their
treatment. This kind of discriminatory position leads to serious complications in some cases. The
Committee is not convinced with the argument that standards at Government Hospitals being very
low, doctors posted there cannot no be held responsible for their lapses. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates is its earlier recommendation to make necessary amendment in the relevant Section of
the ConsumerProtection Act, 1986 so as to bring Govt. Doctors within its purview. (Para 20.2)

The Committee notes that at present Members of Parliament get reimbursement in respect
of treatment taken in a private recognized hospital as per the package rates prescribed by the
CGHS. The Secretary clarified that full powers of passing bills for reimbursement of medical
treatment in private medical institutions for sitting M.Ps. and have now been given to Lok Sabha
/Rajya Sabha Secretariats. The Committee finds this misleading. (20.3)

20


*IV
FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. and 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 27" March, 2001 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri S.B. Chavan —_ Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Eduardo Faleiro

Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”
Shri Dina Nath Mishra
Prof. R.B.S. Varma

Shri Bratin Sengupta

AAPWN

LOK SABHA

7. Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
8. Shri Ramakant Angle

9. Shri Kirti Jha Azad

10. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
11. Shri V. M. Sudheeran

12. Shrimati Shyama Singh

13. Shri Samik Lahiri

14. Shrimati Renu Kumari

15. Shri Shivaji Mane

16. Dr. Baliram

17. Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
18. Shri Vanlal Zawma

WITNESSES
1. Representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health )

Shri J.A. Chowdhury, Secretary

Dr. S.P. Agarwal, Director General, -Health Services
Shri J.U.R. Prasada Rao, Addl. Secretary

Shri V. R. Patwardhan, Additional Secretary

Shri Vijay Singh, Joint Secretary & F. A.

vPwene

*Minutes of the 1* to. 3” Ineetings relates to other matters.

23


6. Ms. Sujata Rao, Joint Secretary |

7. Shri Jawahar Thakur, Chief Conttoller of Accounts
8. Prof. N.K. Ganguly, Director General, ICMR

9. Dr. P.K. Dave, Director (AIIMS)

10. Smt. B. Thayagarajan, Joint Secretary

I x x x

SECRETARIAT

Smt. Vandana Garg, Director

Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary

Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer
Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretaries of the Departments of Health and X X X,
separately, in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2001-2002. Members
put queries which Secretaries and other representatives replied.

2A. _ A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

3. The Committee adjourned at 12.40 P.M. for lunch and adjourned again at 4.45 P.M. to meet again
at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 28" March, 2001.

XXX Relate to other matters.

24


*VIl
SEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 11% April, 2001 in Committee Room No.
139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri S.B. Chavan — Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”
Shri Dina Nath Mishra
Shri Bratin Sengupta

Fen

LOK SABHA

5. Shri Ramakant Angle
6. Shri Kirti Jha Azad

7. Shri Ramanand Singh

8. Shri Dileep Sanghani

9. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan

10. Shri 6. S. Baswaraj

11. Shrimati Shyama Singh

12. Shri Kantilal Bhuriya

13. Shri Samik Lahiri

14. Shri Davendra Singh Yadav

15. Shri Shivaji Mane

16. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
17. Shri Trilochan Kanungo

18. Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
19. Dr. S. Venugopal

SECRETARIAT

Smt. Vandana Garg, Director

Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary

Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer
Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer

*Minutes of the 50 and 6" meetings relate to other matters.

25


2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on Demands for Grants for 2001-2002 of the
Departments of X ».¢ X, Health, X XX X. The Committee, after some discussion,
adopted the Reports with certain modifications.

3. ' The Committee adjourned at 12.20 P.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 12" April,
2001.

XXX Relates to other matters.

26