PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March 
TWO HUNDRED 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF 
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL OPMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
March , 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH  REPORT 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT ON  
GRANTS 2015 -2016 (DEMAND NO. 60 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 16 th March, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16 th March, 2016) 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO. 
274  
REPORT  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
 
2016 (DEMAND NO. 60 )  
HIGHER EDUCATION   
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT ) 

PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL OPMENT  
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 -2016 (DEMAND NO. 60 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT) 
 
to the Rajya Sabha on 16 th March, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16 th March, December, 2016) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
March , 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
 
2016 (DEMAND NO. 60 )  
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION   
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)  
 

C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …........................................................... (i)-( ii)   
2.        PREFACE.................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3. ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................... (iv) 
4.  REPORT............................................ .............................................…............................  
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations/Observations which h ave been accepted  
 by the Government ...................................................................  
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply.............  
Chapter-III -  Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee...  
Chapter-IV -  Recommendation/Observation in respect  of which reply of the  
Government is still awaited......................................................... 
   
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE    
5. *MINUTES........................................ ................................................................... 
6. *ANNEXURES...................................... ............................................................     
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
*Appended on printing stage 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st  August, 2015) 
 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13.  Shri C.R. Chaudhary 
14.       Shrimati Bhawana Gawali Patil 
15.       Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16 .       Shri  Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.       Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.       Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.       Shri Chand Nath 
20.       Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.       Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.       Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.       Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.       Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
26.       Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.       Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.       Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
30.       Shri Ajay Tamta 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher  
  
 
 
 
 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director 
Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
  

 
P R E F A C E 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorised by the Committe e to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred Seventy-fourth Repo rt on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Sixty-  fifth Report on Demands for Grants 
(Demand No. 60) of the Ministry of Human Resource D evelopment, Department of Higher 
Education for the year 2015-16.   
 
2. The Two Hundred Sixty- fifth Report of the Departme nt-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development was present ed to Rajya Sabha on 23 rd  April, 2015 
and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 23 rd  April, 2015.  Replies of the Government to the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Repor t, were considered by the Committee at its 
meeting held on the 14.3.2016. 
 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopt ed the same at its meeting held on 
the 14.3.2016. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
14 
th March, 2016 
Phalguna 24,1937 (Saka) 
 
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

ABBREVIATIONS  
 
 
1. AICTE : All India Council for Technical Education 
2.  CAGR:  Compounded Annual Growth Rate 
3.  CFEI:  Centrally Funded Educational Institutions 
4. DEC:  Distance Education Council 
5.  GER:   Gross Enrolment Ratio 
6.  ICT:  Information and Communication Technology 
7.   IIIT:  Indian Institute of Information Technology  
8.   IIM :  Indian Institute of Management 
9. IISER:  Indian Institute of Science Education and R esearch 
10. IIIPRS:  Indian Institute of Intellectual Property Rights Studies 
11.  IIT:  Indian Institute of Technology 
12.   IQAC:  Internal Quality Assurance Cells 
13.   MDC:  Model Degree College 
14. MOOCS: Massive Online Open Courses 
15. NIT:  National Institute of Technology 
16.   NQRI:  National Quality Renaissance Initiative 
17. NSQR:   National Skill Qualification Frameworks     
18. ODL:  Open and Distance Learning 
19.   PPP:  Public Private Partnership 
20. RUSA:   Rashtriya Ucchatar Shiksha  Abhiyan 
21. TEQIP:  Technical Education Quality Improvement Pro gramme 
22. T&T:  National Mission on Teachers And Teaching 
23.  UGC:  University Grants Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

REPORT 
 
 
 The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development deals with the action taken by  the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Two hundred sixty-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(Demand No. 60) of the Ministry of Human Resource D evelopment, Department of Higher 
Education for the year 2015-16. 
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the 265 
th  Report have been categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been a ccepted by the Government – paras – 
2.7, 12.2 and 14.1 
 (Chapter-I) Total – 3 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply – paras -3.4, 4.5, 5.2, 6.16, 7.13, 8.6, 9.2 and 10.5  
 (Chapter-II) Total – 8 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee – paras –2.5, 2.8, 6 .7, 6.10, 6.14, 7.11, 7.12, 10.6, 11.2 
and 14.2 
 (Chapter-III) Total – 10  
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which  reply of the Government is still awaited. 
 (Chapter-IV)  Para - 13.4  
 Total - 1  
 
 
  

CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.7 The Committee is, therefore, constrained to sta te that this unspent balances could be one of 
the factors for the declining budget allocations of  the Department.  The declining allocation and 
under-utilization of funds, it appears are turning into a vicious cycle.  The Committee also noted 
that a large number of utilization certificates are  outstanding in respect of Grants/loans upto 31 
st  
December, 2014 as indicated in the table below : 
                                                                                                                                         (` in crore) 
No. of UCs 
outstanding in 
respect of Grants 
released upto 
1.04.2014 
Amount 
Involved 
No. of UCs 
received 
during 
01.04.2014 to 
31.12.2014 
Amount 
Involved in 
respect of 
UCs 
received 
No. of UCs 
outstanding 
as on 
31.12.2014 
Amount 
Involved in 
Outstanding 
UCs 
4259 15153.04 920 2002.27 3339 13150.77 
 
Action Taken 
 
Regarding the unspent balance it has been brought t o the notice of the National Council for 
promotion of Sindhi Language (NCPSL) and National C ouncil for promotion of Urdu Language 
(NCPUL); two autonomous organizations whose matters  are dealt with L-III Section of this 
Ministry and they are requested for timely utilizat ion of funds allocated to them and have been 
informed that from year 2015-16, no unspent balance will be allowed to carry forward. 
The UGC has taken efforts to bring down the unspent  balances available with it at the end 
of the year. The Ministry is also taking care to re lease the final instalments to the UGC at an early 
date in the last quarter to ensure its utilization. There are no UCs outstanding from the UGC, under 
the UGC General, UGC NER and UGC Deemed University Heads, that were due to be furnished 
on 31 
st  December, 2014. 
  

Utilization Certificates Outstanding in respect of Grants/ Loans released - Up to 31 st  March, 
2015. 
(` in crore) 
No. of UCs 
Outstanding 
in respect of 
Grants 
released up 
to 1.04.2014 
Amount 
Involved 
 
No. of UCs 
received during 
01.04.2014 to 
31.03.2015 
 
Amount Involved 
in respect of UCs 
received  
 
No. of UCs 
outstanding as on 
31.03.2015 
Amount 
Involved in 
Outstanding 
UCs  
 
1.  2.   3.   4.   5.   6.   
4259 15153  .04 1864 14568.21 2395 584.83 
 
As may be seen from the table above, the No. of UCs  outstanding and the Amount involved in 
respect of Outstanding UCs as on 31st March, 2015 i s considerably lower than the figures as on 
31st December, 2014. 
MASSIVE ONLINE OPEN COURSES (MOOCs) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
12.2 The Committee is also of the view that other t echnological interventions, such as the one 
based on MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) run by  IITs can prove to be helpful especially 
in view of its likely immediate impact. The Committ ee reiterates that this aspect has to be given 
top priority. The other viable option likely to sho w immediate results would be to utilize the 
services of available teachers to the maximum by me ans of information technology like video-
conferencing having a single teacher teaching the students of more than one IIITs at the same time. 
Action Taken 
 
Once SWAYAM platform would be ready, the MOOCs woul d be delivered through it 
where the course (MOOCs) can be taken by a number o f students simultaneously at various 
locations.  
CONSLUSION 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
14.1 The Committee considers that development, expa nsion and growth of Higher Education, 
both in the public and private sector, especially i n view of our demographic dividend in the form 
of young population available in the Country, which  is at present highest in the world, requires 
highest attention of the Government. The youths of the Country deserves the best of education to 
realize these dreams. India has got all the ingredi ents to become an International Education Hub as 
in the IT Sector. The Committee recommends that pau city of funds should not be allowed to come 

in the way of India acquiring the status of leader in this field. All the stakeholders be it government 
regulatory bodies like UGC/AICTE; Institutions of H igher Education and Research like IITs, 
IIMs, IISERs, NITs, IIITs; Private Sector, etc., sh ould galvanize to achieve the dreams of our 
young population. 
Action Taken 
 
The observations of the Committee are accepted.  
  

CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO (GER) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3.4 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the Twe lfth Plan Approach Paper which 
mentions that about 18 per cent of all Government e ducation spending or 1.12 per cent of GDP be 
spent on higher education. This funding should be r aised to 25 per cent and 1.5 per cent 
respectively. However, the overall scenario regardi ng the declining allocations over the years as 
discussed in preceding paras shows altogether a dif ferent picture. This is also reflected in low 
achievement of GER which is taken as an indicator o f the growth and development of Higher 
Education Sector in the country. As may be seen fro m the comparative figures, India ranks at the 
bottom regarding GER amongst those nations. The Com mittee, therefore, reiterates that to achieve 
higher GER and for making India an educational hub globally, not only more allocations are 
required but the utilization of allocations also has to be more efficient. 
Action Taken 
 
National Policy on Education, 1986 (modified in 199 2) stipulates that investment in 
education should be gradually increased so as to re ach a level of expenditure of 6% of National 
Income as early as possible. The Plan allocation fo r Education shows that there has been a 
phenomenal increase in the Plan Allocation during XI Plan vis-vis X Plan. As against a total actual 
expenditure of Rs. 58817.33 crore (for both the Dep artments) during X Plan, the actual allocation 
for the Ministry of HRD during XI Plan has gone up to Rs. 193570 crore, which is an increase of 
3.3 times. Central XII Plan out of Ministry of HRD have also been increased vis-à-vis XI Plan 
Actual Expenditure of Rs. 1.78 lakh crore (for both  the Department) during XI Plan, the Central 
Plan Outlay of Education during XII Plan has gone u pto 4.54 lakh crore, which is an increase of 
2.55 times. With the several initiatives taken by t he Central Government in the recent past, it is 
expected that expenditure in Education Sector will be faster and the State Government will also 
come forward for investing in Education Sector, as the 6% of GDP has to come from Central as 
well as State Government. About 18 percent of all g overnment education spending or about 1.12 
percentage of GDP is spent on higher education today.  

RASHTRIYA UCHATAR SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RUSA) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.5 The Committee appreciated the launching of the RUSA and hopes that the objectives of the 
Scheme to help the State Universities and colleges to upgrade themselves both in terms of 
academics and physical infrastructure would go a lo ng way in improving the standard of Higher 
Education in the country. The Committee, however, expresses its concern over declining allocation 
and reduction at RE stage to this scheme since its inception as well as under-utilization. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that this scheme m ay be implemented more efficiently and 
enhanced allocations may be made for achieving desired results. 
Action Taken 
 
(RUSA) 
 -  Funding to states under RUSA is made on the basis of critical appraisal of State Higher 
Education Plans (SHEPs). These plans describe each state’s strategy to address issues of equity, 
access and excellence in higher education. Institut ions are required to prepare “Institutional 
Development Plans” (IDP). These IDPs are then aggre gated to form a SHEP. All funding under 
the RUSA is norm based and future grants are outcom e dependent.  Certain academic, 
administrative and governance reforms are a precond ition for states to receive funding under 
RUSA. The prerequisites include Creation of a State  Higher Education Council, Preparation of 
State Higher Education Plan, State funding commitme nt – share and timeliness, Filling faculty 
positions, Academic and Examination reforms, Governance and administrative reforms, Affiliation 
reforms etc. RUSA fund release is linked to willingness to implement these reforms.  
RUSA implementation started with centre: state shar ing pattern of 65:35 for general category 
states and 90:10 for special category states (North -Eastern States, Sikkim, J&K, Himachal Pradesh 
and Uttarakhand) & UTs. The Central funding in Gene ral Category States has been modified to 
60:40 and to 100% for UTs. This has also led to some delay in release of funds.  
The total funds allocated and released under RUSA, with the approval of the Project Approval 
Board is Rs. 6540.86 Crore and Rs. 820.81 Crore res pectively . The amount approved by the PAB 
has not been released in total on account of the fa ct that the fund released is in instalment and that  
approval to States and UTs in some components are c onditional (e.g. requiring submission of 
complete DPRs, enactment of University Act etc.).  

The BE during the financial year 2015-2016 is Rs.11 55 Crores and funds to the extent of 43% of 
BE have already been released this year as on 30 th  November, 2015.  States have started 
submitting proposals under the entire gamut of comp onents of RUSA. These are being considered 
expeditiously by the PAB.  It is expected that the BE will be fully utilized this year. 
NATIONAL MISSION ON TEACHERS AND TEACHING 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
5.2 The Committee feels that although quite delayed , this is a step in the right direction. The 
Committee would appreciate if an assessment of vaca ncies of teachers in all categories is made 
across the country on a priority basis. Similarly, a critical review of recruitment procedure along 
with eligibility criteria being followed by differe nt university authorities also needs to be made in 
consultation with all the stakeholders. This should  be followed by corrective measures as and 
where required by the concerned authorities. The Committee also feels that teacher-training is 
one of the most important area which should be give n due priority if quality education is to 
be imparted to the students. The Committee recommen ds that the Department should take 
immediate steps in this regard. 
Action Taken 
The Para 5.1 and 5.2 under para V; are about  Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya National 
Mission on Teachers and Teaching (PMMMNMTT). In Par a 5.2, it has been mentioned that an 
assessment of vacancies of teachers in all categori es on a priority basis be made across the country 
and a critical review of recruitment procedure alon g with eligibility criteria being followed by 
different university authorities be also made in consultation with all stakeholders.  
In this regard, it is being mentioned that an asses sment of the vacancies of teachers in school 
education is done on yearly basis in the District I nformation System for Education(DISE) Report 
of MHRD. Also, similar assessments are made in the Higher Education sector. All the concerned 
will be asked to compile data consisting of latest figures in respect of vacancies of teachers across 
the country and also to review recruitment procedur e along with eligibility criteria being followed 
by different university authorities in consultation with all stakeholders.  
IITs 
Recommendations/Observations 
6.16 The Committee observes that the country has do ne extremely well in the field of 
Information Technology, which has become an importa nt tool in the development of manpower 

for various areas of knowledge. The Indian Informat ion Technology manpower has emerged as a 
strong and credible force which is now highly accla imed by the global information 
technology/services industry. The Committee underst ands that in order to provide manpower of 
global standards in the information technology to c ater to the needs of emerging areas of 
knowledge and services, such premier institutes in information technology are an essential pre-
requisite. There is also no denying the fact that t he IT sector has a positive impact on our economy 
and governance which in turn has improved immensely  every aspect of our society, be it 
education, health facilities, agricultural innovati ons or service sector. The Committee welcomes 
the objective behind the proposed institutions but feels concerned about certain visible gaps 
noticed in respect of the status of existing centrally funded IIITs, mode of setting up the new IIITs,  
their governance structure and likely impact on all  the stakeholders that needs to be corrected 
urgently. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The four Centrally Funded IIITs , namely, IIT Allah abad, IIIT&M Gwalior, IIIT D &M 
Kancheepuram and IIIT D&M Jabalpur have been brough t under the ambit of IIIT Act, 2014 
which came into effect from, 5.1.2015. Through this  Act, these 04 CFIIITs have been declared as 
Institutes of National importance.   
As per the IIIT Act, 2014, the following shall be t he authorities of the Institutes :- (i)Board of 
Governors (ii) Senate (iii) Finance Committee (iv) Building & Works Committee (v) Research 
Council and (vi) such authorities as may be declared by the Statutes . 
The Board of Governors of each Institute shall be the Principal executive body of the Institute. 
New IIITs-PPP 
 :- The Scheme of Setting up 20  IIITs in Not for P rofit Public-Private-Partnership 
Mode (N-PPP) was approved by the Union Cabinet on 7 .12.2010. As on date approvals have been 
given for setting up of 19 new IIITs in PPP Mode.  12 IIITs have become functional with the 
commencement of Academic Session in 05 IIITs in 2013-14 ; in 03 IIITs in 2014-15 and in 5 IIITs 
in 2015-16 .  IIITs-PPP are registered as Societies  and are governed by a Memorandum of 
Associations and Rules of the IIIT Society.  The Au thorities of the Institute are the Board of 
Governors, Chairperson of the BoG, Director of the Institute,  Senate , Research Council, Finance 
Committee ,Registrar of the Institute  and such aut horities as appointed or nominated by the Board 
. 

The Board is to generally pursue and carry out the objects of the Society as set forth in the MoA 
and in doing so shall follow and implement the poli cy directions and guidelines laid down by the 
Government of India.  
The Board exercises all administrative and financia l powers of the Society including those vested 
or conferred on it by or under any statute subject,  nevertheless in respect of expenditure, to such 
limitations as the Central Government, from time to time, impose.  
There are ample representation of Industry Partners , State Government and Central Government 
on the BoGs of IIITs -PPP.  
 
FACULTY POSITION 
  
Recommendations/Observations 
 
7.13 The Committee would like to have an evaluation  report, if any, about the quality and 
standard of Ph.D holders across the country to unde rstand why suitable candidates are difficult to 
find for the vacant positions. May be we need to re orient the entire system of evaluation of Ph.D 
and other research scholars. 
 
Action Taken 
 
While no dedicated study for assessing the quality of Ph.D research in the Country has 
been undertaken, as informed by the University Gran ts Commission (UGC), the UGC Review 
Committee constituted by the Central Government in July, 2014 has observed that there is a 
Mushroom growth of sub-standard Ph.D degrees.  The report of the Committee further observed 
that the race for obtaining Ph.D degree has now bec ome a necessity in view of the minimum 
qualification for recruitment at entry level and requirements for promotion.   
In order to serve national purpose of maintaining s tandards of Higher Education and to bring 
uniformity in the procedure of award of M.Phil. / Ph.D. Degree, UGC has framed UGC (Minimum 
Standard and Procedure for the awards of M.Phil/Ph. D. Degree), Regulation 2009. These 
Regulations have been notified in the Gazette of In dia dated 11th-17th July, 2009 and are 
available at UGC website 
www.ugc.ac.in  .  The UGC has written, on 6 th  July, 2015, to the Vice-
Chancellors of all Universities that it has come to the notice of the UGC that some Universities are 
hiring the services of the Supervisors who do not h appen to be the regular teachers of the 
Universities or its affiliated Post Graduate (PG) c olleges/ Institutes awarding the M.Phil/ Ph.D. 

degree. It has observed that this practice is in vi olation of UGC (Minimum standards and 
procedure for award of M.Phil/Ph.D. Degree) Regulat ions, 2009. The UGC has advised the Vice 
Chancellors that Universities shall allocate the su pervisor from amongst the regular faculty 
members in a department or its affiliated PG Colleg es/ institutes depending on the number of 
students per faculty member, the available speciali zation among the faculty supervisors and the 
research interest of the student. It has been furth er clarified by the UGC that any Ph.D. / M.Phil. 
degree awarded by a University under the supervisio n of a Supervisor who is not a faculty 
member of the University or its affiliated PG Colle ges/ Institutes would be in violation of UGC 
(Minimum standards and procedure for award of M.Phil./ Ph.D.) Regulations, 2009.  
 
SCOLARSHIP 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
8.6 The Committee observes that all these Schemes a re meant for providing an opportunity to 
students belonging to marginalized sections to get proper coaching so as to enable them to 
compete for higher studies and become eligible for teaching in higher educational institutions and 
for getting gainful employment in Central/States/pr ivate sector services. The objective behind all 
these Schemes is very laudable. The Committee can o nly emphasize that these schemes need to be 
administered more effectively to bring its benefit to the targeted beneficiaries. The Committee 
would like to have a status note on all these schemes. 
Action Taken 
 
The Status of schemes being administered by AICTE is given below. 
The Scholarship Scheme for Girls (PRAGATI) is an en deavour by AICTE to promote technical 
education at Degree and Diploma levels to a girl ch ild. The Scheme’s aim is to provide financial 
assistance to girls for advancement and participati on in Technical Education across India, in order 
to empower them with the Knowledge, skills and self  confidence necessary to participate fully in 
development process of the Nation. Under this schem e, 4000 girl children will be benefited every 
year with the restriction that only one girl child per family where family income is less than   Rs. 6  
lakhs/annum will be considered. The candidates are selected on merit at the qualifying 
examination. The scheme envisages to provide Rs.30,  000/- or tuition fees or at actual whichever 
is less and Rs.2000 per month for 10 months as a co ntingency allowance in a year until the 
duration of the course. The student should be admit ted to a AICTE approved Technical 

Institution’s/University Department Imparting Techn ical Education in Diploma/Undergraduate 
degree level in the 1 st  year. The numbers of beneficiaries for 2014-15 are  740 and the amount 
disbursed towards scholarship is Rs.252.28 Lakhs. 
In addition, the Council also offers relaxation  of Rs.1.5 Lakhs in processing fee for setting up new 
Technical Institution offering Technical Program at  Degree/Diploma/PG Diploma & PG level 
exclusively for women, the number of such instituti ons exclusively for women is shown in 
Annexure-1. 
All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) h as launched a Scholarship on 11.11.2014 
named  “SAKSHAM” for differently abled students to provide financial assistances to 
encourage/promote technical education at Degree and  Diploma levels to differently abled students 
across India. In order to empower them with the knowledge, skills and self confidence necessary to 
participate fully in development process of the Nat ion. The Scheme support 1,000 differently – 
abled students to pursue technical education in an year. The amount of Scholarship is tuition fee of 
Rs. 30,000/- or at actual whichever is less and Rs.  2000 per month for 10 months as a contingency 
allowance in a year until the duration of the cours e. This scholarship is for those differently abled 
students whose family income is less than Rs 6 lakh  per annum. The candidates are selected on 
merit at the qualifying examination.  
The students should be admitted to a AICTE approved  Technical Institution’s/University 
Department imparting Technical Education in  Diplom a/Undergraduate degree level in the 1 
st  year 
through centralized admission process of the State/ Central Government. The number of 
beneficiaries for the scheme for 2015-16 are 38 and the amount disbursed is Rs.10.38 Lakhs. 
UGC fellowships and scholarships are awarded at the  undergraduate and postgraduate level and 
also comprise research fellowships, postdoctoral fe llowships and research awards. The objective 
of these awards is to promote research and excellen ce along with addressing concerns of access 
and equity.   The status of UGC fellowships and sch olarships as on 31 st  March, 2015 is at 
Annexure 2.  
The UGC has reported that the DBT has been started under its following schemes viz. (i) Junior 
Research Fellowship (JRF)/ Senior Research Fellowsh ip (SRF) in Science, Humanities and Social 
Sciences; (ii) Post Doctoral Fellowship for Women; (iii) Emeritus Fellowship; (iv) Postgraduate 
(PG) scholarship for university rank holders; (v) Swami Vivekanand Single Girl Child Scholarship 
for Research in Social Sciences; (vi) Dr. S. Radhak rishnan post-doctoral fellowship in humanities 

and social sciences; (vii) Dr. D.S. Kothari post-doctoral fellowship Research Fellowship in science 
for meritorious students (viii) Rajiv Gandhi Nation al Fellowship for Scheduled Castes (SC) 
candidates; (ix) Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship f or Scheduled Tribe (ST) candidates; (x) 
Maulana Azad National Fellowship for minority stude nts; (xi) National Fellowship for students of 
Other Backward Classes (OBCs); (xii) Post Doctoral Fellowship for SC/ST candidates; (xiii) PG 
scholarship for professional courses for SC/ST cand idates; (xiv) PG Indira Gandhi scholarship for 
single girl child; (xv) Basic Scientific Research ( BSR) fellowship; and (xvi) Ishan Uday special 
scholarship scheme for North Eastern Region. 
The UGC has reported that it is taking efforts to i mplement DBT scheme for fellowship/ 
scholarship selections undertaken in the past and also in the remaining schemes.  
Aadhar is not mandatory for the disbursal of  schol arship, however, where Aadhar seeded bank 
account is provided, the scholarships/fellowships a re disbursed through Aadhar Payment Bridge 
(APB).The UGC has reported that Rs. 6.86 crores hav e been disbursed till date under its 
fellowship/ scholarship schemes through the APB. 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
9.2 The Committee appreciated the efforts of the De partment to enhance the skill and 
employability of the youth. The Committee pointed o ut that in order to leverage the demographic 
dividend that India enjoys, we need to ensure that our youth are empowered with right skills to 
meet the challenges of the knowledge based economy.  The Committee recommends that some 
strategies for the skill development like skills re quirement assessment, Diploma Education, lateral 
entry from ITIs to Diploma programmes, Industrial t raining finishing schools and Special 
Manpower Development Programme should be taken up. The Committee points out this area 
should be accorded the highest priority as it will impact our development strategies in other areas 
as well. Skill Development, in fact is not confined  to one Ministry/Department; many of them 
including State Governments and Private Sector woul d be involved. Although we have a separate 
Ministry for coordination in this regard, the Commi ttee hopes that such schemes are implemented 
with proper synergy/coordination without any duplication of efforts/ resources. 
  

Action Taken 
 
The University Grants Commission is implementing th ree schemes namely; Community 
Colleges (CC), B.Voc. degree programme and DeenDaya lUpadhyay KAUSHAL Kendras for 
imparting skill based vocational courses at certifi cate, diploma, advanced diploma degree and 
masters as well as research level. The UGC has fram ed the guidelines for curricular aspects, 
assessment criteria and credit system for skill bas ed vocational system through which road to 
understanding is paved with the clearly prescribed assessment criteria and requirements of skills 
competency for specific certificate, diploma or deg ree level programmes. It is also indicated that 
the skill component of the programmes will be asses sed by the concerned sector skills council and 
the same will be certified for being qualified if f ound fit towards skills abilities this will lead to  
requisite skill credits. The general education comp onent is being assessed as per the university / 
collegiate education norms. The courses offered und er UGC schemes of Community Colleges / 
B.Voc degree programme / DDU KAUSHAL Kendras have p rovision for multiple entry and exit 
options. The students who have certificate / diplom a / advanced diploma etc awarded by a 
recognized university / board corresponding to skil l competency of NSQF level 4 / 5 / or 6 have 
the option for lateral entry to these programmes to  next higher level as per national Skills 
Qualification Framework (NSQF) providing vertical mobility.  
The knowledge-Skill mixed programmes of different d urations under NSQF are available in CC / 
B.Voc / KAUSHAL institutions depending on the need of industry leading to a certification at 
various levels of NSQF (4-10) starting from certifi cate to research degree Level. This would 
enable the graduates completing B.Voc. to make a me aningful participation in accelerating India’s 
economy by gaining appropriate employment, becoming  entrepreneurs and creating appropriate 
knowledge. The private / self financing institution s recognized by UGC can also run such 
programmes without financial support from UGC.   
The Ministry has put up in place institutional arra ngement for coordinating skill development with 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship.       
The ITI courses may, if the Govt. feel fit, be decl ared equivalent to class 10 and may be aligned to 
NSQF Level 2 for entry to polytechnic programmes of  three years which may further be aligned to 
NSQF level 3, 4 and 5 corresponding to first year, second year and third year of diploma courses 

offered by polytechnics enabling the vertical mobility through lateral entry to direct second year of 
B.Voc degree programme. 
In order to inculcate employable skills among stude nts, the AICTE has implemented the following 
Schemes: 
(1) SAMVAY  
Under National Skill Qualification Frame (NSQF) Ski ll Assessment Matrix for Vocational 
Advancement of youth (SAMVAY) to promote lateral an d vertical mobility of students has been 
made. The Credit Framework allows the horizontal an d vertical mobility of students through the 
National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF). 
(2) 
Employability Enhancement Training Programme (EETP)     
AICTE is implementing Employability Enhancement Tra ining Programme (earlier Finishing 
Schools) with a vision to enhance employment amongs t fresh engineering graduates, imparting 
business and soft skills for sustained performance,  career success and to meet growing industry 
demand.   Under the scheme Under Graduate Engineeri ng students of AICTE approved Colleges 
are being trained in around 26 BSNL Training Centre s on state of art Telecom equipment for 
which AICTE has allotted seats.   First batch of 20 14-15 students have completed training under 
the Silver Certificate, whereas students admitted i n 2013-14 have completed and are enrolled for 
Platinum Certificate. 
(3) National Employability Enhancement Mission (NEEM):  
AICTE is implementing National Employability Enhancement Mission (NEEM) with the objective 
to offer on the job  practical training to enhance employability of a person either pursuing his or 
her graduation / diploma in any technical or non-te chnical stream or have discontinued studies of 
degree or diploma course to increase their employab ility.  AICTE has also issued notification in 
this regard for registration of NEEM Agent and elig ibility criteria on 15 th  April, 2013 to place at 
least 10,000 students per year in the registered co mpanies or registered industries for the purpose 
of providing training under the objective of NEEM. All India Council for Technical Education 
(AICTE) is having All India Board of Under-Graduate /Post-Graduate Education.   The new 
programmes/ courses are being added from time to ti me based on the recommendations of these 
Boards. 

 
OPEN AND DISTANCE LEARNING 
 
10.5 The Committee is also aware of the fact that t he primary mandate of IGNOU is 
introduction and promotion of Open University and d istance education systems. However, there 
are several provisions that do not restrain the Uni versity from using classroom engagement as a 
means to fulfil its mandate. The Committee has been  informed that there are as many as 164 
programmes in the face-to-face mode on IGNOU campus  and 20 at partner institutions across the 
country. The Committee would like to point out that  the Scheme of Community Colleges that was 
launched in July, 2009, had run for about two years  only and has since been scrapped. It was too 
short a time to take a final view about the status of the Scheme, especially in view the level of pre-
introduction exercise undertaken by the University.  The rational approach would have been to 
suggest measures for strengthening the Scheme. The Committee strongly feels that the High 
Powered Committee had nowhere recommended scrapping  the Scheme; instead, it had 
recommended restructuring of the Scheme by having a n appropriate statutory mechanism for the 
Scheme along with certain other modifications. The only restriction placed by the Committee was 
that no new colleges should be admitted to the Sche me of Community Colleges till such 
restructuring. 
Action Taken 
 
 The Scheme of the Community College (CCs) of IGNOU  was started during the year 2009. 
620 Community Colleges across the country were regi stered under the Community College 
Scheme of IGNOU through MoUs. 88 out of these CCs w ere deregistered in 2011 as they were 
inactive. Out of the remaining 532 CCs, 253 were th e active CCs with students enrolled in 1568 
programmes having 12,639 courses on offer. 
2. A lot of complaints were filed by the various st ake holders in the country regarding 
implementation of the Community College of IGNOU. A ccordingly, IGNOU constituted a High 
Power Committee to look into the details and issues  regarding the Community College Scheme 
and other similarly placed schemes of IGNOU. The High Power Committee accordingly submitted 
its report to the University which was discussed in  the 113 
th  meeting of the Board of Management 
(BOM) of IGNOU held on 31.05.2012 and resolved that  Community College/Convergence 
Scheme be subjected to a thorough time-bound review . Till then all actions be taken to be kept in 

abeyance. The Vice-Chancellor may constitute the review Committee(s) to complete the task in six 
months and till then all such schemes be kept in abeyance. 
3. In the 117 th  meeting of the BOM of IGNOU held on 05.01.2013, the Board resolved to take 
a lenient view for issuance of certificates to a select category of students enrolled and complete the 
programme under Community College Scheme of the university under up to January, 2012. 
4. IGNOU in its 118 th  meeting of the BOM held on 15.06.2014, on the basi s of the finding of 
the Review Committee, decided to discontinue the ex isting Community College Scheme. The 
BOM also recommended for introduction of a new Comm unity College Scheme through a 
separated Statute/Ordinance. 
5. Since there was an environment of unrest amongst  students who have enrolled and 
completed their programmes under Community College Scheme of IGNOU (face-to-face mode) 
through MoUs/MoA, the Ministry intervened keeping t he interest of the students in forefront and 
accordingly requested to IGNOU to do the following  to take care of the future of the students and 
complete the necessary action so that the students enrolled up to January, 2012 under community 
College Scheme immediately appear for the examinati on and the successful candidates receive 
their Degree/Diploma/Certificates: 
(i) To declare result and complete the process of i ssuing of certificates to all the students for 
whom the BOM of IGNOU resolved in its 117 
th  meeting held on 05.01.2013. 
(ii) As resolved in the 118 th  BOM meeting held on 15.06.2013, to notify the exam ination 
schedule for those students who have already comple ted their courses/programmes and are 
waiting to appear for the examinations. 
(iii) Frame a scheme for skill development with cer tification with an annual intake capacity of 
five lakh students that is compliant with the Natio nal Skill Qualification Framework 
(NSQF). 
6. IGNOU vide its letter dated 14.10.2014 has infor med that the Screening Committee 
constituted by the BOM of the university recommende d for declaration of result of 146 
Community College (118 th  BOM) and subsequently added 19 colleges (121 st  BOM). Out of the 
59,860 students appeared the examination conducted by Community Colleges, 39,012 students 
successfully completed the programme and their grad e card and provisional certificates have 
already been issued by the university. 
7. A D.O. letter dated 07.11.2014 from the Ministry  has been issued to the Vice-Chancellor, 
IGNOU to expedite the whole process of moderation o f question papers and results involving 
UGC and AICTE in the areas where IGNOU has no domai n knowledge and subject expertise so 

that the left out students could write their examin ations and in-turn the results are declared by the 
university and finally this long pending issue is closed once for all. 
8.    In addition to above for issuance of Degrees/ certificates/Diplomas to defence and paramilitary 
forces, the Indian Army, Indian Navy and Indian Air  Force had signed MoUs between 2009 and 
2011 with IGNOU for recognizing the in-service trai ning conducted at their respective training 
centres for the award of certificates, diplomas and  associate degrees by IGNOU.  Accordingly, 
4.56 lakh jawans and 49,634 airmen were enrolled in  the scheme, named Gyandeep for Army and 
Akashdeep for Air Force respectively.  Naval office rs were not allowed to register for the scheme 
as IGNOU unilaterally stopped the scheme in 2012. 
9.    For expediting and resolving the pending issu es of grade cards and provisional certificates of 
Air Force and Army personnel, a meeting was held on  18 
th  June, 2015 in the Chamber of Hon’ble 
HRM with the Official of IGNOU and Army in the matt er.  As follow up to the above mentioned 
meeting of Hon’ble HRM in the matter, Prof.Nageshwa r Rao, VC (I/c) vide his letter dated 6 th  
August, 2015 has informed that out of 4.56 lakhs Ar my Personnel who were enrolled under 
Gyandeep Scheme, 2,78,807 Certificate/Diplomas/Degr ees have already been awarded to Army 
personnels. Further IGNOU has already awarded 49,61 5 Certificate/Diplomas/Degree to the Air 
Force Personnel. 
10. As regard the remaining Certificate/Diplomas/De grees, he has informed that the same shall be 
done upon the receipt of the details on the marks d ata from Indian Army side for which Army has 
informed to IGNOU that they may take 2-3 months time. 
 

CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.5 The Committee observes that there is a huge gap  between the projected demands and actual 
allocations during the Twelfth Plan period i.e. 201 2-17, and with only two years left, it would not 
be possible to cover this gap. Moreover, the reduce d allocation of funds does not match with the 
objectives of Twelfth Plan regarding expansion and growth of Higher Education Sector in the 
Country and that this is also in contrast with the main objective of the improvement of access 
alongwith equity and excellence in Higher Education. The allocation needs to be enhanced. 
Action Taken 
 
The allocation of budget for Central Government Dep artments have been decided by the 
Ministry of Finance on the basis of expenditure tre nd  and the absorptive capacity, existing 
commitments, available fiscal resource position, av ailable fiscal space and demand of various 
Department and sharing pattern between the Central Government and State Government as 
applicable under the schemes.  
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.8 The Committee, in view of the declining allocat ions combined with underutilization of 
budget allocations, expresses its serious concerns and recommends that the Department should 
reconsider/review its overall mechanism in so far a s the implementation of various schemes is 
concerned and bring in new ideas. This is high time  to show high achievements in the 
growth/development of Higher Education Sector, if I ndia were to compete with advanced 
Countries in this regard. We have to achieve equity , access and excellence in Higher Education to 
overcome the existing inequality prevailing in the Country as well as to bridge the urban/rural 
divide. The Committee, however, also recommends to the Government to take seriously the 
growth and development of this sector and increase budgetary allocations keeping them closer to 
the Twelfth Plan projections made by the Department  of Higher Education as they are serving the 
needs of the society. 

Action Taken 
 
Various schemes and programmes being implemented in  HE Bureau and the UGC are 
constantly reviewed to ensure that the envisaged ou tcomes are achieved along with judicious 
utilization of funds. 
Moreover, the reduction is due to the fact that the re has been a substantial enhancement of direct 
devolution to the State Government. Government of I ndia has rationalized the Scheme provisions 
to ensure that total outlays for the individual schemes do not suffer. 
 
Comments of the Committee (Paras 2.5 & 2.8) 
 
 The Committee does not agree with the reply of the  Department.  The Committee 
feels that Department has not been spending the all ocated amount on the schemes launched 
by them.  The underutilization of the funds allocat ed to the Department has led to 
undermining the projected needs of the Higher Educa tion Sector, leading to decrease in the 
budgetary allocation for the Department.  The Commi ttee recommends that the Department 
should implement the various schemes earnestly.    The Committee also acknowledge that 
now the Government has substantially enhanced the d irect devolution to the state 
governments so that individual schemes do not suffe r on account of funds constraints.  Here 
it becomes imperative upon the Department to active ly pursue with the State Governments 
for proper utilization of funds and periodically ge t the feedback in respect of those schemes.  
Committee would like to apprised of the mechanism h ow the funds are allocated and utilized 
by the mode of direct devolution to the State Gover nments and in what manner the Central 
Government Department supervises the progress of the scheme. 
 
SETTING UP OF NEW IITs, IIMs, IISERs, NITs and IIITs 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
6.7 The Committee notes with serious concern the de lay in shifting of the new IITs to their 
own buildings. As informed, the acquisition of land s for new IITs is at various stages and some of 
these lands are likely to be required at an early d ate. The Committee is of the view that since the 
brand name of IITs carries international standards and this standard and brand name may be 
maintained at any cost. The Committee, therefore, r ecommends that all out efforts be made to 

expedite the land acquisition and construction of n ew buildings so that academic activities could 
be started and carried out in organized and focussed manner. 
Action Taken 
The Scheme for establishment of the 8 new IITs was approved by the Union Cabinet on 
17.07.2008. There has been delays in handing over o f land by the respective State Governments, 
which is evident from the fact that three of the 8 new IITs got the land during first quarter of 2011,  
while two of them got it as late as the middle of 2 012. As a result, construction of the campuses 
was delayed, which ultimately delayed their shifting to permanent campuses. 
However, as of now, IIT-Patna has shifted into its Permanent Campus on 25.07.2015. IIT- 
Gandhinagar, IIT-Bhubaneswar, IIT-Mandi, and IIT-Hy derabad have partially shifted into its 
permanent campus whereas the construction of perman ent campus in respect of remaining three 
IITs namely IIT- Jodhpur, IIT-Indore and IIT-Ropar are in full swing. The likely dates by which 
these three Institutes will shift to their permanen t campuses are September, 2016 March, 2016 and 
April, 2017 respectively. 
The delay in construction of permanent campus was p rimarily due to delayed handing over of land 
by the respective State Governments, as well as fac tors like environmental clearances, agitation by 
local farmers etc. 
The Ministry has been monitoring the progress of th e new IITs at all levels through regular 
meetings, video conferencing and visits to the Inst itutes. In order to ensure that such delays do not 
recur during the 12 
th  Plan Period, especially in case of the five new II Ts(Jammu, Chattisgarh, Goa, 
Andhra Pradesh and Kerala) as announced during Budg et, 2014-15, a principled stand has been 
taken to start the academic session only in respect  of those institutes whose permanent and 
temporary sites have been identified and approved by the competent authority.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken up by th e Ministry in shifting the IITs 
into their permanent campuses.  The Committee re-it erates that since IITs are one of the 
premier institutions of the Country, the Ministry s hould continue to press the concerned 
authorities to expedite the process of shifting of IITs to permanent campuses from partially 
shifted condition. The Committee also recommends th at sites for five new IITs announced in 
2014-15 should be taken up on priority basis and la nd should be acquired to start the 
academic section of these institutions and set up their campuses at the earliest. 

IIM 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
6.10 The Committee, like in the case of IITs reiter ates its recommendations that all out steps be 
taken on priority basis to acquire land for these i nstitutes of higher learning so that they start 
functioning from their campuses at the earliest. 
Action Taken 
The land for permanent campus in respect of RGIIM S hillong, IIM Rohtak, IIM Trichy, 
IIM Kashipur and IIM Udaipur is under the possessio n of the Institutes and construction is already 
going on.  All these Institutes are in the advanced  stage of construction of permanent campus and 
are expected to shift to their permanent campuses b y the year 2016-17.   The land for IIM Raipur 
has also been handed over to the Institute and the work is expected to be awarded soon.  The land 
for IIM Ranchi has been identified by the State Gov ernment of Jharkhand and a Site Selection 
Committee will soon visit the area to assess the su itability of the land for the Institute.  So far as  
the land for the new IIMs opened in 2015-16 is conc erned, the Governments of the States 
concerned have already offered land and physical handing over of these lands will take some time.  
 
IISERs 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
6.14 The Committee while welcoming the setting up o f new IISERs expresses its concern on the 
delay in construction of permanent campuses where t hey would shift. The Committee observed 
that these IISERs have been envisaged not only as i nstitutes of higher education but also to carry 
out research in various fields which would bring ob vious benefits to the country. Any delay, 
therefore, would impact the research activities adv ersely as it requires not only facilities like labs , 
libraries and other related infrastructure but also an appropriate ambience to do so. The Committee 
notes that the Department of Higher Education and t he Government should work for this purpose 
with synergy to get best of the results. 
 
  

Action Taken 
 
The delay in construction of permanent campus of th e IISERs was mainly on account of 
delay in handing over of land by the State Governme nts concerned.  However, the construction of 
permanent campus of the IISERs is expected to be co mpleted by the 12 
th  plan period except for 
IISER, TVM, which is expected to be completed by 20 18-19.  Three IISERs, namely IISER 
Bhopal, IISER Pune and IISER Mohali have shifted to their own campus, while IISER Kolkata has 
shifted most of its operations to its own campus an d is expected to fully shift to its campus by the 
next academic year 2016-17.   Meanwhile, the approv al of Cabinet has also been obtained for the 
revised cost estimates of the five IISERs at Rs.4788 crore.   
 
Comments of the Committee (Paras 6.10 and 6.14) 
 
 The Committee is not happy with the reply of Gover nment regarding the setting up of 
new IIMs and IISERs.  The Committee would like to p oint out that both IIMs and IISERs 
are world renowned institutions and the country's b est minds study in these institutions.  
The Committee feels that the Department would take up the setting of these new institutions 
exigently and see that delay does not adversely aff ect the teaching, research and other 
facilities at these Institutions. The Committee is also of the view that the intake capacity of 
most of the old institutions remains stagnant.  The  expansion of IITs and IIMs is very 
important for the development of these institutions .  The Committee hopes that IITs and 
IIMs will enhance the seats as well as expand the f aculty in periodical basis and 
accommodate more students.   
  
FACULTY POSITION 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
7.11 The Committee has been voicing its concern fro m time to time on the acute shortage of 
faculty in higher educational institutions across t he country. Right from well established Central 
Universities to those set up recently, State univer sities as well as private universities, premier 
institutions like IITs, NITs and IIMs, this problem  has emerged as the biggest handicap for the 
development and growth of Higher Education vis-a-vis  maintaining the quality of education. 
Situation continues to be grim with no improvement foreseen in the near future. The Committee 
points out that the availability of adequate and qu alified faculty is a pre-requisite for quality 

education. The Committee appreciates the steps take n by the Department like increase in the 
retirement age up to 65 years, improvement of salar y structures, etc. The Committee feels that 
there can be only three possibilities, either our y oung students are not attracted towards the 
teaching profession or the recruitment process is a  prolonged involving too many procedural 
formalities or the quality of candidates in not upt o the required level. In either case, the 
Department being the nodal authority for higher edu cation sector has to take a proactive 
role so as to expedite the filling up of the existing vacancies.  
 
Action Taken 
 
In IIMs, the age of retirement of faculty is alread y 65 years. The salary structure of IIMs is 
also one of the best amongst the Government academi c institutions. The quality of education in 
IIMs is one of the best in the country and they con stantly endeavour to keep their quality of 
education and improve it.  
 Keeping in mind the fact that the field of higher education is currently facing an acute shortage of 
teachers at all levels and also being aware of the decision of the central government to expand the 
base of college and university education significan tly throughout the country, the 
UGC Regulations on Minimum Qualifications for Appoi ntment of Teachers and Other Academic 
Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for  the Maintenance of Standard in Higher 
Education, 2010 has extended the age of superannuat ion to 65 years for teachers in University and 
College across the country. 
 Ministry of Human Resource Development and Univers ity Grants Commission have repeatedly 
written to Central Universities to expedite filling  of vacancies of teachers and are continuously 
monitoring the progress. The progress has also been  discussed in the Conference of Vice-
Chancellors of the Central Universities held on 4th  – 5th February, 2015 and Visitor’s Conference 
on 4th -6th November, 2015. Visitor’s nominees have  also been provided to all Central 
Universities for Selection Committees for teachers, to expedite the selection process. 
 
The UGC has allowed the University to re-employ sup erannuated teachers for a maximum 
period of five years, i.e. up to 70 years against s anctioned vacant post, if such posts are not 
filled up by regular candidates. 
Intensive efforts are being made to attract talente d, bright and qualified young men and women to 
college and University jobs. The entry point incent ives have been substantially increased. The 

UGC Regulations, 2010 has prescribed norms for impr ovement in service conditions for the new 
entrant, in terms of better working and leave condi tions, career advancement prospects, retirement 
benefits etc. 
The Central Government has also recommended the con stitution of the UGC pay review 
committee to the Department of Expenditure.  
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 The Committee has repeatedly been voicing its conc ern on the shortage of faculty in 
higher educational institutions in the country.  Th e Committee notes the re-employment of 
teachers for a period of five years till the age of  70 years as a temporary measure, if such 
posts are not filled up by regular candidates.  The  shortage of faculty in the higher 
educational institutes is also affecting the qualit y of education being imparted in these 
institutions.  The Committee would like to highligh t that this perennial shortage of faculty 
can only be addressed if there is an increase in nu mber of research fellowships and also 
improvement in service condition and increase in re muneration for new entrants.  The 
Committee recommends that the Government needs to take urgent steps to address this issue 
within a definite time frame and also direct the UGC to submit a report on this matter. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
7.12 The Committee also feels that to tackle the sh ortage of faculty in the Higher Educational 
Institutions (HEIs) there should be an increase in the number of research fellowships and new 
schemes for teaching assistantship should be introd uced. The Committee further points out that 
there should be appropriate linkages with S&T insti tutions, joint appointment of teachers and 
researchers as faculty and promotions should be lin ked with performance. The Committee further 
adds that the Department should take steps to enhan ce the prestige of the teaching profession. The 
Committee is also of the view that in case the stri cter norms for the appointment of faculty is 
coming in the way then UGC and other regulatory bod ies should review them on regular basis and 
bring in necessary changes so as to fill up the vacant posts at the earliest. 
Action Taken 
 
 The Government has appointed a Committee on 24 
th  July, 2015, under the Chairpersonship 
of Prof. Arun Nigavekar, former Chairman, Universit y Grants Commission (UGC) to examine the 

issues related to attracting and retaining talented  and quality manpower in the teaching profession.  
The Committee has following members, viz., Shri Sum it Bose, former Secretary, Government of 
India, Prof. Sunil Gupta, former Vice-Chancellor, H imachal Pradesh University, Prof.B. Thimme 
Gowda, Vice-Chancellor, Bangalore University, Prof.  Ashwini Kumar Mohapatra, Professor, 
Jawaharlal Nehru University and Shri S.S.Sandhu, Jo int Secretary, MHRD as Member-Convener. 
The Terms of Reference of the Committee are, namely ; (i) evaluation of the Academic 
Performance Indicator(API) Scheme as regards the en try point and Career Advancement of 
Teachers by taking into account its criticism and s uggest suitable improvements/alternatives, (ii) 
evaluation of Ph.D-NET qualifications for entry of teachers and to accordingly suggest a policy for 
selections and (iii) consideration of the problems and issues related to ad-hoc and contractual 
appointments in Central Universities and recommenda tions to resolve them. The Committee has 
already held regional level consultations and is li kely to submit its report in the first week of 
January, 2016. 
The Central Government has also recommended the con stitution of the UGC pay review 
committee to the Department of Expenditure. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
 The Committee appreciates the appointment of a Com mittee to examine the issues 
related to attracting and retaining talented and qu ality manpower in teaching profession. 
The Committee would further like to point out that attracting and retaining talented people 
to the teaching profession is the key to increase t he quality of education being imparted in 
Higher Education Institutions.  The Committee also appreciates the recommendation of the 
Government for the constitution of the UGC pay revi ew Committee, which is a right step for 
attracting quality manpower to the teaching profess ion.  However, the Committee feels that 
the Government should pursue the matter with the De partment of Expenditure for 
expediting the matter. 
 
 
OPEN AND DISTANCE LEARNING 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
10.6 The Committee reiterates its recommendations t o give DEC a statutory status to regulate 
distance learning in the country. The present arrangement of transferring DEC with UGC is neither 

practicable nor legally tenable. Therefore, the DEC I Bill should be brought before Parliament as 
soon as possible. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The draft Bill for the creation of an independent s tatutory regulatory authority to regulate 
open and distance learning (ODL) education in highe r Education System in the country is under 
consideration in the Ministry. 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of t he Ministry.  The Committee feels 
that Open and Distance Learning (ODL) education system is catering to a large section of the 
Country and a regulatory body should be there to ov ersee ODL education system.  The 
Committee again reiterates that the Distance Educat ion Council of India (DECI) Bill should 
be brought before Parliament without loosing further time. 
 
STRENGTHENING PRIVATE TECHNICAL INSTITUTIONS IN THE COUNTRY 
 
11.2 The Committee is concerned about the issues su ch as quality of faculty and its shortage in 
general and in private universities/institutions in  particular. Last year, the Committee had 
recommended that an assessment may be made about th e quality of faculty and its positions in 
private universities and institutions. However, the  Committee is at loss to find that no action has 
been taken in this regard so far. The only feedback  made available to the Committee is that UGC 
conducted a comprehensive review of 124 Deemed Univ ersities in 2009 which included 
availability of faculty and its quality. It was found that the faculty was inadequate in 17 Deemed to 
be Universities and needed further augmentation in 8 Universities. No status about the follow-up 
action taken has been shared with the Committee. Wi th regard to private Universities, the 
Committee has been given to understand that out of 53 such universities 17 were inspected by the 
Expert Committees of UGC and faculty status was par t of this exercise. No specific information 
about the availability of faculty has been given. W ith regard to technical institutions, the 
Committee has been simply informed that faculty nor ms are verified at the time of establishment 
of new institutions and thereafter, every year institutions are required to maintain the faculty norms 
on a self disclosure basis on the AICTE portal. The  Committee, therefore, stresses that apart from 
other parameters which have been required faculty p osition should be given more priority and that 

communication should be sent to States in this rega rd. The existing mechanism for this purpose, 
the Committee feels, needs revisiting for making it  more regular and effective leaving little scope 
for corruption/ favouritism. 
 
Action Taken 
 The Institutional faculty data for the last three y ears is enclosed herewith as per Annexure 
-3   of the ATN(Annexure of this Report) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee notes the faculty position as provid ed by the Department.  The 
Committee, prime concern is quality of the faculty is yet to be addressed.  The Committee 
observes that the reply of the Department is incomp lete in as much as it does not apprise the 
Committee of the steps taken/being taken by them fo r improving the existing mechanism for 
eliminating the favouritism and corruption in the p rocess of selection of faculty.  The 
Committee strongly feels unless strong measures are taken the menace would continue.  
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
14.2 There are large number of complaints about wor king of our Regulatory bodies in 
higher education, particularly UGC and AICTE, which  needs to be looked into seriously. 
They sometimes in some cases fail to ensure the pro bity and transparency expected from 
them. As a result, the people voice about sub-stand ard institutions getting necessary 
approval. This, the Committee feels, is the root ca use for declining standards in Higher 
Education. The Committee, therefore, emphasizes the  need for improving the working of 
such bodies by making them more responsive, accessible and transparent. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Complaints to be received and registered (in case o f Institution: only against AICTE 
approved institutions) for violation of prescribed norms and standards of AICTE. The 
complainants are requested to confirm genuineness of the signature and address and also providing 
supporting evidences in support of allegations with in stipulated time. All the verified complaints 
are placed before the Standing Complaint Scrutiny C ommittee (SCSC) headed by Chief Justice 
(Retd.) of a High Court, constituted by the Compete nt Authority of AICTE for scrutiny / 
examination.  The recommendations of SCSC along wit h the all relevant documents are sent to 

concerned bureau of AICTE for further processing th e complaint. The final decision on the 
complaint is taken by the SCSC after receipt of the  necessary Action Taken Report (ATR) / reply 
from the concerned bureau and after that necessary approval of competent authority is taken 
accordingly.  As per CVC guidelines anonymous / pse udonymous complaints are not dealt in 
Complaint Cell. 
Grievances relating to UGC and received through the  online grievance redressal portal 
pgportal.gov.in are being monitored rigorously. The  guidelines of the CVC regarding complaints 
related to the UGC are being strictly adhered. To m ake the functioning of the UGC more 
transparent, 16 scholarship schemes have been on bo arded the DBT platform. The UGC is taking 
up e-governance measures to make all its schemes online. 
 
Comments of the Committee (Para 14.2) 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of t he Department.  The Committee 
points out that UGC, AICTE, NAAC and NAB are regula tory bodies dealing with Higher 
Education in the Country, and there seems to be lac k of transparency in these Institutions, 
Higher Education in suffering in the Country.  The Committee would also like to point out 
that complaint related to these regulatory bodies s hould not just be monitored but action 
should also be taken to address these concerns.  Th e Committee appreciates the online 
redressal portal devised by the UGC and other regul atory bodies like AICTE, etc. should 
adopt such best practices not only for grievances a gainst AICTE approved Institutions but 
those against AICTE itself. 
  

CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
STRENGTHENING OF UGC AND AICTE 
Recommendations/Observations 
13.4 The Committee takes this opportunity to observ e that for quite some time, increasing 
number of students have been opting for technical a nd professional courses for future 
employability thus leaving the fields of social sci ences and humanities neglected. The Committee 
would appreciate if steps are initiated to attract students to the fields of social sciences and 
humanities also as these subjects address vital soc ial issues and public policies. Further, the 
Committee would like the Department to give more fo cus to the three language formula in the 
Education System as it would also strengthen the concept of National integration in our society. 
Action Taken 
An All India Council for Technical Education Review  Committee to restructure and 
strengthen the Technical Education sector was const ituted vide MHRD Note F.No.1-19/2014-TS-
II dated 22.10.2014 and the Committee has since submitted its report to the MHRD in April 2015.  
The comments on the report had been invited from th e stakeholders and the report of the 
Committee is under consideration of the Ministry. 
The Government had constituted a Review Committee h eaded by Dr. Hari Gautam, former 
Chairman, University Grants Commission (UGC) to rev iew the working of the UGC. The 
Committee has submitted its report.  
The report is being examined, in its entirety, in consultation with the Niti Aayog.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee wishes that findings of the said two  Committee, and action taken 
thereon be furnished to this Committee. 
 
***** 
 
  

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE  
 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
 The Committee does not agree with the reply of the  Department.  The Committee 
feels that Department has not been spending the all ocated amount on the schemes launched 
by them.  The underutilization of the funds allocat ed to the Department has led to 
undermining the projected needs of the Higher Educa tion Sector, leading to decrease in the 
budgetary allocation for the Department.  The Commi ttee recommends that the Department 
should implement the various schemes earnestly.    The Committee also acknowledge that 
now the Government has substantially enhanced the d irect devolution to the state 
governments so that individual schemes do not suffe r on account of funds constraints.  Here 
it becomes imperative upon the Department to active ly pursue with the State Governments 
for proper utilization of funds and periodically ge t the feedback in respect of those schemes.  
Committee would like to apprised of the mechanism h ow the funds are allocated and utilized 
by the mode of direct devolution to the State Gover nments and in what manner the Central 
Government Department supervises the progress of the scheme.            (Paras 2.5 & 2.8) 
 
SETTING UP OF NEW IITs, IIMs, IISERs, NITs and IIITs 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken up by th e Ministry in shifting the IITs 
into their permanent campuses.  The Committee re-it erates that since IITs are one of the 
premier institutions of the Country, the Ministry s hould continue to press the concerned 
authorities to expedite the process of shifting of IITs to permanent campuses from partially 
shifted condition. The Committee also recommends th at sites for five new IITs announced in 
2014-15 should be taken up on priority basis and la nd should be acquired to start the 
academic section of these institutions and set up their campuses at the earliest.  
                 (Para 6.7) 
  

IIM 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 The Committee is not happy with the reply of Gover nment regarding the setting up of 
new IIMs and IISERs.  The Committee would like to p oint out that both IIMs and IISERs 
are world renowned institutions and the country's b est minds study in these institutions.  
The Committee feels that the Department would take up the setting of these new institutions 
exigently and see that delay does not adversely aff ect the teaching, research and other 
facilities at these Institutions. The Committee is also of the view that the intake capacity of 
most of the old institutions remains stagnant.  The  expansion of IITs and IIMs is very 
important for the development of these institutions .  The Committee hopes that IITs and 
IIMs will enhance the seats as well as expand the f aculty in periodical basis and 
accommodate more students.             (Paras 6.10 and 6.14) 
 
 
FACULTY POSITION 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 The Committee has repeatedly been voicing its conc ern on the shortage of faculty in 
higher educational institutions in the country.  Th e Committee notes the re-employment of 
teachers for a period of five years till the age of  70 years as a temporary measure, if such 
posts are not filled up by regular candidates.  The  shortage of faculty in the higher 
educational institutes is also affecting the qualit y of education being imparted in these 
institutions.  The Committee would like to highligh t that this perennial shortage of faculty 
can only be addressed if there is an increase in nu mber of research fellowships and also 
improvement in service condition and increase in re muneration for new entrants.  The 
Committee recommends that the Government needs to take urgent steps to address this issue 
within a definite time frame and also direct the UGC to submit a report on this matter. 
                     (Para 7.11) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
 The Committee appreciates the appointment of a Com mittee to examine the issues 
related to attracting and retaining talented and qu ality manpower in teaching profession. 
The Committee would further like to point out that attracting and retaining talented people 
to the teaching profession is the key to increase t he quality of education being imparted in 
Higher Education Institutions.  The Committee also appreciates the recommendation of the 

Government for the constitution of the UGC pay revi ew Committee, which is a right step for 
attracting quality manpower to the teaching profess ion.  However, the Committee feels that 
the Government should pursue the matter with the De partment of Expenditure for 
expediting the matter.                                 (Para 7.12) 
  
OPEN AND DISTANCE LEARNING 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of t he Ministry.  The Committee feels 
that Open and Distance Learning (ODL) education system is catering to a large section of the 
Country and a regulatory body should be there to ov ersee ODL education system.  The 
Committee again reiterates that the Distance Educat ion Council of India (DECI) Bill should 
be brought before Parliament without loosing further time.        (Para 10.6) 
 
STRENGTHENING PRIVATE TECHNICAL INSTITUTIONS IN THE COUNTRY 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee notes the faculty position as provid ed by the Department.  The 
Committee, prime concern is quality of the faculty is yet to be addressed.  The Committee 
observes that the reply of the Department is incomp lete in as much as it does not apprise the 
Committee of the steps taken/being taken by them fo r improving the existing mechanism for 
eliminating the favouritism and corruption in the p rocess of selection of faculty.  The 
Committee strongly feels unless strong measures are taken the menace would continue. 
                    (Para 11.2)  
Comments of the Committee  
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of t he Department.  The Committee 
points out that UGC, AICTE, NAAC and NAB are regula tory bodies dealing with Higher 
Education in the Country, and there seems to be lac k of transparency in these Institutions, 
Higher Education in suffering in the Country.  The Committee would also like to point out 
that complaint related to these regulatory bodies s hould not just be monitored but action 
should also be taken to address these concerns.  Th e Committee appreciates the online 
redressal portal devised by the UGC and other regul atory bodies like AICTE, etc. should 

adopt such best practices not only for grievances a gainst AICTE approved Institutions but 
those against AICTE itself.       (Para 14.2) 
 
STRENGTHENING OF UGC AND AICTE 
 
 The Committee wishes that findings of the said two Committee, and action taken 
thereon be furnished to this Committee.              (Para 13.4) 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 