PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

THIRTEENTH REPORT
ON
THE PREVENTION OF APARTHEID IN SPORTS BILL, 1988

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st December, 1994)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 1994)

ata जयते

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

DECEMBER 1994/AGRAHAYANA 1916 (SAKA)


1, Composition OF THE COMMITTEE

2. Report

3. ANNEXURES

CONTENTS

Paces
(i)-(ii)
1-2

3-7


Peeper
छ + ०७ एउ ८ 8 ७ ०० :3 9 ७ + ० ७

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(1994-95)

. Shri P. Upendra —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
. Miss Saroj Khaparde

Shri O.P. Kohli

Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Md. Salim

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. I. 0. Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar’ Sen

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

. Dr. Vasant Pawar

. Prof. P.J. Kurien

. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

. Shri Datta Raghobaji meghe

. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
. Shri K.T. Vandayar

. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

. Shri Inder Jit

. Shri Anna Joshi

. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya


di)

37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer


REPORT

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Thirteenth Report of the Committee on the Prevention of
Apartheid in Sports Bill, 1988.

2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary: Standing
Committees, the Hon’ble Chairman Rajya Sabha referred the Bill to the Committee for
examination and report.

3. The Committee considered the Bill in two sittings. (Annexure-I).

4, The Committee at its meeting held on 20th December, 1994 adopted the Draft
Report on the Bill.

5. India has always been a fore-runner in the international campaign against apartheid,
i.e., any system of institutionalised racial segregation and discrimination for the purpose of
establishing and maintaining domination by one racial group of persons over another racial
group and systematically oppressing them, as was done in South Africa. India was actively
involved in the drafting of the International Convention Against Apartheid in Sports, which
was approved and adopted by the UN General Assembly. Like other member countries,
India was required to accede to and ratify the Convention, which came into force on 3
April, 1988.

6. Since some of the provisions of the convention impinged on the normal legal rights of
the sports persons and their associations, the Government of India decided to have a
legislation to equip itself with the legal powers necessary for giving effect to those provisions
and, therefore, brought this Bill, which was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 7 December,
1988.

7, The prevention of Apartheid in Sports Bill, 1988, seeks to prohibit sports bodies,
sports teams and individual sportspersons to have sports contacts and enter into contract
with a country practising apartheid. The Bill provides for refusing to give financial or other
assistance to sportspersons who participate in sports activities in a country practising
apartheid or with teams or sportspersons selected on the basis of apartheid. It provides for
restriction on access to national sports facilities to such teams and sportspersons. It also
provides for penalty of imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both, for violating the provisions
mentioned above.

8. The International Convention Against Apartheid in Sports, according to the
Statement of the objects and Reasons of the Bill, is a major step in the sustained efforts to
secure comprehensive boycott of the racist regime of South Africa, by the international
community, in respect of sports.

9. In view of the latest developments in South Africa, such as holding of elections based
on universal franchise after, dismantling the racist regime, series of cricket matches between

“Rajya Sabha Parhamentary Bulletin Part II, para 34730 dated the 28th September, 1994.


India and South Africa and participation by the latter in the World Cup Hockey
Championship held recently in Australia, the comments of the Ministry were invited by the
Committee on the following points:

1. whether the Government has acceded to the Convention;
2. whether the Bill still holds good; and

3. whether the Government wants to go ahead with the Bill in the light of the changed
scenario in South Africa.

10. The Ministry, in their note has informed the Committee that the matter was
examined by the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, in consultation with the
Department of Legal Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs. It was agreed that since
the Convention has lost its significance in the emerging new world scenario, no legislation
was necessary for implementing the provisions of the Convention any more. The note
further added “In our view, in the light of the latest developments in South Africa, it is not
necessary to proceed with the Bill”. A copy of the Ministry’s note is at Annexure-Il.

11. The Government, however, in the meantime had acceded to the Convention and the
Instrument of Accession was handed over to the UN on 12 December, 1990.

12. The Committee noted the latest developments and changes that have taken place in
South Africa, the fact that India has already acceded to the Convention, and the categorical
advice given by the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Youth
Affairs and Sports that it was not necessary to proceed with the Bill, recommends that the
Bill be withdrawn.

New Deut; P. UPENDRA
Se शक ३क Chairman,
20 December, 1994 Department-Related

Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human
Resource Development.


ANNEXURE—I

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

XVI
Sixteenth Meeting*

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 6th October, 1994 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra - Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
10. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

11. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

12. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

13. Dr. Vasant Pawar

14. Prof. P.J. Kurien

15. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
16. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

17. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
18. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

21. Shri Anna Joshi

22. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
23. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

24, Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
25. Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

७9० :3 ०७ (७ + ० ७

* Minutes of I to XV meetings of the Committee relate to matters not included in the report.

3


Shri Nand: Lal; Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Chairman informed the Committee that the ‘Prevention of Apartheid in Sports
Bill, 1988’ was referred to the Committee for examination and report.

3, * * * *
4. * * * *
5. * * * *

6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Friday, the
7th October, 1994.

*** Relates to other matters.


XxI*
Twenty First Meeting

The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 20th December, 1994 in Room No. 67,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
6. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

7. Shri Md. Salim

8. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

9. Prof. 1.6. Sanadi

10. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
11. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

12. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

“LOK SABHA

13. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
14. Dr. Vasant Pawar
15. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
16. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
17. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Nand Lal Deputy Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Draft Thirteenth Report on the
Prevention of Apartheid in Sports Bill, 1988 and adopted the same.

3. * * * *

4. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence, Dr. M. Aram and Prof,
Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma to present the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Reports in Rajya Sabha
and Dr. Vasant Pawar and Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan to lay the Reports on the
Table of Lok Sabha.

5. * * * *
(ae * *
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m.

*

* Minutes of XVII to XX meetings relate to matters not included in this report.

5


ANNEXURE-IL

MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (DEPART-
4 MENT OF. YOUTH AFFAIRS &-SPORTS)

uy
The Prevention of Apartheid in Sports Bill, 1988.

This. pertains to the Prevention of Apartheid in Sports Bill; 1988. The Bill was introduced
in Parliament with a view to giving effect to the provisions of the International Gonvention
against Apartheid in Sports and for India to accede to the said Convention,. upon: the passing .
of such legislation. The Bill was not pressed for discussion as there was thinking in the
Department to move some official amendment with regard to the “Third Country principle
and this needed further examination

2. The matter was reviewed by the then Minister for Human Resource Development in
July, 1989 when it was decided to examine whether India could accede to the International
Convention without prior legislation. After consultation with the 1960 Legal Affairs and
Ministry of External Affairs, the following proposals were made to the Government:—

i) Mo External Affairs may be asked to go ahead and accede to the Convention without
waiting for legislation on the subject

ii) for further action in regard to the endorsement of Article 6(b) (c) and (d), the matter
would be examined a new in consultation with the Mo Law and M.E.A

3. Government decided to accede to the Convention and the Instrument of Accession was
handed over in the UN Secretariat on 12th September, 1990.

4. However, in pursuance of the decision of the Government, Department of Youth
Affairs & Sports persued the matter with the 1160 Legal Affairs as far as Article 6(b) (०) and
(d) were concerned. These are as follow:—

6(b): To restrict access to national sports facilities to such sports bodiesteamsSportsmen
that participate in sports in a country practising apartheid or with teams representing
a country practising apartheid 4

6(c): Not to enforce sports contracts which involve sports activities with a country
practising apartheido or individual sportsmen selected on the basis of apartheid.

6(d): To deny and withdraw national honours and awards in sports from such teams/
sportsmen that participate in sports in a country practising apartheid or with teams
representing a country practising apartheid.

5. Subsequent discussionconsultation with the Deptt. of Legal Affairs led to the
conclusion that there is no need for legislation to implement Articles 6(b) and (c). However,
the Law Deptt. was of the opinion that Article 6(d) may require legislation as it will not be
easy otherwise to recover the amount of the cash award.

6. It was noted by Deptt. of Youth Affairs & Sports that the rules for Arjun Awards etc.
provide for withdrawalcancellation of the award. However, in case of cash component of
Arjuna and Dronacharya Awards, it would be difficult to recover the amount even after the
award has been cancelled. Deptt. of Legal Affairs observed that the provisions of the rules


could be applied either to the cancellation of certificates or recorded entry relating to cash
award but it may be unreasonable to insist upon the refund of amount and compulsory
recovery of the same in case of refusal.

7, In the light of the opinion given by the Deptt. of Legal Affairs and views of the Deptt.
of Youth Affairs & Sports, Min. of External Affairs was consulted in the matter. That
Ministry agreed with the views that no legislation is considered necessary for implementing
the provisions of the Convention. Approval of the Minister for Human Resource
Development was, therefore, sought and obtained for approving the proposal for withdrawal
of the Bill. Globally also, it was seen that apartheid is getting dissipated. There has been
definite demolition of barriers in South Africa and racial discrimination is on the wane all
over the world. Therefore, the Convention has lost its significance in the emerging new
world scenario. The proposal for withdrawing the Bill was, however, not approved by the
Cabinet.

8. Thus, the present status of the matter is that Government of India has already acceeded
to the International Convention against Aparatheid in Sports. In our view, in the light of the
latest developments in South Africa, it is not necessary to proceed with the Bill.

9, This is to further inform that Smt. Asha Swarup, Joint Secy. Depit. of Youth Affairs &
Sports, Room No. 504, 8 Wing, Shastry Bhavan (Tel. 384441) is dealing with the Bill in the
Ministry.


BRRATA TO THE THIRTEENTH REPORT ON THE PREVENTION
OF APARTHEID IN SPORTS BILL, 1988 OF THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMIITEE ON HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMEM.

secs

On page 3 In the heading for ‘Meeting’ read ‘Meetings’.

On page 5 In the footnote, for para 3,5,6 read ‘relates to cther
matters’,