PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SIXTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1998-99 (DEMAND NO. -48)
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

a2

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3RD JULY, 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH JULY, 1998)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

JULY, 1998/ASADHA, 1920 (SAKA)



eee 6

CON TE NEES

ComposITION OF THE COMMITTEE
PREFACE
REPORT

Minutes

PAGES
@-G)
ii)
1—12
13—20


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1998-99)

~ 1. Shri $.8. Chavan—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Oscar Fernandes

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Shri O. Rajagopal

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

|
|
)
|
y

न 5
BRE Seer AHWAwWN

LOK SABHA

14. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
15. Shri Sartaj Singh

_ 16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
17. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
18. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
19. Dr. Sanjay Singh
20. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
21. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
22. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
23. Shri-Ashok Singh
24. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
25. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
26. Shri Ashok Gehlot
27. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
28. Shri Ajit Jogi
29. Shri V.M. Sudheeran
30. Shri Laxman Singh
31. Shri Shankar Pannu
32. Shri Abdul Hamid
33. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
34. Shri Samik Lahiri
35. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
36. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja
37. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
38. Shri H.P. Singh
39. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera

@



Gi)

Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
Shrimati Krishna Bose

Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

Shri S. Arumugham.-

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committce on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixty-fourth Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 48) of the Department of Education, Ministry of Human
Resource Development for the year 1998-99.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development and also heard
the Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the said Demands for Grants in its
meeting held on 19th June, 1998.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the Ist July,
1998.

New DeEtHi; S.B. CHAVAN,
July 1, 1998 Chairman,
बार Gn ९ ६ कट पर 7 Department-related Parliamentary
Asadha 10, 1920 (Saka) Standing Committee on

Human Resource Development.

(iti)


REPORT

I. INTRODUCTION

1.1 The main function of the Department of Education is to evolve educational policy
and also to coordinate and determine standards in higher education, including research. The
Department mainly undertakes the Programmes relating to elementary education, Secondary
education, University and Higher education, adult education and technical education. The
Department also coordinates various programmes of assistance and other activities with
UNESCO and other foreign agencies.

1.2 The literacy rate in the country as per the 1950-51 census was 18%. Female literacy
of just 9% as compared to the male literacy of 27.2% indicated a wide gap between the two.
In comparison to 1950-51 census, the Census Report 1990-91 shows the literacy rate to be
52.2%. The male literacy is reported to be 64% whereas female literacy is 39.4% thereby
indicating that the wide gap between male and female literacy existing in 1950-51 has been
bridged: only marginally by 1990-91. Not only this, the picture is dismal in educationally
backward States. Against the national average of gender gap at 25%, it ranges between
28.41% (Orissa) and 34.55% (Rajasthan). This calls for a serious review of our educational
planning and its implementation both at the Central and State levels.

1.3 The Eighth Five Year Plan (1992—97) had set the target of achieving 100% literacy
among the people of age group of 15 to 35 years. This involved changing the literacy status
of about 100 million people. The sector-wise plan outlay on education during Eighth Five-
Year Plan (Central) was Rs. 7,443 crores out of which Rs. 4148.75 crores was earmarked for
Central Schemes and Rs. 3294.25 crores for Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The sector-wise
plan outlay on education during the Eighth Five Year Plan (States/UTs.) was Rs. 12,156.73
crores. Thus, the total sector-wise plan outlay on education during Eighth-Five Year Plan
(Central + States/UTs.) was almost Rs. 19,600 crores. As against the initial outlay of
Rs. 7443 crores (Centre) for Eighth Five Year Plan, the Actual Expenditure has shown it to
be Rs. 8521.89 crores.

1.4 Social Services Sectors—The Committee is perturbed to note that in almost all the
Social Service Sectors cut in financial terms have been imposed by the Ministry of Finance
which may affect the overall development of the Country including human resources. The
Committee feels that this tendency is not correct. Hence the Committee recommends that
Social Service Sectors must be given its appropriate weightage as compared to other sectors.

1.5 The Ninth Plan (1997—2002) outlay on Education in general estimates it to be
Rs. 78708.75 crores showing a steep rise when compared to Eighth Plan outlay. The
Approach Paper on the Ninth Five Year Plan indicates that apart from carrying out the
directions given by National Policy on Education, 1986 and NPA 1992, and keeping in view
the declaration of education as an aspect of fundamental human right to life, making the
nation fully literate by the year 2005 will be 'a cominitted goal. Around 6% of the GDP will
be earmarked for the education sector by the year 2000 A.D. and 50% of that will be spent
on Elementary Education. Allocation of substantial funds for, imparting technical and
Vocational skills and training coverage of 100 million adults by the year 1998-99 under
National Literacy Mission (NLM) are the special targets. The unfinished task of Universal
Elementary Education (UEE) will be completed with intensive focus on the backward

1


States/districts, the girl child and other disadvantaged population groups, with active
participation of NGOs, the corporate sector and various other groups. Linkages will be
developed between adult education and formal and non-formal education including open
learning. Similarly in Secondary Education the major issue is one of modification and
diversification of curricula so as to provide skill-training through well-structured vocational
courses, planned with community involvement and support, enlisting the Community and
Agricultural Polytechnics in the task. In Higher education the existing infrastructure needs to
be nurtured in order to enhance the country’s competitiveness in the global market.
Additional resources will be generated by involving industry and commerce and through
contribution from community.

1.6 Committed Liability—The Committee in its 56th Report had recommended that the
Department should make a thorough review of the schemes and identify the committed
liability. In this matter, the Committee considered the Report of the Tenth Finance
Commission. The Tenth Finance Commission have observed as under:

“Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in
deciding the cut-off date for transfer of committed liability on- account of plan
scheme, the incremental liabilities that would arise in 1997-98 on account of 8th Plan
scheme completed in the next two financial years would have to be provided for. The
Commission are, therefore, of the view that the Planning Commission may‘ consider
providing for the maintenance of such schemes till 1999-2000 in the Plan itself as was
done for the schemes of the two Annual Plans of 1990-91 and 1991-92.”

The Committee in this connection heard the views of the Secretary, Department of
Expenditure last year to clarify the position. He informed the Committee that even though
communications were sent to various Ministries, the Ministries could not identify the
committed expenditure on time. Accordingly a lumpsum amount has been provided under
Demand No. 31. The Secretary also assured that if required more funds for this purpose will
be provided at the RE stage. He also stated that the Departments may approach the
Department of Expenditure for their share.

The Committee notes that the Department had proposed under the scheme of
Installation of Mini-Computer Terminal, UGC and NVS an amount of Rs. 0.14, Rs. 27.87
and Rs. 62.70 crores respectively for the acceptance of the Ministry of Finance for 1997-98
onwards under Committed Liability. No response has been received by the Department from
the Ministry of Finance so far.

The Committee views with corfcern that the Finance Ministry has not honoured such
clear cut commitment made before the Parliamentary Committee. As the recommendations
of the Tenth Finance Commission have been accepted by the Government it is the
commitment of the Government too. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department of Education should get the assurance implemented without any delay.

1.7 The total budgetary allocation for the Department for 1997-98 was Rs. 5231.63
crores (Plan: Rs. 4094.13+Non-Plan 1137.50 crores) which was around 3.7% of the GDP.
The Budgetary allocation for 1998-99 is Rs. 7046.82 crores of which Rs.-4244.18 crores is on
Plan side and Rs. 2802.64 crores is on- Non-Plan side. Compared to last year’s Plan
allocation of Rs. 4094.13 crores at BE 1997-98 which was reduced to Rs. 3350.45 crores at
RE 1997-98 due to economy consideration and also under utilisation in some of the schemes,
the Plan allocation for 1998-99 Rs. 4244.18 crores shows a significant increase.

1.8 The Secretary, Department of Education informed the Committee that at present,
the expenditure on education both of the Central Government and the State Governments,


a dint ———

3

if taken together is less than 4% of GDP. Suitable budgetary provisions in the Ninth Plan
period are required if it is to be raised to the tune of 6% GDP by 2000 A.D. Budgetary’
provision for 1998-99 should, therefore, have been Rs. 9,500 crores instead of Rs. 7046.82
crores. :

1.9 While admitting that there was under utilisation of funds and poor track record in a
number of schemes, during 1997-98, the Secretary stated that the Department had to face a
number of hurdles. In pursuance of Ministry of Finance instructions of September 18, 1997,
there was a 5% cut in Plan and Non-Plan Budget and in addition no new expenditure
proposal was cleared by the Government. 85 ३ result only those existing schemes, which
were continuing beyond the Eighth Plan could be funded. Not only this, even any avoidable
augmentation of expenditure on existing schemes/programmes was met by re-appropriation
of saving. There were a number of schemes, which in the opinion of both Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance ought to be discontinued or transferred to the States.
However, there being no final decision funds were not released. Cumulative result of all
these was certain slackening of pace and lesser expenditure than what was envisaged in the
Budget. J

1.10 The Committee understands that ‘a number of Centrally-sponsored Schemes are
being transferred to the States. The Committee feels that the transfer of innovative and
significant schemes such as Vocational Education, Integrated Education for Disabled
Children (IEDC) and Computer Education etc. will prejudicially affect the interest of the
students. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such schemes should not be
transferred except where the State Governments are themselves willing to take over those
schemes and provide necessary funds.

1.11 The Committee drew the attention of the Department towards press reports about
basic changes likely to be made in the National Policy of Education (NPE) 1986. The
Secretary clarified that there was no such move. Policy updation has become due as 5 years
have elapsed after Plan of Action evolved in 1992.

1.12 The Committee expressed its apprehension about reference made by the Finance
Minister in his Budget speech about making Primary Education free and compulsory upto
fifth standard. The \Secrétary clarified that there was a clear constitutional mandate -for
providing Free and Compulsory Elementary Education upto 14 years of age which has been
validated by Supreme Court judgement also. There was no change in the’ commitment.
Government only plans to go about in phases. However, the Committee feels that this goes
against the National Agenda of achieving Universalisation of Elementary Education (UEE)
by 2005 A.D. Hence, this has to be achieved within the stipulated time and not just in
phases.

II. ELEMENTARY EDUCATION

2.1 The Department informed the Committee that in pursuance of the National Policy
of Education, 1986 as modified in 1992, concerted efforts were being made by Central/State
Governments to achieve the goal of UEE before we enter the 21st Century. The Centrally-
sponsored schemes of Operation Blackboard, NFE, Teacher Education and externally aided
projects of primary education like DPEP were aimed at supplementing the efforts of States
and UTs for promotion of primary education. The Department further clarified that it had
been amply reflected in the budgetary allocation made for elementary education in. the
Annual Plan for 1998-99 wherein allocation has increased from Rs. 2543.08 crores in 1997-98
to Rs. 2780.03 crores in 1998-99. Moreover, of the total budget of the Department of
Education for 1998-99, 39.45% has been allocated for the elementary education sector.


n

\
|
|
|
|

|
|
|

4

However, the Committee finds that like in the previous year, bigger allocation has been
earmarked for Mid-day Meal Scheme and the District Primary Education Programme
(DPEP).

2.2 Operation Blackboard—The Department informed that under ‘Operation
Blackboard’, 5.23 lakh primary. schools and 0.96 lakh upper primary schools have been
provided funds for teaching learning material. About 1.5 lakh posts of additional teachers
for single teacher primary schools, 0.45 lakh posts of additional teachers at the upper
primary stage and 0.56 lakh posts of third teachers have been sanctioned upto 1997-98. The
figures are quite impressive. However, the Committee finds the ground realities to be
entirely different. Either there was a very tardy progress in construction of class rooms or
class rooms already constructed have not yet started functioning. This was the position in
‘most educationally backward States like U.P. and Bihar. Similarly, inspite of fulfilment of
target of appointment of teachers, the Committee finds that teaching community by and
large was reluctant to be posted to rural areas for want of proper facilities. This defeats the
very purpose of Operation Blackboard Scheme. The Committee firmly believes that those
posted in rural areas must join their duties and the Government concerned should make all
out efforts to solve the problems of such teachers during their posting in rural areas.
Department’s stand that successful implementation of Operation Blackboard Scheme was
entirely the responsibility of State Governments was not acceptable to the Committee. The
Committee recommends that a Joint Monitoring Cell comprising of both State and Central
Government representatives and local MLAs/MPs should be evolved to effectively supervise
the implementation of Operation Blackboard Scheme.

2.3 Residential Primary Schools in Rural Areas—The Committee observed that there
were variations in allocation for this scheme. It was Rs. 25 crores in the BE of 1997-98
reduced to a meagre amount of Rs. 1 crore in its RE stage and now stepped up to Rs. 24
crores in BE 1998-99. The Department in its reply clarified that in pursuance of the
instruction of the Ministry of Finance dated September 18, 1997 to defer all new schemes to
the next financial year, the scheme was not taken up for implementation in 1997-98.
However, the deferred allocation i.e. Rs. 24 crores is now reflected in the BE of 1998-99.
Expressing its concern over such drastic cut by the Ministry of Finance, the Committee feels
that once the Parliament has approved the allocations, any cut in the allocations of various
schemes at a subsequent. stage by the Ministry of Finance should be brought to the notice of
Parliament.

2.4 On a specific query about the fate of the feasibility study to be conducted by
NCERT, the Department informed the Committee that in view of the uncertainty regarding
the age group of children to be covered under the Scheme, NCERT has not been in a
position to proceed with the feasibility study in 1997-98. The Committee recommends that
immediate steps should be initiated for resolving this issue so that the scheme of Residential
Primary Schools in rural areas can be started during the current year.

2.5 Teachers Training Programme—There was a provision of Rs. 159 crores in BE of
1997-98 for the Teacher Training Programme which was reduced to only Rs. 89.50 crores at
its RE stage. However, the BE of 1998-99 again proposes it for Rs. 159 crores. When asked
to clarify, the Department informed that Rs. 159 crores in the BE of 1997-98 was in
accordance with the recommendations of the wérking group on Teachers Education for 1X
Plan. However, the norms for grant of Central Assistance for setting up of DIETs/CTEs/
IASEs and strengthening of SCERTs could not be revised in view of instructions from
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. The budgetary provision was accordingly


5

reduced from Rs. 159 crores to Rs. 89.50 crores at the RE stage. Expressing its concern over
such drastic cuts, the Committee observes that Teachers Training Progranime is an essential
pre-requisite for achieving the Total Literacy Target by 2005 A.D. Hence, the Committee
recommends that the BE of 1998-99 for this scheme be maintained and no further reduction
under this scheme be brought about.

2.6 Non-Formal Education—The allocation under the schemes for the year 1997-98 was
Rs. 324.86 crores for running 2.90 lakh NFE centres. The Department informed the
Committee that since Ministry of Finance did not allow revision of the scheme as envisaged,
the budgetary allocation for NFE scheme was reduced to Rs. 183.05 crores at the RE stage.
The Department further clarified that the drastic reduction did not: affect the smooth
functioning of NFE centres as grants were released on the existing pattern during 1997-98.
The Committee has made a number of regommendations in its 560 Report for smooth
functioning and effective monitoring mechanism of NFE scheme in general and in U.P.,
Bihar and Rajasthan in particular. The Committee reiterates the same and notes that a draft
report of the evaluation study conducted by the Planning Commission on impact of NFE
scheme is at present under examination of the Department and hopes that remedial steps in
the light of this study would be taken by the Department without delay.

2.7 District Primary Education Programme (DPEP)—There was a provision of Rs.
651.31 crores for DPEP in BE 1997-98 which was reduced to Rs. 560.89 crores at RE stage.
The Department clarified that this was due to slower pace of expenditure in States and
procedural delays in appraisal and approvals to the projects.

2.8 The Department informed the Committee that a new initiative of providing
integrated education to disabled children and distance education for teacher training has also
been incorporated in the DPEP scheme. At present, the scheme is under implementation in
149 low female literacy districts in 14 States. Expansion of the project in another three
districts in U.P. and 19 districts in Rajasthan is in the pipeline. Expansion in another 14
districts in A.P. through IDA assistance has been negotiated as a State sector project. The
increase in BE 1998-99 (Rs. 667 crores) over the last year’s budget is to meet the
requirements of additional districts and DPEP phase III in Bihar, approved for coverage in
1997-98. Budgetary Provisions have also been made to match the expected flow of external
assistance for the project. The Committee hopes, that procedural delays would be removed
so as to fully utilise the funds allocated for DPEP. projects during 1998-99. 85% funding of
DPEP projects by external agencies is a welcome step. But the Committee feels that there
should be no-imposition of their own terms and conditions by these agencies as it may create
problems for its proper functioning.

2.9 The Committee was informed that the first in-depth Review of DPEP conducted in
September/October, 1997 through a mission comprising of representatives from the external
funding agencies and GOI has commended the progress of programme implementatjon. The
Committee notes with satisfaction that there has been a significant increase in enrolment in
the DPEP districts as compared to Non-DPEP districts, gender and social inequities have
been substantially reduced and preliminary signs of increased learning achievements are in
progress. The Committee, however, expects the Department to see that the disparity
between the norms of the external aid agencies and the norms of State Governments in
respect of salaries and other amenities is removed.

2.10 Mid-Day Meal Scheme—The Physical and Financial achievements of Mid-Day Meal
Scheme launched in August, 1995 have been commendable. The number of children covered
under the programme has risen from 3.4 crores in about 3.22 lakh schools in
1995-96 to 9.10 crores in about 6.41 lakh schools in 1998-99. Funds spent have risen from

|
|
|


6

Rs. 441.21 crores in 1995-96 to Rs. 1070.38 crores in 1997-98. Supply of cooked food in only
5 States and 1 UT due to resource constraint and insufficient cooking arrangements, less
than satisfactory lifting by a few States and inadequate provision of transportation charges,
especially in North-Eastern States were the major. operational problems being faced in
implementation of this programme, the Committee was informed. The Committee is of the
view that only cooked food be served to the students and in order to overcome the
problems of auxiliaries, the employment schemes may be linked with this scheme so as to
provide logistic support to it and to make the scheme successful.

2.11 Against the projected requirement of Rs. 1900 crores for Mid-Day Meal Scheme
for the year 1998-99, only Rs. 1092.15 croreg has been provided. The Department advocated
provision of required funds in 1998-99 so as to prevent delays in release of payments to FCI.
While not disputing the Department’s requirement of funds under this programme for
1998-99, the Committee expresses its deep concern for there being no effective monitoring
mechanism evolved so far. Mere monitoring and review of the implementation of scheme at
regular intervals through various Committees and groups set up at Block, District, State and
national levels would not serve the purpose. As admitted by the Department, monthly data
on enrolment, number of eligible children, number of students benefited, quantity of food-
grains allocated and lifted from FCI outlets and utilised by each school through a
computerised Management Information System (MIS) has not been forthcoming from most
of the States. The Committee recommends that the Department should approach the State
Government for making furnishing of monthly data as a pre-requisite for release of funds to
District Headquarters. Feedback from time to time should also be made available to Centre.
In views of reports of large scale corruption and malpractices in the scheme, the
representatives of people such as MPs, MLAs and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) should
be involved for effective implementation and monitoring of those schemes. Only then,
positive impact of the Scheme on enrolment and participation of children in primary classes
can be assessed in the real sense.

2.12 Drop-Out Rates—The Department informed that the drop out rates have shown
declining trend during the last five years. The decline is from 42% in 1991-92 to 39% in
1996-97, showing an overall decrease of 3% at the primary level. At the upper primary
Stage, the drop out rate was 58.7% in 1991-92 and it declined to 52.3% in 1996-97, showing
an overall decrease of 6.4% points. Whereas the drop out rate for boys in primary classes
declined by 1%, for girls it declined by 6.0% during the period from 1991-92 to 1996-97. In
upper primary classes, mf é drop out rate has declined by 4.2% for boys and 9.6% for girls
during the same period./However, the Committee was given to understand that this positive
trend is not equally distributed over the various regions and regional disparity remains an
area of great concern. The persistence of high levels of female illiteracy in Bihar, U.P.,
M.P., Rajasthan and Orissa is a matter of great concern. The Committee feels the problem
of drop-outs can be effectively tackled by increased public spending on elementary education
by the State Governments, emphasis on teacher-student ratio, increased parental motivation
and above all a cooperative social environment. Economic and social factors operating are
likely to be different in different regions. Hence a detailed area based study on these aspects
will be necessary before policies for micro intervention can be formulated and implemented.

II]. SECONDARY EDUCATION

3.1 The Department informed the Committee that the number of Secondary and Senior
Secondary Schools has increased from 0.07 lakh in 1950-51 to 1.02 lakh in 1996-97.
Provisional statistics available in the Sixth All India Educational Survey indicate an increase


7

to the extent of 51% in the enrolment in classes IX to X and 54% increase in classes XI to
XII. The demand on senior secondary education is bound to increase during the coming
years because of universalisation of elementary education causing a greater transition to
secondary education. There is a provision of Rs. 922.98 crores in BE 1998-99, for secondary
education as compared to Rs. 684.29 crores in BE 1997-98.

3.2 Kendriya Vidyalayas—The Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan has been facing severe
resource crunch for the last few years as a result of inadequate allocation of budget
estimates, the Committee was informed. The allocation of Rs. 356 crores under Non-Plan
for 1998-99 as against Rs. 543.24 crores projected was so low that additional allocation will
be necessary at the stage of first supplementary itself to take care of additional requirement
due to Sth Pay Commission recommendation. Similarly, there is a meagre proposed
allocation of Rs. 88 crores as against Rs. 180 crores projected under Plan for 1998-99. There
are no funds for on-going construction activities and maintenance and repair of existing
buildings. At present there are 357 Vidyalayas without permanent school buildings. The
Committee recommends that adequate budgetary support be provided to Kendriya
Vidyalayas so as to prevent the decline of Kendriya Vidyalayas which were conceived as
pace-setting institutions. At the same time, the Committee would like the Department to
ensure that school buildings already constructed are provided with infrastructural facilities so
that they can start functioning without delay. The Committee feels that in ordér to get
cooperation of the local people, it will be advisable if certain percentage of local students are
also admitted.

3.3 Vocationalisation of Education—In order to promote vocational education facilities
have been created for diversion of about 9.35 lakh students at the +2 level. The Committee
was given to understand that there was a provision of Rs. 60 crores in BE 1997-98.
However, after the decision of Planning Commission to transfer the Scheme to States, as
well as transfer the salary liability after the 8th Plan period, no funds could be released to
States/UTs. As a result budget provision was brought down to Rs. 20 crores and actual
expenditure was only Rs. 4 crores. Allocation for 1998-99 is Rs. 10 crores. The Department
clarified that pending a final decision regarding the transfer of the scheme to the States, and
assuming that this programme will continue to be implemented as a Centrally-sponsored
Scheme, the NCERT has been requested to constitute a full-fledged working group with
representation from Industry and employer agencies for a complete revamping of the scheme -
for implementation during the 9th Plan. The Committee is however of the view that as
stated earlier this scheme is of special significance and should therefore continue as a
Centrally-sponsored Scheme. :

3.4 In view of increasing number of educated unemployed youths there is a greater need
for Vocational Education. Hence the Committee recommends that enhanced allocations for
Vocational Education in the RE stage must be done. The Committee further recommends
that Vocational Education be properly linked with Industries and Corporate groups. Where
there are no industries focus should be on area specific needs.

3.5 Computer Education in Schools—The Department informed the Committee that for
Computer Education in Schools a provision of Rs. 20 crores under BE 1997-98 was proposed
in anticipation of the approval of the 9th Plan allocations to cover 400 additional Senior
Secondary Schools. However, while preparing the Draft Approach Paper for 9th Plan,
Planning Commission indicated that the Computer Literacy and Studies in Schools (CLASS)
scheme would no longer be a Centrally-sponsored Scheme and it was proposed to be
transferred to the States during 9th Plan. Besides this scheme was identified by the Ministry



8

i of Finance for weeding out and accordingly the Department was stopped from utilising any

Finance agreed to release grants for meeting the recurring committed liability on account of
maintenance and training only. Accordingly Rs. 10.30 crores as grants due on account of
| maintenance and training for the ‘schools could be released to the State Governments of
Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Goa and NCT of Delhi only at the final stage. The
| Department further informed that the amount of Rs. 10 crores, proposed for BE 1998-99 is
| the anticipated requirements for meeting the Committed Liability of the State Governments
| and not for hardware supply for new schools Keeping in view that Computer education has

| become one of the most important aspects of Secondary School Education, the Committee

[Fa out of the BE 1997-98 allocation. However, on reconsideration, the Ministry of

| fails to understand the rationale behind the Finance Ministry decision to identify this scheme

{
i

|
|
|
}
|

for weeding out. The Committee recommends that Computer education in schools should be
continued as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme and also adequate allocation may be provided at
RE stage.

3.6 Integrated Education for Disabled Children (IEDC)—The Committee was given to
understand that the BE of 1997-98 for this scheme was Rs. 13 crores which was reduced to
Rs. 4.70 crores in the RE stage. The Department in its reply stated that the actual
expenditure in 1997-98 was Rs. 9.99 crores and the reduction was due to the guidelines
issued by the Planning Commission to transfer all committed expenditure under the IEDC to
the State Governments in view of the decision taken to transfer this scheme to the States in
a phased manner. In addition, the Ministry of Finance issued instructions that funds under
Centrally Sponsored Scheme be released only after prior clearance for Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance. However, in December, 1997 the Planning Commission on
reconsideration approved the Department’s proposal for allowing release of funds for
committed expenditure as a very special case. Further, Planning Commission informed that
there was no immediate more to transfer the scheme to States. Expenditure thereafter
picked up and the actual expenditure during 1997-98 was Rs. 9.99 crores. Keeping in view
the noble idea of this scheme which aims at providing educational opportunities to disabled
children with mild to moderate disabilities in the general school system the Committee
recommends that efforts to expand this scheme should not suffer a set back and provision of
Rs. 13.00 crores made in BE 1998-99 should not be reduced at RE stage.

3.7 The Committee in its 56th Report expressed the need for the telecast of syllabus
based programme for the benefit of student. The Department in its reply stated that with the
coming into existence of Prasar Bharati the entire issue of education telecast is being looked
into by a sub-Committee of Prasar Bharati on Educational channel. With the closure of DD
Il, the earlier proposal for seeking slots on Education could not materialise, the
Department clarified. Expressing its concern, the Committee recommends that the decision
on education channel should be expedited so that school children can make use of this
facility without delay.

3.8 Promotion of Science Laboratories—The Committee was given to understand that
the BE of 1997-98 for this scheme was Rs. 19.90 crores which was reduced to a meagre
amount of Rs. 3.25 crores in its RE stage. The Department in its reply stated that as most of
the State Governments except Kerala, H.P. and Pondicherry had unspent balances of the
previous grants under this scheme, it was not considered appropriate to release further
grants. Some general constraints at the level of State Governments were lack of adequate
infrastructure, inadequate science teachers and cumbersome procedure for procurement of
laboratory equipment etc. The Committee expresses its concern over unspent balances lying
with States which could have been utilised for removing the constraints being faced by State


eee ane

9

Governments. The Committee therefore recommends that steps should be taken for
streamlining the procurement procedures and improving infrastructure in schools for
successful implementation of this scheme.

IV. ADULT EDUCATION

The Committee was constrained to note that the Literacy rate as per the 1991 census was
around 52%. If compared with the neighbouring countries such as Myanmar, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Japan and Singapore our position is poor. Taking a rough estimate for the year
1998 the Literacy rate might have gone up to around 60% which shows that the country still
is having around 40% illiterates. The Department stated that the National Literacy Mission
(NLM) set up in the year 1988 with the target of making 100 million persons in the age
group of 15—35 Literate in a phased manner through its policy of Total Literacy Campaign
(TLC) & Post Literacy Campaign (PLC) has been able to achieve a target of 68.57 million
persons by now of which 60% are Women, 23% SCs and 12% STs which is a very
encouraging achievement. 447 districts are covered under Literacy Campaigns.The
programme of TLC and PLC has been faced with some difficulties in the low Literacy States
mainly due to the absence of Voluntary Organisations and other socio-cultural barriers. At
present 215 districts are under the TLC programme and 173 districts under PLC and another
59 districts under the third stage of Continuing Education where the impetus built up in the
first two stages is sought to be sustained together with elements of skill training. This
programme requires qualitative upgradation in order to make it relevant, contextual and
acceptable, the Department further clarified. Provision of Rs. 127 crores in BE 1997-98 was
reduced to Rs. 81.42 crores due to economy cuts imposed by Ministry of Finance,
uncertainly regarding transfer of the scheme of strengthening of Administrative structures of
States and less number of proposals for TLC projects. Bihar, M.P. and U.P. are some of the
States where the campaigns have lagged behind and thus not able to utilise funds fully. The
Committee feels that concerted efforts are required to make Pr paigns for Total Literacy
and Post Literacy successful in Educationally Backward Statey/The Committee is not fully
satisfied with the implementation of the scheme and the impact ‘it has had on the targetted
group. The Committee therefore recommends that the scheme be evaluated properly and
effectively and its benefit to the masses in real terms should be assessed.

५. UNIVERSITY AND HIGER EDUCATION

5.1 There is a provision of Rs. 1821.78 crores under Non-Plan in BE 1998-99 as
compared to allocation of Rs. 472.47 crores in BE 1997-98. The total increase to the tune of
Rs. 1349.43 crores over 1997-98 is intended to meet claims of salaries and allowances of
teaching staff of Central and State Universities/Deemed to be universities and colleges.
However, the position is totally different under Plan allocation. Allocation under Plan is
Rs. 412.75 crores in BE 1998-99 as against Rs. 403 crores provided in BE 1997-98. The
Department clarified that the modest increase of around Rs. 10 crores has been made for
upgradation of Libraries and Laboratories in selected colleges and universities» No major
additional provisions have been made in keeping with the Government’s policy of ensuring
self supporting institutions by encouraging internal resource generation by the Institutions/
Organisations themselves.

5.2 University Grants Commission (UGC)—The Committee heard the Secretary,
Department of Education and Chairperson, GC on the issue of pay-scales of teachers. The
Chairperson, UGC submitted that the mandate of UGC is to maintain the standards of
Edcuation and to advise the Government. In pursuance of that, the UGC undertook
consideration of the scales of pay of teachers recommended by the Fifth Pay Commission.
The Chairperson also pointed out that UGC is now-a-days finding it difficult to attract talent

\


10

in the field of teaching as other fields are offering more to the puss-outs. It is therefore,
necessary to offer attracting pay scales to the talented persons so as to make them join the
teaching profession. The suggested pay scales are linked with qualifications also. The
Chairperson also added that the revised pay scales were arrived at after a series of meetings
held with all concerned. The suggested pay scales were finally crystallised in consultation
with all Central and other Universities in the meeting held in the month of October, 1997.
The Secretary, Department of Education was also invited in the meetings. The Education
Secretary submitted that what the UGC recommended was wholesale revision of the scales

recommended by the Rastogi Committee for the teachers. This had created an unusual

situation and the Department is finding it difficult to accept the recommendations in toto.
The Committee notes that as per the convention, the scales suggested by the UGC are
usually accepted by the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should initiate immediate steps to resolve the issue amicably.

5.3 The Committee was informed that the Central Universities and IITs etc. were
expected to undertake their own resource generation, as a result of which they had
generated an amount of Rs. 67 crores during 1991—96. The Department informed that the
institutions were allowed to utilise those funds for developmental purposes. The Committee
recommends that such institutions should be ‘allowed to utilise these funds for developmental
purposes in future also. The Committee also feels that the Universities and other such
institutions which generate resources and make earnings should be provided sufficient
incentives.

5.4 Programme to strengthen Scientific Research—The Committee notes that for
research works a meagre allocation of Rs. 28 crores is‘also a matter of great concern. The
Chairperson UGC further clarified that due to financial constraints research projects were
adversely affected during the 8th Five Year Plan. As without proper research the progress of
a country is handicapped to a great extent. Greater attention must also be given to the
applied and scientific research.

5.5 The Committee was also given to understand that the Government has put higher
education as a non-merit subject and plans the de-subsidisation of higher education from the
present 90 percent to 50 percent in three years and with a further aim of reducing jt to:a
meagre amount of 25 percent in another two years. The Committee feels that the idea that
higher education caters only to upper middle class and rich is quite. a fallacious conclusion.
Sizeable portion of students are drawn from SCs, STs and-Backward classes including rural
youths, many of whom are first generation learners. Pence the Committee is of the view
that a reasonable allocation must be made for UGC in general and for the “Programme to
strengthen Scientific Research” in particular at the RE stage.

5.6 Indian Council of Historical Researeh (ICHR)—The Committee was constrained to
note that the ICHR, which was previously having its composition of eminent historians of
proven calibre was reconstituted. In the reply supplied to the Committee, the Department
stated that ICHR was inaugurated on March 27, 1972. The normal tenure of the
membership is three years. In this way the term of the council, which was constituted on
September 8, 1994 came to an end on September 7, 1997. Hence the कर कस of ICHR
was due and the council has been re-constituted on Junie 1, 1998 for three year; 521 Regarding
the methodology to determine the composition of the council the Department further
clarified that it was governed by Rule 3 of the MOA & rules of. the ICHR. Eighteen
Historians are nominated by the Government of India and an eminent Historian is
nominated as the Chairman of ‘the council. However, the Committee was given to
understand that it is the interpretative scholars and not the ones dealing with documentation |

Sa aT


11

that the ICHR was set up to help. Hence the Committee recommends that keeping the
objectives of ICHR in view, reconstitution in future must be made so that future generations
see a more humanitarian, secular and ‘live and let live’ form of society through history. The
Committee also recommends that all shades of opinion should be given representation on
the Council.

VI. DEVELOPMENT OF LANGUAGES

6. The Committee noted that the BE of 1997-98 for Sanskrit in total was Rs. 32.31
crores which was reduced to Rs. 19.96 crores in its RE stage. However the BE of 1998-99
has increased it to Rs. 37 crores. When enguired about such fluctuations the Department
stated that certain fresh proposals could not be considered during 1997-98 due to the ban
imposed by the Ministry of Finance. However during the BE of 1998-99 those fresh
proposals such as recognition of two new Adarsh Sanskrit Mahavidyalayas, construction of
buildings of Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeths at Sringeri, Lucknow and Puri, opening of new
Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeths at Garali (H.P.), Mumbai, Bhopal and proposal to increase
the amount of honorarium of Shastra Chudamani from Rs. 1000/ to Rs. 2500८ per month
per scholar and above all to increase the existing corpus fund from Rs. 10 crores to Rs. 20
crores during 9th Five Year Plan to provide funds for the construction of building of the
Maharshi Sandipani Rashtriya Ved Vidya Pratishthan, Ujjain got accepted. Hence, the
increase in the BE of 1998-99. The Committee is happy to note that steps for development
of languages are to be taken during 1998-99. The Committee also recommends additional
amount of Rs. 6 crores (Rs. 5.50 crores Plan + Rs. 0.50 Non-Plan) which is required for the
Development of other Languages may also be provided at the RE stage.

VII. TECHNICAL EDUCATION

7.1 The Committee was given to understand that various inadequacies existed in the
technical education. There was necessity to widen the course areas under Polytechnics. The
Committee in this regard heard the views of the Chairperson AICTE who stated that
allocation for AICTE for 1998-99 was totally inadequate, which is only Rs. 79 crores in the
BE stage which shows. around Rs. 8 crores less than the BE of 1997-98. Guidelines for
granting recognition to Technical Institutes have been throughly simplified. There was a grey
area in the field of technical education. Most of the students after completing their studies in
Computer Science, instead of joining teaching profession are drawn towards the corporate
and business groups which offer lucrative salary from the beginning. Unless this is checked
we may face lop sided development in our technical education. In this direction for
attracting the students towards teaching professions after the completion of the 6th semester
from 7th semester onwards an amount of Rs. 10,000/ per month per student is given in
terms of scholarships, the Chairperson clarified. The Committee emphasises the necessity of
motivating the students for teaching profession to meet the long term goal of producing a
qualitative technical education.

7.2 The Department clarified that under the Apprentices Act the spread of apprentices
trained increased to 10000 industrial establishments of the country in 90 technological/
engineering subject in 94 subject fields. In addition apprenticeship training of vocational
students in 94 subjects fields has also been introduced. The Government has extended the
facilities of National Scheme of Apprenticeship Training to graduate Engineers and
Technicians of SAARC Member States. In this regard the Committee recommends that
there should be updated courses in Polytechnics and adequate allocations be made for
AICTE in the RE stage in particular and technical education in general. f


12

VIII. FUND FOR GOLDEN JUBILEE OF INDIA’S INDEPENDENCE

8. The Committee was given to understand that the entire allocation of Rs. 200 crores
made in the BE 1997-98 under the plan side for the Golden Jubilee of India’s Independence
had been taken back by the Ministry of Finance. The Department informed the Committee
that a series of Programmes and activities were chalked out only to be told at the last stage
that provision of Rs. 200 crores was meant for all the Departments of the Government and
not for Department of Education alone. Incidentally, this entire amount has been treated as
surrendered by the Department. The Committee observes that such cuts must not be
effected at the last stage.

IX. NEW INITIATIVES

9. The Department informed the Committee that certain new initiatives have been
taken which are: ‘

(i) Free Education for Girls—Apart from free and compulsory primary education, it is
proposed to launch a new scheme for providing free education for girls up to college level
including professional courses. An amount of Rs. 100.00 crores has been earmarked for this
scheme in the current year.

(ii) Sports Schools—In order to dove-tail, a sports component in the Educational
System, as mentioned in the earlier National Policy on Education, it is proposed to either
upgrade or set up 20 sports schools by suitably adapting the Navodaya Vidyalaya Schemes in
different States. The schools would mainly be geared to physical disciplines and have some
academic subjects in addition. An amount of Rs. 20 crores has been earmarked in the
current year for this purpose and further modalities are being worked out. The Committee
desires that 50% of the allocation should be earmarked for rural areas.

(iii) Strengthening of the Statistical Machinery in States—A new Centrally Sponsored
Scheme of strengthening of statistical machinery in States will be launched to strengthen the
educational data base and to meet the international requirements of the educational statistics
(UNESCO) and also to meet the requirement of the World Education Indicators. 0, notional
provision of Rs. 1 crore has been provided in the current year. The Education Department
collects statistics from: 900,000 institutions from the primary to the tertiary stage, the
Department clarified.

The Committee appreciates those new initiatives taken by the Department and hopes
that those new initiatives would be carried out with a greater enthusiasm in this 50th year of
India’s Independence.


MINUTES



I
FIRST MEETING

: The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 16th June, 1998 in Committee Room
‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S. B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi: Das Gupta

Shri Oscar Fernandes

. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Shanker’ Prasad Jaiswal

. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

. Dr. Sanjay Singh

. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
. Shri Shankar Pannu

. Shri Abdul Hamid

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja

. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

. Shri H.P. Singh

. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera

. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

. Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
wit * * *

9० २ 9 ७ #+ ० ७

i

BSEREBBESSESEEESBES o

***Relates to other matters.

15


16
| * *

4. The Chairman, then, informed about the schedule of the Meetings of the Committee in
connection with the examination of the Demands for Grants 1998-99 of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development* * * and invited suggestions from the Members on the
general working of the Departments Which are under the purview of the Committee.

5. The Members made some suggestions pertaining to most of the Departments under the
two Ministries. The Chairman, then informed that the issues may be discussed in detail when
the Secretaries of the concerned Departments appear before the Committee.

6. The Committee, then adjourried at 12.15 p.m. to meet again on 18th June, 1998.

***Relates to other matters.


॥॥॥।
“THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Friday, the 19th June, 1998 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S. 8. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
Shri Oscar Fernandes
Shri O. Rajagopal
Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Roy
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

} LOK SABHA

9. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

10. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

11. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

12. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

13. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
14. Shri Ashok Gehlot

15. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
16. Shri V. M. Sudheeran

17, Shri Shankar Pannu

18. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

19. Shri Samik Lahiri

20. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja

21. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

22. Shri H.P. Singh

23. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
24, Shrimati Krishna Bose

25. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

26. Shri S. Arumugham

i WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education)

9० 53 9 ० + ० ७

1. Shri P.R. Dasgupta, Secretary

2. Shri M.C. Satyawadi, Additional Secretary
3. Shri R.S. Pandey, Joint Secretary

4. Shri Abhimanyu Singh, Joint Secretary

5. Shri Champak Chatterjee, Joint Secretary

*Minutes of the Second meeting relates to other matter.

17


18

Shri M. M. Jha, Joint Secretary

Shri S. D. Awale J.E.A.

Shri D.P. Agarwal, J.E.A.

Dr. P.H.S. Rao, J.E.A.

10. Shri Sudhir Nath, J.S. & F.A.

11. Shri S. Joshi, C.C.A.

12. Dr. (Ms) Armaity Desai, Chairperson, UGC
13. Shri G.D. Sharma, Secretary, UGC

14, Shri Anurag Bhatnagar, Director, NVS
15. Shri 7.5. Rajput Chairman, NCTE

16. Shri Ramegowda, Chairman, AICTE
17. Shri A.K. Sharma, Director NCERT
18. Shri B.P. Khandelwal, Chairman, CBSE

IL *
SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

eens

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the
Departments of Education and* * * in connection with the examination of Demands for
Grants for the year 1998-99.

2.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 p.m.

***Relates to other matters.


NE

“FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the Ist July, 1998 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $. 8. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
. Shri Oscar Fernandes
. Shri 0. Rajagopal
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
LOK SABHA
. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
8. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
9. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
10. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
11. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
12. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
13. Shri Ashok Gehlot
14, Shri Ajit Jogi
15. Shri Abdul Hamid
16. Shri Samik Lahiri
17. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
18. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
19. Shri H.P. Singh
20. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
21. Shrimati Krishna Bose
22. Shri S. Arumugham
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

>> ४७ +> ७०

x

2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on Demands for Grants for 1998-99 of
the Departments of Education (Demand No. 48), * * * The Committee after some
discussions, adopted the Reports with some modifications.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m.

*Minutes of the Fourth meeting of the Committee relates to other matters.
***Relates to other matters.

19


VI
SIXTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 2nd July, 1998 in Committee Room
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. .

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S. B. Chavan — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
3. Shri Oscar Fernandes
4. Shri O. Rajagopal
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
6. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
7. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
8. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
9. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
10. Shri V.M. Sudheeran
11. Shri Abdul Hamid
12. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
13. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
14. Shri H.P. Singh
15. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
16. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
17. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
18. Shri S. Arumugham
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
y % ¥ * : *
3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati
Ray and Shri Oscar Fernandes to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Sumitra

Mahajan and Shri Ajit Jogi to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha of the Ministries of Human
Resource Development on 3rd July and Health and Family Welfare on 6th July, 1998.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.30 a.m

***Relates to other matters.

20


ERRATA

to Sixty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants 1998-99
(Demand No. 48) of the Department of Education (Ministry
of Human Resource development).

On cover page for ‘LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON
3RD JULY, 1998’ read ‘LAID ON THE TABLE
OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH JULY, 1998! .

Page 1 line 5 para 1.4 delete ‘its’.
Page 3 line 8 para 1.9 for ‘saving’ read
‘savings’.
Page 4 line 2 para 2.5 for ‘Teacner’ read
| ‘Teachers’. ;
| Page 5 jine 1 para 2.6 for ‘schemes’ read
scheme".
Page 6 line 13 para 2.11 for ‘Government’ read
i

‘Governments’ and in line 17 for ‘those
schemes’ read ‘this scheme’.

Page 8 line 8 para 3.6 for ‘for’ read ‘from’
and in line 12 for ‘more’ read ‘move’.
A line 2 para 3.7 for ‘student’ read
} “students’.
Page 9 line 5 para 5.2 delete ‘recommended by |

the Fifth Pay Commission’.

Page 9 & 10 line 8 pat 5.2 for ‘attracting’ read
‘attractive’.
1
| Page 10 line 4 para 5.3 for ‘those’ read
1 "these’.

line 5 para 5.4 for ‘extent. Greater’ : iS |
read ‘extent, greater’.

Page 11 line 14 para 6 add ‘that’ after
‘recommends’ .

line 3 para 7.2 delete ‘in 94 subject’.

Page 12 line 2 & 3 from below in para 9 read
‘these’ for ‘those’.

PRINTED BY MANAGER GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS (PLU), MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI



is ही | |

है

in gE

है ४ ।

watt 4
he |

a ee es
“y Be inged :