‘RS—1A

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SEVENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
HEALTH SCHEME

(Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 30th Report of the Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development)

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 9TH DEC., 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 9TH DEC., 1998)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

AUGUST, 1998/BHADRAPADA, 1920 (SAKA)


ispesarnreneigencrreg iene meme eer तट 1



CONTENTS

PaGEs
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE... (ji) Hiv)
?REFACE, a (v)
THAPTER I Report. vee 4०-43
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by th

(कं :५०००६६२०५७३३-+०«- ०७+६५+० ०६०३० से ० +6++ हे 4 नल कस्बे न हे + ४ रब 44—70

‘HAPTER वा Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies...............6+ 71--78

HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee.............. "9

HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government
has not given any reply 180

* 81--90



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(1998-99)

. Shri S.B. Chavan —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Balkavi Bairagi

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
Shri O. Rajagopal

. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

. Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Shri M.P.A. Samad Samadani

. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
. Dr. ९. Narayana Reddy

. Dr. Akhtar Hasan Rizvi

LOK SABHA

. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
. Dr. Sanjay Singh

. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

. Shri Ashok Singh

. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
. Shri Ashok Gehlot ५
. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
. Shri Ajit Jogi

. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

. Shri Laxman Singh

. Shri Shankar Pannu

. Shri Abdul Hamid

. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja

. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

. Shri. H.P. Singh

6)


Gi)

. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

. Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1997-98)

. Shri S.B. Chavan __ Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
. Dr. B.B. Dutta
. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Shri Raj Nath Singh

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr. Mohan Babu

. Shri M. P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shri Jai Prakash (Hardoi)

. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Maharani Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

. Dr. C. Silvera

. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
. Shri Dutta Meghe

. Shri 1.0. Sanadi

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Pawan Diwan

. Shri Krishna

. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri S.K. Kaarvendhan

. Shri Mukhtar Anis

. Dr. M. Jagannath

(ii)


&
श्र
acy
3
ct
=
=
A
ES
ao]
by
प्र्प
हट
हि
a
a
¥

42. Shri Ranen Barman
43. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

41. Dr. Bali Ram



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventy-eighth Report of the Committee on
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in its Thittieth
Report on Central Government Health Scheme.

2. The Thirtieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 16th August, 1995 and
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16th August, 1995. Replies of the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Health were
considered by the Committee and the Committee also heard the views of the Secretary and
other Officials of the Department.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the 27th
August, 1998. The Committee at its meeting held on 19th November, 1998 decided to
present the Action Taken Report in the House during the Winter Session of Parliament.

New Deu; S.B. CHAVAN
27 August, 1998 Chairman,

Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human

Resource Development.

Bhadrapada 5, 1920 (Saka)


CHAPTER-I

REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Thirtieth Report on functioning of Central Government
Health Scheme (CGHS) which was presented to Rajya Sabha on 16.8.1995 and laid on the
Table of Lok Sabha on 16.8.1995.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 15,
16, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59,
60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 79, 89, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102,
103, 104.

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 67, 68, 69, 70, 84, 85,
86, 87, 88, 90.

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
255:26, 29,.35, 36,.375, 38, 39, 45;°48, 49; 58 515'52,971,872) 73,074, 75,016, 77, 78,
80, 81, 82, 83.

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been received—Nil.

3. The Committee will now deal with some of its recommendations on the Action Taken
Notes of the Government.

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

it

General Functioning:

The Committee, during the course of its
consideration of this subject, received a
large number of representations from a
cross section of he people, including
pensioners. Many, beneficiaries, in their
written representations, submitted to the
Committee, expressed their dissatisfaction
over the general functioning of the Central
Government Health Scheme and _ its
dispensaries. It was stated that much was
‘left to be desired in the medical facilities
available at the CGHS dispensaries. Work
culture in the dispensaries had degenerated

11 to 14: There has been a constant
endeavour to improve the work culture
in the dispensaries as well as the
availability of medical facilities. To this
end the following new steps have been
initiated:—

(i) With effect from 21-6-96, CGHS
beneficiaries. have the option of
availing of specialized treatment either
in the Government hospitals extending
CGHS cover or at a CGHS recognized
private hospitals after obtaining the
recommendation of a CGHS specialist

and that government servants were or Government Hospital, as the case
gradually x losing faith in the CGHS may be. Officers drawing a basic of
dispensaries.



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

aby

13.

In view of a large number of complaints, as
stated earlier, the Committee undertook
visits to some of the dispensaries situated in
Delhi, Madras and Bombay, to make an
on-the-spot study of their functioning. The
Committee, during these visits, was
dismayed to observe the state of affairs
there and was extremely dissatisfied with
the functioning of the CGHS dispensaries.
In fact, endorsing the feeling of the
Committee in this regard, the Secretary,
Health, during the course of his oral
evidence, himself admitted,“unfortunately it
is true that much is left to be desired so far
as upkeep and maintenance... We can
admit that it is a weakness on our part.”
The Secretary also stated “we have to make
a very sincere effort to see that all the
problems are removed because I really
cannot offer any valid explanation... It is
painful”. The Director, CGHS,.,, wha
accompanied the Committee during its
visits to the dispensaries, was also can did
enough, during his oral evidence before the
Committee, that the patient service and
other facilities provided in the dispensaries
were not upto the mark.

The Committee is convinced that inspite of
its failure, so far, in delivering the goods,
CGHS can improve its functioning and win
back the confidence of the beneficiaries, if
it can enkindle in the minds of both
medical and paramedical staff, a sense of
professional approach and instil in them the
ethos of discipline, dedication and devotion
to their duties. The Committee is also of
the view that while this campaign for
improvement must continue, there is need
for a specific attention to key areas of its
working.

Rs. 4000+ and above per month are
entitled for direct consultation with the
specialists in Govt./State Govt.
hospitals. Others have to go to the
specialists through their respective
CGHS dispensary.

The procedure of referral to such
recognized private facilities has been
considerably simplified, so that the
parent department of the serving
employees can _ directly accord
permission for their treatment, and in
the case of pensioners, Members of
Parliament, former Governors etc.
permission would be accorded by the
Chief Medical Officer/In-charge of the
concerned CGHS dispensary after the
initial recommendation of the CGHS
specialist or the Govt. hospital.

In case the beneficiary desires to avail
of treatment in a city other than where
his, token card stands issued,
permission for the treatment can be
given by Director/Addl. Director
(CGHS) of the city but no TA/DA
would be admissible unless the
spécialised facility does not exist in the
city where he is covered under CGHS.

The expenditure to be reimbursed
would, however, be restricted to the
package deal rates/rates approved by
the Government from time to time.

(ii) In addition to the 43 private
hospitals/diagnostic centres recognized
at Pune and Calcutta under CGHS in
the last financial year, another 57
private medical facilities at Hyderabad
and Delhi have been recognized under

GHS for augmenting the medicare
services to the beneficiaries.

(iii) The rates of major medical
procedures/artificial appliances have
also‘been rationalized in keeping with
rising costs. With effect from 12-6-96,
the reimbursable ceiling has gone up



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

14,

From the evidence before the Committee
and from the nature of the problem itself,
the Committee has arrived at the conclu-
sion that barring a few special aspects, the
problem lies in non-implementation of the
already existing guidelines and arrange-
ments due to the structural defects in their
implementation. In a service sector, this
calls for imaginative leadership and creation
of incentives for better performance, with
severe punishment for failure in adhering to
the guidelines . Instead of supportive super-
vision over the routines of the CGHS
systems, especially at the dispensary level,
too many exaggerated claims are made,
based on misleading averages, leading to
decline in credibility because the claims
made do not correspond to the direct ex-
perience of many beneficiaries. City wise
levels of supervision have to be made active
with specific responsibilities for outcomes
and grievances thoroughly investigated. The
Committee expresses its disappointment
that no close and sustained supervision
seems to exist at various levels. All efforts
seem to be concentrated on crisis manage-
ment or in attending to complaints and
needs of beneficiaries who matter.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is, however, not fully satisfied over the steps taken by the Department.
The Committee gets a feeling that the Department does not have any control over the
system. It would require taking radical steps for bringing about any change in the
functioning of CGHS.

for Coronary Stents to Rs. 60,000 per
Stent (subject to a maximum of two
Stents per patient); for Rootablators to
Rs. 50,000 per patient, for Dual
Chamber Pacemakers to Rs. 1,15,500-,
for Single Chamber Pacemaker with
rate response to Rs. 65,000 and for
Single Chamber Pacemaker without
rate response to Rs. 37,500. The cost
of Coronary Stent would be admissible
over and above the cost of Angioplasty
and the cost of Rotablator over and
above the charges of Baloon Angioplasty.

(iv) Central Government pensioners
residing in non-CGHS: covered cities,
who previously had practically no med-
ical cover since they were not entitled
to medical care under the CS(MA)
Rules, 1944, have now been linked to
the nearest CGHS cities for their con-
venience. This Ministry along with
Ministry of Finance has taken up with
the Fifth Pay Commission the matter
of medical coverage to pensioners re-
siding in non-CGHS covered areas.

(v) Efforts to expand the CGHS net-
work has led to coverage by CGHS of
two new cities, viz. Trivandrum and
Guwahati, where the majority of the 6
dispensaries sanctioned became func-
tional during 1996. The number of
beneficiaries covered by CGHS rose
from about 41.65 lakhs in 1995-96 to
approximately 43.61 lakhs during 1996-97.


Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

15.

16.

The Committee feels that responsibilities
should be fixed for such a state of affairs in
the CGHS and suitable action should be
taken in this regard. The Health Secretary
has, no doubt, candidly admitted failure but
this by itself is not enough. Those
responsible for the present state of affairs
should be held accountable and appropriate
action taken against them. The Health
Secretary and the CGHS have promised to
conduct a campaign for improvement. The
Committee would endorse such a campaign,
and desires that it be spearheaded by
earmarked Senior officers drawn from two
or three hierarchical levels, including the
Director General, Health Services.

The core of such a campaign should be
sustained and painstaking attention to day-
to-day routines and implementation of
policies. This can only be done by schedule
of inspections at each level. Such
inspections should not be confined to a
mere administrative compliance of
minimum performance but a close
understanding of the levels of patient
dissatisfaction and the causes thereof and
removal of impediments, if any. The
powers and responsibilities of in-charges of
dispensaries require to be clarified and they
should be held squarely responsible for
proper functioning of the units under their
control. It seems that when things go
wrong, neither the doctor-in-charge nor the
Area Welfare Officer is capable of solving
the problems. The Committee feels that the
present arrangements diffuse responsibility
so much that none, from the Director down
to the CMO-in-charge, can ever possibly be
held totally accountable for the holistic
realisation of the objectives behind CGHS.
The Committee would recommend the
urgent need to stop this decay of a system
and ensure a well considered campaign in
the designing of which Secretary and
DGHS must give their personal attention.

For effecting further improvements in
the System, the following steps are
being taken:—

(i) From time to time, the medical and
para-medical staff are told of the
importance of professional approach,
dedication and devotion to duties with
a view to sensitise them with the work
culture they are expected to observe
and maintain. Chief Medical Officers
(CMOs) of the CGHS are also sent for
various training for sensitising them
for a more responsible health care
system.

(ii) Periodic meeting of the CMO In-
charges are also convened at the Zonal
level to create awareness about the
various administrative and functional
requirements in CGHS dispensaries.
CMOs/other Medical Officers are also
regularly involved in medical care
during emergencies such as plague,
dengue, malaria outbreaks and other
disaster management programmes as
also in Office Council, Grievances
Cell, Complaint Cell and other areas
of functioning which sensitise them to
the problems of beneficiaries at large.

(iii) A schedule of inspections to instil
a sense of discipline, has been laid
down at all levels. Regular surprise
inspections, are also carried out in the
course of last one year or so, in Delhi
alone 114 inspections have been
conducted. The pattern of intensive
inspections is being followed in other
CGHS cities also.

A four-tiered system of inspections has
been introduced for ensuring
responsiveness of the system to the
needs of beneficiaries. Under this
system CMO Incharges of dispensaries
are required to take an inspection
round of their dispensary on a daily
basis and take action for rectifying



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

lacunae. At the next level, Zonal
Additional Directors of CGHS are to
make regular inspections of a certain
number of dispensaries every month in
such a manner that each dispensary is
inspected once every quarter, i.e four
times in a year. At the next level,
Director, CGHS would be taking
inspections of a minimum of 4 to 6
dispensaries in a month, selecting a
specially those dispensaries which
appear to need special attention.
Finally, Director General of Health
Services would himself also be
undertaking inspections of certain
dispensaries on a monthly basis.

Additional/Deputy Directors of CGHS
in the zonal offices are required to
frame a detailed scheduled of monthly
inspections and send the same to
Director, CGHS who in turn would be
keeping the Ministry informed about
the progress as per this sechedule.
Moreover, a feedback would be sent
to Director, CGHS, by Additional/
Deputy Directors of CGHS from the
zonal offices on a monthly basis, who
in turn, would be furnishing quarterly
reports to the Ministry regarding the
main irregularities noted, follow up
action taken thereon and progress of
inspections as per the inspection
schedule of each zonal Additional
Director.

Over and above the system of
inspection, Additional Directors of
CGHS Zones would be holding
meeting with CMOs of different
dispensaries at regular intervals to
discuss with them and jointly evolve a
strategy for improving the general
functioning of the CGHS.

Since the introduction of the new
intensive pattern of inspections,
Additional Directors of CGHS in



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

Delhi alone have carried out 91
inspections. Director, CGHS, has
carried out 9 inspections in Delhi and
12 in outstations. At the level of
Director General of Health Services
there has been 2 inspections so far.

(iv) Fixing up of responsibilities has
been done at the grassroot level, with
the CMO Incharge having to ensure
punctuality of staff, maintenance of
cleanliness, sanitation, ensuring proper
accounting of stores, keeping liaison
with Area Welfare Officers, timely
revalidation of CGHS cards, timely
grant of permission for treatment in
recognized referral/private hospital
and diagnostic centres, maintenance of
‘Chit Books’ etc. vide “Duties and
Responsibilities” of CMOs.

(v) For the specific purpose of
effecting improvement in the supply
line of medicines, a schedule of
monthly meetings between Additional
D.G. of the MSD and the Additional
Director, CGHS, MSD, has been
framed for better coordination
between the supplier and user
organization. Through consistent
monitoring, the availability of
medicines in the dispensaries has now
gone up to 66% (excluding those
which MSO is unable to supply
because of the production being
stopped, suppliers not responding etc.)
from the Medical Supplies
Organization (MSO) source alone, and
the balance required by beneficiaries is
made up through local purchases.

(vi) A programme of upgradation of
pathological laboratories is being done
in a phased manner, with the major
laboratories at Kingsway Camp,
Parliament House and Pusa Road
Polyclinic, Delhi, having been covered
in the first phase.



---- ge ॥

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

(vii) Through analysis of complaints
received/interaction with beneficiaries,
it emerges that the major areas of
patient dissatisfaction centred around
(a) quality of medicines supplied, (b)
supply of what is viewed as
“substitute” medicines. (c) lack of
punctuality, courtesy and human
approach among the CGHS doctors
and staff. To ensure quality of
medicine each and every batch of
medicine supplied by the Govt.
Medical Stores Organisation is tested
through Govt. approved laboratories.
Any drug found substandard 15
debarred for one year.

CGHS, Medical Stores Depot. (MSD)
takes random samples and gets them
tested. if found sub-standard the entire
stock is returned.

To instil public confidence in the
system the Drug Controller General of
India is associated with the testing of
drugs supplied to CGHS.

To avoid the misunderstanding of
supply of ‘substitute’ medicines
(generally arising because of specialists
prescribing by brand names and CGHS
supplying in generic name as per
recommendation of Hathi Committee)
the specialists are being requested to
restrict themselves to the CGHS
Formulary.

(viii) Responsibilities have been fixed
at all levels and these are being
monitored at the level of Addl.
Directors. CMO Incharges are made
aware of the lapses on their part &
consequent follow-up action is taken
by CGHS Hars. The responsibilities
and powers of CMO In-charges of
CGHS dispensaries have been freshly
reiterated so that every aspect of
health care at the dispensary level is
covered.



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

(ix) Regular meetings are being taken
by the dispensary Incharges with the
Area Welfare Officers. Complaints
received are processed for introducing
improvements in the system.

A complaint cell has also been set up
at the zonal levels. In the functioning
of this Cell Area Welfare Officers are
also associated and problems faced by
the beneficiaries are tried to be sorted
out jointly.

A Grievance Cell exists in CGHS
Headquarters under the supervision of
Joint Director where grievances which
cannot be dealt with at the dispensary/
zonal levels are examined.

(x) A system of incentive has been
build in for better performance.
Shields, cash prizes and certificates are
awarded for complaint free and clean
dispensaries.

The above measures taken/
contemplated require administrative
appeals, proper sensitisation of the
CMOs and a system of monitoring and
reviewing. These are ongoing
processes and their efficacy can be
judged only over a period of time.

However, some of the ground realities
which stand in the way of effecting
overnight changes in the functioning of
the CGHS are the following:—

(6) . The pressure . which _ the
organization is facing due to financial
and manpower constaints. The SIU
report of 1991 recommended abolition
of as many as 2000 and odd posts.

Though the Ministry of Finance has

been moved for a fresh SIU report,
the efforts have yet to bear fruit, and
in the meanwhile CGHS is facing the
problem of reduced manpower and
daily increasing workload. The



Para Observation/Recommendation Action Taken

statistics show that in the course of the
last one year alone, the CGHS
beneficiaries have increased by
approximately 1.96 lakhs, but MO
Finance has not agreed to the creation
of posts for opening new dispensaries,
bifurcating overloaded dispensaries
etc. till the implementation of the SIU
Report.

(ii) There is constant pressure from
different categories of various types to
be covered under CGHS facilities. The
retired employees of the Para-Military
Forces/the Delhi High Court, the
serving and retired employees of
different autonomous organizations are
but a few examples of those insisting
upon getting CGHS coverage. The
budgetary increases however are not
commensurate to cope with the
expansion needed, and the manpower
position remains virtually frozen.

Further Comments

On a specific query, about the latest position on SIU implementation of the Report.
The Department submitted as under:

“In the year 1990, the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) of the Ministry of Finance had
conducted a study of the CGHS allopathic dispensaries and submitted its report in the year
1991, recommending abolition of more than 2000 posts of medical and paramedical “surplus”
staff in the dispensaries as a whole. The Dte. General of Health Services and the All India
CGHS Employees Association did not accept the report as no technical personnel/medical
officer was associated with the SIU study of CGHS dispensaries. There have been agitations
and demonstrations by the All India CGHS Employees Association in this regard.

The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Finance a number of times at the official
level and later even at the level of the Minister of Health for undertaking a fresh SIU study
of the dispensaries. After a lot of effort and persuasion, the Ministry of Health was finally
able to prevail upon the Ministry of Finance to conduct a fresh SIU study of the
dispensaries. The study was conducted in 1997-98 and is nearing completion. As it is yet to
be completed, the study has been included in the 1998-99 schedule. For ensuring a proper
appreciation of the work being done by the CGHS at our request, two doctors were also
included in the Committee. As of now, the spot studies and data analysis is over. It is
expected that the report will be submitted shortly.

In the meanwhile, pending the submission of the SIU Report, the Ministry of Finance
have not been agreeing to any requests for creation of new posts of medical officers and


10

para-medical staff required for bifurcation of over loaded dispensaries and expansion of
CGHS dispensaries in the existing CGHS cities as well as new stations. Consequently, the
expansion of CGHS dispensaries has been held up and new dispensaries opened only at
Trivandrum and Guwahati that too by internal adjustment of medical officers and para-
medical staff. Even at Trivandrum and Guwahati dispensaries we do not have the full
complement of medical officers, as required under the norms.

The former MOS had approved in the principle for extension of CGHS to the following
seven cities:

. Chandigarh
Bhopal

. Shillong

. Vijayawada

. Vishakapattnam
. Varanasi

. Jodhpur

NAWRWNE

As soon as the SIU Report is received and the Ministry of Finance agrees to create new
posts of medical officers and para-medical staff for the expansion of CGHS in the existing
cities as well as in the new cities. Further necessary action will be taken accordingly.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that the addresses of the Area Welfare Officers and Zonal
Additional Directors should be displayed in the dispensaries so that the beneficiaries can
approach them to redress their problems. The financial and man power constraint should be
seriously considered by the Ministry of Finance so that the CGHS may come up to the
expectations of the beneficiaries. The Committee hopes that as a result of fresh SIU study of
the dispensaries being conducted by the Ministry of Finance, opening of new dispensaries
and bifurcating of over-loaded dispensaries would be taken care of resulting in the overall
improvement in the working of the CGHS.

Para

7.

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

Medicines

Supply: The Committee was informed that
life-saving drugs were generally not
available in the CGHS dispensaries. It was
also stated that the supply of medicines,
particularly the indented medicines, was a
very time consuming process as supplies
have to be made from medical stores. The
Committee is also constrained to note, from
the submissions made by the beneficiaries,
that 50% medicines are generally not
available in the dispensaries. Some of the
beneficiaries have suggested that authorised
chemists should be nearer to the
dispensaries so as to avoid delay. Adding to

17 to 21: The Govt. Medical Store
Depots maintain stock of life saving
drugs which can be drawn on at any
time by CGHS. The availability of
medicines which previously varied
between 30% to 50%, has now
improved to approximately 66%
excluding 69 items which cannot be
supplied by MSO since their
manufacture has been discontinued by
manufacturers there is no trade
response depite repeated enquiries etc.
The balance items are made available
to patients through local purchases.



Para

18.

11

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

this, a representative of CGHS Employees’
Association, during the course of his oral
evidence, stated that the lists of medicines,
one with the Medical Store Organisation
(MSO) and the other with the CGHS,
generally would never tally. The medicines
required in CGHS were not supplied and
only common medicines were supplied. He
further stated that the satisfaction ratio was
30% to 50% but had never exceeded 50%.
All this evidence only highlights the
substantial gaps in co-ordination and team
spirit between the dispensaries, the
Directorate and the Medical Stores Depots,
all of them working under the DGHS,
eroding the credibility of the scheme.

The Ministry, responding to the above, has
stated that CGHS has taken the following
measures to ensure timely supply of
medicines:

“CGHS procures bulk supply of formulary
items from the Medical Store Organisation
(MSO) under DGHS. The indents of these
items, as per the annual requirement of
CGHS are placed with the MSO well in
advance by the Medical Store Depot of
CGHS. MSO make the supply on a
quarterly basis on CGHS request. Local
chemists have been appointed in and
outside Delhi and the medicines not

available in the dispensaries are procured.

for the beneficiaries from them against
specialist prescriptions. In all emergent
cases, CGHS beneficiaries are issued
authority slips by the CMOs in-charge and
they obtain the medicines from the
authorised local Chemists”.

‘inspections by Additional

The above position of availability
applicable to the CGHS Stores Depot
also prevails at the dispensary level, as
indicated by recently conducted
Director
(CGHS Store) on a cross section of
Delhi dispensaries (V.J.Z., Kalkaji-I,
Laxmibai Nagar, New Rajinder Nagar,
Rajpur Road, Nangal Raya, R.K.
Puram II etc.)

The improvement in availability has
come about due to a close liaison
being maintained between MSO of
DGHS & Medical Store Depots of
CGHS to monitor proper & timely
supply of drugs / medicines.
Coordination meetings are generally
held on fortnightly basis between the
GMSD & CGHS (Delhi) officials to
ensure proper flow of medical
supplies.

In cities like Delhi, where both CGHS
and MSD have a presence, the
coordination meetings are held
between the Addl. DDG (MSO) and
Addl. Dir. (CGHS) in other CGHS
cities, for effective tie up with the
MSD Organisation, Zonal Heads of
CGHS are required to refer their stock
requirements to the Zonal Heads of
those CGHS stations where MSD is
having a presence to take up their
cases in the monthly meetings with
MSD. Instructions have been issued to
all the in-charges of GMSDs at
Bombay, Calcutta, Hyderabad,
Madras, Guwahati, Karnal, New Delhi
in the above matter.

Fresh guidelines for timely indent of
medicines which are to be purchased
locally if not in stock, have been
issued. The CMOs have also been
instructed to ensure that all the
medicines listed in the formulary are
always available in the dispensary.


Para

19.

20.

12

Observation/Recommendation,

When the Committee sought to know as to
whether decentralisation of purchase of
medicines could be done so as to improve
the supply position of the medicines, the
Ministry had stated that it was not
considered necessary as decentralisation
would mean that the advantage of bulk
purchase from MSO would not be available
and also that the procurement of medicines
was different from other procurement
because of criticality of quality aspect. The
Ministry has felt that tenders were invited
only from registered firms. On a suggestion
made as to whether beneficiaries could be
allowed to purchase the prescribed
medicines from any chemist, the Ministry
submitted that the system of direct
purchase of medicines from any chemist by
the beneficiaries was not found practicable.

The Committee is, however, not satisfied
with the replies given by the Ministry
because the key issue relates to failure in
implementing policy and procedures in a
co-ordinated fashion and absence of
accountability for failure or shortcomings.
No efforts appear to have been made to go
into the obstacles in working out proper
supply arrangement. The Committee would
emphasis that unless the Ministry goes into
desegregated dispensary-wise problems,
covering drug supply, quality and
distribution arrangements, the position
cannot improve, since overall averages hide
considerable disparities in dispensaries in
regard to regularity of supply drugs issued
per head, timely availability, etc. between
well placed and lower income beneficiaries.
Evidence was available of many
malpractice, including pilferage, lack of
proper control over storage and lack of care
in weeding out time-barred medicines.

Action Taken

Surprise checks are made by Addl.
Director, CGHS (Stores) / Senior
Officers to ensure that the instructions
are carried out in letter & Spirit.

Further, a new system ‘has been
evolved by which a weekly bulletin is
issued by CGHS (MSD) for the
information of the CMO In-charges of
dispensaries regarding availability of
fresh arrivals of medicines. Through
this bulletin, dispensary In-charges are
able to collect medicines as per their
requirements.

In case of urgent need of medicine for
meeting any acute situation, the
existing system of “authority slip”,
through which the beneficiary is
authorised to obtain medicines directly
from the local authorised chemists, is
being publicised in the meetings with
Area Welfare Officers.

In the Delhi area, 60 local chemists
have been freshly appointed keeping in
view the nearness to dispensaries, for
meeting the need of timely supply of
medicines. Regarding the Committee’s
recommendation that a beneficiary
should be free to purchase medicines
from any chemists on the prescriptions
given and reimbursement to be
claimed later by him, it may be
mentioned that this system was given a
trial in 1994, but had to be withdrawn,
soon afterwards, due to unwillingness
of the beneficiary to initially spend
money, for which reimbursement
would be claimed only later.

In view of the Committee’s
observations that inconvenience is
caused to beneficiaries due to different
formularies being followed by the
MSO and the CHGS, it has to be


Para

13

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

21.

The Committee feels that the entire
arrangement between the central stores
depot and CGHS is not working properly,
leading to mutual recrimination but without
any result. A close look is necessary to see
why such a tendency exists. The Committee
feels that a key gap lies in absence of close
and sustained supervision of detailed day to
day arrangements for indenting,
procurement, storage, investigation and
distribution of drugs in MSD and with
CGHS. Director, CGHS and Director,
MSD, must be held responsible for
performance of agreed tasks set out in a
verifiable format. For this purpose,
Ministry may, if need be, seek outside help,
to devise suitable foolproof working system,
with clear accountability, patient safety and
quality assurance. Nothing would, in the
Committee’s view, enhance the credibility
of CGHS more.

The Committee would also emphasise that
the Ministry should review the ‘system to
streamline and revamp it so as to remove
the delay in supply of medicines. The CMO
of every dispensary should ensure that all
the medicines listed in the formulary are
always available in the dispensary. So far as
the system of authroised local chemists is
concerned, the Committee feels that a
beneficiary should be free to purchase
medicines from any chemist on the
prescription given in the dispensary and
later it could be reimbursed. The
Committee is aware that several steps were
tried out in the past but never pursued to
ensure that delay is eliminated. It should
not be beyond the administrative system to
devise a well thought-out system. The
Government should consider this aspect
and take an early decision. Steps should
also be taken to ensure payment of bills to
the chemists within three months from the
date of supply of medicines.

remarked that the formularies of the
two organisations would necessarily be
different, since the MSO caters to a
wide range of consumers other than

the CGHS, such as the National
Health Programmes etc. However,
steps have been initiated since

February,’ 96, for bringing about some
uniformity in the different formularies
being followed by the various
Government Health Organisations,
vide details in paras 27-28 which
follow.

As far as pilferage/proper storage /
distribution is concerned surprise
checks are being made from time to
time. A ‘chit system’ has also been
introduced for costly medicines,
whereby the chit issued by the
incharge is signed by the beneficiary
on receipt of medicines. A stock tally
is also taken from time to time.

For weeding out date-expired
medicines an Expiry Date/Life
Register is being maintained at the
dispensary level & on the basis of this
date expired medicines are being
weeded out by dispensary-incharges
from time to time. During the last one
year weeding out has been carried out
and date expired stock isolated at
Bombay, Delhi, Bangalore. Further,
checks are also made by the Addl.
Directors, during their regular and
surprise inspections, and date-expired
medicines have by and large, not been
found on dispensary shelves in the
course of recent inspections.



Para

14

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

Quality: The Committee received a number
of complaints from the beneficiaries
regarding the quality of medicines supplied
in the dispensaries. It was stated that the
standard medicines were not purchased
from listed companies and many of the
companies supplying the medicines were
little known. One of the beneficiaries also
informed the Committee that medicines
were procured through the lowest tenders
as a result of which, medicines of requisite
standards were not procured. On this, the
Ministry, in its reply, has clarified that
medicines were procured and supplied by
the MSO. with a certificate of 100%
satisfaction over standard quality. It was
further stated that whenever a complaint
was received by CGHS about the quality of
any formulary item, such medicines were
sent for testing to the Government
laboratory at Ghaziabad. In such cases,
issue of those medicines to patients was
suspended, it was added.

The Committee is, however, not satisfied
with the Ministry’s routine reply. The
Committee feels that ultimately it is the

Monitoring is also being done to
ensure regular payments to local
chemists. The instructions issued on
23-5-96 also lay down that all local
chemists bills should be forwarded to
the Accounts Officer, CGHS, Delhi,
stationed at Nirman Bhawan by the
CMO I/C of the dispensary within
the stipulated period of a fortnight.
This is to ensure regular payments to
local chemists as enjoined by the HRD
Committee.

22 to 23: Each & every batch of
medicines supplied by the Govt.
Medical Stores Organisation is tested
through Govt. approved laboratories.
Any drug found sub-standard is
debarred for one year. In the last
three years, about 55 preparations
have been withdrawn for purchase by
Govt. institutions on these grounds
during 1995-96. Withdrawal of 18 more
preparations took place during 1996-
97. Twenty three ‘complaint tests’ have
been carried out at Delhi in the last
about one year, out of which only two
have failed and have been withdrawn
from dispensaries.

The CGHS, MSD, takes random
samples, apart from the samples taken
on complaints basis, and gets them
tested. These medicines are suspended
temporarily for distribution to the
beneficiaries when visible defects are
noticed (e.g. growth of fungus / tablets
in liquified form etc.) if found
substandard, the entire stock is
returned to the MSO.

To further strengthen the system,
senior _ officers of DGHS/Ministry
carry out random checks by
withdrawing samples for testing by
Central Drug Laboratory. Calcutta etc.
to instil public confidence in the
system, the Drug Controller of India is
also associated with the testing of
drugs supplied to CGHS. In this
context it has been decided that
inspections would be carried out by



15

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

29.

beneficiaries’ satisfaction which is of
paramount importance. It is also given to
understand that it is one of the factors
leading to aversion towards CGHS among
the beneficiaries. The CGHS does not
appear to feel the pulse of the beneficiaries
in regard to the quality aspect. Prescribing
medicines without examining as to whether
those medicines were effective or not or
qualitatively good or bad, would not lead
the system anywhere. The Committee is
surprised to hear from one of the
beneficiaries that some of the doctors
advised them not to take the medicines
supplied by CGHS dispensaries as they
were not effective. In view of a large
number of complaints regarding the quality
aspect, the Committee observes that the
quality testing machinery of CGHS is either
non-functional or is ineffective. None in the
organisation seems concerned at recurrent
complaints as these are not properly
investigated leading to logical conclusions
regarding accountability. The Committee’s
discussions with Drug Controller, MSD and
CGHS leave it gravely concerned at the
quality standards of drugs supplied to
dispensaries. The Committee strongly feels
that it needs to be streamlined and
strengthened by more clearly, specifying
their respective roles and providing for
foolproof evidence of performance at each
level Government should take necessary
steps immediately for quality control.

Date-Expired Medicines: The Committee
during its visits to the dispensaries, noted
poor maintenance of medical stores. The
Committee found outdated medicines in the
stores. Proper accounting of medicines was
not done by the stores incharge and this
aspect had been confirmed by the CGHS
Director himself during the oral evidence.
The Committee is surprised to observe that
even CMOs incharge do not maintain
adequate supervision, let alone the so
called inspections done by CGHS
authorities. As regards outdated medicines,

the staff of the Drug Controller
General (India) of the major
manufacturing units from whom the
GMSD is getting its supplies. Lists of
these manufacturers would be supplied
by GMSD to the DGCI, so that
inspections are made at least once a
year of these major suppliers.

29. The steps taken in this regard have
been detailed in paras 17-21 above.

942/RS—4A


16

Para Observation/Recommendation Action Taken

the Commitee observes that the inventory
is not maintained properly and the
procedures laid down for periodic weeding
out of date expired medicines is not strictly
followed. And, as in other lapses, there
seems to be no method to punish those
accountable for failure to operate a simple
system such as periodic elimination of time
expired medicines. Clearly, CMOs
incharge, who should ensure regular
inventory of the medicines, and CGHS
authorities who should supervise them have
both failed to ensure inventory of the stores
and weeding out date expired medicines.
The Commitee takes serious note of this
deplorable situation and wants _ that
recalcitrant doctors should be given
exemplary punishment.

The Committee sought further clarifications from the Secretary, Health on various
aspects relating to availability of drugs, supply of sub-standard drugs, drugs banned in India
etc.

On a specific query about the reasons for discontinuance of manufacture of 69 items,
the Secretary cited the following factors responsible for this situation:—

(i) Inadequate market demand (The demand of the item by CGHS being nominal,
production for CGHS use is not economically viable);

(ii) Manufacturers are not registered with DGHS. Procurement from unregistered firms
is prohibited as per policy of Government of India; and

(iii) Some manufacturers were producing the drugs through unregistered firms which is
prohibited under the law.

The Secretary explained the procedure for checking supply of sub-standard drugs as
under—

As per the policy of the Government of India, Medical Store Depots purchase
medicines only from the registered manufacturers. These manufacturing units are inspected
to ensure that they have the requisite facilities as per norms of good Manufacturing Practices
by a team of experts consisting of a representative of Drug Control Department, a Professor
of Pharmacology of a University and a representative of the Medical Store Organization.
Only those manufacturing units, which have been cleared by the expert teams are eligible for
registration with Medical Store Organization.

Each and every batch of the medicine is subjected to visual inspection by an authorized
officer of the depot to check whether there is any spot, change in colour, broken tablets, any
suspended particle in case of liquid/injectables preparation as well as proper labeling as per
drug acts. Once the drug is cleared by visual inspection, it is subjected to chemical/
microbiological analysis either in the laboratory situated in the depot or in the Government

942/RS—4B


17

approved: laboratory. Only those drugs which are found to be of standard quality are
accepted by the depot for onward dispatches to the indentors. The drugs lying in the depot
are periodically inspected by the senior officers/Drug Inspectors to check its quality.

Any firm whose drug is found to have failed in the test during quality assurance is
debarred for that product to supply to any Medical Store Depot and at the same time the
fact is brought to the notice of Drug Control Department for taking necessary action against
the firm under Drugs & Cosmetics Act.

A number of firms that were debarred are as per details given below:

Period under reference Number of firms debarred
1.1.96—31.12.96 20
1.1.97—31.12.97 35
1.1.98—20.08.98 aT

He also stated that if there is some minor lapses they stop them tendering for one or
two years. He admitted that there were instances where date—expired drugs were found in
stock or such drugs were issued. He, however clarified that the system has now been
streamlined. Every fortnightly or monthly the Store Incharge checks medicines and ensures
that all those medicines’ whose expiry date is over are separated.

As regards the drugs which were banned abroad but still in use in India, the
Department, in a subsequent note furnished to the Committee stated as under:

“The exercise of screening formulations licensed by the States and which are moving in
the market is a continuous process and Government, from time to time, based on such
examination, prohibits import and/or manufacture and sale of formulations considered
harmful or irrational in the context of present knowledge. Government have so far banned
56 categories of formulations most of which are combination formulations and which are
banned on the ground of irrationality and not on the ground of harmfulness.

A Sub-Committee of experts of Drugs Consultative Committee, a statutory body under
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, was constituted as early as 1979 to screen formulations
including fixed dose combination of drugs, licensed by the Licensing Authorities appointed
by the State Governments, from the angle of safety, efficacy and rationality in the context of °
the present knowledge. The screening of drugs and pharmaceuticals by the Sub-Committee is
a continuous process. The Sub-Committee examines categories of formulations either as a
result of suggestions obtained from the various professional bodies, academic institutions,
medical profession or of its own regarding the formulations which appear to be irrational.

The Sub-Committee also examines formulations reported to be banned in some
countries of the world. As decided by the Courts of Law, the Sub-Committee is also
required to give a hearing and record the view points of the manufacturers who may be
affected by the recommendations causing banning of formulations.

The recommendations of the Sub-Committee are required to be examined by the Drugs
Consultative Committee which in turn places its recommendations to the Drugs Technical
Advisory Board, the highest technical body under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act. Based on
the recommendations of the Drugs Technical Advisory Board, the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, from time to time, in consultation with the Ministry of Law, prohibits
manufacture and sale of formulations considered ineffective or irrational or where the
possible risk of administration of the drug may outweigh the benefits due to its


18

administration. As a result of the exercise, the Central Government have already prohibited
manufacture and sale of 56 categories of formulations (which would cover 3000 branded
products).

WHO has so far reported withdrawal of 44 drugs by different countries of these 26
drugs were not approved for marketing in India, 11 drugs have been withdrawn on the
advice of experts and 7 drugs have been allowed for being continued to be marketed in
consultation with medical experts subject to Cautionary Statement on the labels and package
insert.”

On being asked to specify the reasons for allowing 7 drugs to be marketed in India,
even though not found suitable in other countries, the Department have explained as
under:—

“There is a definite Procedure for Examination of drugs reported to be withdrawn in
some countries abroad. Such information is generally received by the Government from
WHO banning drugs reported to be withdrawn in other countries”.

However, it is pertinent to mention here that such banning may be preferred by some
countries while the drug may continue to be marketed in many countries. Banning is not
necessarily due to adverse reactions but may be to availability of better substitutes,
commercial strategy of the company manufacturing the drug etc. (

On receipt of information regarding banning of drugs in some countries abroad, Drugs
Controller General (India) invariably consults medical experts and expert bodies like Indian
Council of Medical Research (ICMR) seeking their opinion on the subject. The Courts of
Law insist that banning of drugs which are moving in the market for years cannot be done
arbitrarily and technical data should be generated as well as a hearing be granted to the
manufacturers before Government decides to ban a drug.

The WHO has so far reported withdrawal of 44 drugs by some countries. Out of these,
26 drugs were not at all approved for marketing in India and action to withdraw 11 drugs
from the Indian market has already been taken in consultation with the experts.

In respect of the remaining 7 drugs, namely (i) Nitrofuran compounds (anti- bacterial);
(ii) Phenfurmin (anti-diabetic); (iii) Hydroxyquinoline (Enterquinol—anti diarrhoeal);
(iv) Lynestrenol (women diseases); (v) Piperazine (to kill worms); (vi) Phenylbutazone
Oxyphenbutazone (for gout and ankylosing spondylitis) and (vii) Analgin (pain killer). It is
stated that though these drugs are withdrawn in some countries, yet are still being marketed
in a number of countries. In consultation with the medical experts, a decision was taken to
permit the marketing of these drugs in the country subject to a cautionary statement and
contraindications being given on the lable/package insert in some cases.

Power of Central Government for banning drugs

Before 1982, Central Government did not have any power under the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act to prohibit manufacture and sale of a drug licensed by the Licensing
Authorities appointed by the State Governments. The Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)
Act, 1982 empowers the: Central Government to prohibit import (Section 10A) and
manufacture, sale and distribution (Section 26A) of a drug which is considered by experts to
be ineffective or irrational or the possible risk of administering the drug outweighs the
benefits due to administration. As such there is no necessity to make any amendment in the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act to achieve this objective. However, some of the affected
manufacturers moved to the various High Courts against the alleged infringement of
Fundamental Rights granted by Article 19 of the Constitution of India. In some cases they
have been successful in obtaining stay from different High Courts. In such cases, the Central
Government initiates action for vacating the stay.


19

In the past, all over the world a drug used to be registered on the evidence of safety
and efficacy data generated in laboratory studies and animal models and based on clinical
trials on patients. The concept of rationality for a combination drug is relatively recent in
origin. What appears to be rational once upon a time may not stand the scrutiny of modern
tests for evaluation. As a result, the necessity was. left globally to examine formulation
moving in the market not only from the angle of safety and efficacy but also from the angle
of rationality. For example in the United States, Food and Drugs Administration have
delegated this task of screening formulations moving in the market to National Academy of
Sciences (NAS). The NAS, from time to time, advises Food and Drugs Administration on
the continued marketing of certain formulation which are under question.

The relative benefit—risk ration of a drug is also influenced by the disease pattern in a
country, the ethnic group of a selected population which may react differently to a particular
drug, the availability of safer substitution for the treatment of a particular disease and cost
factor for the management of a disease. All these factors are taken into consideration by
Indian experts before recommending a drug (which may be indicated for a disease not
prevalent in that country), many other countries would recommend continued marketing of
the same drug keeping in view that administration of any drug is not absolutely free from
side effects or adverse reactions in a statistically insignificant minority population. Because
of this, it may appear paradoxical at a point of time that some drugs may be banned in some
countries, yet continued to be marketed in many other countries.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is, however, not satisfied with the overall functioning of the system
relating to purchase/supply of drugs in the CGHS. The Committee is also of the view that if
the quality of the drugs is maintained and once the beneficiaries have a confidence on the
quality and standard of the medicines supplied in the CGHS dispensaries, the problem of
demand for brand name drugs would not arise. The Committee was informed that as per the
norms, orders for supply cf drugs were placed with the firm offering the lowest tender. The
Committee is not satisfied with this state of affairs. It being a question of supply of life-
saving drugs, quality aspect has to be ensured. The Committee also finds that there are
instances where drugs were being procured from such manufacturers who not having their
own manufacturing units were supplying the same through their agents. Even though the
Secretary was confident that the system has been streamlined now in regard to date-expired
medicines yet the Committee has got its own doubts on this. There are still reports from
various corners about the supply of date-expired medicines. This has to be seriously looked
into. Foolproof action needs to be taken to ensure immediate disposal after the expiry of the
date. As regards black listing of firms or debarring of drugs for only one year is concerned,
the Committee feels that it is not an appropriate punishment. Any firm found to be
supplying sub-standard drugs should be permanently banned.

Para Observation/Recommendation Action Taken

24. Substitutions: The Committee has been 24 to 26: CGHS dispensaries provide
informed by the beneficiaries that single ingredient formulary medicines
medicines prescribed were more often than by generic names as per
not, substituted by less potent and cheaper recommendations of the “लगा
medicines. The Committee, during one of Committee” an Expert Committee in

This regard. These medicines are
procured by CGHS from Medical
Stores Organization (MSO) with a


20

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

205

26.

its visits to the dispensaries, found that the
substitution of medicines was done on a
regular basis and in many a case in the
substituted medicines were totally of
different composition, besides being
different in quality.

When the Ministry was asked to comment
on this aspect, it was stated that single
ingredient medicines were procured ' in
generic name by MSO and proprietary
items were procured as per formulary of
CGHS. Ingredients contained in proprietary
items did not change with the brand name.
However, items not available in the CGHS
formulary were procured from — local
chemists and issued to the patients as per
prescriptions, the Ministry added. This view
was also confirmed by one of the CMOs
who appeared before the Committee.

The Committee is however, not satisfied
with the Ministry’s reply, for it does not
explain why medicines, as set out above
should not be always available, if a policy
regarding common formulary exists. It is
well known that branded drugs are
promoted among physicians by the
respective drug manufacturers and this may
provide temptation for prescribing
medicines outside the formulary. Giving
substitute medicines is a very delicate issue.
The Committee is given to understand that,
sometimes substitute. medicines are given by
the pharmacist even without consulting the
doctor. If substitute medicines’s
composition is different from that of the
medicines originally prescribed, it could
cause major complications to patients. The
Committee, therefore, insists that the

certificate that they are pre-tested and
are of standard quality. Non-available
formulary medicines and non-
formulary medicines, are procured
through authorised local chemists as
per specialists’: prescription.

In case the formulary medicines are

not in stock, the medicines are
procured from the appointed local
chemists for beneficiaries. As

mentioned above, for urgent need/
acute illness, an “authority slip” is
issued to patients themselves for
procuring medicines directly from the
appointed chemists..

Dissatisfaction of the beneficiaries
mostly occurs when medicines
prescribed by the specialists are
supplied by generic name for single
ingredient items or whenever the same
drug of any other brand name
available in the CGHS formulary, is
supplied by the dispensaries. The
prescription for single ingredient items
are also being prescribed by brand
name by specialists, from time to time.

To avoid misunderstanding on this
account and apprise beneficiaries
correctly about supply of medicines by
generic rather than brand name, it has
been decided to (i) hold meetings with
Area Welfare Officers at Zonal levels
to aprise them about the
recommendations of the ‘ Hathi
Committee regarding prescribing of

single ingredient items in generic
name/compulsions of the CGHS
dispensaries to follow these

recommendations (ii) to circulate the
CGHS Formulary extensively of
CGHS Specialists, requesting them to
restrict themselves to the Formulary,
wherever possible, while prescribing
drugs so as to help CGHS to reduce
misunderstandings with beneficiaries/



Para

21

Observation/Recommendation

Ministry must set up a system under which
every dispensary should have sufficient
stock of all formulary medicines, and in
case the prescribed medicines is not
available in the dispensary, the beneficiary
should be allowed to purchase it from a
local chemist.

-proprietary

Action Taken

help decrease local purchase of non-
formulary items by CGHS.

Further, regarding 34 single ingredient
items which are included as
items in the CGHS
formulary, but which MSO is unable
to supply under brand name in view of
the ‘Hathi Committee’ restrictions the
matter of revision of formulary etc. is
being taken up to streamline supplies
further.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. The Committee feels that in the interest

of patients, prescriptions of specialists should be honoured. Besides, patients should not be
given a large number of medicines by strictly adhering to Hathi Committee
recommendations of single ingredient formulation. In view of the complexity of diseases and
advent of new diseases, the Committee is of the opinion that some recommendation of the
Hathi Committee may be out dated and such recommendations should be reviewed and up-
dated. The Committee agrees that such medicines can be procured through local chemists.
However, it would be better in the interest of beneficiaries, that the medicine are available

in the dispensaries itself.

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

30.

Pilferage: The Committee was informed by
the beneficiaries that a lot of pilferage of
medicines takes place in the dispensaries.
Supporting this, one of the CMOs stated
that many of the good medicines, available
in the dispensaries, were generally taken
away by the staff themselves. When the
Committee sought to know as to what was
a good medicine, it was clarified that good
medicines were of the make of standard
companies which would cost more than the
other medicines. It was further stated that
if the staff were denied the medicines, they
would feel irritated and would neglect the
work. Usually they would take the
medicines without any prescriptions from
the dispensary, and in some cases, the
employees sell the medicines, in the
market, and make money. He further
informed the Committee that no action was

30. For prevention of pilferage the
‘Chit System’ has been introduced for
costly medicines, whereby the chit
issued by the Incharge is signed by the
beneficiary on receipt of medicines,
and the stock tally taken from time to
time. Checks are also, carried out by
Addl. Director. Recently, a system has
been instituted of asking for
photocopies of prescriptions wherein
costly preparations have been
prescribed for verification by CMOs.
In this way, fear of detection of false
prescriptions has reportedly brought
down to a large extent the expenditure
on costly medicines in recent months.



22

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

taken against them by CGHS authorities.
The Committee is concerned about the lack
of responsibility and total helplessness of
doctors, CMOs and the administration in
preventing such pilferage and taking action
against the culprits, especially when they
are Government employees themselves.
The Committee strongly recommends that
exemplary punishment be given in such
cases of pilferage. The system needs to be
corrected and streamlined from the top to
the bottom so as to plug all the lacunae/
loopholes in this regard.

Comments of the Committee

30. The Committee is happy to note that to a large extent, expenditure on costly
medicines has been brought down. However, the Committee feels that this is only a tip of
iceburg and stresses upon close monitoring to make it pilferage free.

Para Observation/Recommendation Action Taken

3a. Functional Dispensaries: Requests have 32 to 34: The financial and
also been received for conversion of more administrative implications of
non-functional dispensaries into functional conversion of nonfunctional
dispensaries. One of the beneficiaries, who dispensaries into multi-shift

appeared before the Committee suggested
that all the dispensaries, should be made
functional so that people may not face any
difficulty in regard to timings. It was also
suggested that every dispensary should have
a resident doctor who should be given a
residence there itself and necessary
paramedical staff, including staff nurse,
pharmacist and ward-boy, etc., should be
provided. It would help people approach
them even at odd hours in case of
emergencies. The CMOs who met the
Committee, endorsed the proposal. They
stated that it would ease the situation. The
Committee feels that these two are good
suggestions and, if implemented, would go
a long way in improving patient care and
providing better services.

dispensaries would be immense. With
the cut of 166 posts imposed through
the SIU Report of 1991, the lapse of
another 91 posts which came under the
shadow of the orders of
M/O Finance, as also the ban on
filling up of new posts till a fresh SIU
is conducted, there have been severe
constraints on manpower in_ the
CGHS. This does not _ permit
conversion of single shift dispensaries
to a multi-shift system.

Moreover, with new categories (like
the retired employees of the para-
military forces. The Delhi High Court
and employees of various autonomous
bodies) insisting on admission to
CGHS facilities, the financial burden
of CGHS, meant originally for civilian
Central Government employees, is
also too great to allow CGHS scope



Para

38

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

In regard to improving the work
arrangements of CGHS dispensaries, the
Committee feels that a number of steps can
be taken for enhancing functional
efficiency. Following the vigorous plea

made by many beneficiaries, the Committee -

would recommend that dispensaries should
be made functional, viz. their services are
available on Twenty-four hour basis. This
would be a departure from the usual system
under which availability of services is
between 7.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. only,
followed by truncated services thereafter,
which are not seen to be reliable by the
beneficiaries. The requirements of making
dispensaries functional would no doubt,
involve augmenting the strength of doctors
and associated staff for availability on a
rotation basis. If such augmentation to the
permanent strength of the CGHS would
have financial and cadre implications for
CGHS, there is always a possibility of
contracting services of doctors -: for
dispensary work along well considered
lines. The effectiveness of such twenty four
hour functional arrangement should not
merely be tested against the number of
patients treated, but rather from the sense
of assurance that medical facilities are at hand
round the clock and whenever needed.

This could be done according to a phased
programme, starting with dispensaries
located in low income beneficiary areas,
examining how far the augmentation can be
done on a contractual basis and how to
retain accountability for performance.

for new innovations, such as
conversion of all dispensaries into
multi-shift pattern. The Ministry is

approaching the Committee of
Secretaries for a decision on
enhancement of the budget and

manpower of CGHS in case new
categories are to be admitted to its
benefits.

The Ministry, however, is aware of the
need for provision of more health care
facilities for Central Govt. Employees
and is, therefore, trying to meet the
shortfall through recognition of private
hospitals etc. as detailed in subsequent
paras.

Regarding the recommendation | for
augmenting the CGHS strength by
contracting services of: doctors for
dispensary work, since the CGHS
doctors belong to an established cadre,
engaging private doctors on contract
basis would give rise to various
administrative problems.

Some kind of round-the-clock medical
facility is available in Delhi, having the
greatest concentration of beneficiaries,
since all single shift dispensaries are
linked with the 42 ~ mulit-shift
dispensaries. Moreover, a tie-up with
the “Central Accident and Trauma
Service (CATS) Scheme of the Delhi
Government is under process, through
which the Central Government
beneficiaries are likely, to have the
benefits of a dedicated ambulance
service round-the-clock in case of need
for urgent hospitalization.



Comments of the Committee

The Committee notes that the beneficiaries are not informed of their multi-shift
dispensaries where they should go in odd hours. The Committee recommends that in each
and every single shift dispensary the address of the linked multi-shift dispensary should be

displayed at the entrance gate of the dispensaries.

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

35.

36.

oe

Cleanliness: Many beneficiaries complained
that cleanliness was totally lacking in
dispensaries and they were generally dirty
and the standard of sanitation was very
poor. The Committee agrees with this view
as the Members themselves had witnessed
the situation prevailing in the dispensaries
during their visit. It was found during the
visits that many of the dispensaries were
lacking in proper maintenance and upkeep
and medicines were kept in very dirty
conditions. The stores were filled with dirty
broken furniture etc. and did not appear to
have been cleaned for years. Toilets were
in a very unhygienic condition. In an
Ayurvedic dispensary at Kalibari, New
Delhi, medicine bottles were lying without
any covers and the Pharmacist incharge
could not even show to the Committee the
covers which were reportedly removed
prior to distribution of medicines. Similarly,
in a homoeopathic dispensary, pills kept in
an open tray, were being handled with
naked hand.

One of the CMOs who appeared before the
Committee on being asked to comment on
the cleanliness aspect, aruged that
cleanliness depended totally on safaiwalas
who could not be made to work and no
action could be taken against them as they
were a law unto themselves.

When the representative of CGHS
Employees’ Association was asked to
comment on this, he confirmed the
existence of such conditions in the
dispensaries and the excuse he gave was
that there was no incentive to Safai
Karamcharis at all as they retire in the
same grade.

35 to 39: Instructions have been
reiterated in this regard on 7.2.96. An
incentive scheme, as mentioned in
paras 11-16 above, has been instituted
for well maintained dispensaries. This
is also monitored through surprise
inspections by senior officers.
Administrative action could also be
taken against erring staff, if necessary
privatisation of sanitation could be
considered, after exhausting other
possibilities, within the ambit of labour
laws existing at the time.

The Secretary in his oral evidence
stated that cleanliness generally
depends on the CMO concerned.
There are CMOs who have taken
action against some of the employees
who are not doing work. But there are
others who are of different type and
are not willing to do work.



Para

38.

a

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

Even though the CGHS Director was
himself a witness to the conditions in the
dispensaries the Ministry, in its written
reply, had stated that the cleanliness of
dispensaries was maintained by the CMOs
incharge and by and large it was
satisfactory.

The Committee wonders as to how the
dispensaries are working under such
unhygienic conditions. The Committee
‘expresses its deep anguish over such an
important aspect being deliberately over
looked and ignored. The fact that a
Safiawala outrightly refuses to discharge his
duties is a glaring example of slackness,
laxity and indifference on the part of the
CGHS administration. The Committee is
not convinced by the argument that since
Safai Karamcharis do not get any incentive,
they would not work. The Committee feels
that the CMOs do not have any control
over Safai Karamcharis and even if they
had, they may be inclined to take the line
of least resistance. Unhygienic conditions,
prevailing in medical stores, is largely due
to store keeperpharmacist paying scant
attention to the upkeep. Condemned items
must be disposed of quickly by streamlining
the existing procedure. Strict guidelines be
issued for maintenance of cleanliness in the
dispensaries and privatisation of sanitation
work considered.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not happy with the routine reply. The Deptt. does not appear to have
taken any steps after the Report was presented by the Committee. The dispensaries remain
as they are. They are not clean and are very dirty and the staff just do not bother about the
cleanliness. The Deptt. should give a very serious thought to it and take some radical
measures. The Committee reiterates its recommendations made earlier.

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

45.

Inspection

The Committee is constrained to observe
that the existing system of inspection of
CGHS dispensaries is very ineffective. The
Secretary, Health during his oral evidence

45: An inspection schedule for
inspection by officers of different levels
has been laid down alongwith a
comprehensive proforma. The proforma



Para
38.

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

before the Committee, conceded that he
could not visit a single dispensary ever since
he became the Health Secretary. Even the
Director, CGHS admitted that he rarely
inspected the dispensaries. The conditions
noticed by the Committee, during its visits,
give credence to the view that inspections
did not perhaps take place for years
together. When the Ministry was asked, it
was stated that inspections were conducted
by the Additional Directors of Zones and

covers availability of medicines,
attendance of staff, number of patients
serviced, use of disposableSterlized
needlesSyringes, state of equipment
used, cleanliness of premises etc. The
inspection reports are reviewed at

higher level for taking necessary
action.
Besides the regular inspections,

surprise checks are also carried out as

Headquarters and also the CMOs of the stated in paras above.
respective dispensaries. The; Committee,
however, is not happy with the present
supervisory mechanism and emphasises the
need for regular inspections. The
Committee desires that ‘the Additional
Directors should make monthly inspections
and submit their reports. All those reports,
the Committee desires, should be reviewed
at the higher level and necessary action
taken.

Further Comments

The Secretary, Health further explained the position during the oral evidence before the

Committee on 15th September, 1997 that he himself visited a number of dispensaries. There
were certain parameters which had to be checked up by the inspecting authority and then by
the Directorate of CGHS. All these reports were scrutinised at the level of Additional
Director. He further stated that the Department was very much aware about the necessity of
quality of inspection. In regard to the follow-up of the various inspections conducted by the
CGHS Officers, in terms of disciplinary actions initiated or any other administrative action
in the matter, the Department in a written note stated as under:

“Regular inspections of CGHS dispensaries are carried out at the level of Medical
Officers/Incharges, Additional Directors (ADs), Joint Directors (JDs) and Director
(CGHS) for which a detailed proforma has been laid down covering major functions’
activities of a dispensary. 374 inspections have been carried out by ADsJDs.
Director (CGHS) has conducted inspections of Offices and dispensaries in all the
CGHS covered cities. DGHS and Secretary (H) have also carried out inspections of
CGHS dispensaries.

On an analysis of the inspection reports, it is observed that the dispensaries have
generally been graded as ‘good’ and ‘very good’ by the inspecting Officers. Only nine
dispensaries out of 154 outstation dispensaries have been graded as ‘average’
Dispensaries like Minto Road, Jangpura, Kali Bari, Dev Nagar, and:South Avenue
(Homoeopathic) in Delhi are reported to be working satisfactorilyfrequire no action.


27

Major problems centred around punctuality, shortage “of medicines and
equipments, cleanliness and maintenance of premises, behaviour of doctors and staff,
ete.

Through consistant monitoring the availability of medicines in the dispensaries
has now gone up to about 60%.

Training courses are being organised for sensitising the CMOs for a more
responsible health care system. For the Group ‘C’ personnel, the cutting edge level
of the working of dispensaries, a training programme has been organised from
15.9.97 to 17.9.97 in collaboration with DOPT. The objective of the course was the
development of a positive attitude towards work, good inter-personal relationship,
team spirit and stress management.

In some cases, e.g. Azad Nagar in Kanpur Zone and Paharganj in Central Zone
of Delhi, instances of absenteeism/late coming have been noted for action.

Cleanliness which was initially very poor in dispensaries like Chandni Chowk and
Kali Bari is reported to have improved. The maintenance of buildings has been taken
up with CPWD. Keeping in view the convenience of the beneficiaries, the local
purchase counter which was earlier on the first floor on the GKG dispensary has
been shifted to the ground floor. New sign boards have been put up in the dispensary
at Gurgaon Examination table has been arranged in the East Patel Nagar dispensary
for the examination of patients. :

Besides the regular inspections, the ADsJDs hold regular meeting with the
Medical Officers Incharge of different dispensaries. 139 such meetings are reported to
have been held in and outside Delhi. 81 meetings are also reported to have been held
with Area Welfare OfficersCentral Government Coordination Committees in
different cities’.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is, however, not satisfied either with the explanation given by the
Department or with the action reported to have been taken so far. It has been reported to
the Committee that the behaviour of the doctors in the dispensaries is wantingland generally
medicines are not available. The very fact that out of the 200 dispensaries inspected during
1997-98, in 109 cases, memos have been issued calling for explanation and in 7 cases
‘warning’ has been issued indicates the real state of affairs. It is the quality of inspection
followed by action against erring persons which is more important than the number of
inspections that are conducted. It should be the endeavour of the Department to ensure that
inspections are followed by remedical action thereby gradually leading to overall
improvement in the functioning of CGHS.

Para Observation/Recommendation Action Taken

New Dispensaries

48. The Committee had received a large 48 to 50: The Ministry has undertaken
number of representation for opening more a two pronged strategy, viz. extending
dispensaries, not only in Delhi but at CGHS to new cities & intensifying
various other places in the country. The network of dispensaries in cities
Committee was informed that even though already covered by CGHS.



28

Para

49.

50.

* places

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

many new colonies had come up,
particularly in Trans Yamuna areas, where
there is a sizeable concentration of Central
Government employees, the CGHS has not
taken any initiative to open new
dispensaries, with the result the
beneficiaries had to travel long distances to
reach the dispensary.

When the Secreatry, Health asked to
comment on this, he stated that even
though CGHS was not non-expanding
scheme, it could be done only if provision
existed for new dispensaries. When the
Ministry of Finance was approached for
sanction of new dispensaries, they had
asked CGHS to reduce the staff strength in
each dispensary as per the revised SIU
norms. The Secretary informed the
Committee that if the strength was reduced,
it would adversely affect the services.

The Committee suggests that the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare may take up
the matter with the Ministry of Finance
once again and convince them of the
necessity of opening new dispensaries. The
Ministry of Finance should also adopt a
more cooperative attitude in this matter.
The Committee received many requests for
opening new dispensaries. A list of the
for which requests have been
recieved is at Annexure VI. The
Committee would like the Government to
consider all the requests expeditiously.

CGHS has been extended to Guwahati
& Trivandrum recently. Three
dispensaries each have been sanctioned

for these two stations. Both at
Trivandrum and Guwahati, the
administrative office & two

dispensaries each have already started
functioning. The other two
dispensaries would become functional
soon.

In the first four years of the 8th Plan,
9 dispensaries, 1 Unani Unit, 2 First
Aid Posts & 4 laboratories have
already been set up. To strengthen the
network of allopathic dispensaries at
Delhi, the dispensary at Malviya
Nagar, which had become
dysfunctional since 1993, has been
restarted.

During the Ninth Plan, it is proposed
to set up 19 allopathic dispensaries,
ten homoeo units, ten ayurvedic, one
Unani Units and three polyclinics. It is
also proposed to set up a 100 bedded
hospital at Hyderbad in collaboration
with the DRD Organisation of the Mo
Defence.

However, constraints exist in opening
new dispensaries in view of manpower
shortages and ban of creation of new
posts as discussed in earlier paras.

Further Comments

In a subsequent note the Department clarified the position as follows:

“As already stated, the Ministry of Finance have not been agreeing to the creation of
new posts of medical officers and paramedical staff for expansionopening of new
CGHS dispensaries due to non implementation of the SIU Report of 1991. During


29

the IX Plan, in the first two years, so far no new dispensary has been opened due to
non receipt of the SIU Report.

The 100 bedded hospital at Hyderabad, for the DRDO, is a proposal between
Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare at an estimated cost
of Rs. 7 crores. In accordance with the understanding arrived at, the Ministry of
Defence was to provide the building and furniture at a cost of Rs. 7.39 crores and
the Department of Health was to provide manpower, technical furniture, machinery
and equipment and medical supplies at a cost of Rs. 9.61 crores. The hospital
building has already been constructed by the Ministry of Defence. The machinery
and equipment was proposed to be procured through HSCC Limited and the beds in
the hospital were to be shared in the ratio of 60:40 by CGHS and Ministry of
Defence. CGHS was the agency through which the scheme was to be executed.

When the above mentioned proposal was placed for consideration and approval
before the meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee held on 20th March, 1997,
the Secretary (Expenditure) observed that a collaborative venture of this kind may
establish an awkward precedent. Brig. S. K. Dewan, representing the DRDO,
justified the need for such a hospital on the basis of the nature of cases occurring
among DRDO. personnel requiring specialized treatment. It was also explained that
the sizeable concentration of Central Government employees residing in the
proximity would also be benefited by the proposed hospital. The EFC noted that the
location of the hospital may not be convenient to many employees who may prefer to
continue to use the existing facilities in Hyderabad provided under CGHS.

The Ministry of Finance also felt that a disproportionate amount of the Plan
allocation for CGHS would be taken up by the proposed hospital project thereby
giving little scope for expansion of CGHS activities elsewhere, Therefore. Secretary
(H) suggested that doctors from the Central Health Schemes (CHS) could be sent on
deputation to the proposed hospital if DRDO was willing to run the hospital from
their resources. Summarising the view points, the following conclusions were arrived
ati—

(i) A joint venture of this kind where the non-recurring and recurring cost is
proposed to be shared by two separate Ministries of the Government was not
advisable as it would serve as a precedent for similar demands from other
establishments.

(ii) The outflow of expenditure of CGHS plan allocation would be sizeable,
curtailing the scope for funding other priority schemes needed elsewhere.

In view of these factors, the proposal for setting up of the hospital.in the DRDO
Complex. Hyderabad was not approved by the Committee. It was recommended that
the financing and running of the hospital at Hyderabad may be from DRDO’s own
resources, or in collaboration with the Armed Forces Medical Organization. Thus,
for want of approval from Ministry of Finance, there is no progress.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is pained to note the rigid stand taken by the Ministry of Finance. The
Committee in this connection reiterates its earlier recommendations. A

Emergency Services
Observation/Recommendation

51. Considering the location of CGHS facilities in urban areas, there is need to increase
the emergency services. The Committee has been informed that emergency services available


30

in the CGHS dispensaries, were very inadequate. The Committee noted this fact during its
visits to the dispensaries. It was also stated that most of the dispensaries did not have
emergency kits. The Ministry conceded that emergency services available were only to treat
common and uncomplicated cases. It was also stated that a patient was first screened by the
doctor on duty and then referred to the hospital, if required. The Committee is not
convinced by the reply given by the Ministry. Emergency services should be adequately
strengthened in all the dispensaries especially in respect of ambulance availability. The
Government may consider providing one ambulance for four or five dispensaries/maternity
centres so that its services can be utilised in case of emergency. Whenever the proposed
Centralised Accident and Trauma Services is set up for Delhi, CGHS must make its facilities
also a part of the Central pool.

52. The Committee was also informed by the beneficiaries that all the dispensaries were
not provided with facilities for basic pathological tests. Patients are often required to go to
another dispensary for tests and in the process, diagnosis and treatment take a long time.
When the Committee asked the Ministry to comment on this, it was stated that the basic
laboratory facilities were available on an average ratio of 1:3 dispensaries. It was further
stated that considering the workload and financial constraints, the present arrangement was
considered satisfactory. The Committee, however, feels that laboratory facilities in the
dispensaries need to be strengthened so that beneficiaries are not put ‘to any serious
inconvenience.

Action Taken

51 to 52. Keeping in view the Committee’s recommendations about emergency servcies,
a scheme of “Mobile Ambulance Service” is being evolved in collaboration with the
Centralised Accident Trauma Services (CATS) of the Delhi Government...The scheme is
likely to provide a service of 5 fully-equipped ambulances dedicated specifically to CGHS
beneficiaries under the professional management of CATS. This facility would be better able
to meet the emergency needs of the beneficiaries than is now possible.

So far as upgradation of pathological laboratories is concerned: the laboratories are
being provided with the latest equipment in a phased manner, depending upon the
availability of funds. For e.g., major laboratories at Kingsway Camp and Pusa Road, Poly-
clinic, Delhi have been provided with a fully automatic auto-analyser ‘RA-100’ alongwith a
back-up semi-automatic auto-analyser “RA-50” for conducting bio-chemical tests;
Haematology auto-analyser “HAEMAT-8 SEAS” For Haematological Tests, Semi-automatic
Cell Counter for improving accuracy etc. of blood tests, binocular microscope for more
accurate diagnosis etc.

As a result of such upgradation results. of tests.are obtained quickly and the variety of
biochemical tests has increased thus obviating the necessity for referral to hospitals.

Tests now possible through CGHS’s own laboratories include liver function tests, kidney
function tests, lipid profiling tests, serum calcium, phosphorous, iron, total iron binding
capacity, serum GGT, serum protiens and albumin tests. The scope of haematological tests
has been enlarged with tests results on parameters like PCV, MCH and MCHC now
becoming: possible in addition to the routine tests for TLC, DLC, ESR etc.

For augmenting the pathological diagnosis facilities available with CGHS private
diagnostic centres are being recognized in all CGHS cities. Orders have already been issued
for Pune, Calcutta, Hyderabad and Delhi and the orders for other cities are under active
processing.

Further Comments

Ona specific query about the fate of the scheme of ‘Mobile Ambulance Service’ being
evolved in collaboration with the Centralised Accident Trauma Services (CATS) of the


31

Delhi Government the Department have replied as under: -

“In brief, the proposal was to operate 5 ambulances in collaboration with Centralized
Accident Trauma Services (CATS) of the Government of Delhi. The financial implications
of the scheme were that, there would be an expenditure of Rs. 49.45 lakhs (recurring and
non recurring) for the first year of the operation of the scheme. Out of this, Rs. 22.95 lakhs
was the cost of ambulances including the cost of equipment. The balance of Rs. 26.50 lakhs
was the recurring cost per year. The total expenditure on the above scheme for five years
was estimated as indicated below:

Rs. in lakhs
lst year 49.45 (Recurring & Non-recurring)
2nd Year 26.50
3rd Year 26.50
4th Year 26.50
Sth Year 26.50
Total 155.45

Although the proposal was approved in principle on 21.01.97, yet it was reviewed again
on 27.03.97 to examine whether the CGHS should go ahead with the mobile ambulance
scheme in collaboration with CATS of Delhi Government. The proposal was referred to DG
for his comments who was of the view that initially the proposal was mooted for creation of
32 ambulances but was abandoned in view of the huge capital expenditure of Rs. 11.25
crores. Alternatively, the present proposal was initiated under which five dedicated
ambulances were to be added to the existing fleet of CATS ambulances to be stationed at
CGHS dispensary, R.K. Puram, New Delhi and to be used exclusively for CGHS
beneficiaries located in South Delhi. Under the scheme, in addition to these five
ambulances, provision was made to have the services of other 27 ambulances of the CATS in
the event of additional demand arising.

The above mentioned proposal was submitted for approval of the then MOS who
observed on 3.10.97 that “linkage with CATS is not administratively viable. Instead, invest
in strengtheing existing ambulance services in our hospitals and earmark for CGHS
beneficiaries”.

The CGHS has got only 3 ambulances which are already stationed at Parliament House,
Parliament House Annexe and CGHS dispensary at North Avenue. In case of an
emergency, the ambulance is called from the nearest hospital. Incidentally, 5 ambulances
were procured for the RML Hospital in 1997 following a Supreme Court direction.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is constrained to note that no progress has been made for providing
ambulance services for CGHS beneficiaries in emergent circumstances. The Committee
reiterates its earlier recommendations that Government may consider providing one
ambulance for four or five dispensaries / maternity centres so that its services can be utilised
in case of emergency.

942/RS—6A


32

Para

71.

72.

73:

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

Railways and Armed Forces-Medical Facilities

In this connection the Committee has also
considered the Railway Health Services and
the Armed Force Health Services and
heard the view of the Chief of both the
services so as to compare the medical
facilities available to the employees of these
two organisations with the CGHS.

The network of Armed Forces Medical
Services(AFMS) starts with the Medical
Services Units at the primary level. It has
zonal and sub-zonal hospitals at the
secondary level and command level
hospitals at the teritary level which have all
types of super specialities and the latest
medical equipments. The network caters to

- the medical needs of the armed force

personnel free of cost, from the lowest to
the highest level. A beneficiary may seek
treatment by private doctors in case of
emergency and later claim reimbursement
of the full amount spent on such treatment.
Their arrangements with private hospitals is
better as they make advance payment for
the treatment of their beneficiaries and as
such the patient receives better care and
satisfactory services.

As regards ex-serviceman except for such
diseases as cancer, leprosy, T.B, mental
disorder etc. all sorts of treatment are
provided free of cost. For them a scheme
called ‘Army Group Insurance’ (AGI) is
also there. Under this scheme, a retiring
employee makes a lump sum contribution,
ranging from Rs. 3,000 to Rs. 6,000
depending upon the rank from which he
retires. It entitles him to get treatment for
cancer, by-pass surgery, kidney transplant
etc., costing upto Rs. 1 lakh. The
Committee was given to understand that
despite doctor/nurse, patient ratio being
lower in the AFMS, as compared to civil
hospitals/;CGHS, the quality of services
provided by the former is far better than
that of the latter.

71 to 78: Regarding improving the
functionning of CGHS to the level of
Armed Forces Medical Services and
the Railway Hospital Services. It is
submitted that a comparison between
the Medical Services offered by the
AFMS and Railways vis-a-vis the
CGHS is not feasible since the medical
services of both these organizations are
“captive” services dedicated exlusively
with Railways/Armed Forces where
CGHS is common for Central Govt. as
a whole and therefore its efficiency is
to that extent diluted. The Army and
Railway medical outfits have their own
buildings and are run in army
cantonements/Railway Colonies,
whereas CGHS is mostly runs from
hired buildings, which may not all be
in good condition. The punctuality of
staff in CGHS is affected by the fact
that they have to come from a
distance. whereas in the Army/
Railway employees generally live in
the same cantonement or colony. Since
even housing, food, clothing and
primary education needs of employees’
children are met by the Army and to a
lesser extent by the Railways, loyalty,
discipline and morale in their medical,
Services is high as compared to
CGHS. The Armed Forces do not face
dearth of funds of essential such as
medical services and the Railways are
a commercial, profit-earning venture,
which is not the case with CGHS.
Moreover, the regimentation in the
Army, and to a lesser extent in
Railways, makes enforcement of
discipline in their medical services that
much easier, than in the CGHS.
However, despite differences in the
work, culture of AFMS/Railway
Health Services vis-a-vis the CGHS,
efforts are being made, as indicated in
the earlier paras, for revitalizing and
streamlining the CGHS system.



Para

74.

75.

76.

Wf dis

33

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

Similarly, the network of Railway Health
Services (RHS) consists of health units at
the lowest level sub-divisional and
divisional hospitals at the secondary level
and zonal hospitals at the tertiary level
which provide speciality and - super
speciality services. They also have some
centres of excellence located in different
parts of the country which provide
specialised services for heart diseases,
cancer, orthopaedics, cardio-micro vascular
surgery, gastro-entrology and __ plastic
surgery etc.

Periodic examination of the health
conditions of railway employees, the
Committee noted, is undertaken with a
view to have an early detection of diseases
and curing them at the initial stages only.
For pensioners, RHS has two schemes,
retired employees Contributory Health
Scheme and the Retired Employees
Liberalised Health Scheme. While
beneficiary seeking in-door treatment has to
pay 10% of the charges under the former, a
pensioner has to deposit the amount equal
to the last pay drawn under the latter. He
is provided all the services available in the
railway hospital free of cost in case of
emergency, a beneficiary may seek private
treatment and get the amount reimbursed
within a maximum ceiling of Rs. 1500

Further, there is a clearly laid down
procedure of inspection under which a
health unit is inspected every six months,
All the medicines prescribed by the
doctors/specialists are made available to
the beneficiary in the unit/hospital itself.
Medicines are given for more days so that
the patient need not go to the doctor
frequently.

The beneficiary does not need to wait for
the days together for various investigations.
Generally the investigation of the patient
admitted in the morning is completed by
the evening itself.



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

78.

In view of the above the Committee is of
the opinion that the general functioning and
the quality of services being provided by
the AFMS and the RHS are far better and
satisfactory as compared to those of the
CGHS. This is despite the fact that AFMS
and RHS are non-contributory. If both of
them are able to provide better services
without any contribution from their
beneficiaries the Committee fails to
understand as to why the same could not be
done by the CGHS which collects some
amount as contribution. The Committee
feels that the its afflicting the functioning of
the CGHS are more because of
mismanagement of men and materials than
on account of lack of resources.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is pained to note that the reply of the Ministry is not only unspecific but
also irrelevant. The Committee feels that the Ministry is taking discipline loyality and
devotion to duty lightly. The Department should think about all possible steps to make
CGHS a dedicated service.

Para Observation/Recommendation Action Taken
Recognised Private Hospitals
80. As far as CGHS needs are concerned, one 80 to 83: To supplement CGHS

area to be explored is how to use private
hospital services to supplement CGHS
facilities, specially where beneficiaries
cannot easily have access to such facilities
due to distance. Already, the Committee
notes, private hospital services are used to
supplement CGHS in respect of facilities
and procedures. In this connection, the
evidence reveals that private hospitals have
a grievance about payment at low rates, or
at discriminatory rates, not adequate to
cover their costs. The Committee would
recommend that, while taking advantage of
private hospital facilities, CGHS must
evaluate such facilities and lay down rates
of payments on a uniform basis as part of
regulatory guidelines. CGHS may also
consider procedures for approaching private
doctors and hospitals specially to cover
pensioners or those living beyond the city

facilities as recommended by the
Committee, private hospitals/
diagnostic centres are being recognised
in all the CGHS covered cities. Orders
in respect of Pune, Hyderabad,
Calcutta and Delhi have already been
issued while those for other cities are
under process. Uniform rates are being
prescribed from city to city on
the basis of rates received from
the hospitals who applied for recogni-
tion.

Rates laid down for specific
procedures/interventions are revised
from time to time. Lately, rates of
pace-makers, cornonary stents,
Rotablator spectra-scan etc. have been
revised and those for kidney
transplantation, etc. are under process.



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

81.

82.

where CGHS facilities are located. There
could also be arrangements for a separate
CGHS wing, on an earmarked basis
reserving beds in the hospital general wards
for CGHS patients despite the reasons
given against such arrangement by the
Ministry.

The Committee feels that the services of
private hospitals and laboratories are not
being tapped effectively. The Committee
received several complaints from the
beneficiaries that many efficient and good
private hospitals have been kept out of the
purview of the CGHS, causing a lot of
hardship to the beneficiaries. The
Committee also received complaints that
recognised private hospitals often refuse to
entertain CGHS beneficiaries due to non-
payment/delayed settlement of their bills
by CGHS authorities. The Committee also
held discussions with the representatives of
some of the private hospitals recognised by
CGHS. Dr. P.C.Reddy, Chairman, Apollo
Hospitals, informed the Committee that
there was no rationale on the part of the
CGHS in prescribing the approval rates.
Further, there were city to city and hospital
to hospital variations in costs. It was also
stated that the hospitals would not be able
to render service at the existing approved
rates, unless these were revised from time
to time. Similar complaint was made by
Shri B.K. Thaparia, Chairman of Bombay
Hospitals.

When the Committee sought the comments
of the Additional Director General of
Health Services, he submitted that the
Government had received a number of
requests for revision of rates. He further
stated that Committee had been set up in
1994 to carry out inspection of all the
recognised hospitals and a revision would
be done soon. There was also a budget
constraint he added.

The Deptt. in the subsequent note
furnished to the Committee stated as
under.

The experience with recognition of
private hospitals has shown that
beneficiaries have been seeking redress
from the courts to enable them to get
total reimbursement for all hospital
costs incurred. The scheme was made
to cover specific ailments and
according to the package deal,
Government had only undertaken to
provide financial support upto a
specific ceiling which had been
determined by averaging costs of
different hospitals, for each illness
episode covered by the Scheme.
Beneficiaries, however, expect full
payment which in the case of some
private hospitals is exorbitant and will
be outside the capacity of Government
and also will give unintended benefits
at the cost. of other patients who will
be deprived of treatment and other
medical services as the overall budget
for CGHS will not be increased as a
result of the introduction of the
Scheme.



Para Observation/Recommendation Action Taken

83. The Committee, after taking into
consideration various aspects related to this
arrangement, observes that CGHS has not
adopted a proper system of prescribing
rates to the mutual advantage of the CGHS
beneficiaries and the private hospitals. Non-
revision of rates for several years and
delayed payment of bills would only affect
the beneficiaries. The Committee desires
that the formalities regarding revision of
rates be completed early and the concerned
hospitals informed accordingly. The
department may also consider undertaking
the exercise of recognising more reputed
private hospitals and laboratories. These
efforts would go a long way in not only
supplementing the efforts of CGHS but also
help achieve the ultimate goal of patient
care and satisfaction.

Further Comments

The Secretary in his oral evidence stated dated 15th September, 1997 that of late the
courts have said that the patient should be entitled for full reimbursement. Now everybody
would like to avail the facilities which are available in 5 Star Hospitals. As a result
expenditure on such medical treatment has almost doubled. If the courts continue to give
such directions, the Department shall have to withdraw the facility, the Secretary added.

The Committee was informed that the Supreme Court in a judgement of December, 1996
delivered in the case of Shri Mohinder Singh Chawla Vs. Government of Punjab had gvien
the decision for full reimbursement of medical expenditure incurred by the Government
servants even for the treatment taken in a private hospital.

However, this judgement has since been superceded by another judgement of
26th February, 1998 pronounced in the case of Shri Ram Lubhaya Bagga Vs, State of
Punjab, In which has been Stated that:

“When Government forms its policy, it is based on number of circumstances on facts,
law including constraints based on its resources. It is also based on expert opinion. It
would be dangerous if Court is asked to test the utility, beneficial effect of the policy or
its appraisal based on facts set out on affidavits. The Court would dissuade itself from
entering into this realm which belongs to the executive. Further, no State of any
country can have unlimited resources to spend on any of its project. That is why it only
approves its projects to the extent it is feasible. The same holds good for providing
medical facilties ‘to its citizens including its employees. Provision of facilities cannot be
unlimited. It has to be to the extent finance permit. If no scale or rate is fixed then in
case private clinics or hospitals increase their rate to exorbitant scales, the state would
be bound to reimburse the same.


37

Where according to new Government policy, the employee was given free choice
to get treatment in any private hospital in India but due to financial constraint the
reimbursement was allowed to the level of expenditure as per the rate fixed by the
Director, Health and Family Welfare, for a similar treatment package or actual
expenditure whichever it less. A Committee of technical experts was constituted by
the Director, Health and Family Welfare, to finalize the roles of various treatment
packages the principle of fixation of rate and scale under this new policy was justified
and cannot be held to be violative of Art. 21 or Art. 47 of the Constitution of India. In
such a case, exclusion of private designated hospital was also not violative of Art. 21.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee, however feels that the first judgement of the Supreme Court is absolutely
clear that medical expenditure incurred by the Govt. Servants even for the treatment taken
in a private hospital is fully reimbursable. So far as the second judgement is concerned, the
Committee feels that the Hon’ble Supreme Court has inferred that when Article 21 is read
with Article 47 of the Constitution, the financial limitations should be considered as one of
the implications. Article 47 says —

“47, Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to
improve public health—the State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and
the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its
primary duties and, in particular, the state shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of
the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs
which are injurious to health.

The Committee feels that by no stretch of imagination this kind of an interpretation of the
economic situation in a State in which article 47 has to be implemented, can be considered.

Because of total indiscipline and inefficiency in CGHS run hospitals, the practice of
allowing patients to go to private hospitals was allowed. It is mainly a question of whether
the rates prescribed by the hospital or the package rates fixed by the Department of Health
are to be taken into account. This definitely goes against the intention to allow the Govt.
servants to have treatment in privates hospitals. Averaging the rates for prescribing the
package rates will be an unnecessary burden on the patients, going per force to the private
hospitals. Since the present package rates are in force only upto September, 1998, the
Committee strongly feels that the actual rates of private hospitals should be allowed.

Para Observation/Recommendation Action Taken
Chief Welfare Officer/Area Welfare Officer/Beneficiaries’ Welfare Committee ie
93. | The Committee also heard the views of the 93 to 96: In CGHS there is three tier

Chief Welfare Officer and one of the Area
Welfare Officers in order to find out their
role in redressing the grievances of the

grievance redressal system.

The CMO Incharge of the dispensary

beneficiaries and to what extent they have
been protecting the interests of the
beneficiaries. On being asked about the
appointment procedure etc. of these
officers, it was stated that the post of Chief
Welfare Officer was a regular post. Area
Welfare Officers, however, were appointed
for various residential colonies for a period
of two years on honorary basis.

settles the grievances as and when it is
brought to his/her knowledge by the
beneficiary. The Area Welfare Officer
plays an important role and there is a
system of monthly meeting by the
CMO (Incharges), of the dispensary
with the local Resident Welfare
Association and Area Welfare Officer.



Para

95.

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

It was further Stated that the Area Welfare
Officer and the Residential Welfare
Associations were the two fora where
CGHS related issues were raised Generally,
Area Welfare Officer takes up the
complaints with the CGHS Dispensary and
in case he was not satisfied, he would refer
it to the Chief Welfare Officer of CGHS. It
was, however, submitted that the post of
Area Welfare Officer was purely honorary
and no special benefits were attached when
a probing enquiry was made to the Chief
Welfare Officer as to whether Area
Welfare Officers were effective in dealing
with the problems of CGHS beneficiaries,
he evaded direct reply, except stating that
in certain areas they took a lot of interest.

The Committee, however, is not happy
with the system of Area Welfare Officer.
The Committee is constrained to observe
that the beneficiaries are generally not in
contact with the Area Welfare Officers or

‘rather they did not know about them. The

Committee agrees that since the Area
Welfare Officers are not paid for their
services and they have various other
activities, they would not take that much
interest as is required of the job. The
Committee is therefore, of the view that
the Government should consider providing
some minimum facilities, such as telephone,
etc. to Area Welfare Officers. Some
monetary incentives could also be provided.
The suggestions of Area Welfare Officers
should have some authority and sanctity so
that the beneficiaries’ grievances could be
effectively redressed. The Government
should give necessary instructions to all
CMOs to act immediately on the
suggestions made by the Area Welfare
Officers. Government may also consider
appointing Beneficiaries’ Welfare

In case the beneficiary is not satisfied,
he/she may approach the Addl.
Director of the Zone where a
Complaint Cell exists and generally all
such complaints are dealt with by the
Zonal Complaint Cell.

Finally the grievances are looked after
by CGHS (HQ) at Nirman Bhawan
where a Grievance Cell is functioning.
Now at dispensaries, the redressal of
grievance channel alongwith the name
and telephone no of the officer has
been displayed on the notice board.
Some grievances are also received
directly by the Ministry, who tackle
these in conjunction with the CGHS
9७, fechnical advice.

So far as enipowerment of Area
Welfare Officers are concerned this is
the subject matter of Mo Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions

A half-yearly open house meetings
would be held by the Addl. Directors.
CGHS, as recommended by the
Committee.



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

g

Committees for each dispensary involving
the Chief Medical officer, the Area Welfare
Officers and representatives of Residential
Welfare Associations apart from providing
incentive to the Area Welfare Officers.
Government should give them some sort of
authority. So that they could discharge. their
responsibility effectively.

The Committee feels that lack of proper/
regular interaction between the CGHS
functionaries and its beneficiaries is the
main cause of the dissatisfaction amongst
the beneficiaries and non-redressal of their
grievances the Committee therefore
recommends that a half-yearly open house
meeting of the Additional Director, CGHS
of the concerned Zone. CMOs and para-
medical staff of a dispensary with its
beneficiaries should be held so that the
grievances may be redressed quickly.

Comments of the Committee

The Ministry should take up the matter of empowerment of Area Welfare Officers with
the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension for providing monitary incentives
and telephone facility to them. Ministry of Finance should also be approached.

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

Pensioners

The Committee received a large number of
complaints in regard to treatment of
pensioners in CGHS dispensaries. The main
complaint was that senior citizens were
made to wait for their turn in the queue
alongwith others Complaints, have also
been made in regard to hike in subscription
rate, delayed reimbursement and non-
availability of CGHS facilities at places
where a large number of CGHS pensioners
are residing.

97 to 103: Regarding better facilities to
pensioners under the CGHS Scheme.
It may be mentioned that certain
special facilities are already being
extended to them under the Scheme.
Such as supply of medicines for three
months together on the advice of
specialist, permission to take treatment
from private recognized hospitals with
a due reference, provision of 80%
advance of estimated cost of treatment
on hospitalisation. Right to out-of-turn
consultation and issue of medicines at
dispensaries.

942/RS—7A


Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

98.

Many pensioners stated that they might be
exempted from making any subscription
and be excluded from any future revision.
It was further stated that wherever the
CGHS facilities were not available, some
sort of monthly allowance should be given
to get treatment for minor ailment. For
major ailments, there should be an
arrangement with the State run hospitals
for their treatment.

The Committee sought the comments of the
Ministry on various issues relating to
pensioners. The Ministry has stated that
instructions were already issued about
giving preference to retired people at the
dispensaries. As regards provision of free
medical facilities to pensioners, it was
stated that the matter was under the
consideration of the Fifth Pay Commission.
On the issue of payment of lumpsum
amount to pensioners for treatment the
Ministry informed the Committee that the
demand was justified and a proposal was
sent to the Finance Ministry but it was not
agreed to. The Committee was also
informed that the issue was then referred to
the Fifth Pay Commission. When the
Committee sought to know as to whether it
would be possible to open separate
counters for senior citizens. one of the
CMOs informed that due to lack of
sufficient staff and space it would not be
possible. The Committee feels that
sequentally negative view has been taken of
genuine problems of pensioners, where
every suggested solution has been
confronted by pointing out new problems
or postponement of decision. Considering
the world wide trend of respect and special
attention to problems of senior citizens.
The Committee would request the
Government to take a just and fair decision
on all these issues.

Orders have been issued for a separate
queue for pensioners at CGHS
dispensaries. Moreover, the proposal
of extending benefits under the
Central Services (Medical Attendance)
Rules 1944, to pensioners residing in
areas not covered by CGHS is before
the Fifth Central Pay Commission for
consideration.

On a clarification sought by the
Committee in regard to . medical
facilities available for Ex-M.Ps the
department have stated as under:

“Ex-MPs are extended medical
facilities under the CGHS Scheme in
the CGHS covered cities. They are
entitled to the same facilities as serving
MPs, i.e. outpatient care facilities in
all systems, emergency services, free
supply of prescribed drugs, laboratory
and radiological investigations,
domiciliary visits in case of seriously ill
patients, specialist consultation,
treatment in specialised hospital, etc.

They have the option of getting their
CGHS Token Card on year to year
basis or for the whole life by paying .
ten years subscription at one time.

The ex-MPs living outside the
CGHS cities have the option of getting
themselves registered in the nearest
CGHS city for indoor treatment.

942/RS—7B


Para

41

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

100.

101.

102

The Committee received a suggestion that
geriatric clinics be opened in all CGHS
dispensaries. In response to this the
Ministry stated that
upcoming facility and specialists in this field
were very few it might be possible to open
geriatric clinics only in phases in course of
time.

The World Health Organisation has been
periodically drawing attention of the health
authorities to the problems of the aged. In
regard to health related issues. WHO had
recommended that health and health allied
services should be developed to the fullest
extent possible. It also recommended that

institutional care should always be
appropriate to the needs of the elders and
necessary health infrastructure and

specialised staff to provide thorough and
complete geriatric care should also be made
available. There has been a variety of
experiments abroad of redesigning of
hospitalisation needs of old people. making
domiciliary and community care as a part of
hospital services.

In view of the above the Committee
recommends that appropriate instructions
be issued for according priority in treatment
to senior citizens and the same be
scrupulously adhered to in each and every
dispensary. The CMO himself should see to
it that they are not put to unnecessary
hardships and strain. The Committee hopes
that the Fifth Pay Commission would give
sympathetic consideration to the grievances
of the pensioners as regards payment of
lumpsum amount to those not availing of
the CGHS facilities and come out with
positive recommendations. The Govern-

geriatrics was an ~

They can draw an advance upto 90%
of the package/ceiling rate or estimate
of the hospital whichever is lower.

Facility of obtaining medicines for
chronic ailments upto three months at
a stretch has also been made available
to them.

They can also avail of the medical
facilities at the recognised private
hospitals after the initial advice of a
Government/CGHS Specialist has
been obtained. The permission letter
in such cases is given by the CMO
Incharge of the concerned CGHS
dispensary. In case of medical
emergency, the details of which are to
be recorded by the CMO Incharge, the
CMO concerned can directly refer the

patient to the recognised private
hospital for further management/
treatment.

The expenditure to be reimbursed
is restricted to the package deal rates/
rates approved by Government from
time to time. The expenditure in

excess is to be borne by the
beneficiary himself.
The CS (MA) Rules, 1944 are

applicable to only serving employees
and, hence are not applicable to ex-
MPs. The Fifth Central Pay
Commission has, however, in its
Report recommended extension of CS
(MA) Rules to the pensioners in
stages. This is under examination of
the Government.

The Pay Commission has also
recommended a Medical Allowance of
Rs. 100/- per month in respect of
pensioners who are not covered under


42

Para Observation/Recommendation Action Taken

ment must also try to’ identify the any Medical Scheme. This is also being
areas where there is comparatively larger examined by the Government.
concentration of retired Central

Government employees and provide them

CGHS coverage Government should also

expedite the proposal for allowing $ .

pensioners to seek treatment in local

recognised hospitals and get reimbursement

thereafter.

103. |The Committee strongly recommends that a
complete study of the CGHS related issues
and problems faced by pensioners may be
undertaken and a plan of action for
removing their difficulties be drawn up.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee recommends that the recommendation of the Fifth Pay Commission for
extension of CS(MA) Rules to the beneficiaries may be implemented at the earliest.

GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Transfer Policy

The Committee sought to know the normal tenure of the doctors in the CGHS
dispensaries, details of Chief Medical Officers due for transfer and whether they had been
transferred and if not the reasons therefor. The Department in the note submitted as under:

“According to the Transfer Policy of CGHS, Medical Officers posted in the different
allopathic dispensaries, are required to be rotated within the zone after completion of three
years of service at one dispensary in a phased manner, by the Zonal Heads taking into
account administrative exigencies so that services of the dispensaries are not hampered.
Incharge of dispensaries are required to be) rotated after four years.

Generally more than 80% transfers have been effected expect, at Patna, Chennai,
Allahabad, Pune, Jabalpur, Meerut, and Nagpur where the Orders are being implemented in
a phased manner. In Ahmedabad and Calcutta, the transfers have been 100% while at Delhi
and Luknow, they are to the extent of 96%.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is constrained to note that at Patna and Allahabad, even 50% transfers
have not been effected. In fact the worst performance is at Patna where it is 20% only. The
situation should change immediately. Unless the transfer are done on rotation as per the
guidelines laid down, nepotism and indiscipline will creep into the system. The Department
should seriously consider the matter and take necessary action.

Protection of CGHS Beneficiaries

The Committee noted that the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissioner,
New Delhi has taken a view that a Government servant under the Central Government
Health Scheme is not a consumer within the meaning of Consumer Protection Act, 1986 as


43

defined in Section 2(1) (d) of the Act and the services rendered to him under the CGHS do
hot constitute service as defined under Section 2(1) (0) of the Act. The Supreme Court in a
recent decision in Indian Medical Association vs. V.P. Shantha & others dated 13th Nov. 95
has ruled that service rendered at a Government Hospital/health centre/dispensary where
no charge whatsoever is made from any person availing the services and all patients (rich
and poor) are given free service—is outside the purview of the expression ‘service’ as
defined in Section 2(1) (0) of the Act. The payment of a token amount for registration
purpose only at hospital/nursing home would not alter the position.

- The Secretary clarified that it was in 1994 that the Consumer Protection Act sought to
cover all categories of services given in hospitals, including the Government hospitals, When
the matter came up before the Cabinet, agitations took place at several quarters and the
then Health Minister took the view that Government hospitals are not able to give quality
service for lack of certain factors that are beyond their control, nemely, overcrowding,
infrastructure, support of the para medical staff and overall conditions prevailing in the
hospitals. Therefore, it was decided that it would be kept out of the purview of the
Consumer Protection Act. Nonetheless, when the matter went to the Supreme Court, it was
mandated that anything which is a free service will be kept out of its purview.

The Secretary, however, admitted that there ougth to be a forum where people who are
aggrieved about negligence, both in Government as well as private hospitals, can seek
redressal.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is of the view that in the light of Article 21 of the ‘Constitution it is
obligatory on the State to see to it that proper service is given to all patients, it is irrelevant
whether he is charged or not. Merely because it is a free service, this kind of negligence,
cannot be tolerated. Therefore, the Committee strongly feels that efforts should be made to
amend Section 2(1)(0) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Thereafter, the Department
after consulting the Ministry of Law may approach a larger bench of the Supreme Court in
the matter.


CHAPTER-II

RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Para

i:

16,

Observation/Recommendation

Committee feels that responsibilities should
be fixed for such a state of affairs in the
CGHS and suitable action should be taken
in this regard. The Health Secretary has, no
doubt, candidly admitted failure but this by
itself is not enough. Those responsible for

- the present state of affairs should be held

accountable and appropriate action taken
against them. The Health Secretary and the
DGHS have promised to conduct a
campaign for improvement. The Committee
would endorse such a campaign, and
desires that it be spearheaded by
earmarked senior officers drawn from two
or three hierachical levels, including the
Director General, Health Services.

The core of such a campaign should be
sustained and painstaking attention to day-
to-day routines and implementation of
policies. This can only be done by schedule
of inspections at each level. Such
inspections should not be confined to a
mere administrative compliance
minimum performance but a _ close
understanding of the levels of patient
dissatisfaction and the causes thereof and
removal of impediments, if any. The
powers and responsibilities of in-charges of
dispensaries require to be clarified and they
should be held squarely responsible for
proper functioning of the units under their
control. It seems that when things go
wrong, neither the doctor-in-charge nor the
Area Welfare Officer is capable of solving
the problems. The Committee feels that the
present arrangements diffuse responsibility
so much that none, from the Director down
to the CMO-in-charge, can ever possibly be

44

of.

Action Taken

For effecting further improvements in
the System, the following steps are
being taken:—

(i) From time to time, the medical and
para medical staff are told of the
importance of professional approach,
dedication and devotion to duties with
a view to sensitise them with the work
culture they are expected to observe
and maintain. Chief Medical Officers
(CMOs) of the CGHS are also sent for
various trainings for sensitising them
for a more responsible health care
system.

(ii) Periodic meeting of the CMO in-
charges are also convened at the Zonal
level to create awareness about the
various administrative and functional
requirements in CGHS dispensaries.
CMOv/other\Medical Officers are also
‘fegularly involved in ‘medical care
during emergencies such as plague,
dengue, malaria outbreaks and other
disaster management programmes as
also in Office Council, Grievances
Cell, Complaint Cell and other areas
of functioning which sensitise them to
the problems of beneficiaries at large.

(iii) A schedule of inspections to instil
a sense of discipline, has been laid
down at all levels. Regular surprise
inspections are also carried out. In the
course of last one year or so, in Delhi
alone 114 inspections have been
conducted. The pattern of” intensive


45

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

held totally accountable for the holistic
realisation of the objectives behind CGHS.
The Committee would recommend the
urgent need to stop this decay of a system
and ensure a well
considered campaign in the designing of
which Secretary and DGHS must give their
personal attention. :

inspections is being followed in other
CGHS cities also.

A four-tiered system of inspections has
been introduced for ensuring
responsiveness of the system to the
needs of beneficiaries. Under this
system CMO in-charges of dispensaries
are required to take an inspection
round of their dispensary on a daily
basis and take action for rectifying
lacunae. At the next level, Zonal
Additional Directors of CGHS are to
make regular inspections of a certain
number of dispensaries every month in
such a manner that each dispensary is
inspected once every quarter, i.e. four
times in a year. At the next level,
Director, CGHS, would be taking
inspections of a minimum of 4 to 6

dispensaries in a month, selecting
specially. those dispensaries which
appear to need special atteation.

Finally, Director General of Health
Services would himself also be
undertaking inspection of certain
dispensaries on a monthly basis.

Additional/Deputy Directors of CGHS
in the zonal offices are required to
frame a detailed scheduled of monthly
inspections and send the same to
Director, CGHS, who in turn would
be keeping the Ministry informed
about the progress as per this
schedule. Moreover, a feedback would
be sent to Director, CGHS, by
Additional/Deputy Directors of CGHS
from the zonal offices on a monthly
basis, who in turn, would be furnishing
quarterly reports to the Ministry
regarding the main irregularities noted,
follow up action taken thereon and
progress of inspections as per the
inspection schedule of each Zonal
Additional Director.

The points for inspection by the CMO-
in-charge during his daily round is



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

noted in “the Duties, Responsibilities
and Powers of CMO-in-charges of
CGHS dispensaries.”

Over and above the system of
inspections, Additional Directors of
CGHS Zones would be _ holding
meeting with CMOs of different
dispensaries at regular intervals to
discuss with them and jointly evolve a
strategy for improving the general
functioning of the CGHS.

Since the introduction of the new
intensive pattern of inspections,

Additional Directors of CGHS in

Delhi alone have carried out 91
inspections. Director CGHS, has
carried out 9 inspections in Delhi and
12 in outstations. At the level . of
Director General of Health Services
there has been 2 inspections so far.
(iv) Fixing up of responsibilities has
been done at the grassroot level with
the CMO in-charge having to ensure
punctuality of staff, maintenance of
cleanliness, sanitation, ensuring proper
accounting of stores, keeping liaison
with Area Welfare Officers, timely.
revalidation of CGHS cards, timely
grant of permission for treatment in
recognized referral/private hospital
and diagnostic centres, maintenance of
‘Chit Books’ etc.

(v) For the specific purpose of
effecting improvement in the supply
line of medicines, a schedule of
monthly meetings between Additional
D.G. of the MSD and the Additional
Director, CGHS, MSD, has been
framed, for better coordination
between the supplier and user
organization.

Through consistent monitoring, the
availability of medicines in the
dispensaries has now gone up to 66%
(excluding those which MSO is unable
to supply because of the production



47

Para Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

being stopped, _— suppliers _—not
responding etc.) from the Medical
Supplies Organization (MSO) source
alone, and the balance required by
beneficiaries is made up through local
purchases.

(vi) A programme of upgradation of
pathological laboratories is being done
in a phased manner, with the major
laboratories at Kingsway Camp,
Parliament House and Pusa Road
Polyclinic, Delhi, having been covered
in the first phase.

(vii) Through analysis of contplaints
received/interaction with beneficiaries,
it emerges that the major areas of
patient dissatisfaction centred around
(a) quality of medicines supplied, (b)
supply of what is viewed as
“substitute” medicines, (c) lack of
punctuality, courtesy and human
approach among the CGHS doctors
and staff. To ensure quality of
medicine each and every batch of .
medicine supplied by the Goyt.
Medical Stores Organisation is tested
through Govt. approved laboratories.
Any drug found substandard 15
debarred for one year.

CGHS, Medical Stores Depot (MSD)
takes random samples and gets them
tested. If found substandard the entire
stock is returned.

To instil public confidence in the
system the Drug Controller General of
India is associated with the testing of
drugs supplied to CGHS.

To avoid the misunderstanding of
supply of ‘substitute’ medicines
(generally arising because of specialists
prescribing by brand names and CGHS
supplying in generic name as per
recommendation of Hathi Committee)
the specialists are being requested to
restrict themselves to the CGHS
Formulary.

942/RS—8A


Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

(viii) Responsibilities have been fixed
at all levels and these are being
monitored at the level of Addl.
Directors. CMO in-charges are made
aware of the lapses on their part and
consequent follow-up action is taken
by CGHS Hars. The responsibilities
and powers of CMO in-charges of
CGHS dispensaries have been freshly
reiterated so that every aspect of
health care at the dispensary level is
covered,

(ix) Regular meetings are being taken
by the dispensary in-charges with the
Area Welfare Officers. Complaints
received are processed for introducing
improvements in the system.

A complaint cell has also been set

up at the zonal levels. In. the
functioning of this Cell Area Welfare
Officers are also associated and
problems faced by the beneficiaries are
tried to be sorted out jointly.
A Grievance Cell exists in CGHS
Headquarters under the supervision of
Joint Director where grievances which
cannot be dealt with at the dispensary/
zonal levels are examined.

(x) A system of incentive has been
built in for better performance.
Shields, cash prizes and certificates are
awarded for complaint free and clean
dispensaries.

The above measures taken/
contemplated require administrative
appeals, proper sensitisation of the
CMOs and a system of monitoring and
reviewing. These are ongoing
processes and their efficacy can be
judged only over a period of time.
However, some of the ground realities
which stand in the way of effecting
overnight changes in the functioning of
the CGHS are the following:—

(1) The pressure which the
organization is facing due to financial

942/RS—8B


49

Para

Observation/Recommendation

27.

Formulations: The Committee is given to
understand that the key to some of the
problems relating to medicines, lies in
different formularies of medicines
maintained by CGHS and in different
hospitals, where specialists prescribe either
from the respective formulary (or
sometimes even outside on justified
grounds). Many  benefeciaries, | who
appeared before the Committee were of the
view that different formularies being
allowed within the same scheme was
leading to a lot of confusion and they
suggested that there should be only one list
drawn and approved by DGHS, after due

Action Taken

and manpower constraints. The SIU
Report of 1991 recommended abolition
of as many as 2000 and odd posts.
Though the Ministry of Finance has
been moved for a fresh SIU Report,
the efforts have yet to bear fruit, and
in the meanwhile CGHS is facing the
problem of reduced manpower and
daily increasing workload. The
statistics show that in the course of the
last one year alone, the CGHS
beneficiaries have increased by
approximately 1.96 lakhs, but M/O
Finance has not agreed to the creation
of posts for opening new dispensaries,
bifurcating overloaded dispensaries
etc. till the implementation of the SIU
Report.

(2) There is constant pressure from
different categories of various types to
be covered under CGHS facilities. The
retired employees of the Para-Military
Forces/the Delhi High Court, the
serving and retired employees of
different autonomous organizations are
but a few examples of those insisting
upon getting CGHS coverage. The
budgetary increases however are not
commensurate to cope with the
expansion needed, and the manpower
position remains virtually frozen.

27 to 28: A national level workshop
was held in Feb. 1996, under the
Chairmanship of DGHS, to review the
existing formularies from the angle of
safety, efficacy, quality etc. In the
workshop a ‘‘National Essential Drugs
List” has been evolved which could
serve as a guideline list to various
formularies being updated/integrated
by the beneficiary agencies, including
CGHS. There is a Formulary
Committee which meets every 2 years
under the Chairmanship of the D.G.
Health Services. This Committee could
take into consideration the guidelines



50

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

28.

consultation with concerned specialists
applicable to all the Central Government
hospitals and the CGHS. One of the
CMOs, who appeared before the
Committee, while supporting this point of
view, however, suggested that there could
be two lists one for dispensaries and the
other for specialists.

The Committee recognises, that even
though generic drugs are to be supplied
wherever possible, brand-name drugs are
often prescribe by specialists. Where such
brand name drugs are not available,
substitute medicines are given at the
dispensary. The patient often fears that the
substitute medicine would not be equally
effective and insists on the prescribed brand
named drug. This is one of the major
problems at the dispensaries. The
Committee recommends that without
disturbing the well laid down principles of
the physicians’ right and freedom to
prescribe, in the best interest of the patient,
it should be possible for DGHS to lay down
a well thought out formulary for different
diseases uniformly applicable at all
establishments carrying generic and
permitted brand name medicines. CGHS
should be under an obligation to supply
only drugs included in the current
formulary. Specialists should in turn, be
subject to the 6 cipline of using the

laid down in the “National Essential
Drugs List” with a view to revising the
CGHS Formulary appropriately.

An identical formulary for CGHS and
the Central Government hospitals,
would however not be feasible.
Whereas at hospitals, medicines are
supplied to the entire population, and
the formulary caters to both out-
patient and indoor patients. The
CGHS Formulary caters to a well-
defined population comprising outdoor
patients only.

With a view to ensuring that CGHS
Specialists attached to hospitals
prescribe such drugs, as are available
in the CGHS Formulary, steps are
being initiated as detailed in paras 24-
26 ante.

The CGHS Formulary is revised every
two years, with a view to rationalising
it in keeping with new developments in
medicine etc.



St

Para

Observation/Recommendation
:

Action Taken

30.

41,

formulary as a rule, giving reasons for
justified deviations. The Committee hopes
that there would be enough enthusiasm on
the part of doctors to make a success of the
formulary scheme and, thus reduce system
costs for CGHS. This step would bring
about better value for money and,
therefore, greater patient satisfaction.

Pilferage: The Committee was informed by
the beneficiaries that a lot of pil a of
medicines takes place in the dispensaries.
Supporting this, one of the CMOs stated
that many of the good medicines, available
in the dispensaries, were generally taken
away by the staff themselves. When the
Committee sought to know as to what was
a good medicine, it was clarified that good
medicines were of the make of standard
companies which would cost more than the
other medicines, It was further stated that
if the staff were denied the medicines, they
would feel irritated and would neglect the
work. Usually, they would take the
medicines without any prescriptions from
the dispensary, and in some cases, the
employees sell the medicines in the market,
and make money. He further informed the
Committee that no action was taken against
them by CGHS authorities. The Committee
is concerned about the lack of responsibility
and total helplessness of doctors, CMOs
and the administration in preventing such
pilferage and taking action against the

culprits, especially when they are
Government employees themselves. The
Committee strongly recommends _ that

exemplary punishment be given in such
cases of pilferage. The system needs to be
corrected and streamlined from the top to
the bottom so as to plug all the lacunae/
loopholes in this regard.

Disposable Syringes

30: For prevention of pilferage, the
‘Chit System’ has been introduced for
costly medicines, whereby the chit
issued by the in-charge is signed by the
beneficiary on receipt of medicines and
the stock tally taken from time to
time. Checks are also carried out by
Addl. Directors. Recently a system has

been instituted of asking for
photocopies of prescriptions wherein
costly preparations have been

prescribed for verification by CMOs.
In this way, fear of detection of false
prescriptions has reportedly brought
down to a large extent the expenditure
on costly medicines in recent months.

Many beneficiaries, in their written 3; Instructions have been issued on

representations, as well as in their oral
evidence, complained that

disposable Delhi

8.2.96 to all the dispensaries, both in
and outside Delhi, to use



52

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

32.

syringes were not being used by CGHS
dispensaries. When the Ministry was asked
to comment on the use of disposable
syringes, it was stated that efforts would be
made to introduce them, subject to budget
provisions. The Committee was shocked to
find that even sterilization of syringes, etc.
which is a mandatory procedure, is not
properly. done. For a example the
Committee during its visit to Kalibari
Dispensary in Delhi, found that injections
were being administered without
sterilization and the sterilization equipment
could-not be shown to the Committee. The
Committee feels that resource constraints
should not be cited as an excuse for not
using disposable syringes. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends _ that
disposable syringes should be introduced in
all dispensaries on an emergency basis. The
Committee also desires that till disposable
syringes are not made available,
sterilization of syringes needs to be strictly
ensured under the regular supervision and
monitoring of CMO and necessary articles/
equipments should be made available for
sterilizing the syringes.

Functional Dispensaries: Requests have
also been received for conversion of more
non-functional dispensaries into functional
dispensaries. One of the beneficiaries, who
appeared before the Committee suggested
that all the dispensaries should be made
functional so that people may not face any

difficulty in regard to timings. It was also -

suggested that every dispensary should have
a resident doctor who should be given a
residence there itself and necessary
paramedical staff, including staff nurse,
pharmacist and ward-boy, etc., should be
provided. It would ‘help people approach
them even at odd hours in case of
emergencies. The CMOs who met the
Committee, endorsed the proposal. They
stated that it would ease the situation. The
Committee feels that these two are good
suggestions and, if implemented, would go

disposable syringes. In the intervening
period glass syringes could be used
with disposable needles only after
proper sterilization by autoclaving.
Complaince reports regarding
observance of these instructions have
been obtained.

During surprise checks/inspections this
is also monitored.

32 to 34: The financial’ and
administrative implications of
conversion of non-functional
dispensaries into multi-shift

dispensaries would be immense. With
the cut of 166 posts imposed through
the SIU Report of 1991, the lapse of
another 91 posts which came under the
shadow of the orders of M/O Finance,
as also the ban on filling up of new
posts till a fresh SIU is conducted,
there have been severe constraints on
manpower in the CGHS. This does not
permit conversion of single shift
dispensaries to a multi-shift system.

Moreover, with new categories (like
the retired employees of the para-
military forces/the Delhi High Court
and employees of various autonomous
bodies) insisting on admission to



53

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

33.

34.

a long way in improving patient care and
providing better services.

In regard to improving the work
arrangements of CGHS dispensaries, the
Committee feels that a number of steps can
be taken for enhancing functional
efficiency. Following the vigorous plea
made by many beneficiaries, the Committee
would recommend that dispensaries should
be made functional, viz. their services are
available on Twenty-four hour basis. This
would be a departure from the usual system
under which availability of services is
between 7.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. only,
followed by truncated services thereafter,
which are not seen to be reliable by the
beneficiaries. The requirements of making
dispensaries functional would, no doubt,
involve augmenting the strength of doctors
and associated staff for availability on a
rotation basis. If such augmentation to the
permanent strength of the CGHS would
have financial and cadre implications for
CGHS, there is always a possibility of
contracting services of doctors for
dispensary work along well considered
lines. The effectiveness of such twenty four
hour functional arrangement should not
merely be tested against the number of
patients treated, but rather from the sense
of assurance that medical facilities are at
hand round the clock and whenever
needed.

This could be done according to a phased
programme, starting with dispensaries

CGHS facilities, the financial burden
on CGHS, meant originally for civilian
Central Government employees, is
also too great to allow CGHS scope
for new innovations, such as
conversion of all dispensaries into
multi-Shit pattern. The Ministry is

approaching the Committee of
Secretaries for a decision on
enhancement of the budget and

manpower of CGHS in case new
categories are to be admitted to its
benefits.

The Ministry, however, is aware of the
need for provision of more health care
facilities for Central Govt. employees
& is, therefore, trying to meet the
shortfall through recognition of private
hospitals etc. as detailed in subsequent
paras.

Regarding the recommendation for
augmenting the CGHS strength by
contracting services of doctors for
dispensary work, since the CGHS
doctors belong to an established cadre,
engaging private doctors on contract
basis would give rise to various
administrative problems.

Some kind of round-the-clock medical
facility is available in Delhi, having the
greatest concentration of beneficiaries,
since all single shift dispensaries are
linked with the 42  multi-shift
dispensaries. Moreover, a tie-up with
the Central Accident and Trauma
Services (CATS) Scheme of the Delhi
Government is under process, through
which the Central Government
beneficiaries are likely to have the
benefits of a dedicated ambulance
service round-the-clock in case of need
for urgent hospitalization.



54

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

40.

located in low income beneficiary areas,
examining how far the augmentation can be
done on a contractual basis and how to
retain accountability for performance.

Punctuality and Behaviour

The Committee has been informed by the
beneficiaries that dispensaries do not
normally open in time and punctuality is
ignored. One of the beneficiaries who
appeared before the Committee, stated that
due to lack of punctuality on the part of
doctors and para medical staff, the
beneficiaries would have to wait for hours,
for getting registered and examined.
Confirming this; the representative of
CGHS employees, Association Stated that
when the officers themselves come late they
should not expect the other staff members
to come in time. When one of the CMOs
was asked by the Committee to comment
on this aspect, he stated that generally all
would not reach late Some of the staff
members who stayed far away from the
dispensary might be late in fact, he himself
stayed far away from the dispensary and he
was not able to attend the dispensary on
time. The Committee conveys its shock and
anguish at this absence of work discipline
and easy compromises in discharge of
duties. The Committee has been informed
that all the doctors and staff members were
not provided accommodation nearby but.
that is not possible in practical terms and
even if it did, it had no relevance to work
conditions and discipline.

(Comments of the Committee on this reply may be seen in chapter-I)

40 to 43 : The surprise inspections vide
paras 11—16 above are also
undertaken with the purpose of
ensuring punctuality, courtesy etc. In
some cases (e.g. Azad Nagar in
Kanpur Zone and Paharganj in Central
Zone of Delhi) instances of
absenteeism/late coming have been
noted for action.

In so far as the behaviour of doctors
and staff is concerned, the suggestions
of beneficiaries present during
inspections is also considered for
instituting suitable remedial measures.

Review of workload of dispensaries as
per norms is done from time to time
and it has been observed that certain
dispensaries like in Delhi are over-
burdened. To off-load the burden on
these dispensaries additional
manpower is required but Ministry of
Finance is not agreeing to creation of
additional posts, till the
implementation of the disputed SIU
Report of 1991. As stated earlier, M/o
Finance has been requested for a fresh
SIU study. The revision of manpower
norms is extremely necessary if the
CGHS is to handle its workload to the
satisfaction of beneficiaries and the
Parliamentary Committee may like to
recommend to Ministry of Finance for
early completion of a fresh SIU
Report of this end.



BP!

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

41.

42.

43.

The Committee’s attention was also drawn
to the discourteous behaviour of some
doctors and para medical staff towards
patients at the dispensaries. Many
beneficiaries informed the Committee that
doctors sometime, start writing
prescriptions even before the patient has
fully explained his problem. Over crowding
of patients/pressure of work during peak
hours did not give time to doctors to listen
to the patients satisfactorily

When the Ministry was asked to comment
upon the punctuality aspect, it was stated
that the dispensaries, by and large start
functioning in time. However, in cases of
default the CMOs incharge were suitably
advised to ensure punctuality. It was
further stated that senior officers from the
Zone, as well as from the Head-Quarters,
would pay periodical surprise visit to the
dispensaries to ensure punctuality. In
regard to the behavioural aspect, the
Ministry has stated that from time to time
directions were issued to doctors and staff
to be more polite and courteous to patients
and necessary action was taken on receipt
of complaints. The Ministry affirmed that
doctors and staff were generally courteous
however, whenever work load was heavy,
irritation on some amount of unavoidable
delay resulted in arguments and loss of
temper.

The Committee feels that punctuality
should be strictly adhered to and polite
behaviour of the staff ensured. The
Committee opines that this is an area which
has gone unnoticed by the government and
no serious efforts have been made to

Regarding inter-zonal and intra-zonal
transfers, a policy decision has been
taken at the level of Minister of State
for Health based on the Committee’s
recommendations.

The Main highlights of the transfer
policy are as follows:

1. Transfer would be made after 3
years from one dispensary to another
by zonal head so that the changes are
made within the same zone so that
there is minimum dislocation.

2. Incharges of dispensary would be
allowed a longer slint of 4 years so
that there is enough time for them to
make substantial changes and
improvements in the dispensary and
there is no sudden dislocation by
having the incharge of the dispensary
as well as other doctors moving at the
same time. हे

3. A small Committee comprising the
Director, CGHS. Addl. DDG(H.Q.)
and the Addl. Director (H.Q.) would
meet and hear the requests of doctors
who are in the transfer zone in case
they have a special problem.

The above transfer policy has been
approved in September, 1996.

942/RS—9A


56

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

sensitise the CGHS staff including the
doctors, with the work culture they are
expected to observe and maintain. There
must be a periodic review of workload and
norms so that physicans/doctors do not
carry unmanageable burden Wherever a
norm is determind after due consideration.
There should be no excuse for discrepancy
or inter personal problems. Prompt and
stringent disciplinary action may be
initiated against doctors and staff accused
of frequent misbehaviour. Periodic inter-
zonal, as well as intra-zonal transfer of staff
may be one way of ensuring better
behaviour and punctuality. The Committee
feels that a three year tenure is desirable.

Coordination

The Committee pained to note that there is
lack of coordination among the staff almost
at all levels. The CMO does not get the
desired cooperation from the doctors,
doctors do not get due assistance from the
subordinate staff and the group ‘D’
employees do not pay any heed to the
superiors. This the Committee feels, affects
the general functioning, as well as the
quality of service. The Committee
therefore, recommends that Government
should take necessary remedial measures to
streamline the functioning of the
dispensaries and _ restore congenial
atmosphere of working by way of ensuring
better coordination among the staff.

Shift System

The Committee reviewed a number of
representations that the existing single-sift
system was not convenient to the
beneficiaries. It was stated that the
beneficiaries being Government employees,
had to leave for office before 9.00 a.m. and
more often than not they get delayed in the
dispensary. It was therefore suggested that
‘multi-sift’ or ‘double sift’ would be better
so that the beneficiaries could visit the
dispensary for checkup etc. after office

44: There is a constant endeavour to
ensure better coordination among the
staff and congenial atmosphere of
working. These points are stressed in
inservice training programme of
doctors and staff of the CGHS.
Sessions on behavioural sciences are
included as course content in training
programmes to improve the behaviour
pattern of staff and doctors in their
dealings with colleagues, beneficiaries,
specially senior citizens.

46: For introducing improvements in
CGHS functioning of any _ kind,
additional manpower is the crying
need of the hour. For this, a proposal
for creation for more posts was sent to
the M/o Finance but it was not agreed
to on account of non-implementation
of the SIU Report of 1991
recommending abolition of 2000 odd
posts in CGHS. A note for Committee

942/RS—9B


a

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

47.

hours also when the Committee sought the
Ministry’s view on this issue, it was stated
that the proposal to introduce double-shift
system was already under the consideration
of the Government. The Committee is
convinced that the present single sift system
and the timing are certainly not convenient
to the Central Government employees. The
Committee desires that evening sift may be
introduced in all the dispensaries to enable
the office goers to avail of the services even
after office hours. The Committee feels that
while the needs and difficulties of CGHS
functionaries should be taken into account,
the paramount consideration must be
satisfaction of beneficiaries.

Night Duty

The Committee notes with concern that in
the night shift of the dispensaries. Only one
doctor is available and he has to perform
all sorts of jobs himself. Some of the
beneficiaries stated that the night duty
doctor would not examine properly and,
therefore, the system was virtually non-
functioning. The Secretary, Health, gave a
different version on the necessity of night
service. He stated that, at one stage, it was
decided to do away with this. In support of
this, he informed that during night, the
number of patients attending the dispensary
was one to eleven. The Committee,
however, feels that a review be made of the
requirements of the night shift and suitable
action taken.

of Secretaries for the scrapping of the
Report & initation of a fresh SIU
study has already been moved. The
matter has also been taken up at the
level of the then Finance Minister.
This is being pursued at the level of
Secretary (Expenditure). The
Parliamentary Committee on HRD
may like to add its weight behind this
Ministry for getting the proposal
through.

47: The CGHS Advisory Committee in
its meeting held on 17.5.85 under the
Chairmanship of then MOS (Health),
held that “all CGHS dispensaries both
at Delhi and outside will function as
single shift dispensaries between 7.00
a.m. and 1-00 p.m. daily (except
Sundays and holidays)... a skelton
service with 1 Medical Officer and
another staff for emergency purpose
only will be made available in
dispensaries between 2-00 p.m. and
8-00 p.m. “and” emergency service
during the night will be available from
the existing functional (i.e. multi-shift)
dispensaries only”. Since then, the
current system of single shift
dispensary is functioning, with night
emergency services available only in
multi-shift of “functional” dispensaries.

A study undertaken in 1995 on 20
sample dispensaries in South Delhi has
brought out that attendance in the
night shift is very thin, numbering
between 4 to 16 patients on an
average. This is roughly the position
with regard to CGHS functioning in
other cities also. It is because of this



58

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

aos

54.

2»

Specialist Services

Specialist services are an important
ingredient of CGHS. Many beneficiaries
complained to the Committee, both in
writing and in oral evidence, that Specialist
Services were totally inadequate and were
not meeting the requirement of the
beneficiaries. When a Specialist takes leave
on the specified day, no substitute is
provided another complaint is that
Specialist Services are not provided in
dispensaries where the number of patients
requiring such treatment is quite large. It
was suggested to the Committee that
Specialist in different fields should visit
individual dispensaries regularly.

When the Committee sought clarifications
from the Ministry on this aspect, it was
stated that visit of Specialists to each and
every dispensary would require
appointment of additional Specialists and
this would not be feasible due to resource
constraint. The Committee was further
informed that Specialist Services were,
however, provided through poly-clinics.

The Committee is of the view that the
present arrangement of Specialist Services
is not sufficient to meet the requirements of
the beneficiaries. The Committee is
convinced that beneficiaries are put to a lot
of avoidable inconvenience whenever a
Specialist does not turn up on the
appointed day. While recognising the
resource constraint, the Committee feels
that Government should consider

that at present, there are only 42
multi-shift dispensaries in Delhi where
night services are available with a
skelton staff. Beneficiaries of other
dispensaries are attached to the nearby
night shift dispensaries.

Other points regarding meeting the
beneficiaries’ needs for 24 hours
medicare have been detailed in paras
32 to 34 ante.

53 to 55: For better patient
satisfaction, problems arising due to a
large number of vacancies in the
specialist cadre are being sorted out by
filling up these posts through direct

recruitment from UPSC/through
advertisement for ad hoc
appointments.

To supplement the efforts of specialists
of CGHS, private hospitals, in CGHS
covered cities, are being recognised for
speciality & super speciality treatment.
So far 100 hospitals and diagnostic
centres have been recognised in 4
CGHS-covered cities.



Para

56.

ot.

58.

59

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

strengthening the Specialist Services so as
to ensure better patent care and
satisfaction. The Committee feels that those
doctors who acquire Specialist qualification
in service should be utilised as Specialist
rather than allowing their additional
knowledge and expertise to go waste.

Polyclinics

The Committee has been informed that the
system of poly-clinic has not been very
effective. Requests have also been received
for opening more poly-clinics. |The
Committee has also noted, from the Table
given in Annexure-1, that the ratio of
dispensaries and poly-clinics is not
satisfactory. For example, while Delhi has
four poly-clinics for one hundred & twenty
dispensaries, Bombay has two for thirty
four. Calcutta two for twenty one and
Madras two for seventeen dispensaries. In
some cities, there is not even a single poly-
clinic.

The representatives of the CGHS
Employees’ Association informed the
Committee that none of the poly-clinic was
functioning properly. Explaining the
condition of poly-clinics, he stated “There
may be one specialist but you cannot find
all specialists. Somewhere there is a Chilé
Specialist and somewhere there is @
Gynaecologist. Somewhere there is X-ray
and somewhere there is ECG. The situation
is worse outside Delhi. If there is a
Radiologist, there is no X-ray machine. In
Calcutta there is Radiologist but there is no
X-ray machine. In Pune, there is an X-ray
machine but there is no Radiologist. In
Allahabad, the X-ray machine was
purchased in 1984. But, even after 10 years,
it has been still lying unpacked.”

When the Committee sought the Ministry’s
comments on opening of poly-clinics in the
ratio of 13 or 14, it was stated that
multiplication of polyclinics would require
additional specialists. These specialists

56 to 59: As stated above, vacant posts
of specialists are being filled up.
Infrastructural facilities like laboratory
& other equipments are being
upgraded, and to supplement the
efforts of CGHS speciality & super
speciality private hospitals are being
recognised under CGHS in all CGHS-
covered cities.



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

39.

60.

would get frustrated after some time
because they would not get an opportunity
to treat patients in the wards. it was further
stated that whereas necessary equipments
would have to be provided in all such poly-
clinics, these might be under-utilised in
view of this, the existing poly-clinics were
being further strengthened to deliver better
service.

The Committee feels that the scheme of
polyclinics is not functioning effectively to
the satisfaction of the beneficiaries.
Government should look into the
complaints of lack of adequate number of
Specialists and other staff members’ and
necessary steps should be taken
expeditiously in this regard and should
there be any sense of frustration among
specialists it can be removed by a well
designed rotation/transfer system. The
Committee is convinced that the number of
polyclinics presently operating is not
sufficient to meet the requirements of the
beneficiaries. The Committee agrees that
the existing polyclinics need to be
strengthened. But, it should not be made
an excuse for not opening new polyclinics.

Separate CGHS Hospitals/CGHS Wings in
Central Government Hospitals

Many of the beneficiaries, who met the
Committee and also through written
representations, suggested that separate
hospitals should be opened in major cities
to cater exclusively to the needs of CGHS
beneficiaries. It was complained to the
Committee that CGHS beneficiaries did not
get proper treatment and adequate
attention in Government hospitals. Even
though there are separate CGHS wings in
Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia and Safdarjung
hospitals there is no reservation of beds in
them for CGHS beneficiaries.

60 to 63: A CGHS Hospital at
Hyderabad in collaboration with M/o
Defence is proposed to be set up
during 1996-97. The building for the
hospital has already been completed.
However, it may not be feasible to
open more-& more CGHS Hospitals
due to resource constraints. CGHS
facilities are being augmented with the
recognition of specialised & general
hospitals. It is proposed to recognise
142 specialised & 232 general hospitals
under the CGHS.



61

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

61.

62.

63.

On the suggestion of opening separate
hospitals for CGHS beneficiaries, the
Secretary, Health, stated that opening of
new hospitals or providing hospitals wings
exclusively for CGHS beneficiaries was not
a feasible proposition and that he would
instead prefer recognition of more hospitals
in corporate and private sectors for the
CGHS beneficiaries. Elaborating the idea,
he further stated that charges could be
fixed for different kinds of treatment so
that the beneficiaries should be free to have
treatment in any hospital and claim
reimbursement. The Secretary also added
that there could be a system of some
revolving fund with these recognised
hospitals so that any beneficiary could go
and get treatment there and the charges
could be adjusted later.

In regard to reservation of beds for CGHS
beneficiaries in Central Government
hospitals, the Ministry stated that the
Government hospitals were already
overcrowded and such reservation of beds
was not feasible.

The Committee sees merit in the contention
of the Health Secretary and views it to be a
practical solution. Recognition of more
private hospitals would indeed be a better
and quicker solution than setting up new
hospitals. The idea of the Health Secretary
to keep a revolving funds with recognised
hospitals is welcome and Government
should act on this proposal immediately. As
regards the other details relating to the
recognised private hospitals, the Committee
has dealt with them separately, while
discussing the issue of supplementing
CGHS with recognised hospitals.

Reimbursement

The Committee has noted, from the
complaints received from the beneficiaries,
that reimbursement of money spent on
purchasing medicines, etc. takes unduly
long time. It was suggested that the
procedure should be simplified so as to
avoid delays. Some of the beneficiaries
suggested that full meidcal expenditure,

64 to 66: The Procedure for referral to

reputed hospitals & obtaining
reimbursement has been further
simplified and rationalized vide

Ministry’s order dt. 21.6.96.



62

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

65.

including that incurred in referral hospitals,
should be reimbursed and that the earlier
system of setting reimbursement between
the hospitals and CGHS was good and
should be restored.

The Ministry, responding to the complaints
on the delay in reimbursement, stated that
powers of reimbursement of cost of
indented items had been delegated to the
respective departments. On the suggestion
of restoring of earlier system, it was stated
that it would not be feasible due to
financial constraints of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare. But
subsequently, the Ministry has informed the
Committee that they had gone back to the
old system.

The Committee is given to understand that
even though the reimbursement system has
been decentralised, the sanction for
reimbursement is given by CGHS only and
CGHS takes a very long time in giving its
sanction/approval = which puts the
beneficiaries to much inconvenience. The
Committee would like the Ministry and the
CGHS to undertake a reyiew of the present
system and fix time limits for such
reimbursement and streamline the
mechanism.

W.e.f. 21.6.96, beneficiaries have the
option of availing of specialised
treatment either in the Govt.
recognised hospitals extending CGHS
cover or at a CGHS recognised private
hospital of choice, after obtaining the
recommendation of a CGHS specialist
or Govt. hospital, as the case may be.

In case of serving employee, the final
permission would be given by the
parent Department/Office, while that
for pensioners, Mps, etc. the
permission would be given by the
CMO-In-charge of the concerned
CGHS dispensary.

The expenditure to be reimbursed
would be restructed to rates approved
by the Govt./package deal rates.

In case of facility being available in the
city where the beneficiary normally
resides, but the beneficiary desiring to
take treatment in another CGHS
covered city, permission for the
treatment may be given, but TA/DA
would have to be borne by the
beneficiary.

To further streamline the processing of
Medical Reimbursement Claims
(MRCs) a Computerized Central
Claims Section is now working at
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi. Here the
“Front Desk” processes all claims at
the initial stage and tells the
beneficiary whether all documents in
support of the claim have been
teceived. In case the documentation is
incomplete, a “Returned in Original”
(RIO) Slip is issued, stating the
deficiencies to be made up in case the
MRC is complete in all respects, then
further processing is done at the “Back
Desk”, where the MRC is marked to
one of several dealing hands in a
“tound robin” fashion. An
Acknowledgement Form is given to



63

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action: Taken

79.

The Committee, however, agrees with the
Ministry that whatever be the extent of
resources made available to CGHS, the
system cannot be expanded without limit,
particularly in an era where private sector’s
role in medicine is getting dominant. The
Committee recognises that there are
difficulties in large-scale expansions of the
schemes and does not expect this to
happen, barring a few marginal additions it
should, however, be possible to expand
CGHS to all major cities of India. It is
noteworthy that no State Government has
adopted the model of CGHS for its own
employees, preferring, instead, to continue
with a medical reimbursement system of
grant of standard medical allowances in lieu
thereof.

the applicant, carrying his computer
number and names of the Doctor-in-
charge of the Reimbursement section
whom he is to contact in case of
problems. The applicant would be able
to trace the status of his MRC through
the computer number.

In the next stage of computerization,
further processing of MRCs would be
done on computer for swifter results.

Tt «४9 hoped to introduce
computerization in other cities, once
the initial venture in Delhi is fully
underway.

The new system of ‘‘package 0९४)" and
ceilings of reimbursement for
treatment of major illnesses in CGHS
recognised private horpitals is likely to
curtail delays in reimbursement as
under this the rates for reimbursement
are specified. x

Moreover, keeping in view the
difficulties faced by beneficiaries,
orders have been issued for sanction of
80%' medical advance on the basis of
the estimate given by the treating
hospital or the package deal. The
advance can be given by the concerned
parent department.

79: As mentioned in points:No. 48 to
50, three new dispensaries for each of
the cities of Trivandrum and Guwahati
have been sanctioned. The Min
proposes to open new dispensarie:
all the State capitals in a phased
manner.



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

89.

915

Staff Morale

The representative of the CGHS Em-
ployees’ Association informed the
Committee that there was a lot of
frustration among categories ‘C’ and ‘D’
employees. Certain grades of employees
retired for the same post in which they had
joined a Safaiwala would retire as a
Safaiwala and he suggested that there
should be some promotion/incentive for
them. The Committee is, therefore, of the
view that Government may take positive
steps in this regard. The Committee feels
that a quota be prescribed for promotion of
Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’ employees
depending upon the length of their service
and the acquisition of the required
qualification. The Committee hopes that
the Government and the Pay Commission
would take a positive view in this regard.

Exposure to latest developments and

innovations

The Committee has found that CGHS
doctors generally are not upto date with the
latest developments taking place in the fidld
of medical science. Nor they get exposure
to the complicated cases/ailments, which
tend to limit their knowledge only to minor
and routine problems. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that CGHS doctors
must be given adequate opportunity to
keep themselves abreast and aware of the
new advancements by providing
opportunities to participate in national and
international seminars, workshops and
training programmes. Promotions of these
doctors to higher posts may be linked with
the training/refresher courses.

89: The Committee’s recommendations
for improvement of ‘staff morale
through a system of incentives by
creating promotional channels for
Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ has been taken up
with MOF. Already, orders have been
issued for upgradatioin of 25% posts
of pharmacists. The matter is also
before the Vth Central Pay
Commission.

91: Refresher courses for upgrading
skills of Medical Officers is an ongoing
process. During July, 95 to July, 96, 14
doctors of varying specialities have
been nominated for WHO fellowships,
182 doctors have been nominated for
refresher courses, in health/health
management at, National Institute of
Communicable Diseases, AIIMS,
Safdarjung Hospital. National Institute
of Health and Family Welfare, Dr.
R.M.L. Hospital, LI.P.A. etc. at
Delhi. Similarily the doctors are
nominated for various _ refresher
courses at different institutes at
Bangalore, Jaipur and Nanital.

The CGHS, Delhi itself recently
organized a reorientation programme
for medical update at AIIMS, Delhi
for 314 doctors.

942/RS—10B


65

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

92.

93:

94.

Complaint Box

One of the points brought to the notice of
the Committee by several beneficiaries was
that in most of the dispensaries Complaint
Boxes were not kept, even though it was
mandatory on the part of CGHS to do so.
Even if a complaint box was kept, it was
kept at such a place where it could not be
easily seen by the patients. The Ministry
should ensure that complaint boxes are
kept at prominent places and prompt action
taken on each and every complaint.
Chief Welfare  Officer/Area Welfare
Officer/Beneficiaries’ Welfare Committee

The Committee also heard the views of the
Chief Officer and one of the Area Welfare
Officers in order to find out their role in
redressing the grievances of the
beneficiaries and to what extent they have
been protecting the interests of the
beneficiaries. On being asked about the
appointment procedure etc. of these
officers, it was stated that the post of Chief
Welfare Officer was a regular post Area
Welfare Officers, however, were appointed
for various residential colonies for a period
of two years on honorary basis.

It was further stated that the Area Welfare

Officer and the Residential Welfare
Associations were the two fora where
CGHS-related issues were _raised.

Generally, Area Welfare Officer takes up
the complaints with the CGHS Dispensary
and in case, he was not satisfied, he would
refer it to the Chief Welfare Officer or
CGHS. It was, however, submitted that the
post of Area Welfare Officer was purely
honorary and no special benefits were
attached. When a probing enquiry was
made to the Chief Welfare Officer as to
whether Area Welfare Officer were
effective in dealing with the problems of
CGHS beneficiaries, he evaded direct
reply, except stating that in certain areas
they took a lot of interest.

92: Orders have been reiterated for
keeping complaint boxes at prominent
places in the dispensaries. Compliance
reports have also been received from
various stations. This is also reviewed
during inspections & surprise checks.

93 to 96: In CGHS there is a three tier
grievance redressal system:—

The CMO Incharge of the dispensary
settles the grievances as and when it is
brought to his/her knowledge by the
beneficiary. The Area Welfare Officer
plays an important role and there is a
system of monthly meeting by the
CMO (Incharge), of the dispensary
with the local Resident Welfare
Association and Area Welfare Officer.

In case the beneficiary is not satisfied,
he/she may approach the Addl.
Director of the Zone where a
Complaint Cell exists and generally all
such complaints are dealt with by the
Zonal Complaint Cell.

Finally the grievances are looked after
by CGHS (HQ) at Nirman Bhawan
where a Grievance Cell is functioning.
Now at dispensaries, the redressal of
grievance channel alongwith the name
and telephone No. of the officer has
been displayed on the notice board.
Some grievances are also received
directly by the Ministry, who tackle
these in conjunction with the CGHS
Dte.’s technical advice.

So far as empowernment of Area
Welfare Officers are concerned this is
the subject matter of M/o Personnel,
Public Grievances & Pensions.



Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

95.

96.

The Committee, however, is not’ happy
with the system of Area Welfare Officer.
The Committee is constrained to observe
that the beneficiaries are generally not in
contact with the Area Welfare Officers or
rather they did not know about them. The
Committee agrees that since the Area
Welfare Officers are not paid for their
services and they have various other
activities, they would not take that much
interest as is required of the job. The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that
the Government should consider providing
some minimum facilities, such as telephone,
etc. to Area Welfare Officers. Some
monetary incentives could also be provided.
The suggestions of Area Welfare Officers
should have some authority and sanctity so
that the beneficiaries’ grievances could be
effectively redressed. The Government
should give necessary instructions to all
CMOs to act immediately on the
suggestions made by the Area Welfare
Officers. Government may also consider
appointing Beneficiaries’ Welfare
Committees for each dispensary, involving
the Chief Medical Officer, the Area
Welfare Officers and representatives of
Residential Welfare Associations Apart
from providing incentive to the Area
Welfare Officers. Government should give
them some sort of authority, so that they
could discharge their responsibility
effectively.

The Committee feels that lack of proper/
regular interaction between the CGHS
functionaries and its beneficiaries is the
main cause of the dissatisfaction amongst
the beneficiaries and non-redressal of their
grievances. The Committee therefore
recommends that a half-yearly open house
meeting of the Additional Director CGHS
of the concerned Zone, CMOs and para-
medical staff of a dispensary with its
beneficiaries should be held so that the
grievances may be redressed quickly.

A _half-yearly

open house meetings

would be held by the Addl. Directors,

CGHS, . as
Committee.

recommended by the

(Comments of the Committee on this reply may be seen in Chapter-I)


67

Para

oT,

98.

99.

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

Pensioners

The Committee received a large number of
complaints in regard to treatment of
pensioners in CGHS dispensaries. The main
complaint was that senior citizens were
made to wait for their turn in the queue
alongwith others. Complaints have also
been made in regard to hike in subscription
rate, delayed reimbursement and non-
availability of CGHS facilities at places
where a large number of CGHS pensioners
are residing.

Many pensioners stated that they might be
exempted from making any subscription
and be excluded from any future revision.
It was further stated that wherever the
CGHS facilities were not available, some
sort of monthly allowance should be given
to get treatment for minor ailments. For
major ailments, there should be an
arrangement with the State-run hospitals
for their treatment.

The Committee sought the comments of the
Ministry on various issues relating to
pensioners. The Ministry has stated that
instructions were already issued about
giving preference to retired people at the
dispensaries. As regards provision of free
medical facilities to pensioners, it was
stated that the matter was under the
consideration of the Fifth Pay Commission.
On the issue of payment of lumpsum
amount to pensioners for treatment. the
Ministry informed the Committee that ‘the
demand was justified and a proposal was
sent to the Finance Ministry but it.was not
agreed to. The Committee was also
informed that the issue was then referred to
the Fifth Pay Commission. When the
Committee sought to know as to whether it
would be possible to open separate
counters for senior citizens one of the

97 to 103: Regarding better facilities to
pensioners under the CGHS Scheme,
it may be mentioned that certain
special facilities are already being
extended to them under the Scheme,
such as supply of medicines for three
months together on the advice of
specialist, permission to take treatment
from private recognized hospitals with
a due reference; provision of 80%
advance of estimated cost of treatment
on hospitalisation; right to out-of-turn
consultation and issue of medicines at
dispensaries.

~Orders have been issued for a separate

queue for pensioners at CGHS
dispensaries. Moreover, the proposal
of extending benefits under the
Central Services (Medical Attendance)
Rules. 1944, to pensioners residing in
areas not covered by CGHS is before
the Fifth Central Pay Commission for
consideration.



68

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

100.

101.

102.

CMOs informed that due to lack of
sufficient staff and space it would not be
possible. The Committee
feels that sequentially negative view has
been taken of genuine problems of
pensioners, where every suggested solution
has been confronted by pointing out new
problems or postponement of decisions.
Considering the world wide trend of respect
and special attention to problems of senior
citizens, the Committee would request the
Government to take a just and fair decision
on all these issues.

The Committee received a suggestion that
geriatric clinics be opened in all CGHS
dispensaries. In response to this, the
Ministry stated that geriatrics was an
upcoming facility and specialists in this field
were very few. It might be possible to open
geriatric clinics only in phases in course of
time.

The World Health Organisation has been
periodically drawing attention of the health,
authorities to the problems of the aged. In
regard to health related issues. WHO had
recommended that health and health allied
services should be developed to the fullest
extent possible. It also recommended that
institutional care should always be
appropriate to the needs of the elders and
necessary health infrastructure and
specialised staff to provide thorough and
complete geriatric care should also be made
available. There has been a variety of
experiments abroad of redesigning of
hospitalisation needs of old people, making
domiciliary and community care as a part of
hospital services.

In view of the above, the Committee.
recommends that appropriate instructions
be issued for according priority in treatment
to senior citizens and the same be
scrupulously adhered to in each and every
dispensary. The CMO himself should see to



69

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

103.

104.

it that they are not put to unnecessary
hardships and strain. The Committee
hopes that the Fifth Pay Commission would
give sympathetic consideration to the
grievances of the pensioners as regards
payment of lumpsum amount to those not
availing of the CGHS facilities and come
out with positive recommendations. The
Government must also try to identify the
areas where there is comparatively larger
concentration of retired Central
Government employees and provide them
CGHS coverage. Government should also
expedite the proposal for
pensioners to seek treatment in local
‘recognised hospitals and get reimbursement
thereafter.

The Committee strongly recommends that a
complete study of the CGHS-related issues
and problems faced by pensioners may be
undertaken and a plan of action for
removing their difficulties be drawn up.

allowing ,

(Comments of the Committee on this reply may be seen in Chapter-I)

Need for considering alternative schemes

Although the intention of the Committee is
to examine the functioning of the CGHS by
way of suggesting ways and methods for
improving the functional efficiency and
increasing patients’ convenience and
satisfaction, within the existing system, it
would, however, like to put forth the
following alternatives for consideration:

(a) Introduction of a Comprehensive
Health Insurance Scheme

There has been a general feeling that the
Government should consider the Health
Insurance Scheme initially to cover the
senior citizens and later on extend the same
to serving employees as well. The senior
citizens upto the age of 60 years to begin
with, could be brought under the Scheme.

104: The issue of the introduction of a
comprehensive Health Insurance
Scheme is already before thé Sth Pay
Commission. The Ministry has
examined a Medical Insurance Scheme
framed by the Postal Deptt. & sent its
comments to the Pay Commission.

In the meanwhile numerous Medical
Insurance Schemes have-already been
brought out by the General Insurance
Company (GIC), which aim to meet
the needs of different categories of
beneficiaries.



70

Para Observation/Recommendation Action Taken

This could be on the lines of the scheme
already introduced by the Unit Trust of
India for senior citizens. A similar proposal
is also reported to be under consideration
of the Fifth Pay Commission. The proposed
scheme will initially, supplement the
existing CGHS infrastructure and services.
In this connection, expert opinion may be
obtained to .see how far innovative
measures, such as Medisave Scheme -of
Singapore, could help provide suitable
insurance cover to salaried employees. The
Committee would, therefore, urge the
Ministry, to set up a working group to
prepare the details of this scheme. in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance.

(b) Setting up of Health Trusts

The Committee also desires that the
Ministry may explore the possibility of
setting up Trusts, in place of the existing
CGHS system. This may help in
decentralising the existing monolithic
structure of the CGHS. The Ministry could
think of establishing three or four Trusts,
based at Bombay, Madras, Calcutta and
Delhi, covering the beneficiaries in
different parts of the country. i

These Trusts may include appropriate
managemenvfinancial experts and be
headed by professional Executive Directors.
responsible for their proper functioning
within the objectives laid down. The
existing infrastructure, personnel and
assets, etc. of the CGHS may ultimately be
transferred to these Trusts.



CHAPTER-III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

Introduction

The Central Government Health Scheme
(CGHS) was started in 1954, with the
objective of providing comprehensive
medical care to the Central Government
employees and their family members so as
to avoid the cuimbersome system of
medical reimbursement.

Besides Central Government employees the
scheme also provides services to Members
and former Members of Parliament, Judges
of Supreme Court and Delhi High Court
(sitting and retired), freedom fighters,
Central Government pensioners; employees
of a few autonomous bodies and semi-
government organisations. Former
Governors and former Vice-Presidents of
India are also covered under the scheme.
The dependent family members of Central
Government servants, who are residing
with them and though dependent on them
but do not come in the definition of the
family, also take benefit under the scheme.

This scheme was initially started in Delhi.
Subsequently, the services have been
extended to the following fifteen other
cities so far.

Allahabad, Ahmedabad, Bangalore,
Bombay, Calcutta, Hyderabad, Jaipur,
Jabalpur, Lucknow, Madras, Meerut,
Nagpur, Patna, Pune, Kanpur.

J to 10: These introductory paras give
the objective, scope applicability,
budgetary provision, . facilities and
services etc of the CGHS Scheme ‘and
the scope of the Report of the
Committee.

१/॥

942/RS—11A"


Para

72

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

In addition, employees of the Accountant
General of India are being provided CGHS
coverage, at Bhubaneshwar and Ranchi.
Employees of Post & Telegraph
Department in certain cities like Jabalpur,
Pune, Jaipur, Lucknow and Ahmedabad,
are not availing of CGHS facilities as they
have got their own dispensaries in these
cities. P & T employees in other stations,
however, are covered under CGHS.

Presently, there are 233 Allopathic, 18
Ayurvedic, 34 Homoeopathic, 8 Unani, 2
Siddha Dispensaries, 3 Yoga centres and 18
Poly-clinics covering 8.74 lakh card holders
and 40 lakh beneficiaries all over India.
There are also 69 laboratories and 17 dental
units.The table giving city-wise distribution
of dispensaries/beneficiaries/card holders is
at Annexure-I.

Budgetary Provision

The expenditure incurred on CGHS during
1994-95 was Rs. 5 crores on plan side and
Rs. 145 crores on non-plan side. A Table
showing details of expenditure incurred
during 1991-92 to 1994-95 is at Annexure-
I.

Facilities and Services under CGHS

The facilities provided under the scheme
include out-patient care through a net work
of Allopathic as well as Ayurvedic/
Homoeopathic/Unani dispensaries and
units, supply of medicines, laboratory and
X-Ray investigations, domiciliary visits,
emergency treatment, ante-natal care,
confinement and post-natal care, advice on
family welfare, specialist consultations. and
hospitalisation facilities in Government
hospitals, as well as in private hospitals
recognised under CGHS. In order to
increase the number of service institutions,
and to offer better service to the CGHS
beneficiaries, all government hospitals run
by the Army, Navy, Air Force, Railways,
E.S.I.and State Governments, as well as

942/RS—11B


Para

73

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

10.

Municipal hospitals, have also been
recognised under CGHS for taking
treatment through their nearest
dispensaries, irrespective of the fact as to
whether they are residing within the areas
covered by the Scheme or not.

Since November 1984, the Central
Government pensioners have been made
eligible for reimbursement of cost of
hospitalisation/Specialised treatment,
including cost of artificial appliances. A
new scheme has since been introduced for
Central Government pensioners covered
under CGHS. Under this Scheme, the
pensioners can pay ten-times the CGHS
contribution as lumpsum, and become life
members of the scheme. The domiciliary
restrictions to avail of the benefits of the
scheme have been liberalised in favour of
pensioners. Further, pensioners can avail of
CGHS’ facilities from their nearest
dispensary, irrespective of the fact whether
they are residing within the jurisdication of
the city where the CGHS is functioning, or
not.

Previous parliamentary Scrutiny of CGHS

The Committee took note of the fact that
the Estimates Committee of the Seventh
Lok Sabha made a study of this subject and
its report was presented to Parliament in
1982.This Committe is, however, distressed
over the fact that despite the detailed study
and recommendations made by the
Estimates Committee, there seems to be no
distinct improvement in the working of
CGHS. A _ select list of key
recommendations of the Estimates
Committee on the subject is at Annexure-
Ill.

Scope of the Report

The Committee,in view of the numeréus
complaints on CGHS, felt the need to
make a study of its functioning, especially
from the point of view of convenience
and satisfaction of beneficiaries. The



Para

74

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

67.

Committee, during the course .of its
consideration of this subject, received a
number of representations, a list of which is
at Annexure-IV.The Committee also visited
some of the dispensaries in Delhi, Madras
and Bombay to make an on-the-spot Study
of the functioning of CGHS. A list of
dispensaries visited by the Committee is at
Annexure-V. The Committee, in its report,
has laid great thrust on satisfaction of the
patients viz. the CGHS beneficiaries. With

this view, the Committee hereunder has ~

dealt with key problem areas, and made its
recommendations and observations on the
broad areas of arrangement of work,
improvement in quality of service, drug
dispensing procedures, pensioners
problems, reimbursement, emergency care,
specialist consultations, etc., which are
affecting the services provided to the
beneficiaries. Necessary — suggestions/
recommendations have also been made on
all these aspects so as to improve CGHS
functioning. The Committee has also made
tentative suggestions for considering
alternatives to the existing scheme e.g.
health insurance in lieu of CGHS and a
non-departmental framework for the
present CGHS scheme.

Subscription

The Committee is given to understand that
the CGHS subscription has recently been
increased by about five times. Many
beneficiaries complained to the Committee
that the increase effected in the rate of
subscription was on the high side. Justifying
the increase in the subscription, the
Ministry stated that during the last four
decades the pay & allowances of Govt.
servants had undergone upward revision a
number of times and the cost of medicines
had also increased manifold. However, ever
since the CGHS was introduced the rate’
was revised only once. The revision was
done on the recommendations of the

67 to 70: As per the Committee’s
recommendations, the existing system
already prescribes different rates of
subscription for different slabs of basic
pay. Subscription rates currently range
from Rs. 5 to Rs. 50 per month. The
system of lump-sum one time payment
for ten years contribution by pensioners
for issue of life-time CGHS cards to
pensioners (and their dependent family
members) is also prevalent.

Regarding bringing CGHS under the
purview of the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 it may be mentioned that
the National Consumer Dispute


75

Para Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

69.

70.

Fourth Pay Commission, the Ministry
added. A table showing revised rates is at
Annexure-VII

As revealed from the Table, the current
status and trends in levels of contributions
by beneficiaries at different income slabs
indicate that though apparently steep the
hike is fully justified due to the increasing
cost of medical services. Some relationship
between pay scales and contribution rates
has to be maintained. But, the case of
pensioners must be reviewed more
sympathetically preferably by introducing a
system of lumpsum one time payment,
entitling pensioners and their spouses to
avail of CGHS facilities throughout their
lives.

On 8 suggestion received from the
beneficiaries, the Committee sought to
know from the Ministry as to whether it
proposes to make the subscription
voluntary instead of compulsory as at
present in view of the steep hike in the
subscription rate. The Ministry submitted
that no such proposal was under
consideration of the Government as it was
mandatory for Central Govt. Employees to
pay the prescribed fee.

The Committee also wanted to know from
the Ministry as to why CGHS, being a paid
service should not be brought under the

Redressal Commission, New Delhi,
through its order dated 9.2.1996 has
held that the CGHS does not come
under the purview of this Act. Since it
tenders a service “free of charge and
under a contract of personal service”.
The Council while coming to this
decision, relied on the recent decision
of the Supreme Court in Indian
Medical Association vs. V.P. Shanta
dated 13.11.95 where the court had
held that “service rendered at a Govt.
Hospital/Health | Centre/Dispensary
where no charge whatsoever is made is
outside the purview of the expression
service as defined in Section-2(1)(O)
of the Act. The payment of a token
amount for registration purpose only
at hospital/nursing home would not
alter the position.



76

Para

85.

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

purview of the Consumer Protection Act.
The Ministry has stated that the Central
Government Health Scheme was not a paid
service. Only a token contribution was
charged from the beneficiaries. The scheme
was essentially a welfare scheme ‘and,
therefore it was not considered desirable to
bring it under the Consumer Protection Act.

The Committee was informed that private
hospitals are given exemption in customs
duty on the import of hospital equipment
and are also provided land and institutions
finance, etc. on concessional rates. The
Committee is surprised to note that these
private hospitals are not reciprocating by
providing any free or concessional
treatment to the poor CGHS beneficiaries.
If at all any concession is being given by
some hospitals it is generally negligible.
The Government also does not seem to be

bothered about it. The Committee
therefore, recommends that the
Department should ensure that every

private hospital, which has availed of such
concessions from the Government, provide
proportionate number of free/concessional
beds for the poor beneficiaries. The
Government should also have a mechanism
for ensuring its compliance.

It has been observed that the recognised
private hospitals are interested only in
accepting cases requiring costly treatments/
operations such as cardiac bypass and renal
transplant etc. for which they have got full
capacity. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that it should be stipulated
that both major, as well as minor, ‘cases are
entertained by recognised private hospitals.

Staff-Related Issues
Staff Strength:

The Committee does not propose to make
any detailed analysis of staff problems. All

84 to 85: The scheme of Customs
concessions to private hospitals was
withdrawn w.e.f. 1.3.94. However,
earlier concessions were being
extended to private hospitals on
fulfilling certain terms, which included
inter alia the following:

(a) that the institution provide
treatment without distinction of caste,
creed etc.;

(b) that the institution provide free
treatment, on an average to atleast
40% of all their out-door patients;

(c) that it keeps 10% of its bed
strength reserved for poor patients
whose monthly income is less than
Rs. 500 p.m.;

(d) that the institution provides
treatment to other patients not
covered under the above clauses (a)
and (b) at resonable charges.

It will be observed from the above
conditions that some of the facilities as
mentioned above, would be applicable
to the poorest citizens, drawing less
than Rs. 500/- p.m. and thereby, by
implication, falling outside the
category of government servant.

86 to 88: As stated earlier, concerted
efforts are being made to bring down


Para

77

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

87.

such issues must be resolved keeping in
mind the paramount interest of patient
care. However, from the evidence before
the Committee, it seems clear that the
Ministry should take urgent action on some
aspects affecting staff morale and efficiency.
The Committee has been informed that the
full staff strength is never on duty in the
dispensaries. Due to lack of sufficient
doctors, patients are required to wait for
longer periods for check up. The
Committee is distressed to note that out of
the total sanctioned strength of 1656 and 26
in respect of Group “A” and “B” staff,
only 1564 and 18 respectively are in
position. The position in regard to Group
“C” staff is 2765 out of 3108. In case of
Group “D”, out of 2983, 2845 are in
position. Though there was an increase in
the number of doctors, there was no
proportionate increase in the para-medical
staff. One CMO informed the Committee
that due to lack of staff one of the two
counters in the dispensary was run by a
peon which affected other work. When the
Ministry was asked as to why a number of
posts remained vacant for a considerable
time, it was stated that the recruitment of
doctors was done by the UPSC which was a
time-consuming process. Even after
selection, many of thedoctors would not
join, or even if they joined, they would
leave the job soon for better prospects
elsewhere.

The Committee also received complaints
that whenever doctors were on leave, no
substitute was provided to the dispensary
which affected the service to patients.
When the Ministry was asked to explain, it
was stated that there was no provision for
leave reserves in CGHS and sometimes it
might aot be possible to provide a
substitute.

the vacancy position in the various
specialities in Group ‘A’ and ‘B’.
Numerous DPCs are being held to fill
up the vacancies in Group ‘C’ & ‘D’
posts.

For creation of additional posts the
matter was taken up with M/o Finance
but was not agreed to on account of
non-implementation of the SIU
Report. A note has been submitted to
the Committee of Secretaries for the
scrapping of the Report & a fresh SIU
study as has been stated in paras
above.

Proposal for revival of Group ‘C’ &
‘D’ posts has also not been agreed to
by M/o Finance because of the non-
implementation of SIU Report. These
matters have been taken up at the
level of the then Finance Minister &
are being persued regularly.



78

Para

Observation/Recommendation

Action Taken

The Committee feels that efficiency in the
CGHS services can only be improved if
sufficient staff strength is there in position.
The Committee notes with regret that ६
number of posts are lying vacant.
Government should take necessary steps to
fill up the vacancies immediately. The
Committee also recommends that CGHS
should keep a leave reserve, in respect. of
doctors and para-medical staff and for this,
additional posts may have to be created.
Employing doctors on contract basis may
also be considered.The Ministry of Finance
may be approached for sanction of
additional posts as per the requirement.

Private Practice by Doctors

The practice of doctors taking more interest
in private practice than doing justice to
their Government jobs, the Committee
feels, is costing the CGHS dearly. The
Committee is given to understand that
despite issuing guidelines against it, many
doctors continue to indulge in private
practice. Maladies such as poor service,
pilferage of medicines, late coming and
early going etc., are inherent in this issue.
The Committee, therefore, recommends
that Government should take necessary and
stringent measures to stop private practice
by Government doctors employed in CGHS
dispensaries and clinics.

90: Regarding ban on private practice
by doctors, it is already in existence.
Whenever any violation of the rules
comes to the notice of the
Government, immediate necessary
steps are taken to investigate the
matter and _ initiate appropriate
disciplinary action.



CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS(OBSERVATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Please see Chapter-I

Paras: 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 29, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 45, 48, 49,
50, 51, 52; 7, 78, 73;-74, 75; 6, 77 का का का. 382, 83:

79
942/RS—12A


CHAPTER-V

RECOMMENDATIONSOBSERVATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED

Nil

80
942/RS—12B


MINUTES


*
SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Monday. the 15th September. 1997 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan —— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. 8.8. Dutta

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra $. Deo
. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

LOK SABHA

9. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

10. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
11, Shri Sartaj Singh

12. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
13. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

14. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

15. Dr. C. Silvera

16. Shri 1.G. Sanadi

17. Shrimati Krishna Bose

18. Shri A. Venkataram Reddy
19. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

20. Shri Krishna

21. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
22. Shri Samik Lahiri

23. Shri S.K. Kaarvendhan

24. Dr. M. Jagannath

25. Dr. Bali Ram

26. Shri. Ranen Barman

WITNESSES

L * * *

II. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health)
Shri P.P. Chauhan, Secretary

Smt. Shailja Chandra, Additional Secretary

Dr. S.P. Agarwal, D.G.H.S.

Dr. P.K. Bhattacharya, Director, C.G.H.S.

Smt. Sunita Kaila, C.C.A.

*Minutes of the Ist Meeting of the Committee relate of other matters.
***Relate to other matters.

9० 53 9 ७ + ०७

adn eee एन

83


की * *

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
Smt. Manjeet, Committee Officer

2. The Committee sought the clarifications from the Secretaries, Department of ISM &
H, Health and Youth Affairs and Sports on some of the points on the Action Taken Reports
furnished by the Departments on the National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta, National
Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur, India’s Performance in International Sports and Functioning
of the Central Government Health Scheme respectively. The Committee, thereafter
considered the draft Action Taken Reports on the National Institute of Homoeopathy,
Calcutta, National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur, India’s Performance in International Sports
and functioning of Central Government Health Scheme and adopted the same after some
modifications.

2.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

"३, The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Prof. Bharati Ray and Shri
Vishnu Kant Shastri and Dr. M. Jagannath and Shri 1.G. Sanadi in Lok Sabha to present
the reports in Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha respectively.

14, The Committee then adjourned at 4.25 a.m.

***Relate to other matters.


*VIII
EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Monday, the 17th August, 1998 in Committee

Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS

. Shri $.B. Chavan——Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
Shri Balkavi Bairagi

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
Shri O. Rajagopal

. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

. Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
. Dr. ९. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam

. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

. Shri Mallangouda Basanagouda Patil
> Shri Ajit Jogi

. Shri Shankar Pannu

. Shri Abdul Hamid

. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

. Smt. Krishna Bose

26.

Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health)

18

Shri K.K. Baksi, Secretary

2. Ms. Sujata Rao, Joint Secretary
Be
4
5)

Dr. S.P. Agarwal, DGHS

. Dr. (Smt.) Saroj Sagar, Addl. Director (CGHS)
. Dr. P.K. Bhattacharya, Director (CGHS)
6.

Shri R. Mukhi Bhattacharya, Director

*Minutes of Ist to VIIth meetings of the Committee relate to other matters.

85


86

x * *
SECRETARIAT
Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Smt. Manjeet, Committee Officer

2. The Committee sought clarifications from the above mentioned witnesses of the
Department of Health*** in connection with the Action Taken Reports on the functioning
of Central Government Health Scheme, *** respectively.

3. The Committee was not satisfied with the clarification given by the representatives of
the Department of Health and directed them to appear before the Committee again on
27th August, 1998 alongwith the replies on the points raised during the meeting.

3.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

***Relate to other=mattcrs.


Ix
NINTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 27th August, 1998 in Committee

Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS

1. Shri S.B. Chavan —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

. Shri Balkavi Bairagi

. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

. Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

10. Shri M.P.A. Samad Samadani

11. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy

12. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav

LOK SABHA

13. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam

14. Shri Sartaj Singh

15. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

16. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

17. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

18. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

19. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

20. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
21. Shri Ajit Jogi

22. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

23. Shri Laxman Singh

24. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

25. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

26. Shri H.P. Singh

27. Smt. Krishna Bose

28. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

29. Shri S. Arumugham
WITNESSES

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health)
. Shri K.K. Baksi, Secretary

2. Smt. Shailja Chandra, Addl. Secretary
3. Ms. Sujata Rao, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. S.P. Agarwal, DGHS

४० 9० 53 9७ (७ + ० ७

न

5108/RS—14A 87


88

5. Dr. (Smt.) Saroj Sagar, Addl. Director (CGHS)
6. Dr. P.K. Bhattacharya, Director (CGHS)
7. Shri R. Mukhi Bhattacharya, Director

* * *

SECRETARIAT

Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Smt. Manjeet, Committee Officer

2. The Committee sought clarifications from the above mentioned witnesses of the
Departments of Health and Education in connection with the Action Taken Reports on the
functioning of Central Government Health Scheme and on vocational Education
respectively.

3. The Committee adopted the following reports subject to some modifications made by
the Chairman:—

(i) * * *

(ii) Action Taken Report on the functioning of Central Government Health Scheme;

(iii) * * *
a * *

4.1. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

5. The Committee thereafter considered the draft report of the Sub-Committee on
Adult Education and decided to hear the Secretary, Education on the subject at its next
meeting.

The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to meet again on 11th September, 1998.

***Relate to other matters.


*XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 19th November, 1998 in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.8. Chavan——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

. Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

9. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
10. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
11. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
12. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

13. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

14. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
15. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
16. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
17. Shri Shmanur Shiv Shankarappa

18. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

19. Shri Abdul Hamid

20. Shri Samik Lahiri

21. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

22. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja

23. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

24. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy

25. Smt. Krishna Bose

26. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

27. Shri S. Arumugham

OIAAMAWH

WITNESSES

* * *

SECRETARIAT

Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai,. Under Secretary

*Minutes of XIIIth mecting of the Committee relate to other matters.

89


90

2. * * के

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate requisite number of Members for
presentation of some Reports of the Committee to the Rajya Sabha and lay the same in the
Lok Sabha during the ensuing session of Parliament.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 p.m.

***"Relate to other matters.


Errata

to the Seventy Eighth Report on the functioning of the Central

Government Health Scheme of the Department-related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.

Page 13 Para 21, line 8, under observation/recommendation ‘for’

Page
Page
Page

Page

Page

Page

Page

Page

Page

Page

Page

Page

16
27
28

30

34

43

52

56

57

64

73

76

authroised ‘read’ authorised.
In the Ist and 15th lines ‘for’ Commitee ‘read’ Committee.
line 17th ‘for’ on ‘read’ of.

Para 49 line 1, under observation/recommendation add ‘was’
before ‘asked’.

Para 51 to 52 line 1, under Action taken ‘for’ servcies
‘read’ services.

Para 78, line 14, under observation/recommendation delete
‘the’ before ‘its’

Line 13, ‘for’ nemely ‘read’ namely and line 18, ‘for’
ougth ‘read’ ought.

Line §, under Action Taken ‘for’ complaince ‘read’
comp] iance.

Line 5, under observation/recommendation ‘for’ physicans
‘read’ physician

Line 2, under Action Taken ‘for’ initation ‘read’
initiation.

Para 91, line 16, under Action ‘for’ Nanital ‘read’
Nainital.

Para 9, Tine 6, under observation/recommendation ‘for’
Committe ‘read’ Committee.

Sub-para (d) of Para 84-85 under Action Taken ‘for’
resonable ‘read’ reasonable.