REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
 
Parliament of India
Rajya Sabha
Department related ParliamentaryCommittee on HRD
86th REPORT
on
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1999-2000 (DEMAND NO. 39) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on19.04.1999)
(Laid on the table of Lok Sabha on22.04.1999)
CONTENTS
 
1. Composition of Committee
2. Preface
3. Reports
4. Minutes
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1999-2000)
1. Shri S.B. Chavan - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
3. Shri Balkavi Bairagi
4. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
5. Shri Rajnath Singh `Surya’
6. Shri O. Rajagopal
7. Shri Dina Nath Mishra
8. Dr. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
9. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
10. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
11. Shri M.P. A. Samad Samadani
12. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
13. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
14. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
15. Dr. Akhtar Hasan Rizvi
LOK SABHA
16. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
17. Shri Sartaj Singh
18. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
19. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
20. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
21. Dr. Sanjay Singh
22. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
23. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
24. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
25. Shri Ashok Singh
26. Dr. Ashok Patel
27. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
28. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
29. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
30. Shri Ajit Jogi
31. Shri V.M. Sudheeran
32. Shri Laxman Singh
33. Shri Shankar Pannu
34. Shri Abdul Hamid
35. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
36. Shri Samik Lahiri
37. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
38. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja
39. Shri H.P. Singh
40. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
41. Smt. Krishna Bose
42. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
43. Shri S. Arumgham
44. Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
PREFACE

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Eighty-sixth Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand No.39) of the Department
of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 1999-2000.
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers
received from the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Department on
the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 24th March, 1998.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the 9th
April, 1999.
NEW DELHI;                                                                      S.B. CHAVAN
April 9, 1999
                                                                         CHAIRMAN,
Chaitra 19, 1921 (Saka)                                 Department-related Parliamentary
                                                                                   Standing Committee on
                                                                            Human Resource Development
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
1. Main objectives of the Department of Health are:-
i. to undertake national programmes of health and to intensify measures for the prevention,
control and eradication of communicable diseases;
ii. to promote education, research and training in various medical disciplines, to reorient the
medical colleges in the delivery of health services in rural areas;
iii. to prevent adulteration of food as well as drugs;
iv. to provide primary health care at the doorsteps of the people and to train the required number of
personnel for this purpose;
v. to take steps for better implementation of Health Care Programmes for tribal and other weaker
sections of the Society; and
vi. to collaborate with member countries of United Nations and International Agencies like WHO,

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
UNICEF in matters relating to health promotion.
1.2. The Department finances, wholly or substantially, the following autonomous institutions engaged in
patient care and/ or research:
i. All India Institutes of Medical Sciences and Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for Opthalmic
Sciences, New Delhi;
ii. Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh;
iii. All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore; and
iv. Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi.
1.3. Centrally Sponsored Health Schemes are financed by the Central Government on 100 percent or 50
per cent basis. The following Schemes are financed by the Central Government on 100 per cent basis:
i. National Scheme for Prevention of Visual Impairment and Blindness including Trachoma;
ii. National Leprosy Eradication Programme;
iii. National Guinea-worm Eradication Programme;
iv. National AIDS Control Programme.
Schemes on which the expenditure is shared between the Central Government and State Government on
50:50 basis are:-
i. National Malaria Eradication Programme (Rural and Urban);
ii. National Sexually Transmitted Diseases Control Programme;
iii. National T.B. Control Programme; and
iv. Kala-Azar Control Programme.
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS
2.1. The Department of Health has been allocated Rs.1160 crores on the Plan side and Rs.830.28 crores on
the Non-Plan side, for the year 1999-2000. The percentage increase in the approved outlay for 1999-2000
over 1998-99 works out to a meagre 1.29%.
2.2. On a specific query as to the projected requirements of the Department for 1999-2000, the Department
submitted that it had proposed an outlay of Rs.1269.11 crores for 1999-2000 to the Planning Commission
mainly on account of enhanced outlays to be provided for disease control programmes like Blindness,
AIDS, Disease Surveillance and Response System, Central Hospitals and premier institutions engaged in
medical education and research including construction of Delhi Nurses Colony. However, the Department
has been allocated only Rs.1160.00 crores which is less by Rs.109.11 crores vis-à-vis the projected
demand. As a result, not only there would be no enhanced outlays as planned for the programmes/schemes
mentioned above but also the overall programmes would be adversely affected. The programmes/schemes
adversely affected to a significant extent are National TB Control Programme and National Blindness
Control Programme while Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi, Lady Hardinge Medical College, Delhi and PGI,
Chandigarh will be affected marginally, it was clarified.
2.3 The Committee feels that the allocation made is not in consonance with the genuine needs of the
Department. The Committee was given to understand that there has been no substantial increase in
the total investment on Health and Family Welfare Sector over the last few years. As per the WHO
recommentation, if equity and universal coverage is to be realised, at least 5 percent of GDP is to be
made for Public Health Care. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance should give a careful thought to the above recommendation of

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
WHO, before finalising the budgetary allocations of the Department.
2.4. At the same time, the Committee has a word of caution for the Department. The Committee has
observed that during the last three years, although allocations made have been less as compared to
the projected requirements, trend of under-utilisation is very much evident:-
1995-96 Allocation made Rs.1114.93 crores
Expenditure Rs.1030.43 crores
Savings Rs. 84.50 crores
1996-97 Allocation made Rs.1282.93 crores
Expenditure Rs.1160.97 crores
Savings Rs.121.96 crores
1997-98 Allocation made Rs.1486.53 crores
Expenditure Rs.1338.43 crores
Savings Rs.148.90 crores
2.5. The Committee has been given to understand that the position remains unchanged in 1998-99
too. The Committee is concerned to note that the main factors responsible for this situation, as come
out from the details furnished by the Department, are unspent balances lying with the State
Governments, non receipt of utilisation certificates, non-filling of vacant posts, procedural delays in
procurement of medicines and equipments. As admitted by the Department, there are all kinds of
delays which are not satisfactorily resolved. The Committee is fully aware that for providing health
care, both Central and State Governments have a role to play. The Committee, however, strongly
feels that in view of the scale of expenditure during the last three years, the Department of Health,
being the nodal agency has to take remedial steps so as to make basic health care within the reach of
common man a reality.
2.6. The Committee has been given to understand that sometimes delays are caused because the
administrative Ministry does not observe all the procedures in getting the expenditure finally
sanctioned. The Committee feels that the system needs to be modified so as to prevent these
procedural delays. Even in the case of new proposals, administrative Ministry should do away with
the element of adhocism and adopt a systematic approach.
7. A number of National Health Programmes are being run by the Central Government in
collaboration with the State Governments. The main objective of these programmes is to
bring down the rate of incidence of a particular disease. The Committee feels that these
programmes although evolved at a national level also need to have an element of local
input. What is required is a definite preventive scheme for every State according to the
prevalence of the disease there. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the
Department may initiate an exercise of review of all its National Health Programmes in a
phased manner.

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
2.8. The Committee strongly feels that for effective delivery of health care, active co-operation of
other concerned Ministries/Departments both at the Central and State level is very much required.
For example, National Malaria Eradication Programme. To effectively tackle increasing incidence of
malaria, co-ordination with Departments of Urban/Rural Affairs/Environment has to be there. The
Committee, therefore, would like to emphasise that the Department should evolve a system of co-
ordination with other concerned Departments and also impress upon the State Governments to
adopt this strategy.
II. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME
3.1. The plan provision for Central Government Health Scheme which was Rs.9.00 crores in BE
1998-99 got reduced to Rs.6.83 crores at the RE stage. It has been increased to Rs.9.00 crores in BE
1999-2000.
3.2. To a specific query as to whether this provision is sufficient to sustain and expand the activities
of CGHS, the Department stated that as of now, the CGHS is not in a position to expand its
activities due to the non-implementation of the recommendations contained in the SIU’s Report of
1991. A fresh SIU study of CGHS has recently been completed and after the receipt of the Report it
will be able to expand its activities by creation of new posts. Therefore, the Department contended
that the provision of Rs.9.00 crores in BE 1999-20 is sufficient to sustain and expand its activities.
3.3. The Committee feels that there has been no noticeable improvement in the services
provided in the CGHS Dispensaries. Moreover, the medicines given at the CGHS Dispensaries
are reported to be of sub-standard quality. The Committee desires that this aspect may be
looked into. The Committee was also given to understand that recently there was acute
shortage of medicines in C.G.H.S. Dispensaries. The main reason for the shortage of medicines
was reported to be delay in the finalisation of formularies. The Committee, therefore, strongly
feels that the exercise of revision of formularies should be taken up in advance before expiry
of the existing list so as to remove the hardships faced by the beneficiaries.
IV. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES, NEW DELHI.
4.1. The Plan allocation for the Institute has been raised from Rs.69.96 crores last year to Rs.81
crores this year. When the Committee sought to know whether the increase would be sufficient to
carry on the normal activities of the Institute, the Secretary stated that it will be just sufficient.
Elaborating on the needs of the Institute, the Secretary stated that some proposals relating to Cardio-
Thoracic and Neuro-Sciences Centre have been submitted for EFC approval and if the same were
approved, there was a need for additional funds at the RE stage. The Committee is of the view that
for a premier institute like AIIMS, fulfilling of normal requirements will not suffice. The
Committee, therefore, feels that the Department should take a realistic view of the needs of the
Institute before allocation of funds.
4.2. Asked about the progress made in setting up of a smaller Trauma Centre at a cost of Rs.20
crores at AIIMS, the Secretary stated that for establishing a Trauma Centre, the present day cost
worked out to nearly Rs.80-100 crores and it was difficult to establish a Centre on Rs.20 crores.
However, he added, that Director, AIIMS has been requested to organise a workshop on the basis of
Vishwakarma Report in which representatives of major hospitals, Police Organisation, CATS

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
Ambulance Services and Government of NCT of Delhi may be invited to see as to how the network
for tackling emergencies can be established by upgrading the facilities selectively. This exercise will
help the Department in preparing a scheme in a forceful manner which will have wider acceptance
of all concerned, it was informed.
4.3. The Committee is constrained to point out that it was during the course of discussions on
Demands for Grants, 1998-99 last year that the Committee was informed by the Department that it
had been decided to prepare asmaller project for Trauma Centre costing around Rs.20.00 crores
which could be implemented within the available resources. However, as per the latest reply
received from the Department, an amount of Rs.15-20 crores will be grossly inadequate to build a
Trauma Centre. Estimated cost of a Trauma Centre must have been based on some analysis. The
Committee can foresee that organising a workshop and arriving at a final decision will entail
considerable time.
4.4. The Committee feels that as the number of accidents are on the rise and the facilities
available at the Institute are not meeting the requirements, procrastinating on this issue will
cost valuable human lives. The Committee, therefore, desires an early decision on establishing
a Trauma Centre be taken.
V. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL MEDICINE AND REHABILITATION, BOMBAY
5.1. The Committee notes that the plan allocation for the Institute was Rs.2.07 crores in BE 1998-99
which was reduced to Rs.0.53 crores at RE stage. It has been enhanced to Rs.2.00 crores in BE
1999-2000. The Secretary explained that decrease in RE was on account of less expenditure on
salary/wages due to non-creation of posts. The Secretary also stated that additional posts can be
sanctioned only when the facility to absorb the extra staff is there. The Committee is not
convinced by the explanation of the Secretary. The Committee feels that simultaneous efforts
are required to be made for creation of additional posts and required infrastructure for the
same.
5.2. The Committee therefore, desires that since AIIPMR is a pioneer institute in
rehabilitation services, the whole gamut of issues pertaining to it should be looked into and
sorted out at the earliest.
VI. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL
6.1. The Plan allocation for the Hospital has been increased from Rs.17 crores in BE 1998-99 to
Rs.18.60 crores at the RE stage and further to Rs.25.93 crores in BE 1999-2000. Explaining the
manner in which the hospital proposes to utilise the allocation, the Department stated that the
additional allocation was meant for filling up of vacant posts and for payment of allowances to the
staff and training of the staff.
6.2. The Committee notes that equipments worth Rs.115.86 crores for upgradation of Burns and
Plastic Surgery Department of the Hospital were sanctioned during 1997-98. However, the
Committee is dismayed to note that equipments worth only Rs.36.70 lakhs have been installed so far
and equipments worth Rs.70.08 lakhs are still under process of procurement. Explaining the reasons

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
for delay, the Secretary stated that this is due to the complicated procedure involved in the
procurement of imported equipments.
6.3. The Committee would like to emphasise that orders for the purchase of equipments
should be finalised at the earliest, so that facilities at the Burns and Plastic Surgery
Department of the Safdarjung Hospital are upgraded. The Committee feels that the
Department should approach the concerned authorities for simplification of the procedure for
import of equipments to prevent such instances in future.
VII. DR. R.M.L. HOSPITAL
7.1. There is a marginal increase in the plan allocation to the Hospital i.e. from Rs.10 crores to
Rs.12.47 crores in 1999-2000. Explaining the activities of the Hospital, the Secretary stated that
some posts have been sanctioned for proposed Cardiac Surgery facility that is being started. The
Secretary also stated that the Hospital is thinking in terms of having a Trauma Centre of its own in
the triangular plot of land near the casualty for which necessary clearance is being obtained from
DDA and Ministry of Urban Affairs for ground coverage/FAR.
7.2. The Committee notes that the concept of Trauma centre was visualised long time back
and is dismayed to note that it is still languishing in the proposal stage. As the facilities
available for treating the accident victims need to be strengthened, the Committee feels that
the proposal should be cleared without any delay.
VIII. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, RANCHI
8.1. For the Institute, the plan allocation has been raised from Rs.2.80 crores last year to Rs.3.80
crores this year. To a specific query, as to how the proposed allocation is going to be utilised, the
Department stated that the excess provision will be used for filling up 260 vacant posts in the
Institute.
8.2. Commenting about the prevailing affairs of the Institute, the Secretary stated that the posts were
lying vacant for quite some time and it was difficult to complete the exercise of filling up 260
vacant posts with right candidates within a period of one year.
8.3. The Committee notes that the Institute, besides having a 643 bedded hospital attached to
it, provides Postgraduate education in Psychiatry and associated fields. From the wordings of
the Secretary, the Committee infers that the Institute is virtually non-functional as it is being
run as a Centrally administered institution from a far off distance. The Committee is,
therefore, left with no other option but to conclude that the Institute needs some delegation of
powers. This has been admitted by the Secretary himself. Appropriate steps may be taken in
this regard. The Committee also desires that a time bound strategy may also be chalked out
for reducing the vacancy position.
IX. JAWARHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION AND
RESEARCH, PONDICHERRY (JIPMER)
9.1. The allocation for Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research,

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
Pondicherry (JIPMER) was Rs.11.76 crores in BE 1998-99 which got reduced to Rs.8.00 crores at
the RE stage. However, an enhanced allocation of Rs.13.50 crores has been made in BE 1999-2000.
9.2. Commenting about JIPMER, the Secretary stated that the decrease in RE 1998-99 was mainly
on account of reduced expenditure under Salaries and Machinery & Equipments and also due to
delay in non-creation of new posts and also in filling up of the existing vacancies.
9.3. Justifying the increased provision in 1999-2000, the Secretary stated that it will be utilised for
creation of posts for new Casualty Block, development of general and superspeciality
clinics/departments and also for procurement of some costly sophisticated foreign equipments for
upgradation of existing facilities at the hospital/institute which are at present under various stages.
9.4. The Committee feels that a careful follow up needs to be done, otherwise the Committee
apprehends that the situation that occurred last year will be repeated.
9.5. Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the complications arising out of the
centralised system of postings/transfers of doctors of the Central Health Services being
handled by the UPSC. Problems arise particularly when vacancies in the Institutions outside
Delhi are to be filled up. Doctors are generally not inclined to join institutions outside Delhi
due to one reason or the other, the Committee was informed.
9.6. The Committee notes that earlier there used to be a condition of one year service outside
Delhi, on first appointment or first promotion. The Committee fails to understand why this
condition has been diluted over the years. The Committee is of the view that some urgent steps
need to be taken otherwise the functioning of the Institutes situated outside Delhi would
continue to deteriorate. The Committee feels that one solution can be advertisements for
filling up vacant posts given by UPSC should be area-specific.
X. KASTURBA HEALTH SOCIETY
10.1. Kasturba Health Society is the first and foremost medical college in the country to be located in rural
surroundings and exposes the students to the health problems of the rural areas. The Society has a teaching
hospital with 560 beds. Plan allocation for the Society has been enhanced from Rs.6.00 crores in BE 1998-
99 to Rs.8.00 crores in 1999-2000.
10.2. To a specific query as to whether the funds were sufficient to meet the needs of the Society, the
Department stated that they were just sufficient. The Secretary also informed the Committee that 31 new
posts of Staff Nurses for the Society have been recently sanctioned.
10.3. The Committee notes that out of a provision of Rs.6 crores earmarked for the society last year
in BE, only a sum of Rs.4.5. crores have been released. The Committee fails to understand why the
rest of the amount was not released. The Committee, therefore, desires that at least this year full
allocation should be released at one go, for the Society. The Committee also feels that the
Department should impress upon the Society to fill up all the 31 posts of staff nurses, cleared
recently, at the earliest.
 
  
 
XI. VALLABHBHAI PATEL CHEST INSTITUTE, DELHI

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
11.1. For Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi, the plan provision has been steeply raised from Rs.0.64
crores in 1998-99 to Rs.4.00 crores in BE 1999-2000. Justifying the increase, the Department stated that
the increased allocation will be spent on Research, Teaching and Training activities in respiratory diseases
for which the state-of-the art equipments will be added to the Institute in 1999-2000.
11.2. The Committee hopes that the Institute will be able to utilise the funds fully and state-of-the art
equipments will be provided.
XII. CANCER RESEARCH
12.1. For Cancer Research, amount of grants-in-aid to states has been raised from Rs.7.00 crores in 1998-
99 to Rs.17 crores in 1999-2000.
12.2. Explaining the need for the increase, the Department stated that grant-in-aid is available to the State
Governments w.e.f. 5.2.1999 for:-
i. Development of Oncology Wing in Government Medical Colleges/Hospitals (Rs.2.00 crores
enhanced from Rs.1.5 crores);
ii. Setting up of Cobalt-therapy units Rs.1.50 crores in the case of Government Institution
enhanced from one crore. For purchase of Mammography machine for institutions which are
having facilities of a well equipped Radiology Department upto a maximum of Rs.30.00 lakhs;
and
iii. District projects Rs.15.00 lakh is provided in the first year and Rs.10 lakhs thereafter for
subsequent four years.
12.3. The Department further submitted that in view of the above measures, more proposals were expected
than last year and also in view of the enhanced level of assistance, more funds would be required to meet
the demand.
12.4. The Secretary while deposing before the Committee also stated that out of 12 Regional Centres, 10
were assisted by the Department and one by Department of Atomic Energy and another by Government of
Assam. He also stated that the Department was proposing to have one more Centre at Nagpur. He further
added that out of 12 centres, 8 centres received assistance to the tune of 75 lakhs for purchase of essential
equipments, during the year. However, high cost of equipments was creating some problems. Some of the
equipments cost as high as Rs.220 lakhs.
5. The Committee is of the strong opinion that one centre may be assisted at a time instead
of assisting all the Centres at one go. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the
Department in the matter of cancer projects in Districts. Regarding opening of new
Regional Centres in the States, the Committee feels that due weightage must be given to
population factor and the number of patients suffering in the State. The Committee also
desires that an evaluation of the centres be carried out to know how far the poor have
been benefited out of the centres.
12.6 The Committee has been given to understand that some positive achievements have been made
in the treatment of cancer by ISM&H practitioners, specially in Homoeopathy and Ayurveda. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Department in coordination with the Department of ISM&H
should initiate some exercise for the evaluation of the achievements made.
XIII. NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
13.1. The objective of the National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP) is to achieve elimination of
leprosy by the year 2000 A.D. by reducing the case load to less than 1/10,000 population. This objective is
likely to be achieved by 19 States by the end of 2000 A.D. In case of the rest of the States, the target is
likely to be achieved in different stages between 2000 and 2005, the Committee was informed. Modified
Leprosy Elimination Campaign, which was implemented in 21 States/Uts till June, 1998, has been
extended to 6 more States/Uts during the year. H.P., Manipur, Rajasthan and Delhi would be implementing
the campaign during 1999.
13.2. The Committee observes that assessment of the impact of MELP in 22 States has shown encouraging
results. 2.8 million suspected patients were identified by the searchers out of which 4,54,137 were
confirmed to be new Leprosy cases. A total of 5.84 lakh searchers were involved in all the States/Uts. The
Committee is happy to note that a total of 9.35 lakh General Health Care Staff and Volunteers have
been given orientation and sensitization in Leprosy as a first step for starting integration of Leprosy
activities with general health care. Public activities were also undertaken extensively.
13.3. During 1997-98, 5.32 lakh new cases have been detected and 5.30 lakh cases have been brought
under treatment, against the target of 3.24 lakh and 5.75 lakh cases have been discharged against the
annual target of 4.32 lakh. The Committee hopes that all these efforts will result in the achievement of
the targets set under NLEP.
13.4. The Committee, however, views with concern that earlier 50% of cases were in Andhra
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, now over 50% of the cases requiring treatment are reported to be in U.P.,
M.P., Bihar and West Bengal. Action under NLEP may be intensified in these States.
XIV. NATIONAL MALARIA ERADICATION PROGRAMME
14.1. In the case of Malaria Eradication Programme, the plan provision of Rs.287.00 crores in BE 1998-99
was reduced to Rs.217.00 crores at the RE stage and the amount has been raised to Rs.240.00 crores in
1999-2000.
14.2. To a specific query as to why it was reduced at the RE stage, the Secretary stated that it was due to
difficulties faced in making timely expenditure in accordance with the Government of India rules and
World Bank guidelines. Defending the current provision, the Secretary stated that the provision would be
just sufficient to carry out the activities. It was proposed to be utilised for releasing of cash assistance to 7
North Eastern States, District Malaria Control Societies in the 7 peninsular States covered under the
Enhanced Malaria Control Project (EMCP) with World Bank support and for adoption of newer
approaches for controlling Malaria with a mix of interventions like use of Synthetic Pyrethroids, Bio-
larvicides, Medicated Mosquito Nets (MMN) and intensified Information, Education and Communication
(IEC) activities, strengthening of Management Information System and Development of Manpower by
way of imparting training.
14.3. On the question of including Terai areas of U.P. also under the EMCP, the Department stated that
flexibility to divert the resources to areas other than project areas lies with the Government provided the
technical parameters are met in case of any outbreak/exigency.
14.4. The Committee notes that to protect the population from transmission of malaria, every year targets
for spraying of insecticide are worked out for each state on the basis of epidemiological data. Spray
coverage during the year 1997 was around 60% in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat,

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Rajasthan, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh. NMEP had
targeted 164.75 million population to be covered in 1997-98. However, only 92.92 million population
could be covered with insecticidal spray.
14.5. Asked about the reasons for non-achievement of the physical targets in the case of spraying of
insecticides, the Department submitted that the technical target for spray operation is worked out as per the
guidelines of the Modified Plan of Operation of the Programme wherein the areas reporting API 2 and
above (i.e. Malaria cases per thousand population per annum), taking Sub-Centre as a unit are to be
covered with appropriate insecticidal spray. The Department further submitted that states project their own
targets based on availability of funds for spraying operations, vector bionomics etc. Under the new
approach, the selective vector control measure is adopted and focus is given to the high risk areas after
prioritizing the areas, that is why the actual achievements of spray coverage do not match with the
technical targets of spraying. To supplement insecticides spray coverage for prevention of malaria
transmission, some states have undertaken bio-environmental measures, the Department added.
14.6. The Committee is of the opinion that a realistic target for spraying of insecticides be kept
rather than an ambitious one. Mere spraying of insecticides will not solve the problem. The
Committee strongly feels that unless there is a co-ordinated approach between the civic authorities
and the State Departments of Health for sorting out the problems of stagnant water, open drains
and removal of garbage, malaria can never be eradicated. The Committee’s attention has been
drawn to the following constraints cited in the Malaria Control:-
a. Difficulty in regular malaria surveillance acitivities due to difficult terrain
conditions;
b. Large number of vacancies of key posts;
c. Inadequacy of vehicles for movement of superivisory staff; and
d. Frequent shifting of Programme Officers both at State Headquarters and Zonal
level.
The Committee understands that these problems are being noticed for quite some time. The
Committee would like to emphasise that the Department should pursue the matter of removal of
these constraints with the concerned State Governments.
XIII. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
15.1. The aim of the National Programme for Control of Blindness launched in 1976 is to reduce the
blindness rate from 1.49% to 0.3% by 2000 A.D. Besides that, a World Bank Assisted Cataract Blindness
Control Project is being implemented since April, 1994 in seven States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, where prevalence rate is very
high.
15.2. Asked about the impact of the programme so far, the Department stated that rapid assessment
surveys were conducted and it revealed that prevalence of cataract blindness has reduced by 34% in the
age group 50-59 years and by 26% in the age group 60-69 years. An epidemiological blindness survey is
currently being undertaken to assess prevalence of blindness, its causes and visual outcome after surgery.
To improve the programme further and to have better output, the Committee feels that epidemiological
blindness survey should be completed at the earliest.
15.3. Commenting about the programme, the Secretary stated that out of 11 million targeted, 7.8 million

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
operations have been performed and if possible, the Department would like to extend the programme to the
whole country. The Secretary also stated that there was now a gradual shift from the camp approach to an
approach based on mixed institutions. The Secretary, however, added that all the voluntary organisations
prefer the camp approach because of their own limitations. The Secretary also informed that a EFC
meeting was held for this purpose to clear the proposal. As Rs.120 crores were required to implement the
programme, it will not fit in the existing plan allocations.
15.4. The Committee was given to understand that some cases of mishaps have been reported in the
camp approach. The Committee desires that this may be looked into. As the prospects under the
programme seem to be good, the Committee would like the EFC to clear the proposal at the earliest.
15.5. Under the National Trachoma and Blindness Control Programme, there was a provision of
Rs.700.00 lakhs as Grant-in-aid to State Governments during 1997-98. The Committee, however,
notices that actual expenditure amounted to only Rs.110.48 lakhs due to the poor performance of the
States in developing the service units. The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of
the States where funds have not been fully utilised and also the action taken in this regard. The
Committee recommends that the implementation of the programme in the States should be closely
monitored and in the event of any problems, the matter should be taken up with the concerned State
Government.
XVI. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME
16.1. The Plan allocation for the Programme has been hiked from Rs.110.60 crores in BE & RE 1998-99 to
Rs.139.50 crores in BE 1999-2000. The Secretary informed the Committee that as a result of surveillance
carried out in the country, it had been confirmed that one percent of the total population was afflicted with
HIV virus. To combat this alarming situation, the Department proposed to utilise the funds for expansion
of targeted interventions for high risk behaviour groups like Commercial Sex Workers, Truck Drivers,
Intravenous Drug Users, etc. Management of opportunistic infections and control of STD (Sexually
Transmitted Diseases) will be given emphasis and the other thrust areas on which the Department would
like to focus on were preventive interventions for general community groups including women and youth;
strengthening capacity at the State, Municipal and Local levels and forging inter-sectoral collaboration
with public, private and voluntary sectors.
16.2. The Committee was informed that licensing of all the blood banks in the country has resulted in
availability of safe blood. Among the significant decisions taken by the National Council for Blood
Transfusion were banning of professional blood donors with effect from 1
st January, 1998, amendments
were being carried out in Drugs and Cosmetic Rules to make the licensing of blood banks more stringent,
development of operational guidelines, formulation of draft National Blood Policy and Quality Control in
transfusion services, the Committee was informed.
16.3. The Committee is happy to note that as a result of awareness campaigns organised at all levels,
40% of people in rural areas are now aware about this deadly disease. The Committee hopes that all
these measures will yield the desired results. However, the Committee would not like to comment
further as all the issues concerning AIDS have been dealt with by the Committee in its Report on
Dreaded Diseases.
XVII. NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
17.1. The main objectives of the National T.B. Control Programme started in 1962 were to reduce disease
transmission and to diagnose as many cases as possible and to provide free treatment. Following a review
of NTCP in 1992, a Revised Strategy to achieve 85% cure rate as against present treatment completion rate
below 40%. World Bank Assistance is also being provided to this programme. The Committee , however,
observes that inspite of a number of initiatives/ activities undertaken, magnitude of the problem continues
to be a cause of concern:
Estimated prevalence - 14 million
Estimated incidence - 2.2 Million
Currently reported - 1.4 million
Under NTP
Estimated mortality - 53 lakhs per year.
 
  
 
Patients inability on an average to complete the treatment course is partly held responsible for there being
no let up in the incidence of TB. However, the Committee feels that deficiences in the public health care
system are too glaring to be ignored. This Programme is integrated with Central Health Services. Drastic
measures need to be taken for improving the situation at the ground level. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Department should impress upon the State Governments to strengthen the
infrastructure, like filling up of the vacant posts, creation of required new posts and to intensify the
supervision.
17.2. The Committee notes that there is limited data available on the role of Multi-drug Resistant
TB. As most of the drugs are imported, treatment of a case of MDR-TB is very costly. The
Committee feels that the Department should take some effective steps to tackle this problem.
XVIII. YAWS
18.1. The Secretary informed the Committee that Yaws is a disease found among tribal persons in remote
and inaccessible areas of 32 districts in nine States, the largest number being in Chattisgarh region of
Madhya Pradesh. A lot of effort was required to find out people who were suffering from Yaws. After
identification trained people from the existing primary health centres, have to find out and ascertain the
persons who have mixed with others.
18.2. The Secretary also informed that one single shot of pensulin cures Yaws and so far, no medical
complications have been revealed by the ICMR, in case of YAWS. A sum of Rs. 4 crores is proposed in
the entire Ninth Plan period and within this amount, the Secretary hoped that the task will be completed,
since no extra staff, no extra vehicles, no extra buildings are required. Only a certain amount of training
and follow-up search is needed.
3. The Committee feels that since the disease is contagious, the Department should properly
brief the field staff about the precautions to be taken while identifying the case.
4. The Committee has been given to understand that in certain tribal areas of Maharashtra
and A.P. people in thousands are dying due to diseases arising out of malnutrition. The

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
Department may look into.
XIX. NEW INITIATIVES
HOSPITAL WASTE MANAGEMENT
19.1. Hospital Waste is one of the biggest health hazards that is being faced by every citizen of this
country. The Committee feels that all the projects of the Department are envisaged and implemented to
cure disease, but it will remain a dream if abundant caution is not taken to dispose of the waste while
curing the disease.
19.2. The Committee in its 69
th Report had extensively dealt with this problem. The Committee notes that
the Ministry of Environment & Forests have notified the Bio-Medical Wastes (Management & Handling)
Rules on 20th July, 1998 which have been circulated to Health Secretaries of all State Governments/Union
Territories, Director-General of Health Services including Central Government Hospitals on 10th
September, 1998. Under these rules, all the hospitals/nursing homes are required to follow the required
segregation procedure and install the necessary incinerator/alternative facilities. Besides that , a national
Hospital Waste Management Committee has been constituted on 10.11.1998 to co-ordinate and guide on
various aspects including policy and programme issues on Hospital WasteManagement on the country.
The Committee hopes that the initiatives taken by the Department would result in successful
handling of this menace of national magnitude.
XX. AVAILABILITY OF SPURIOUS DRUGS
20.1. The Committee is disturbed to note that of late spurious drugs are freely available in the
market without any check. This is a very serious problem and will result in grave health hazard. The
Committee is of the firm view that the matter needs to be examined at a great length. The
Committee desires that a comprehensive plan to check this menace may be got prepared and
implemented at the earliest.
XXI. NATIONAL ILLNESS ASSISTANCE FUND
21.1. Under the Head ` Assistance toward Expenditure on Hospitalisation of the Poor’ Non-plan allocation
of Rs.25 crores in 1998-99 was reduced to Rs.8 crores at RE stage. There is a provision of Rs.25 crores in
BE 1999-2000. The Secretary informed the Committee, that during 1998-99 grant-in-aid has been
sanctioned to the States of Maharshtra (i.e.Rs.2 crores ) and West Bengal Rs.50 lakhs.
21.2. The Secretary also informed that the Government of Mizoram and Kerala have also set up Illness
Assistance Fund and Grant-in-aid of Rs.50 lakh and Rs.1 crore to Mizoram and Kerala respectively is
likely to be released on completion of certain formalities.
21.3. The Secretary further added that no direct assistance is granted to the patients from National Illness
Assistance Fund (NIAF). As per the scheme an advance of Rs.10 lakhs each has been placed at the
disposal of the Medical Superintendents. All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi; Safdarjung
Hospital, New Delhi, Dr. R.M.L. Hospital, New Delhi, L.H.M.C. & Smt. S.K. Hospital, New Delhi, P.G.I.
M.E.R., Chandigarh, JIPMER, Pondicherry and NIMHANS, Bangalore and detailed guidelines have been
issued to them regarding the modalities for operating the fund.
21.4. The Committee desires that particulars and the manner in which the fund is operated may be
displayed at a prominent place in the hospitals in vernacular language. The Committee is of the
opinion that the Department may urge all the State Governments to set up the fund at the earliest, as

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
it proposes to serve the poorer sections of the society.
XXII. MEDICAL RESEARCH
1. The Committee finds that the Indian Council of Medical Research has conducted research
on tribal health and traditional medicine. The Committee hopes that the Department has
taken some steps in co-ordination with the Department of Family Welfare to take
advantage of the results achieved, so as to provide better health care to tribals. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the same.
XXIII GENERAL
The Committee in its 78
th Report on the Action Taken Report on the functioning of CGHS has dealt
extensively with the following two aspects:-
Reimbursement of the expenses incurred by the CGHS beneficiaries on the treatment taken in
recognised private hospitals.
Application of Consumer Protection Act to the services rendered by doctors of Govt.
Hospitals/CGHS Dispensaries.
While taking not of the Supreme Court Judgements on these two aspects, the Committee had made some
suggestions. The Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken by the Department in
this regard.
XXIV. COMMITTED LIABILITY
24.1. While examining the Demands for Grants 1997-98 of the Departments under its purview, the
Committee noted that the committed liability of the Plan Schemes has not been reflected in the
budgetary allocations.
24.2. The Committee, in this, connection considered the report of the Tenth Finance Commission.
The Tenth Finance Commission have observed in this regard as under:-
"Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of
reference in deciding the cut off date for transfer of committed liability on
account of plan scheme, the incremental liabilities that would arise in 1997-
98 on account of 8
th Plan scheme completed in the next two financial years
would have to be provided for. The Commission are, therefore, of the view
that the Planning Commission may consider providing for the maintenance
of such scheme till 1999-2000 in the Plan itself as was done for the schemes
of the two Annual Plans of 1990-91 and 1991-92".
24.3. The Committee also sought clarifications from the then Secretary (Expenditure). He informed
the Committee that even though communications were sent to various Ministries, the Ministries
could not identify the committed expenditure on time. Accordingly a lumpsum amount has been
provided under Demand No. 31. The Secretary also assured that if required, more funds for this
purpose will be provided at the RE stage. He also stated that the Departments may approach the
Department of Expenditure for their share.
24.4. The Committee, accordingly, directed the Department to approach the Ministry of Finance in
this regard. However, while considering the Demands for Grants 1998-1999, the Committee noticed

REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/86repoh.htm[01-07-2016 15:10:35]
that no progress in this regard seemed to have taken place. The Committee, therefore, reiterated its
stand. In spite of the Departments initiating some exercise, the matter could not be sorted out. The
Committee, therefore, heard the Secretary (Expenditure) on 27th March, 1999.
24.5. The Secretary, while deposing before the Committee, submitted that at the end of the 8th Five
Year Plan the Planning Commission issued very detailed guidelines to carry forward the committed
expenditure from plan to the non plan side. The Ministry of Finance (Budget Division) also issued a
letter to all the Financial Advisors of the Department requesting them to indicate the amount to be
included from plan to non plan.
24.6. The Secretary submitted that as on 10
th February, 1997, 24 Ministries/Departments responded
indicating a figure of Rs.450.28 crore. However, some Ministries/Departments like Education,
Culture, Women and Child Development did not respond. Accordingly a lumpsum provision of
Rs.500 crores in the Ministry of Finance Budget was provided for this purpose. As a result of this
exercise, a sum of Rs.150 crores was indeed transferred from plan to non plan for the various
Ministries as committed expenditure during the year, on the basis of scrutiny with reference to the
Planning Commission’s guidelines. The rest of the amount was surrendered as the proposals were
not found acceptable.
24.7. The Secretary agreed in principle that whatever is the committed expenditure, it should be
transferred from plan to non plan. Otherwise the plan has no meaning.
24.8. The Secretary assured that the proposals pertaining to UGC (Rs.27 crores) and Department of
Education (Rs. 80 crores) which were under consideration would be cleared. Moreover, the Tenth
Finance Commission Report has given a breathing time till 1999-2000 for this transition. The
Committee would like to impress that the real picture should be projected before Parliament.
24.9. The Secretary also apprised the Committee that another Sub Committee has been appointed by
the NDC, consisting of representatives from seven states and Ministry of Finance. This Sub-
Committee will look into the structural distortions which have entered into the finances of the states
on account of 5
th Pay Commission and to suggest a suitable package linked to fiscal reforms.
24.10. The Committee observes that a similar problem exists in the case of Central Ministries also.
The Committee, therefore, desires that a similar exercise be carried out in the case of Central
Ministries also.