PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 231
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON HUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE TWO HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-2011 (DEMAND NO. 105)
OF THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8 MARCH, 2011)TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8 MARCH, 2011)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8 MARCH, 2011)TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8 MARCH, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE TWO HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-2011 (DEMAND NO. 105)
OF THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8 TH MARCH, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8 TH  MARCH, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—28
CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government .................................................... ............................ 2—3
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply ....................... 4—11
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 12—27
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government are still awaited ............................................................... 28
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 29—32
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 33—36
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 37 —51

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2011-12)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
15. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
16. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
17. Shri Rahul Gandhi
18. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
19. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhao
20. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
21. Shri P. Kumar
22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
23. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
24. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
25. Shri Tapas Paul
26. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
27. Shri Ashok Tanwar
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
30. Shri P. Viswanathan
31. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred Thirty One Report on Action Taken by Government
on the Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred-twentieth Report on Demands for Grants
(Demand No. 105) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports for the year 2010-11. The Action
Taken Report contains only those paragraphs which entailed recommendations/observations and it
leaves the narration.
2. The Two Hundred-twentieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 20
th April, 2010 and
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 20 th April, 2010. Replies of the Government to the
recommendations/observations contained in the Report, were considered by the Committee at its
meeting held on the 17
th January, 2011.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
the 17 th January, 2011.
OSCAR FERNANDES
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
January 17, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Pausa 13, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Two Hundred Twentieth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 105) of the Ministry of
Youth Affairs & Sports for the year 2010-11.
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations
contained in the 220
th Report, have been categorized as follow:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government–paras
3.4, 7.3 & 8.4
(Chapter-I) Total – 3
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s reply—paras 1.4, 2.3, 3.6, 3.9, 3.10, 4.7, 4.8, 9.2, 11.3,
20.1, 20.2, 20.3, 20.4, 20.5
(Chapter-II) Total – 14
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee—paras 3.3, 3.7, 3.8, 4.3, 4.5, 4.9, 5.4, 6.3, 6.4,
6.5, 10.3, 12.3, 12.4, 14.3, 15.3, 16.2, 17.2, 18.2 & 19.2
(Chapter-III) Total – 19
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are
still awaited…
(Chapter-IV) Total – Nil

2
2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
Recommendations/Observations
3.4 The Committee fails to understand the reasons for plan allocation for NYKS remaining less
than half of the proposed outlay during the plan period. The Committee finds that in spite of a
projected requirement of Rs.150.00 crore for 2010-11 being made by the Department, plan
allocation has been kept at Rs.92.00 crore. With only one year of Eleventh Plan, the committee can
conclude that proposed outlay of Rs.890.00 crore made for NYKS for the Eleventh Plan will remain
on paper only. The Committee would like to point out that before arriving at final figures of Plan
outlay for any scheme, extensive analysis of past track record of utilization, capacity of the
implementing agencies and the most important of all genuine requirements based both on
implementation of the scheme in true spirit and broad policy parameters is carried out. Thereafter,
it is for the Department to convince the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for allocation
of funds as per plan outlay and projected requirements. The committee is, however, disappointed
to note that the Department has so far not shown any success on this front. Rather it has
weakened its case by not showing optimum utilization of allocated funds. The Committee would,
therefore, like to impress upon the Department to make all conceivable efforts for optimum and
judicious utilization of allocated funds of Rs.92.00 crore for 2010-11. At the same time, it also
needs to make every attempt to convince the Planning Commission/Finance Ministry for additional
release of funds at the RE Stage.
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee have been noted.
Planning Commission make resource allocations based on resource availability and inter-
sectoral priority. The Department of Youth Affairs would continue to endeavour for larger allocation
with constant monitoring and supervision. The Department is confident of optimum and judicious
utilization of the allocated funds.
VII. NA TIONAL YOUTH CORPS
Recommendations/Observations
7.3 It is satisfying to note that 8000 volunteers out of 20,000 would be deployed in Jammu &
Kashmir, a State where it is important to bring the youth into mainstream and inculcate in them
the feeling of nation building. The proposal to deploy a sizeable number of volunteers in North East
States would help in arresting the sense of alienation which has cropped up amongst the citizens
of this area due to alleged neglect of the region over the years. The Committee would like to keep
a watch on the implementation of this useful scheme.

3
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee have been noted.
VIII. RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD)
Recommendations/Observations
8.4 The Committee would like to understand the reasons for withdrawal of ‘Deemed University’
status from the Institute.
Action Taken
RGNIYD did not receive any notice in intimation from the Department of Higher Education
or UGC on the proposed withdrawal of status of deemed University. The issue is presently sub-
judice in the Hon’ble Supreme Court, and the Hon’ble Court has directed to maintain status quo.

4
4
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW  OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
I. INTRODUCTION
Recommendations/Observations
1.4 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has undertaken review of certain schemes such
as NYKS, NSS, Youth Hostels etc. through studies done by reputed institutions. The success of
these studies is directly related with the effective monitoring mechanism for supervising the
activities or otherwise these studies will remain more as futile exercises undertaken by the Ministry,
reaching nowhere. At the same time, Committee is of the opinion that there is general lack of
awareness about manifold activities of NYKS and recommends focused publicity to attract more
and more youth towards its programmes. More and more activities should, therefore, be planned
for youth living in villages and rural areas. The Committee would like to keep a track of activities
to be carried out under the auspices of National Youth Corps and Rajiv Gandhi National Institute
of Youth Development (RGNIYD).
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee have been noted.
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.3 The Committee in the past has time and again been recommending higher allocation for the
Ministry in general and the Department of Sports in particular. It is a matter of satisfaction that
not only the allocation of the Department has increased but the utilization level is also quite
satisfactory. The Committee hopes that the Department would continue its sustained efforts in
optimum utilization of the enhanced allocations. The Committee is, however, not happy with the
fund utilization status in the Department of Youth Affair, which has been approximately 56% in
2007-08, 70% in 2008-09 and about 76% (Up to 28
th February, 2010) in 2009-10. Underutilisation
of funds is indicative of poor implementation of the schemes and lack of proper monitoring
mechanism. The Department’s projections before the Planning Commission for higher allocations
become weak once the utilisation figures are poor. How can the department stake claim for
enhanced outlay when there is under utilisation of funds. The Department needs to set its house
in order with better fiscal management techniques backed up by strong monitoring mechanism to
ensure that the outlays are utilised optimally and then approach the Planning Commission with
requisite supporting documents to prove its claims for hike in allocations. Given the poor rate of
utilisations in the past, the allocations provided to the Department are quite justified.
Action Taken
The concerns of the Committee regarding under utilisation of fund has been noted and

5
appropriate action such as periodic review of the release of the fund, timely submission of UCs
etc. are being monitored on priority basis in order to optimum utilisation of the fund and to ensure
higher allocation from the Planning Commission. As a result the level of utilisation as well as
allocation of fund to the Ministry by the Planning Commission is continuously increasing from
2007-08 onwards.
III.  NEHRU YUV A KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
Recommendations/Observations
3.6 The Committee appreciates the follow up action on some of the recommendations made by
the IIM, Ahmedabad. Increasing the number of Zonal Offices of NYKS from 18 to 28 and
strengthening of State & District level Advisory Committees on Youth Programmes can be
considered a step in the right direction. Effective monitoring mechanism for supervising the
activities of Kendras spread across the country has to be there, otherwise there are chances of
main objective of such a vital programme getting diluted are very much there.
Action Taken
The NYKS plans to further strengthen the 28 Zonal offices. Zonal Directors and Deputy
Directors have been posted in these zonal offices. Adequate allocation for mobility of officers for
monitoring district level activities has also been made. For effective monitoring and supervision of
the programmes and activities undertaken by District NYKs as well as Zonal Offices at the State
level, District Advisory Committee on Youth Programmes (DACYP) under the Chairmanship of
District Collector and State Advisory Committee on Youth Programmes (SACYP) under the
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports of State Governments are constituted.
These Committees not only bridge the missing link between the State development agencies but also
are instrumental in facilitating better linkages with various Govt. and Non-Govt. agencies of the
State for youth development. In order to ensure due monitoring and evaluation of the programmes
undertaken by NYKS, monthly, quarterly and annual formats and a procedure for periodic feedback
and assessment have been devised. Also, in order to reinforce monitoring, an inspection format for
different levels has been put in place in the organization. Besides quarterly review meetings are
taken by senior officers, at regular intervals.
Recommendations/Observations
3.9 It further recommends setting up an advisory committee at the apex level in which peoples
representatives should be included to chalk out a programme sheet. The Committee would like the
Department to devise a focused programme on anti-terrorism measures under NYKS by training the
youth, with a view to involve them in national development so that they could come back to the
mainstream. The very objective of NYKS should be to develop qualities of citizenship and
community development and also engage rural youth in nation building activities, training and
research in youth development. The Committee would like the Department to conceive and
formulate State specific activities in consultation with Governments so as to increase the level of
education and general awareness among the youth.
Action Taken
There are institutionalized arrangements for participation of people’s representatives in
various bodies of NYKS. For example, at the apex level the Governing Body of NYKS, chaired
by Union Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports has three Members of Parliament as members.
Besides eminent persons working in the field of Youth development are the members of State

6
Advisory Committee, which is chaired by Minister Incharge of Youth Affairs of the State
concerned.
Recommendations/Observations
3.10 The Committee would like the Department to review the functioning of these clubs and
formulate a concrete plan to reactivate and rejuvenate them in case the noble objectives of NYKS
are to be achieved in true sense. In fact, the monitoring mechanism under NYKS needs a complete
overhauling to strengthen the delivery system. The study of IIM, Ahmedabad might be containing
the road map to undertake such review exercise.
Action Taken
The main asset of NYKS is its affiliated large number of youth clubs and its members. The
young members of these youth clubs are idealistic and have great enthusiasm. The youth clubs
have major role in the conduct and implementation of the programmes/schemes. With a little bit
of motivation and capacity building, it can further enhance the role and effectiveness of youth club
members. In order to tap their energies and to plan programmes and activities for the youth clubs,
a fresh data base is being prepared.
IV.  NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
Recommendations/Observations
4.7 The Committee also finds that TISS has also pointed out to the need for sensitizing the
volunteers about the various programmes conducted under NSS. The Committee is of the view that
required action will be initiated by the concerned authorities on this very crucial observation made
in the evaluation study.
Action Taken
Awareness is created among the NSS volunteers about various NSS activities, new
initiatives being implemented etc. in the various camps held in different parts of the country. It is
also ensured in these camps that the volunteers are given adequate exposure to issues relating to
Environment and Disaster Management, Social Skills, Personality Development, Career Counseling
etc.
Recommendations/Observations
4.8 The Committee would like the Department to persuade the States in expediting the
disbursement certificate as it would help them to secure the second installment of NSS grants.
Long pendency in settlement of accounts would do more harm than good for the scheme. At the
same time, it was also required to understand the reasons behind the States’ inability to adhere to
the basic financial norms.
Action Taken
The first installment of release of Grants for the year 2010-11, have been made to all
the States except Karnataka, Assam, Manipur, Delhi, Jharkhand and Jammu & Kashmir and all
the Union Territories. Reminders are being sent to those States who have not settled their
accounts.

7
IX. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT
Recommendations/Observations
9.2 The Committee would also like to point out that under the revised scheme also trend of
pending UCs has started. There are 75 pending UCs for 2008-09. Remedial measures in the initial
stage of the scheme needs to be taken otherwise this problem would continue to aggravate.
Action Taken
With persistent efforts and monitoring, pendency of Utilisation Certificates has come down
radically. Grantee organizations who failed to submit Utilisation Certificates during the specified time
are being reminded again and the names and addresses of such organizations have been posted on
the official website of the Ministry. No NGOs have been given the grant under any circumstances
pending submission of Utilisation Certificates.
XI. PANCHAYAT YUVA KRIDA AUR KHEL ABHIYAN (PYKKA)
Recommendations/Observations
11.3 The Committee feels that important schemes like PYKKA with its noble objectives to
provide infrastructure in rural areas, which have so far remained utterly neglected, cannot be
operated, with such a shaky and casual approach. Be that as it may be, there are still two full
financial years available within Eleventh Plan period for the Ministry to make up the time lost and
implement the scheme in a mission mode. The implementing agencies would have to exhibit the
extra level of commitment and vigour in achievement of targets so that the shortfalls so far noticed
in the delivery of performance are bridged. The Committee hopes that the Department would adopt
a proactive and pragmatic approach for better performance during the remaining period of plan.
Action Taken
There are three components of PYKKA scheme dealt with in the Hon’ble MP’s observations. These
are:–
(i) The shortfall between the approved outlay and actual allocation;
(ii) Delay in the launching of the scheme; and
(iii) Implementation of PYKKA scheme in a mission mode.
On (i) above it is stated that Rs. 1500 crore is the projected figure/approved outlay of the
Planning Commission for the PYKKA scheme for Eleventh Five Year Plan. Rs. 1500 crore is an
indicative figure. However actual allocation for a plan scheme is decided by the Ministry of Finance
and the amount recommended by the Planning Commission forms basis for the statement of budget
estimates projected to. Finally, after the Demands for Grants are passed by the Parliament, the
annual budget is received. In the instant case, there has been lower allocation as compared to
approved plan outlay due to resource constraints.
On (ii) above it is stated that the PYKKA scheme was conceived in the year 2006.
Thereafter, the Scheme was discussed with the Planning Commission. The Expenditure Finance
Committee considered and recommended the scheme and it was approved by the Cabinet in
March, 2008. A National level scheme like PYKKA (a Centrally Sponsored Scheme) for mass
participation in sports takes time for launching because:–

8
(i) Robust delivery mechanisms have to be established; and
(ii) All State Governments have to be geared up for providing their share in the budget
and also for implementation and utilisation of funds.
Though Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) was conceived in the year 2006,
the Planning Commission accorded it’s “in principle approval” in July, 2007, the Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC) recommended the scheme in December, 2007 and the Cabinet finally
approved the scheme in March, 2008. Therefore there was no scope to undertake any activity
under this scheme during the year 2007-08. Hence, the scheme was launched and made operational
in June 2008. It is re-submitted that there was no delay on the part of MoYAS in launching the
PYKKA scheme.
A token allocation of Rs.10.00 crore was provided in 2007-08, which was utilised for
establishing the ‘Technical Support and Capacity Building Services’ (TSCBS) for implementation of
the scheme.
The original allocation of Rs.125.00 crore for 2008-09 was reduced to Rs.92.00 crore at RE
stage due to cut imposed by the Ministry of Finance on the overall budget of the Ministry. Proposals
were received from 29 States and financial assistance of Rs.250.77 crore was approved to 24 States
for creation sports infrastructure in 22,854 village panchayats and 601 block panchayats. The entire
allocation of Rs.92.00 crore was utilized during 2008-09 by releasing the admissible amount to 19
States for creation of sports infrastructure and to Sports Authority of India for holding annual
competitions (the remaining States were released funds in subsequent years).
During the year 2009-10 also the original allocation of Rs.160.00 crore was reduced
to Rs.135.00 crore at RE stage. The entire allocation of Rs.135.00 crore was utilised during
2009-10 by releasing the admissible amount to 25 States for creation of sports infrastructure and
to Sports Authority of India for holding annual competitions (the remaining States were released
funds in subsequent years). Financial assistance of Rs.54.88 crore was sanctioned to 9 States for
creation of sports infrastructure in 4434 village panchayats and 249 block panchayats.
A budget provision of Rs.413 crore has been given for the year 2010-11. Out of this,
Rs.185 crore have already been released to States/UTs upto August, 2010. With this trend the entire
budget provision of Rs.413 crore is likely to be utilised by the end of 2010-11.
It is further submitted that the Ministry has taken the following proactive measures for
speedy implementation of the scheme.
(A) States/UTs have been allowed to:–
(i) avail the admissible infrastructure grant for the previous year(s) i.e. from
2008-09 onwards (which were not availed earlier);
(ii) avail the infrastructure grant on pro-rata basis for the previous(s) year(s) i.e.
from 2008-09 onwards for village/block panchayats having population
exceeding national average of 4,600;
(iii) utilize Rs.2,000/- and Rs.4,000/- respectively, from the operational grant
admissible per village/block panchayat, for administrative purpose; and
(iv) avail 100% grant by UTs having no legislatures and getting full budgetary
support from the centre.
(B) In case of North Eastern States annual coverage of village panchayat and block
panchayat has been increased from 10% to 20% of total number of village panchayats
and block panchayats;

9
(C) Hitherto, annual acquisition, operational and competition grants (block, district and
state level competitions) were released to the States/UTs through Sports Authority of
India (SAI). From now onwards, these grants would be released to States/UTs
directly by the Department of Sports; and
(D) Hitherto, admissible grant was provided to States/UTs in two installments. From now
onwards the total admissible grant for creation of sports infrastructure will be
released in one installment.
PYKKA scheme itself provides that it should be implemented in a mission mode. Hence, all
out efforts are being undertaken to implement the scheme with the help of States/UTs and it is
hoped that by 2016-17 the entire country will have been covered under the PYKKA scheme.
XX. COMMONWEALTH GAMES-2010
Recommendations/Observations
20.1 Commonwealth Games, 2010 (CWG) are scheduled to be held in Delhi from 3
rd October
to 14 th October, 2010 for which collective efforts are underway for developing world class
infrastructure and preparation of Indian teams in various disciplines for the Commonwealth Games,
2010. Specific time lines have been fixed for various competitions and training venues.
Action Taken
All the 18 Competition Venues for the Commonwealth Games have been completed. Out of
32 Training Venues, 28 have been completed. Updated status of the Competition and Training
Venues is given in Annexure-1 and Annexure-2 respectively.
Recommendations/Observations
20.2 A budgetary provisions of Rs.2069.52 (including plan outlay of Rs.1454.98 crore and
Rs.614.54 crore as non-plan) in BE 2010-11 has been made to meet expenses on upgradation of
infrastructure by SAI, conduct of games by Organising Committee and preparation of Indian
Contingent for Commonwealth Games, 2010. The decrease in plan 2010-11 is due to the reason
that the Commonwealth Games would conclude in October, 2010. The plan allocation for
Commonwealth Games, 2010 during the last three years presents a mixed bag of financial review.
The plan outlay in 2007-08 was Rs.150 crore which was enhanced to Rs.237.98 crore in
2008-09, the Games got Rs.224 crore at BE stage which was raised to Rs.800 crore but the
actual expenditure was Rs.492 crore only. The plan allocation in BE 2009-10 was Rs.2000 crore
which was revised to Rs.2268 crore but only Rs.1796.51 crore could be spent. The Committee
finds that a stage when the construction work was in full swing the budget was remained
underutilized.
Action Taken
The B.E, R.E and Actual expenditure for 2008-09 and 2009-10 are indicated below:
                 ( Rs. in crores )
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Expdr.
2008-09 224.00 795.00 792.00
2009-10 2000.00 2268.00 2114.31

10
Above details show that maximum funds were untilised during the above period/s.
Recommendations/Observations
20.3 The Committee has kept a close watch on the preparation of CWG since they were
awarded to us. It has noticed lack of coordination and non-adherence to the schedule for
completion of infrastructure projects relating to the Games. Now with the scheduled deadlines over,
hurried construction may lead to compromise with the standards to be maintained for an event of
international level. Even underutilization of funds has delayed the readiness of infrastructure
facilities for out sportspersons. The Committee is worried about the preparation of sportspersons
for the event particularly with regard to their practice, dietary and kit requirement. The Ministry
has informed that work at all the sports infrastructure projects for the Games is progressing at a
rapid pace and are in an advanced stage of completion. Four stadia viz. Major Dhyanchand National
Stadium, Talkatora Stadium, Yamuna Sports Complex and Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Range have
already been completed. All these stadia have also hosted international events recently. The
Committee has noted the following progress of work with regard to other competition venues:
Sl. Competition Progress in %age
No. (As on 28.2.2010)
1. Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium (JNS) – Lawn Bowls 85
2. JNS – Weightlifting 73
3. JNS – Ahtletics 82
4. Indira Gandhi Stadium (IG) – Cycling 91
5. IG – Gymnastics 92
6. IG – Wrestling 93
7. R.K. Khanna Tennis Complex 90
8. Big Bore Shooting Range, Kadarpur 95
9. SPM Swimming Pool Complex 78
10. Siri Fort Sports Complex – Badminton and Squash 85
11. Yamuna Sports Complex – Table Tennis 86
12. Rugby Main Ground, Delhi University 86
13. Thyagraj Sports Complex 98
Updating the status of projects for CWG-2010 the Ministry has informed that various stadia
are in advance stage of completion though there has been certain delays but recovery schedule has
been drawn. 5 stadia have been completed and 7 would be completed by 30
th June, 2010 and rest
of the stadia would be completed between 1 st May and 30 th June, 2010. According to the Ministry,
the Indian Athletes would be able to practice on these grounds for quite some time and hence they
would be able to take advantage. In all thirty two training venues are also being developed for the
Games, which will be completed before the Games.
Action Taken
An updated statement showing progress (in %age) of various Competition Venues is at
Annexure-3.

11
Recommendations/Observations
20.4 The Committee is not convinced with this contention of the Ministry that the completion
dates of both the competition and training venues have been rescheduled due to delay in
construction of projects. The sportspersons are getting training at places different from these
venues. The delay in venues has already reduced the period of practice and advantage of home turf
and conditions to a great extent. These venues may be useful for future events and not only for
the Commonwealth Games. At this stage the Committee can only rely on the Departments readiness
about the venues and also the facilities being extended to out sportspersons. Another aspect related
to completion schedule is the cost factor on these projects. Considerable delay has already taken
place in completion and the projects are bound to have cost overruns. Hike in prices of building
materials due to general inflationary trend coupled with recent addition of service tax, the overall
cost, in all probabilities, is likely to increase. In reply to a query under RTI, the Department has
informed that collective cost overrun for the five projects viz. Jawaharlal Nehru Sports Complex,
Indira Gandhi Sports Complex, Dr. S.P. Mukherjee Aquarium Complex, Major Dhyan Chand Hockey
Stadium and Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Range is over 100 per cent. The Committee hopes that the
Ministry has taken care of this cost escalation factor while reducing budgetary allocations for
2010-11. It would like the Ministry to furnish a comprehensive statement showing the initial cost
projections and the revised one, project-wise including the reasons for delay and hike in cost in
its Action-Taken-Notes.
Action Taken
 A comprehensive statement showing the initial cost projections, revised cost projections
along with reasons for cost escalation is at Annexure-4
Recommendations/Observations
20.5 The Ministry has informed that Government is providing upfront funding to the Organising
Committee for conduct and delivery of the Games. This funding is in form of unsecured loan at
the prevailing Government rate of interest, the Government is also committed to meet any shortfall
between the revenue and expenditure of the Organising Committee. However, the host contract
stipulates that any surplus that may accrue at the conclusion of Commonwealth Games, 2010
would be paid to the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) and the Indian Olympic Association
(IOA) for use in legacy programmes to operate sports venues. The Committee is of the considered
views that since it would be Governments money to be used by the Organising Committee for
conduct and delivery of the Games, any revenue generated should be utilized for the benefit of the
sportspersons and development of sports. The Committee would like the Ministry to prepare action
plan including the modalities on usage of the revenue generated during the Games and share the
details with it.
Action Taken
The Ministry has already taken a decision that all the revenues generated by the OC should
be deposited into Government Account immediately. Secretary (Sports) has, vide letter dated
6.8.2010 also written to the Chairman, OC in this regard (Copy at Annexure-5). OC has, vide their
letter dated 16.8.2010 informed that the matter is under their active consideration. (Copy at
Annexure-6 )

12
12
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
III. NEHRU YUV A KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
Recommendations/Observations
3.3. The Committee recommends that focused publicity so as to attract more and more youth
power towards NYKs Programmes needs to be taken up as a priority. Secondly, the Committee
would appreciate if more and more activities are planned exclusively for the youth living in villages
and rural areas. Another initiative which can be taken by the NYKS is setting up of Youth Service
Centres in the Universities, which can take care of needs, both personal and educational of the
young students. These centres can be the windows for building up leadership qualities, sense of
patriotism and social service in the college students. The Committee would be happy if the
Department takes up this matter with the M/O HRD.
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee have been noted.
NYKS has been endvouring to reach out to the youth specially rural youth at the grassroots
level in a planned way. The programmes/activities of NYKS have suitably been devised during the
current financial year. Some of the important programmes/activities being under taken by NYKS for
the youth living in villages and rural areas are enumerated below.
1. Capacity Building of Youth
To develop leadership qualities among the youth through training and help them to act
as focal point of dissemination of knowledge in their own area of activity, a number
of training programmes are organized in each year in which participation of rural youth
is in thousands.
2. Sports Tournaments
To popularize the spirit of healthy body and healthy mind, sports tournaments are
organized at the block and district levels in which youth participation is again
widespread.
3. Sports materials to youth club
Basic sports material was provided to youth clubs for undertaking various sports
activities.
4. Work Camp
To promote dignity of labour and encourage the spirit of self-help work camps are
organized in which youth participate voluntarily and in large numbers.

13
5. Skill Development training Programme (SDTP) under National Council for
Vocational Training (NCVT)
For providing vocational training to rural youth, skill upgradation training programmes
are organized, resulting in youth being imparted training and converting them into self-
employed youth.
6. Youth Leadership and Personality Development
To develop leadership qualities, national character, comradeship and personality
development among the rural youth, numerous training programmes are organized.
Traditional Employability Skill Certification Project: In conjunction with the Ministry of
Labour, youth are trained in different skills, and after due accredited certification are ready as
employable youth work force. A total of 9212 employable persons were identified as possing
traditional skills.
Comments of the Committee
Committee’s specific recommendation for giving focused publicity to the manifold
activities being carried out by the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan has remained unanswered.
Not only this, the Ministry has failed to indicate any line of action on setting up of Youth
Service Centres in Universities in coordination with the Ministry of Human Resource
Development. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates that steps may be taken for
implementing these two suggestions made by it earlier.
Recommendations/Observations
3.7  At present, Nehru Yuva Kendras are functioning in 501 districts in the country. The
Committee has been drawing the attention of the Department to the urgent need of coverage
of the remaining 123 districts also under the Programme. The Committee is, however,
dismayed to note that no progress whatsoever has been made in this direction so far. The
Committee has been given to understand that the time-frame for expansion of the Programme
is subject to necessary approvals and sanctions of the Government. For operationalisation of
a Kendra, there is a staff requirement of one District Youth Co-ordinator, one Accountant,
Clerk, Typist and one Group ‘D’ Staff. Funds are also required for conducting regular
programmes and for the deployment of volunteers. In addition, there is a requirement of
recurring and non-recurring expenditure in the establishment of a new Kendra. The Committee
has been informed that the proposed expansion would have financial implication of Rs.49.56
crore during the remaining two years of the plan period. The main reason for delay in the
setting up of Kendras in the remaining 123 districts is the proposal for creation for the
required posts not being accepted by the Ministry of Finance, in spite of being approached
twice by the Department. Instead, re-deployment of existing manpower in the new Kendras
was suggested by the Ministry of Finance. The other option was to explore the option for out-
sourcing wherever required. The Committee is inclined to agree with the Department’s stand
that both additional posts and funds are required for operationlisation of a Kendra in the real
sense. The Committee would also like to point out that already 413 posts are lying vacant
under NYKS. In such a situation, creation of required posts for the proposed Kendras is
essential. The Committee strongly feels that for setting up new Kendras, functional Kendras
being deprived of the required staff is a solution worse than the problem. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance needs to make available the required funds
and also give its approval for required posts. One must not forget that youths residing in these
uncovered 123 districts also belong to the country.

14
Action Taken
Proposal for expansion is under active consideration of the Ministry. The proposal is subject
to necessary approvals and sanctions of the Government. This Ministry has already initiated action
for obtaining the same. It is proposed to seek the approval of Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC) for the proposed expansion. The Department would continue its efforts to convince the
Ministry of Finance for sanctioning of posts for the new Kendras. The position of the Ministry
of Finance, so far, has been that the expansion be carried out gradually by re-deployment.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee has been voicing its concern about 123 districts in the country not
having Nehru Yuva Kendras at present. The Committee is constrained to observe that no
progress has been made in this direction so far. The Committee fails to comprehend the
viability of the proposal mooted by Ministry of Finance for re-deployment of existing manpower
when already there is shortage of 168 District Y outh Coordinators. The Committee, therefore,
once again recommends that concerted efforts need to be made for creation of required number
of posts of District Y outh Coordinators for the remaining 123 districts yet to be covered.
Recommendations/Observations
3.8 The Committee observes that despite a number of administrative and structural changes
under process in NYKS, the large number of vacant posts that too at DYC level is a matter of
serious concern. NYKS has already faced a lot of criticism in earlier selection process of DYC
posts held in 1996 after which no recruitment has taken place. With the proposed expansion
programmes covering 123 more districts across the country, the present level of vacant posts
cannot be allowed to continue. The committee would like NYKS to expedite revision of its
recruitment rules so that process for fresh recruitment could take place to fill up the vacancies.
Filling up these vacancies should be the priority area for NYKS in case it wishes to achieve its
objective in real terms.
Action Taken
The Recruitment Rules (RRs) of NYKS have recently been revised. The vacant posts in
different grades which were required to be filled up by promotion have already been filled up. At
present there are 168 vacancies in the grade of DYC and 56 in the grade of ACT. NYKS had earlier
issued an advertisement whereby calling applications from the eligible candidates belonging to State
Government, Semi-Government, Institutions/Autonomous Bodies. In response, applications from 85
candidates were received which were scrutinized and appointment letters have already been issued
to 20 selected candidates.
All State Governments have been requested to give wide publicity amongst the District
Magistrate/Deputy Commissioners of the concerned Districts and other relevant Departments at the
State level for recommending suitable officers of State Governments/Autonomous bodies of State
Government or Government Colleges etc. Out of 30 States/Union Territories, a total of 72
applications have been received. The applications so received are being scrutinized for considering
appointment of eligible candidates to the post of District Youth Coordinator, on deputation basis.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is constrained to observe that no significant progress could be made
so far as filling up the 168 vacancies in the grade of District Youth Coordinators is
concerned. For as many as 168 vacancies, response being received only from 85 candidates,
that too after considerable time is indeed very surprising. Similarly, a very few applications

15
have been received from States/UTs for filling up these posts on deputation. As a result,
about 150 Nehru Yuva Kendras continue to function without District Youth Coordinators.
The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for review of the recruitment
process so as to analyse the reasons for such an unsatisfactory response.
IV. NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
Recommendations/Observations
4.3 So far NSS is operational in 251 universities and 42 Boards at 42 schools. It is spread over
14698 colleges and 8174 schools with an enrolment of 32,57,104 NSS V olunteers. On a specific
query about the further expansion plans, the Committee was informed that Regional Centres were
being directed to collect the data about the universities, colleges and schools that are not covered
under the scheme. The Committee strongly feels that such an exercise should have been initiated
much earlier. The Committee expects the exercise to be completed within a specific time-limit so
that follow-up action is not delayed further. The Committee is of the view that with the expansion
of higher education in the recent years and with Right to Education Act coming into force, the
number of targeted students under the scheme is going to increase substantially. Even otherwise,
the coverage of only 8174 schools and 14,698 colleges shows a considerable gap between eligible
students and those enrolled under the scheme. Details of universities and colleges covered presently
under NSS also seem to indicate that professional colleges like medical and engineering colleges
which have shown a phenomenal growth over the recent years have perhaps remained outside the
purview of the scheme. If that be so, Committee can conclude that a vast potential of our youth
has remained devoid of positive impact of NSS which has creation of social awareness as its main
objective, the need of the hour.
Action Taken
The Department is endeavouring to increase enrolment subject to the budget allocations
available. Another option being tapped is through Self Financing Units.
The data regarding total no. of Educational institutions in India with and without NSS is
given below:
Sl. Category of Institutions Total No. of No. of institutions No. of institutions
No. institutions with NSS without NSS
1 Universities/Deemed universities 335 250 85
2 +2 Councils and Dte of tech 41 41 –
Education
3 Colleges 16885 14698 2157
4 +2 Schools 47730 9230 38500
5 Engineering Colleges 1579 553 1026
6 Medical colleges 685 298 387
7 Pharmacy Colleges 425 120 305
8 Nursing College 574 120 454
9 Management Colleges 1006 347 659
10 Polytechnics 1378 545 833
T
OTAL 70638 26202 44406

16
Comments of the Committee
Latest details furnished by the Ministry depict a very discouraging scenario so far as
coverage of National Service Scheme in different categories of institutions is concerned. Out
of total 70,638 institutions in the country, this scheme is operational in only 26,202
institutions, at present, with the maximum shortfall being in schools. Out of 47,730 schools,
only 9230 schools are covered. The Committee would like to point out that this scheme
plays a very crucial role in character-building and increasing social awareness of our
students. Maximum coverage is, accordingly, the need of the hour, particularly, in the
present day circumstances. The Committee strongly feels that a special drive should be
carried out so as to draw more and more students. The Ministry can very well play a pro-
active role in close coordination with the Ministry of Human Resource Development and
State authorities. The Committee would also like to point out that fund constraints should
not come in the way of expansion of this social scheme. The Committee would also like to
have an idea about the involvement of Self Financing Units in the implementation of NSS.
In Committee’s opinion, the best course is to avail the infrastructure facilities and
manpower available in the institutions.
Recommendations/Observations
4.5 The Committee is not fully convinced by the reason given for coverage of NSS remaining
static. The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department to the Eleventh Plan
outlay of Rs.850.00 crore for NSS. Reasons for Budget provision of Rs.52.60 crore in 2007-08
and Rs.86.00 crore each in 2008-09 and 2009-10 much below the plan outlay of Rs.129.74 crore
(2007-08), Rs.156.00 crore (2008-09) and Rs.172.00 crore (2009-10) are not known to the
Committee. Not only this, no change is reflected in the provision of Rs.92.00 crore against a plan
outlay of Rs.189.00 crore. It seems that the Department has failed to convince the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance about its required Projection of Rs.150.00 crore. Trend of
utilization of allocated funds during 2008-09 and 2009-10 lends credence to Committee’s
assessment. Plan allocation of Rs.86.00 crore in 2008-09 was to be brought down to Rs.54.51
crore at the RE stage and expenditure reported at the end of the year was Rs.47.31 crore. In
2009-10 also, utilization figures up to 06.03.2010 stood at Rs.56.95 crore against an allocation of
Rs.86.00 crore.
Action Taken
As a matter of fact, the Planning Commission has proposed an outlay of Rs. 425 crores
for the NSS scheme during 11
th plan. The total expenditure incurred so far is as given below:
Year Amount Spent
2007-08 Rs.53.95 cr.
2008-09 Rs.51.93 cr.
2009-10 Rs.76.87 cr
T
OTAL Rs.182.75 cr. Approx
Balance : Rs.425 - Rs.182.75 cr. = Rs.242.25 is to be provided in the remaining two years,
out of which allocation for 2010-2011 is Rs.85 crores. With the revised cost norm and funding
pattern becoming effective from 2010-11, a budgetary allocation of Rs.117 crores is required per
annum. Thus, it is expected that the balance amount will be utilized during the 11
th Five Year Plan.

17
As regards expansion of NSS, the reply to para IV-4.3 explains the position.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee observed that the trend in the expenditure incurred during the last
three years is not very encouraging and, therefore, expressed its doubts whether the
balance amount of Rs. 242.25 crores would be spent in the next two years when only 182.75
crore had been spent in the last three years. The reason for this apprehension comes from
the fact that the Department has failed to increase the enrolment and coverage of schools
under the scheme. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Department should strive
hard to achieve the enrolment rate under the NSS.
Recommendations/Observations
4.9 The Committee would like to have an idea about the number of self-financing units set up,
their locations and also their performance level. The Committee finds that most of the replies from
the Department particularly those relating to social and nation-building activities under NSS do not
give clear picture thereof. It would have been more comfortable with more specific and precise
replies.
Action Taken
The State-wise SFU data for the year 2009-10 is as under:
Chandigarh : 02
Punjab : 31
Karnataka : 735
Kerala : 04
Maharashtra : 105
Orissa : 17
Punjab : 31
Rajasthan : 60
      T
OTAL : 985 NSS Self Financing Units are in operation.
Remaining states have not yet started SFUs. Taking this into consideration and to expand
the volunteer base of NSS, Ministry has vide its letter dated 7.6.2010, simplified the ‘Procedure
for Application’ for opening new NSS Units under Self Finance scheme. It is expected that this
would result in setting up of more self-reliant NSS units.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee’s specific query about the performance level of Self-Financing Units
set up so far has remained unanswered. The Committee would like to have full details, i.e.
criteria for selection of Self-Financing Units, their location, institution-wise performance
level and monitoring mechanism.

18
V. NATIONAL DISCIPLINE SCHEME
Recommendations/Observations
5.4  The Committee fails to understand as to why so much liability has accrued even after the
scheme was transferred to the States 38 years back. It cannot be that all the 6145 NDS Instructors
have continued to remain in service for such a long period. The Committee has been informed that
reimbursement to the States is based on the projection of liability towards payment of salary and
allowances to NDS Instructors by the respective State Governments. The Committee wonders
whether the Department is aware about the exact number of Instructors in each State and salary
/ allowances payable to them. The Committee also doubts whether any assessment about the
number of times pays structure of these Instructors might have undergone a change all these years.
The Committee would appreciate that before the release of committed liability, an attempt is made
by the Department to have an idea about the quantum of committed liability released so far, number
of NDS Instructors covered there under, basis of outstanding committed liability along with number
of NDS Instructor (State-wise). One must not forget that Government funds are to be duly
accounted for as per the well-established financial norms. The Committee expresses its deep
concerns about the never ending liabilities and would like that accountability part of concerned
officials be established and an action taken report be furnished to the Committee within one month
of the presentation of the report.
Action Taken
As per the observation made by the Committee, Ministry has taken a view to meet the
liability of the respective State Govts. as one time settlement. In this context, Ministry wrote to
the Chief Secretaries of the concerned States giving a deadline, to submit their liability by
31.3.2009. Out of the 10 states, only 3 states sent their final figures. To liquidate the entire liability,
a further view was taken that the last budget submitted by the remaining 7 states will be treated
as their final liability. The net liability now accrue is Rs.248.19 crores. Accordingly, a proposal has
been prepared and forwarded to the Ministry of Finance for their opinion in the matter.
In so far as the accountability part of the officials is concerned, it may be noted that there
was no delay or laxity on the part of officials in releasing whatever budget provision was available
for this purpose to different states/union territories based on the information made available by
them.
Comments of the Committee
Specific information pertaining to quantum of committed liability released so far,
number of NDS Instructors covered thereunder, basis of outstanding committed liability
along with number of NDS Instructors (State-wise) was sought by the Committee. The
Committee hopes that this information has been forwarded by the three States. The
Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. The Committee would also like to have
a status report on the response received from the Ministry of Finance as well as the
response of the remaining seven States. The Committee strongly feels that the entire
liability needs to be liquidated in one go during the coming financial year.
VI. YOUTH HOSTELS
Recommendations/Observations
6.3 The Committee is not convinced with the maintenance level, leave alone the pace of
construction of Youth Hostels.

19
Action Taken
Out of 5 Youth Hostels which are under various stages of construction, 3 Youth Hostels
viz. Thoubal, Churachandpur in Manipur and Roing in Arunachal Pradesh are in North East Region
and due to paucity of funds, these Youth Hostels could not be completed so far. By the next
financial year, all these Youth Hostels are likely to be completed. Remaining two Youth Hostels at
Jalandhar (Punjab) and Kadapa (Andhra Pradesh) could not be completed so far because of change
of site of construction of Youth Hostels and the delay in finalizing of new site by the constructing
agency/State Government and non-receipt of the utilization of funds in time from the constructing
agency. Efforts are being made to complete remaining 2 Youth Hostel early. Out of the 20 existing
Youth Hostels, the facelifting work in most of the Youth Hostels have been completed. Efforts are
being made to complete the facelifting work in the remaining Youth Hostels early.
Comments of the Committee
The reply of the Department that three Youth Hostels could not be completed due to
paucity of funds has not been taken well by the Committee as it had earlier pointed out
that the Ministry utilized only Rs.84 lakh out of sanctioned Rs.3.25 crores up to 26
th
February, 2010. The Committee wonders whether it is the paucity of funds or under-
utilization of funds that has delayed the progress of construction of Youth Hostels. It is,
however, encouraging that face-lifting work of twenty Youth Hostels has been completed and
that the work in remaining Y outh Hostels will also be completed soon along with the
construction of remaining hostels. The Committee would like to know about the real reason
for delay and about the last minute changes in the site for construction of hostels in two
States and hopes that the funds available with the Ministry for the purpose would be fully
utilized and the remaining works would also be completed.
Recommendations/Observations
6.4 The Committee opined that the difficulties mentioned by the Department are inter-related.
With shortage of manpower and funds, management and maintenance of youth hostels is bound to
suffer. Further the location of youth hostels is directly related with their occupancy and revenue
generation. Out of 55 hostels appraised by Youth Hostel Association of India, 46 hostels have been
rated poor or bad for one reason or the other. The Department has proposed changes in the
management, structure, appointment of Receptionist-cum-caretaker, maximize bed capacity, changes
in norms of furnishing youth hostels and enhanced financial ceiling for renovation and redesigning
work of youth hostels. It is a matter of surprise for the Committee to know that the youth hostels
were being run without Caretakers and Receptionists. How could the management and maintenance
of youth hostels be possible in the absence of a Caretaker? The Committee also feels that the
proposed rate of honorarium for manager and receptionist is quite meager to attract professionally
qualified people. This amount needs to be increased appropriately. In addition to these corrective
measures, the Committee strongly feels that there is a need to take a comprehensive review of all
these under-performing Youth Hostels based on the findings of Youth Hostel Association of India
in coordination with all the concerned authorities at all levels so that these Hostels can also be rated
as good performing hostels.
Action Taken
Out of the 55 appraised Youth Hostels, in the initial stage, 20 Youth Hostels have been taken
up for facelifting work so that these Youth Hostels become more comfortable, more useful,
improve the management system and maintenance. This Ministry has taken a policy decision that
all the vacated posts of warden/manager will be filled up shortly so that the hostels may run

20
smoothly. This Ministry has also introduced posts of receptionist-cum-caretaker in all the existing
youth hostels. In this connection, this Ministry has taken initiative action for filling up of the post
of Manager in the Youth Hostels. These Managers will get a fixed honorarium and in addition to
that, a variable cash incentive will also be given to the Managers as well as the Receptionist-cum-
caretakers. Every youth hostel has a receptionist. The employment of staff is the sole responsibility
of the Hostel Management Committee.
Comments of the Committee
From the reply of the Ministry, it does not appear that the Ministry has taken any
concrete steps in taking corrective measures and a comprehensive review of the under-
performing Youth Hostels. Whether the changes suggested by the Ministry have so far been
implemented is not seen in the reply. The Committee desires that the course of action
suggested by the Ministry may not remain on paper only but it should be implemented in
a time-bound manner. The Committee would also appreciate if an effective monitoring
mechanism including both regular and surprise inspections is also put in place.
Recommendations/Observations
6.5 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take positive and concrete action on
the suggestions provided in the study report of International youth Association with regard to the
functioning of the youth hostels.
Action Taken
Several actions have already taken. Out of 11 Hostels which had bad locations and non-
viable, 5 Youth Hostel have been transferred to NYKS and these Youth Hostels are at Nagoan
(Assam), Bilaspur (Himachal Pradesh), Buldana (Maharashtra), Ukhrul (Manipur), Mokokchung
(Nagaland). 2 Youth Hostels have been transferred to SAI and these Youth Hostels are at Namchi
(Sikkim) and Burdwan (West Bengal). Remaining 4 Youth Hostels at Golaghat (Assam), Nagrota
(Jammu & Kashmir), Tura (Meghalaya), Churulia (West Bengal) have been transferred to the
respective State Governments. Major reforms in management, tariff have been introduced as
described earlier.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee desires that the Ministry has to ensure that these Youth Hostels,
which have been transferred to other agencies shall be used for development of youth only.
Alternate Youth Hostels may be constructed at good locations. Similarly, incentives may be
given to the good performing hostels.
X. SCHEME OF ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
Recommendations/Observations
10.3 In the opinion of the Committee, the popularity level of sports except cricket is very low
and the federations could have contributed to raise the standard and popularity of different games
by a number of innovative measures.
Action Taken
Primary responsibility for promotion and development of particular sports disciplines and

21
their different variants is that of Indian Olympic Association (IOA) and respective National Sports
Federations (NSFs). However, Ministry and Sports Authority of India (SAI) also supplement the
efforts of NSFs for promotion and development of sports and games in the country by running
a number of schemes for identification and nurturing of talent, giving incentives to medal winners.
Under the Scheme of Assistance to NSFs, the Ministry provides assistance to National Sports
Federations (NSFs) for conducting National Championships and International Tournaments in India,
participation in International tournaments abroad, organizing coaching camps, procuring sports
equipment, engagement of foreign coaches and disbursement of salaries of the paid Joint/Assistant
Secretaries engaged by NSFs. 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is aware that the Ministry is running many schemes for growth of
sports and sportspersons and is providing assistance to the sports federations for
development of individual sports for which they are functioning. The Committee fears that
the assistance provided to the SFs should not go down the drain as is evident from the poor
condition of the sports federations, sports infrastructure available in the country and that
none of the international level players who achieved success at the national/international
levels got support from Sports Federations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
more stringent norms and monitoring mechanism have to be set up for better utilization
of funds and running of these federations.
XII. PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG DISABLED
Recommendations/Observations
12.3 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the casual manner in which the scheme is
being handled. It strongly feels that the scheme for Sports and Games for disabled needs to reach
the targeted beneficiaries. One must not forget that creation of exclusive sports facilities for the
disabled not only would help in boosting the confidence level of sportspersons who are not at the
same level as normal sportspersons for no fault of theirs but would also indirectly help in bringing
them in the mainstream of society.
Action Taken
As the Scheme of Sports & Games for Persons with Disabilities could be finally approved
in November, 2009, the Ministry invited applications from schools in December, 2009. The
applications received were scrutinized and comments of the concerned State Governments and
Commissioners for Disabilities were obtained. Thereafter, Apex Committee in its meeting held on
8
th March, 2010 approved 61 schools for giving assistance for engagement of coaches on contract
basis and for procurement of sports equipment. Since the schools could not furnish the requisite
details in time, the sanctions for the schools could not be issued in time.
During the year 2010-11, an allocation of Rs.9.52 crore has been made for the Scheme of
Sports & Games for Persons with Disabilities. An expenditure of Rs.4.19 crore has already been
incurred till 31.8.2010.
57 schools, who have given requisite details, have been sanctioned assistance of Rs.1.19
crore. These schools will continue to get assistance for a period of 5 years provided they submit
the utilization certificates for the grants given to them for preceding periods.
Further, Ministry has sanctioned Rs.4 crore to Special Olympic Bharat (SOB), who has
been designated as the nodal authority for conduct of sports competitions at district level and state
level and for training of community coaches.

22
Further, the Ministry has introduced the component of Master Trainers in the Scheme of
Sports and Games for Persons with Disabilities on the lines of Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel
Abhiyan (PYKKA) Scheme, for imparting training to community coaches. 600 Master Trainers will
be trained annually, which will, in turn, train community coaches in their respective districts. The
Master Trainers are being trained at Laksmibai National Institute of Physical Education (LNIPE),
Gwalior by Resource Persons/Experts drawn from LNIPE, Sports Authority of India, Special
Olympics Bharat, Paralympic Committee of India and All India Council of Sports for Deaf.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that the Ministry has made a beginning by giving assistance
of Rs.1.19 crore to 57 schools and Rs. 4 crores for Special Olympic Bharat (SOB). It has
to ensure that the assistance is actually utilized for development of sports among disabled.
Further, the Committee feels that in any major or State/district level sports events, the
events for the disabled should also be kept besides holding sports events exclusively for the
disabled. Moreover, the Ministry should ensure development of sports infrastructure for the
disabled and create a dedicated group of coaches for the disabled and implement its various
schemes/programmes in a mission mode manner.
XIII. URBAN SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEME
Recommendations/Observations
13.4. The proposal to transfer the centrally sponsored schemes to the state has never been acceptable
to the Committee. In fact, the Ministry was cautioned time and again that states would not be able to
bear the financial burden on creating infrastructure, despite the fact that sports is a state subject. The
Committee is satisfied that the Ministry has taken its view points seriously and convinced the Planning
Commission for keeping some provision of central assistance to states. Planning Commission’s
agreement to adjust those liabilities under ACA of the concerned states vindicated the stand taken by
the Committee. The Committee hopes that the States would get the share of Central Assistance under
ACA to take care of the expenses incurred on the erstwhile schemes approved before 2005. The
Committee would appreciate if the Department plays a proactive role in monitoring the completion of
all the pending projects in the erstwhile schemes for want of funds all these years. The Committee is
also hopeful that the new scheme would get the approval within the time frame indicated by the
Ministry so that necessary funds for infrastructure projects in urban areas could be released in time.
Action Taken
The Ministry has formulated the draft Scheme of Assistance for the creation of Urban Sports
Infrastructure. The Scheme is now to be considered and approved by the Expenditure Finance
Committee. The proposed Scheme is a holistic Central Scheme that aims at addressing the entire
“Sports Eco System”, namely, players training and development, coaching and infrastructure. Scheme
aims to promote and support a mechanism at national and state level to encourage, assist and
preserve community play fields; incentivize the utilization of infrastructure already available in the
states by locating coaching centres/synthetic hockey tracks/players academies, wherever feasible;
create new need-based infrastructure and to promote capacity building among coaches, including
community coaches. The Scheme addresses three basic priorities, viz., development of community
play fields, creation of modern sports training infrastructure, and availability of trained coaches.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee voices its serious concern on the undue delay in the launching of the
Scheme of Assistance for the creation of Urban Sports Infrastructure. The Committee would
like to point out that this Scheme would be taking the place of four erstwhile centrally

23
sponsored sports infrastructure schemes transferred to State Governments w.e.f. 1 st April,
2005. The experience of involving the State Governments in the implementation of these
schemes has been very discouraging. Any delay in reviving these schemes in a composite
scheme will directly impact that too very adversely the creation of sports facilities in urban
areas in the country. However, the latest feedback made available to the Committee clearly
indicates that the scheme continues to be in early stages of finalization. The protracted
exercise of getting the approval at various levels has still to be undergone. The Committee,
therefore, would like to emphasize that concerted efforts need to be made to get the
scheme finally approved at the earliest.
XIV. NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND
Recommendations/Observations
14.3. The Committee is not satisfied with the maintenance and operation of the fund. The
Committee finds that the contribution from private sector has been negligible and no NRI has come
forward for this noble cause. The Ministry’s argument that many private sector entities and NRIs
assist the sports persons and sports activity directly in their own independent way cannot be
denied. But it is also very obvious that the failure of the Department in mobilizing private
contribution indicates that necessary serious efforts have not been made to motivate private entities
particularly big business houses through different Chambers of Commerce. The Department did not
even contemplate to use the Pravasi Diwas platform for raising contributions from NRIs. Another
discouraging development noticed by the Committee is that the Department has managed only 50
per cent matching grants of the total corpus in NSDF. The Committee is not ready to buy the
argument of the Department that contribution is made by it in a phased manner depending on
overall approved budget of the department. It rather reflects the somewhat casual approach of the
Department towards this very important corpus, which if successfully handled could generate
sizeable funds which can benefit our meritorious sportspersons. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the matching contribution from the Government should be released in the current
financial year itself.
Action Taken
Till 2006-07, the Government has made matching contributions to National Sports
Development Fund (NSDF). In 2007-08, Board for Control of Cricket in India (BCCI) made a
contribution of Rs.15 crore and in 2008-09 of Rs.35 crore. Against BCCI’s contribution of Rs.50
crore to NSDF, the Government has contributed Rs.22.36 crore till 2009-10.
During the current financial year 2010-11, an allocation of Rs.20 crore has been made
towards contribution to NSDF as Government’s matching share to the Fund. The Ministry has
released the entire allocation of Rs.20 crore as its matching share to NSDF. Thus, so far,
Government has contributed Rs.42.36 crore against BCCI’s contribution of Rs.50 crore. The
balance share of Rs.7.64 crore will be released on allocation of additional funds at Revised
Estimates stage.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee finds that it is only BCCI which has contributed Rs. 50 crore to the
Corpus. No other private entity has made substantial contribution to the fund which shows
the lack of enthusiasm on the part of the Ministry to generate more funds and is also
indicative of the lack of faith by the private entities in the Government’s efforts and plans.
The Department has failed to make any headway so far despite its efforts/initiatives and is
still following the casual approach. The Committee desires that the Ministry may explore
various fora and channels for generating funds with positive results and also make an

24
honest effort in gaining the trust and confidence of the private sector if it has to achieve
the desired results.
XV. NATIONAL WELFARE FUND FOR SPORTSPERSONS
Recommendations/Observations
15.3 The Committee, however, feels that perhaps the scheme lacks the reach to rural and remote
areas. Persistent Efforts have to be made to provide wide publicity of scheme through print and
electronic media in addition to the Ministry’s website and other useful links in order to create
awareness of the Welfare Fund.
Action Taken
The Scheme of National Welfare Fund for Sportspersons is available on website of the
Ministry. Links of Ministry’s website are available on websites of Sports Authority of India and
Lakshmibai Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior. Further, whenever any amendments in the
Scheme are made, copies of the Scheme incorporating the amendments are sent to Sports
Secretaries of all State Governments, Indian Olympic Association and National Sports Federations.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee, while noting the reply of the Ministry, finds that the Ministry has
not made any special efforts to create awareness about the Fund apart from what is being
done routinely. The Ministry has to ensure that by relevant information reaches the
sportspersons who are the users and beneficiaries of these schemes.
XVI. SCHEME OF PENSION TO MERITORIOUS SPORTSPERSONS
Recommendations/Observations
16.2. The Committee is of the view that this Scheme needs to be extended to those sportsperson,
who win medals in various national championships. Such an initiative would indirectly lead to
drawing more and more young talent towards sports.
Action Taken
At present, the Scheme of Pension to Meritorious Sportspersons is applicable to
sportspersons, who have won Gold, Silver or Bronze medals in Olympic Games, World Cup/World
Championships in Olympics and Asian Games disciplines, Asian Games, Commonwealth Games and
Para-Olympic Games, which indeed can qualify to be called as meritorious sportspersons.
For drawing more and more young talent towards sports, there are many other schemes
being implemented by the Ministry and Sports Authority of India. SAI identifies and nurtures talent
in various sports disciplines under its various schemes such as National Sports Talent Contest
(NSTC) Scheme, SAI Training Centres (STC) Scheme, Special Area Games (SAG) Scheme, Army
Boys Sports Companies (ASBC) Scheme and Centres of Excellence (COE) Scheme.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee had recommended that the scheme of pension to meritorious sports
persons be extended to medal winners of national championships. But, nothing has been
mentioned in that regard in the reply. The Committee is aware of the other schemes

25
mentioned in the reply for nurturing young talent in sports. It was besides these schemes
that the Committee had recommended extension of pension scheme to the winners of
national championships which will create a sense of security among the young talent and
attract them towards sports as their career. Ministry may work out a scheme in this regard.
XVII. NA TIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP FOR WOMEN
Recommendations/Observations
17.2. The Committee understands that the Flagship Scheme PYKKA itself has not taken off as it
should have been. Merging other schemes into it may not be a good idea. Moreover, this scheme
is specifically for women. Merging it with PYKKA, which is primarily for rural areas, this scheme
would lose its identity. Before a decision is taken to subsume this scheme in PYKKA, the
Department also needs to review this scheme itself in order to strengthen it. The other viable option
could be that sports disciplines for women in urban areas are specifically covered under proposed
Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme as a separate component.
Action Taken
Earlier, the Scheme of National Championship for Women was under Non-Plan and the level
of assistance to States/UTs was inadequate. With the kind of assistance available under the
erstwhile Scheme, the States/UTs were unable to organize the competitions properly. Further, with
a view to avoiding multiplicity of schemes and enhancing the funding pattern for women
competitions, it was decided to integrate the Scheme with Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan
(PYKKA). The scheme of National Championship for Women will continue to be implemented as
an exclusive event through States/UTs and it will not loose its identity.
For reference a statement showing the previous norms and enhanced norms of funding for
holding women competitions is tabulated below:–
Sl. Level of Previous norms Enhanced norms
No. Competitions
12 3 4
(a) Block Rs.1,000/- per block upto 5 To be conducted by the States/UTs
disciplines @ Rs.200/- per from their own resources.
discipline (restricted to 60%
of admissible grant).
(b) District Rs.3,000/- per district. Rs.1.2 lakh per district (Rs.10,000/-
per discipline for 12 identified sports
disciplines)
(c) State/UT Rs.10,000/- per State and Rs.6 lakh per state @ Rs.50,000/-
Rs.5,000/- per UT. per disciplines for 12 identified
sports disciplines including travelling
expenses for participation in National
Level Competitions. Rs.3 lakh per
UT @ Rs.25,000/- per discipline for
12 identified sports disciplines
including travelling expenses for
participation in National Level
Competitions.

26
12 3 4
(d) National i. Boarding expenses @ Rs.3.50 lakh per discipline. (Rs.3.00
Rs.100/- per heads per lakh to the host state for making
day for competition arrangements on boarding and lodging
days plus two days, for of the participants for the days of
participants and officials; the tournament and one day before
ii. To & fro 2 nd class rail and one day after the tournaments @
fare/bus fare for participants Rs.100/- per head per day, ground
and officials; preparations and technical officials
iii. Medals, shields and fee and Rs.50,000/- for meeting
certificates; and expenses on utility prizes to the
iv. Utility prizes. medal winning teams, shields, medals
and other misc. expenses).
Due to revision in the financing pattern, it will be possible for the States/UTs to organize
the competitions in a suitable manner. Encouraging responses have been received from the States/
UTs. Funds to the extent of Rs.1.17 Crore have already been provided to 7 States/UTs (Up to
30.06.2010) for holding the Women Competition during 2010-11.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is happy to note the enhanced norms of funding for holding
competitions for women which will help in promoting sports among the women. However, the
Ministry has to ensure that these norms may not remain on paper but should actually be
made applicable and the sanctioned amount be utilized as envisaged.
XVIII. GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM
Recommendations/Observations
18.2. The Committee desires that Ministry may set up a regulatory body/grievance redressal cell that
will look into all aspects of the problems faced by the sportspersons, coaches, sports federations,
NGOs, schools, colleges and other sports bodies receiving grant from the Government. This would
not only help in confidence building among the sportspersons but would also bring down the
grievances of all affected sportspersons/sports bodies/agencies implementing sports programmes.
Action Taken
The Ministry had mooted the proposal of setting up a Sports Regulatory Body as part of
the draft Comprehensive National Sports Policy 2008. In the face of strong opposition from Indian
Olympic Association (IOA) and National Sports Federations (NSFs), the draft Comprehensive
National Sports Policy 2008 was withdrawn as IOA and NSFs have stated that setting up of such
a regulatory body will affect their autonomy.
However, recently, Ministry has declared IOA and all NSFs as public authorities under Right
to Information Act, 2005. This measure will go a long way in grievance redressal as the affected
parties can access information under RTI Act.
Further, complaints received in the ministry regarding selection of athletes are taken up with
the concerned NSFs and the issues raised in the complaints are also duly taken note of in the
meetings of the Departmental Committee of the Ministry while considering the proposals of the
NSFs for participation of athletes in international sports competitions. The Ministry has also issued
detailed guidelines to IOA and all NSFs on 18.9.2008 regarding efficient management of Coaching
camps, selection of coaches, selection of Athletes, etc (copy enclosed as Annexure).

27
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not convinced by the action taken by the Ministry with regard to
setting up of Grievance Redressal Mechanism. The Committee would like to point out that
declaration of Indian Olympic Association and all National Sports Federations as public
authorities under the Right to Information Act, 2005 cannot be equated with a Grievance
Redressal Mechanism. It is a well-known fact that under RTI, only information can be
sought, any remedial action in a complaint cannot be taken. Secondly, complaints cannot be
confined to only matters relating to selection of athletes. Any stakeholder right from
sportspersons, both active and retired, to coaches, NGOs other functionaries can be having
genuine grievances. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates that an effective Grievance
Redressal Mechanism at different levels needs to be operationalised at the earliest.
XIV. COACHES
Recommendations/Observations
19.2 The Committee feels that the most crucial aspect for preparedness of our sportspersons in
different sports disciplines has remained the most neglected one so far. Lack of qualified and
experienced coaches clearly indicates that our country still lags behind when compared with other
countries performing well in sports arena. The Committee once again enjoins upon the Department
to give top priority of building up required number of coaches. One must not forget that in the
recent decades things have changed significantly in sports also. To compete with well-trained
sportspersons, the basic requirement is to have qualified experienced cadre of coaches which is
also satisfied with its service conditions.
Action Taken
Due to vacancies as a result of retirement/death during the period March-April 2010, SAI
has now 1244 regular coaches and 86 on contract basis. The services of coaches are being used
to strengthen the Sports Promotional Schemes of SAI being implemented across the country
through the Regional centres/Sub-Centres. The services of coaches are also being utilized for the
academics programmes of SAI. This apart, coaches are also attached to the National Teams being
prepared by SAI on behalf of MYAS.
In pursuance to the approval of MYAS action is in progress for filling up vacant posts on
contract basis in different disciplines.
The modern sports have become highly competitive and sports science oriented. As such,
the coaches are being sent abroad from time to time for an advanced training in order to keep
themselves abreast of latest techniques, rules and regulations of their respective disciplines. In
addition to this, coaches are also accompanying the National Teams during their visit abroad for
competition exposure.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that at present, SAI has 1244 regular coaches and 86 on
contract basis. But, at the same time, the Ministry has to ensure that any vacancy that may
occur should be filled up immediately. Ministry should also prepare guidelines for training
of coaches abroad and appointing foreign coaches on regular/contract basis. The Committee
has noted the performance of Indian team in Commonwealth/Asian Games and the credit
of good performance should also go to the coaches. The Committee hopes that the exercise
of cadre review including review of recruitment rules for coaches must have been completed
as envisaged by 31
st August, 2010. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
follow-up action taken thereafter.

28
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
–NIL–
28

29
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
Committee’s specific recommendation for giving focused publicity to the manifold
activities being carried out by the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan has remained unanswered.
Not only this, the Ministry has failed to indicate any line of action on setting up of Youth
Service Centres in Universities in coordination with the Ministry of Human Resource
Development. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates that steps may be taken for
implementing these two suggestions made by it earlier. (Para 3.3)
The Committee has been voicing its concern about 123 districts in the country not
having Nehru Yuva Kendras at present. The Committee is constrained to observe that no
progress has been made in this direction so far. The Committee fails to comprehend the
viability of the proposal mooted by Ministry of Finance for re-deployment of existing
manpower when already there is shortage of 168 District Youth Coordinators. The
Committee, therefore, once again recommends that concerted efforts need to be made for
creation of required number of posts of District Youth Coordinators for the remaining 123
districts yet to be covered. (Para 3.7)
The Committee is constrained to observe that no significant progress could be made
so far as filling up the 168 vacancies in the grade of District Youth Coordinators is
concerned. For as many as 168 vacancies, response being received only from 85 candidates,
that too after considerable time is indeed very surprising. Similarly, a very few applications
have been received from States/UTs for filling up these posts on deputation. As a result,
about 150 Nehru Yuva Kendras continue to function without District Youth Coordinators.
The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for review of the recruitment
process so as to analyse the reasons for such an unsatisfactory response. (Para 3.8)
IV. NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
Latest details furnished by the Ministry depict a very discouraging scenario so far as
coverage of National Service Scheme in different categories of institutions is concerned. Out
of total 70,638 institutions in the country, this scheme is operational in only 26,202
institutions, at present, with the maximum shortfall being in schools. Out of 47,730 schools,
only 9230 schools are covered. The Committee would like to point out that this scheme
plays a very crucial role in character-building and increasing social awareness of our
students. Maximum coverage is, accordingly, the need of the hour, particularly, in the
present day circumstances. The Committee strongly feels that a special drive should be
carried out so as to draw more and more students. The Ministry can very well play a pro-
active role in close coordination with the Ministry of Human Resource Development and
State authorities. The Committee would also like to point out that fund constraints should
not come in the way of expansion of this social scheme. The Committee would also like to
have an idea about the involvement of Self Financing Units in the implementation of NSS.
In Committee’s opinion, the best course is to avail the infrastructure facilities and
manpower available in the institutions. (Para 4.3)
29

30
The Committee observed that the trend in the expenditure incurred during the last
three years is not very encouraging and, therefore, expressed its doubts whether the
balance amount of Rs. 242.25 crores would be spent in the next two years when only 182.75
crore had been spent in the last three years. The reason for this apprehension comes from
the fact that the Department has failed to increase the enrolment and coverage of schools
under the scheme. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Department should strive
hard to achieve the enrolment rate under the NSS. (Para 4.5)
The Committee’s specific query about the performance level of Self-Financing Units
set up so far has remained unanswered. The Committee would like to have full details, i.e.
criteria for selection of Self-Financing Units, their location, institution-wise performance
level and monitoring mechanism.   (Para 4.9)
V. NATIONAL DISCIPLINE SCHEME
Specific information pertaining to quantum of committed liability released so far,
number of NDS Instructors covered thereunder, basis of outstanding committed liability
along with number of NDS Instructors (State-wise) was sought by the Committee. The
Committee hopes that this information has been forwarded by the three States. The
Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. The Committee would also like to have
a status report on the response received from the Ministry of Finance as well as the
response of the remaining seven States. The Committee strongly feels that the entire
liability needs to be liquidated in one go during the coming financial year. (Para 5.4)
VI. YOUTH HOSTELS
The reply of the Department that three Youth Hostels could not be completed due to
paucity of funds has not been taken well by the Committee as it had earlier pointed out
that the Ministry utilized only Rs.84 lakh out of sanctioned Rs.3.25 crores up to 26
th
February, 2010. The Committee wonders whether it is the paucity of funds or under-
utilization of funds that has delayed the progress of construction of Youth Hostels. It is,
however, encouraging that face-lifting work of twenty Youth Hostels has been completed and
that the work in remaining Y outh Hostels will also be completed soon along with the
construction of remaining hostels. The Committee would like to know about the real reason
for delay and about the last minute changes in the site for construction of hostels in two
States and hopes that the funds available with the Ministry for the purpose would be fully
utilized and the remaining works would also be completed. (Para 6.3)
From the reply of the Ministry, it does not appear that the Ministry has taken any
concrete steps in taking corrective measures and a comprehensive review of the under-
performing Youth Hostels. Whether the changes suggested by the Ministry have so far
been implemented is not seen in the reply. The Committee desires that the course of
action suggested by the Ministry may not remain on paper only but it should be
implemented in a time-bound manner. The Committee would also appreciate if an
effective monitoring mechanism including both regular and surprise inspections is also put
in place. (Para 6.4)
The Committee desires that the Ministry has to ensure that these Youth Hostels,
which have been transferred to other agencies shall be used for development of youth only.
Alternate Youth Hostels may be constructed at good locations. Similarly, incentives may be
given to the good performing hostels. (Para 6.5)

31
X. SCHEME OF ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
The Committee is aware that the Ministry is running many schemes for growth of
sports and sportspersons and is providing assistance to the sports federations for
development of individual sports for which they are functioning. The Committee fears that
the assistance provided to the SFs should not go down the drain as is evident from the poor
condition of the sports federations, sports infrastructure available in the country and that
none of the international level players who achieved success at the national/international
levels got support from Sports Federations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
more stringent norms and monitoring mechanism have to be set up for better utilization
of funds and running of these federations. (Para 10.3)
XII. PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG DISABLED
The Committee notes that the Ministry has made a beginning by giving assistance
of Rs.1.19 crore to 57 schools and Rs. 4 crores for Special Olympic Bharat (SOB). It has
to ensure that the assistance is actually utilized for development of sports among disabled.
Further, the Committee feels that in any major or State / district level sports events, the
events for the disabled should also be kept besides holding sports events exclusively for the
disabled. Moreover, the Ministry should ensure development of sports infrastructure for the
disabled and create a dedicated group of coaches for the disabled and implement its various
schemes/programmes in a mission mode manner. (Para 12.3)
XIII. URBAN SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEME
The Committee voices its serious concern on the undue delay in the launching of the
Scheme of Assistance for the creation of Urban Sports Infrastructure. The Committee would
like to point out that this Scheme would be taking the place of four erstwhile centrally
sponsored sports infrastructure schemes transferred to State Governments w.e.f. 1
st April,
2005. The experience of involving the State Governments in the implementation of these
schemes has been very discouraging. Any delay in reviving these schemes in a composite
scheme will directly impact that too very adversely the creation of sports facilities in urban
areas in the country. However, the latest feedback made available to the Committee clearly
indicates that the scheme continues to be in early stages of finalization. The protracted
exercise of getting the approval at various levels has still to be undergone. The Committee,
therefore, would like to emphasize that concerted efforts need to be made to get the
scheme finally approved at the earliest. (Para 13.4)
XIV. NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND
The Committee finds that it is only BCCI which has contributed Rs. 50 crore to the
Corpus. No other private entity has made substantial contribution to the fund which shows
the lack of enthusiasm on the part of the Ministry to generate more funds and is also
indicative of the lack of faith by the private entities in the Government’s efforts and plans.
The Department has failed to make any headway so far despite its efforts/initiatives and is
still following the casual approach. The Committee desires that the Ministry may explore
various fora and channels for generating funds with positive results and also make an
honest effort in gaining the trust and confidence of the private sector if it has to achieve
the desired results. (Para 14.3)
XV. NATIONAL WELFARE FUND FOR SPORTSPERSONS
The Committee, while noting the reply of the Ministry, finds that the Ministry has

32
not made any special efforts to create awareness about the Fund apart from what is being
done routinely. The Ministry has to ensure that by relevant information reaches the
sportspersons who are the users and beneficiaries of these schemes.  (Para 15.3)
XVI. SCHEME OF PENSION TO MERITORIOUS SPORTSPERSONS
The Committee had recommended that the scheme of pension to meritorious sports
persons be extended to medal winners of national championships. But, nothing has been
mentioned in that regard in the reply. The Committee is aware of the other schemes
mentioned in the reply for nurturing young talent in sports. It was besides these schemes
that the Committee had recommended extension of pension scheme to the winners of
national championships which will create a sense of security among the young talent and
attract them towards sports as their career. Ministry may work out a scheme in this regard.
(Para 16.2)
XVII. NA TIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP FOR WOMEN
The Committee is happy to note the enhanced norms of funding for holding
competitions for women which will help in promoting sports among the women. However, the
Ministry has to ensure that these norms may not remain on paper but should actually be
made applicable and the sanctioned amount be utilized as envisaged. (Para 17.2)
XVIII. GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM
The Committee is not convinced by the action taken by the Ministry with regard
to setting up of Grievance Redressal Mechanism. The Committee would like to point out
that declaration of Indian Olympic Association and all National Sports Federations as
public authorities under the Right to Information Act, 2005 cannot be equated with a
Grievance Redressal Mechanism. It is a well-known fact that under RTI, only information
can be sought, any remedial action in a complaint cannot be taken. Secondly, complaints
cannot be confined to only matters relating to selection of athletes. Any stakeholder right
from sportspersons, both active and retired, to coaches, NGOs other functionaries can be
having genuine grievances. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates that an effective
Grievance Redressal Mechanism at different levels needs to be operationalised at the
earliest. (Para 18.2)
XIV. COACHES
The Committee notes that at present, SAI has 1244 regular coaches and 86 on
contract basis. But, at the same time, the Ministry has to ensure that any vacancy that may
occur should be filled up immediately. Ministry should also prepare guidelines for training
of coaches abroad and appointing foreign coaches on regular/contract basis. The Committee
has noted the performance of Indian team in Commonwealth/Asian Games and the credit
of good performance should also go to the coaches. The Committee hopes that the exercise
of cadre review including review of recruitment rules for coaches must have been completed
as envisaged by 31
st August, 2010. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
follow-up action taken ther eafter. (Para 19.2)

33
MINUTES

XII
TWELVETH-MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11 A.M. on Monday, the
17th January, 2011 in Committee Room. ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
LOK SABHA
5. Shri P.K Biju
6. Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela
7. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
8. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
10. Shri P.C Gaddigoudar
11. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
12. Shri P. Kumar
13. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
14. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
15. Shri Ashok Tanwar
16. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
17. Shri Joseph Toppo
18. Shri Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
19. Shri P. Vishwanathan
20. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
35

36
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened for consideration and adoption of four Action Taken Reports on 219 th, 220 th, 221 st and
222nd Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of the Departments/Ministries
under the purview of the Committee and also the Report on the Architects (Amendment) Bill, 2010.
3 . ***    *
4 . ***    *
5 . ***    *
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.05 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

37
ANNEXURES

39
ANNEXURE-1
STATUS OF COMPETITION VENUES
Funded by: Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MoYAS)
Sl. Stadium V enue Start Completion
No. Owner Date Status
12 3 4 5
1 JN Sports Complex- SAI Jan. 2008 Completed &
Athletics In augurated on
27
th July, 2010
2 Dr. Karni Singh SAI Oct. 2008 Completed &
Shooting Ranges Inaugurated on
31st January, 2010
3 MDC National SAI Sep. 2008 Completed &
Stadium – Hockey Inaugurated on
24th January, 2010
4 JN Sports Complex SAI Oct. 2009 Completed &
Lawn Bowls Inaugurated on
5th April, 2010
5 IG Sports Complex- SAI Dec. 2007 Completed &
Gymnastics In augurated on
10th April, 2010
6 IG Sports Complex- SAI Aug. 2008 Completed &
Wrestling In augurated on
25th April, 2010
7 IG Sports Complex- SAI Jan. 2009 Completed &
Cycling In augurated on
29th June, 2010
8 SPM Swimming Pool SAI Dec. 2007 Completed &
Complex In augurated on
18th July, 2010
9 JN Sports Complex- SAI Aug. 2007 Completed &
Weightlifting In augurated on
1st August, 2010
Other V enue
10 RK Khanna Tennis DLTA June 2008 Completed &
Stadium Inaugurated on
11th July, 2010

40
12 3 4 5
11 Delhi Univ – Main DU Aug. 2008 Completed &
Ground – Rugby7s Inaugurated on
15th July, 2010
12 Big-Bore Shooting, CRPF Dec. 2008 Completed &
Kadarpur Academy Inaugurated on
10th May, 2010
Funded by: Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), GoI
Sl. Stadium V enue Completion Status
No. Owner
1 Siri Fort Sports Complex- DDA Completed (as reported).
Badminton
2 Siri Fort Sports Complex- DDA Completed (as reported).
Squash
3 Yamuna Sports Complex- DDA Completed (as reported).
Table Tennis
4 Yamuna Sports Complex- DDA Completed (as reported).
Archey Inaugurated on 5 th March, 2010
Funded by: Government of Delhi
Sl. Stadium V enue Completion Status
No. Owner
1 Thyagraj Sports Complex- Govt. of Completed (as reported).
Netball Delhi Inaugurated on 2nd April, 2010
2 Talkatora Stadium – NDMC Completed (as reported).
Boxing Inaugurated on 24th February, 2010

41
ANNEXURE-2
STATUS OF TRANING VENUES
Funded by: Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MoYAS)
Sl. Stadium V enue Completion Status
No. Owner
1 CPWD–DPS TRG-LawnBowls CPWD Completed
2 CPWD-MDC TRG-Hockey SAI/CPWD Completed
3 DU-Daulatram TRG-Rugby7s DU Completed
4 DU-Hindu TRG-Rugby7s DU Completed
5 DU-Indoor Hall TRG- DU Completed
Boxing & Netball
6 DU-Khalsa TRG-Rugby7s DU Completed
7 DU-Kirorimal TRG-Rugby7s DU Completed
8 DU-Polo Ground TRG- DU 2 nd September, 2010
Athletics
9 DU-Ramjas TRG-Rugby7s DU Completed
10 DU-SriRam TRG-Rugby7s DU Completed
11 DU-SriRam TRG-Wrestling(W) DU 10 th September, 2010
12 DU-StStephens TRG-Rugby7s DU Completed
13 JMI-Rugby7s JMI Completed
14 JMI-Table T ennis TRG JMI Completed
15 AITA-RK Khanna TRG-T ennis AIT A Completed
Funded by: Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) GoI
Sl. Stadium V enue Completion Status
No. Owner
12 3 4
1 DDA-GameV ill TRG-Athletics DDA Completed
2 DDA-GameVill TRG-Swimming DDA Completed
3 DDA-GameVill TRG-Weight Wrest DDA Completed
41

42
12 3 4
4 DDA-Saket TR G-Badminton DDA Completed
5 DDA-SiriFort TRG-Badminton DDA Completed
6 DDA-SiriFort TRG-Squash DDA Completed
7 DDA-SiriFort TRG-Swimming DDA Completed
8 DDA-SiriFort TRG-Tennis DDA 8 th September, 2010
9 DDA-Yamuna TRG-Gymnastics DDA Completed
10 DDA-Yamuna TRG-Hockey DDA Completed
11 DDA-Yamuna TRG-Lawn Bowls DDA Completed
12 DDA-Yamuna TRG-Swimming DDA Completed
13 DDA-Yamuna TRG-Archery DDA Completed
Funded by: Government of Delhi
Sl. Stadium V enue Completion Status
No. Owner
1 GNCTD-Chhatrasal TRG- Govt. of Completed
Athletics Delhi
2 GNCTD-Ludlow TRG- Govt. of Completed
Wrestling Delhi
3 GNCTD-Thyagraj TRG- Govt. of Completed
Athletics Delhi
4 NDMC-Shivaji TRG-Hockey NDMC September 2010

43
ANNEXURE-3
STATEMENT SHOWING THE INITIAL COST PROJECTIONS, REVISED COST PROJECTION
ALONG WITH REASONS FOR DELAY IN RESPECT OF SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE
(Rupees in crores )
Sl. Project Initial Cost Revised Reasons
No. Projections Cost for
Projections Escalation
Sports Authority of India - Upgradation/Renovation of SAI Stadia
1. Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium 455 961 At Annexure A
2. Indira Gandhi Stadium 113 669
3. Dr. S.P.M. Swimming Pool 145 377
Complex
4. MDC National Stadium 113 262
Complex
5. Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Range 16 149
6. Consultancy for SAI Stadia – 42
T
OTAL 1000 2460
Delhi University (DU)
1. Competition/Training Venue 222.27 306.41 At Annexure B
Jamia Millia Islamia University (JMI)
1. Training Venues for Table 33.41 42.57 Annexure C
Tennis and Rugby 7
All India Tennis Association (AITA)
1. Development/Upgration 30.00 65.65 Annexure D
of R.K. Khanna Tennis Stadium
CRPF Academy
1. Big Bore Shooting Range 15.00 28.50 Annexure E
Kadarpur
43

44
44
ANNEXURE-A
(i) At the time of preparation of costs estimates, in 2006, Venue Briefs for these stadia were
not available. These will be provided later.
(ii) Escalation in prices of construction material over this period of time have also contributed
to overall increase in Cost Estimates.
(iii) Alterations and additions at venues necessitated by mandatory requirements of the
Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF)/International Federations.
(iv) Items such as Taxes/Statutory Levies, Closed Circuit Television (CCTV), intelligent Building
Management System (IBMS), LAN, PBX etc., which had not been included in earlier
estimates have now been included in the Revised Estimates.

45
45
ANNEXURE-B
(i) Increase in ‘Built Up Area’ as per requirement of OC;
(ii) Increase in rates of structural steel;
(iii) Increase in ‘Value Added Tax (V AT)/Service Tax and Labour Cess (not included earlier);
(iv) Increase in area of Multipurpose Hall, Grand Stand and the ‘Field of Play (FOP);
(v) Addition of sports lighting of one venue and increase in lux level for lighting at Competition
venue for ‘High Definition Television (HDTV);
(vi) Security related equipments; and
(vii) Cost of electronic sub-station and grid connection.

46
46
ANNEXURE-C
(i) Increase in rates of steel;
(ii) Change in specification of wooden floor;
(iii) Change in specification of Rugby field to match with those of Competition Venue;
(iv) Increase lux requirements for sports lighting; and
(v) DG sets and strengthening of grids.

47
47
ANNEXURE-D
(i) Increase in price of Steel
(ii) Increase due to requirements of DUAC and MCD;
(iii) Increase in spectators capacity at Centre Court;
(iv) Laying of synthetic surface and preparation of ‘Field of Play (FoP);
(v) Cost of Techno-financial audit by Government approved agency;
(vi) Enhanced lux level in FoP for HDTV;
(vii) Security related equipments;
(viii) V ideo Screens and Score Boards; and
(ix) Intelligent Building Authomation System.

48
48
ANNEXURE-E
(i) Construction of ‘Baffle Wall’, as finalized by the representative of CGF during site visit on
9th March, 2009;
(ii) For making additional provisions for compound lighting Public Address System;
(iii) Modification in the architectural concept plan for ‘Facility Block’; and
(iv) Additional requirement for funds for development of 2 km. stretch of road of CRPF leading
to the CRPF campus.

49
49
MOST IMMEDIATE
Hkkjr ljdkj
flU/kqJh [kqYyj ;qok dk;ZØe ,oa [ksy ea=ky;
Sindhushree Khullar [ksy foHkkx
lfpo ‘kkL=h Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110 115
Secretary Government of India
Tel. : 23388623 Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
Telefax : 23388758 Department of Sports
E-mail : secy-sports@nic.in Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-110 115
DO No.F.70-47/2005/CWG.I-V ol.4
Dated the 6 th August, 2010
Dear Shri Kalmadi,
This is regarding the repayment of loan provided to Organizing Committee (OC) by Government
for Conduct of the Commonwealth Games – 2010. This matter has been in correspondence with OC
for quite some time and we have noted your response that revenue realized so far, is in the nature of
an advance with certain contractual obligations, and, if these obligations are not fulfilled, in the event
of contingency–including cancellation of Games, OC would be required to pay back the entire amount
to the concerned agency.
02. However, the matter was comprehensively considered and it has been decided that the repayment
of principal and interest is to commence immediately and completed not later than 31.3.2011, and the
terms and conditions of the loan to the OC be amended accordingly. The amendment to this effect was
communicated to OC on 9
th February, 2010.
“Repayment of principal and interest accrue/to be accrued thereon shall be started immediately
and completed not later than 31 st March, 2011.”
03. It is noted that the sanctions for release of installments stipulates this condition and in spite of
the conditions in the sanction, and, our communications to this effect, you have not, so far, taken any
action to repay the principal and interest from the revenues realized until date.
04. Therefore, in order to ensure that these funds are not diverted to emergent expenditures that
are not within the sanctioned budget of the OC, it is necessary to sequester these receipts in a separate
escrow account to be operated only at the highest level under authorization of this Department. I
would, therefore, request that you may issue suitable instructions to the concerned officers for
depositing the revenues realized in an account specifically created for this purpose and exclusively
meant for holding revenue receipts with the above mentioned safeguards.


50
05. It is reiterated that the OC may make concerted efforts to enhance its revenue generation to
repay the loan provided by the Government. We may also be intimated the action taken immediately
by holding these amounts in escrow in an inclusive account meant for this purpose.
Yours sinceraly,
Sd/-
(Sindhushree Khullar)
Shri Suresh Kalmadi, MP
Chairman,
Organizing Committee, CWG-D2010,
Jai Singh Road, NDCC Building
New Delhi.
Copy to:
1. Shri A.K. Mattoo, Treasurer, Organizing Committee, CWG-D2010, Jai Singh Road, NDCC
Building, New Delhi.
2. Shri Jarnail Singh, CEO, OC, CWG-D2010.
3. Shri G . C. Chaturvedi, Special Director General (F&A), OC, CWG-D2010.
4. M. Jaychandran, Joint Director General (Finance and Accounts), Commonwealth Games
Organising Committee, Jai Singh Road, NDCC Building, New Delhi.
Sd/-
(Sindhushree Khullar)
06.08.2010

51
51
ANNEXURE-5
Organizing Committee
Commonwealth Games 2010, Delhi
16th August 2010
To
Shri Rahul Bhatnagar
Joint Secretary (ISD)
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports,
Pragati Vihar Hostal
Lodi Road
New Delhi.
Sub: Opening of an Escrow Account – Proposal Regarding
Sir,
We are in receipt of DO letter No. F70-47/2005/CWG-I/V ol IV dated 6
th August, 2010 from
Secretary (Sports) to the Chairman of the Organising Committee regarding opening of an Escrow
Account in respect of all the income accrued to the Organising Committee on account of revenues
from Broadcasting etc.
In this context, I would like to inform that the matter is under active consideration of the
Organising Committee. The proposal is also required to be put up for the consideration and approval
of the Executive Board. Hence, this may take some more time.
In view of the above, it is requested that the issue of opening of the separate Account should
not be linked with release of Rs. 470.54 crore as there is every likelihood of financial crisis with
expenditure/commitments to meet contractual obligations rising above the balance fund available with
OC.
We therefore request for early release of the aforesaid amount to tide over the present financial
crisis.
Yours faithfully
Sd/-
(KUK Reddy)
Gp. Capt.
ADG (F & A)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.