98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
98
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
NINETY-EIGHTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTIONTAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
54TH REPORT ON NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND NEURO SCIENCES (NIMHANS),
BANGALORE
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27TH FEBRUARY,  2001)
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON  27TH FEBRUARY, 2001)
 
 C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                                 
2.         PREFACE                                                                                                            
3.                  REPORT                                                                                                                        
CHAPTER  I   Recommendations/Observations that have been
                        Accepted by the Government
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
                        Does not desire to pursue in view of the
                        Government’s replies
CHAPTER III
  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
                        Replies of the Government have not been accepted
                        By the Committee
CHAPTER IV
  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
                        Government has not given any reply
4.                  OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                                     
5.                  MINUTES                                                                                                      
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
1.      Shri S.B. Chavan                            ¾¾                Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
2.      Shri Mourice Kujur

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
3.      Shri Akhilesh Das
4.      Shri Eduardo Faleiro
5.      Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”
6.      Shri Dina Nath Mishra
7.      Prof. R.B.S. Varma
8.      Shri Bratin Sengupta
9.      Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”
10.  Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
11.  Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
12.  Shri Mrinal Sen
13.  Dr. C. Narayana  Reddy
14.  Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
15.  Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar
 
LOK SABHA
16.  Shrimati Jaskaur Meena
17.  Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
18.  Shri Ramakant Angle
19.  Shri Kirti Jha Azad
20.  Shri Baliram Kashyap
21.  Shri Ramanand Singh
22.  Shri Dileep Sanghani
23.  Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
24.  Shri G. S. Baswaraj
25.  Shri V. M. Sudheeran
26.  Shrimati Shyama Singh
27.  Shri Sunil Dutt
28.  Shri Ramesh Chennithala
29.  Shri Kantilal Bhuriya
30.  Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
31.  Shri Samik Lahiri
32.  Dr. D.V.G. Shankar Rao
33.  Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
34.  Shrimati Renu Kumari
35.  Shri Shivaji Mane
36.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
37.  Dr. Baliram
38.  Dr. A.D.K. Jayaseelan
39.  Dr. V. Saroja
40.  Shri Trilochan Kanungo
41.  Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
42.  Shri Vanlal Zawma
43.  Smt. Kumudini Patnaik
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretariat
Shri Gurnam Singh, Committee Officer
 PREFACE
 

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
            I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Ninety –eighth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
54th Report on National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore.
2.         The Seventy-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 th February, 2001.  Replies of the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Health, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare were considered by the Committee.  Clarifications were also sought by the Committee from
the representatives of the Department.  .
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 22nd January, 2001.
 
NEW DELHI;
January 22, 2001
Magha 2, 1922 (Saka)
 
 
 
 
 
S.B. CHAVAN
Chairman
Department-related
Parliamentary
Standing Committee
on
Human Resource
Development
 REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in its Fifty-fourth Report on the Functioning of National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS),
Bangalore which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th February, 1997.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in
the Report.  They have been categorized as follows:-
(i)                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 3, 5, 5.1, 5.2, 11 (Chapter
I)
(ii)                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies: 8, 9, 9.1, 10, 10.2, 10.3, 12, 13.1 (Chapter II)
(iii)               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee: 4, 6, 7, 10.1, 13, 13.2, 13.3 (Chapter-III)
(iv)              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been received – Nil
(Chapter – IV)
 CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNEMNT
III        Recommendation
3.         When the Committee sought to know as to whether the Institute is equipped with latest technology and sufficient
equipments in all the departments, the Director stated that efforts have always been made to equip all the departments
with the advanced technology and equipments.  However, due to lack of funds they are not able to keep pace with latest
improvements in technology, he added.  The Committee was also informed that if a special grant is made available to
the Institute then it would be possible to acquire the necessary equipments.  The Committee feels that the Institute is in
need of sophisticated equipments for diagnosis, treatment & research and the Department of Health may consider
making available sufficient funds for the purpose.
Action Taken
            Government of India has released the entire funds and the equipment has been purchased by the Institute.

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
V         Recommendation
5.         One of the three important objectives of the Institute is manpower development in the field of mental health and
Neuro Sciences.  The Committee notes that the Institute offers Post Graduate Courses including M.Phil, Post-certificate
courses in nursing i.e. (Diploma in Psychiatric Nursing DPN and Diploma in Neurological Nursing DNN) are also
offered in the Institute.  Facilities to pursue PH.D Programmes are also available, it was added.
Action Taken
            The Institute has introduced new courses:
a)                  Post Doctoral Certificate course in Neuroanaesthesia
b)                  M.Phil course in Speech Language Pathology.
Recommendation
5.1       The Committee was informed by the Director that the courses conducted by the Institute are always in great
demand due to the limited intake capacity of the Institute.  When asked to explain the steps taken to meet the demand,
the Director replied that recently it has been proposed to increase the number of seats in the following courses:
                        MD-Psychiatry                         8 to 14 seats
                        DM-Neurology                                    4 to 6 seats
                        M.CH Neurosurgery                4 to 6 seats
                        M.Phil Clin. Psychology            12 to 15 seats
                        M.Phil in PSW                         12 to 15 seats
5.2       The Committee desires that this proposal may be finalized as early as possible.  For increasing the seats, the staff
strength is also required to be increased.  Necessary steps may therefore, be taken to sanction additional posts.
Action Taken
            Medical Council of India has agreed to increase the number of seats as proposed by the Director, NIMHANS,
Bangalore and the Institute has also increased the M.Phil Clinical Psychology and M.Phil in PSW as proposed.
11.       Recommendation
            To overcome the problems occurring due to accidents and epilepsy, prevention is required for which public
awareness is essential.  To a question as to whether the Institute is publishing any literature for the awareness of the
common public on the mental health related problems, the Director of the Institute responded that they are planning in
this direction.  One of the faculty members of the Institute has published nearly forty books in Kannada.  The Institute is
also planning to publish them in the regional languages, he added.  The Director also stated that the Health Education
Bureau in the Institute is working on it.  He also stated that the Institute is in a position to supply posters on mental
health in case any State is in need of it.  The Committee is of the opinion that there is need to publish the materials about
mental health and related problems in all the regional languages so that people of all the regions/states can be benefited. 
Necessary steps may be taken in this direction.  The Department should take the responsibility of publishing the material
in various regional languages in a time-bound manner.
Action Taken
            State Health Secretaries have been informed about the IEC materials developed by NIMHANS and have been
requested to make use of these materials after getting it translated into local languages for generating public awareness. 
The Central Health Education Bureau has also been asked for the same.
 CHAPTER-II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATINS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
Recommendation
8.         The Committee has learnt that a sixty bedded drug dependence unit is functioning in the Institute and funds are
not being given for this by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare while similar centres established in PGI
Chandigarh, AIIMS, Delhi etc. are funded by the Govt. of India under the National Drug De-Addiction programme. 

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
The unique feature of the Centre in this Institute is, it has been started with community based activity.  The Committee
was also informed that the Ministry has been approached for providing additional funds for De-Addiction programme. 
The Committee, however, feels that the Institute should not over-burden itself with the Drug De-addiction programme,
particularly when sufficient funds are not being received.
Action Taken
            Ministry of Health has approved the inclusion of existing Drug De-addiction Centre of NIMHANS under
National Drug De-addiction programme and sanctioned Rs. 517 lakhs in the 9 th Five year plan and to make it a
Regional Centre.
Recommendation
9.         The Committee has noted that a survey conducted on more that one lakh population on neurological disorders
showed that approximately 31 people out of 1000 suffer from neurological disorders, the commonest being headache
and epilepsy.  Considering the gravity of the situation, the Committee feels that there is need for evolving a national
strategy on epilepsy and other neurological disorders.
Action Taken
            Under National Mental Health Programme, epilepsy is also included as one of the disorders and NIMHANS has
taken up training of PHC doctors in the management of  Mental disorders including epilepsy.
Recommendation
9.1       The Committee also learnt that basic research studies on Yoga have helped in the application of Kriya Yoga in
the successful treatment of patients with depression.  Since yoga treatment does not require any medicines and is free
from side effects, it needs to be extensively used.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that steps should be taken by
the Institute to involve more yoga experts in treating the patients who suffer  from depression.  The yoga unit may be
further developed.
Action Taken
            The proposal for establishment of advanced centre in Ayurveda at NIMHANS has been agreed to by Deptt.of
ISM&H and  has released amount for providing infrastructure.
Recommendation
10.       The Institute caters to the needs of Patients suffering from Psychiatric and neurological disorders.  The Institute
has a bed capacity of 805.  Besides this, the Institute also offers a combined neuro psychiatric out-patient service to
impart better co-ordinated patient care.  When the Committee sought to know as to whether the bed capacity is proposed
to be increased, it was stated that they propose to increase the beds in casualty unit by 50 beds.  They also propose to
increase bed capacity in head injury unit and stroke unit, it was added.  The Committee desires that necessary steps may
be taken to increase the beds at the earliest.
Action Taken
            Providing emergency care in the city is a State responsibility and NIMHANS being an apex referral Hospital
should normally not be handling emergency cases which can detract from their primary focus which is aimed at
evolving the best standards for teaching clinical research and patient care.  However, subject to receiving State Govt.’s
financial support the proposal for establishing a 50 bedded casualty will be taken forward in the IX  Plan.
Recommendation
10.2     To save a number of lives from head injuries the Director apprised the Committee that by making wearing of
helmets compulsory for two wheeler drivers all over the country, this problem can be solved to a large extent.  The
Committee feels that the suggestion is good and it should be looked into.
Action Taken
            Ministry of Surface Transport has reiterated instruction to all States/UTs Transport Commissioners for imposing
compulsory wearing of helmets by Two Wheeler drivers/pillion riders as prescribed under Section 129 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988.

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
Recommendation
10.3     The Committee has noted that the Institute does not get sufficient kits for HIV testing.  The Director informed
that National Aids Control Organisation (NACO) has been requested to increase the number of HIV kits supplied.  The
Committee feels that the Institute is in need of HIV Kits and NACO may increase the supply of HIV Kits.  The
Committee is, however, of the view that the Institute should not over-burden itself with treating HIV cases.
Action Taken
            NACO has provided sufficient HIV Kits to NIMHANS through State Government.  Further, patients of
HIV/AIDS having neurological and Psychiatric disorders are treated in NIMHANS.  Other AIDS patients are not treated
in NIMHANS.
            Recommendation
12.       There is a small unit under the control of Central Council of Ayurveda functioning in the Institute which is not a
part of NIMHANS.  The Committee was informed by the Director that there is a proposal to establish an advanced
centre of Ayurveda in the Institute.  The Committee, is, however,` of the opinion that the opening of advanced centre of
Ayurveda is an additional burden for the Institute.  Such a centre could be located elsewhere in an Ayurvedic Institute
and the patients requiring treatment in Ayurveda could be referred there.
Action Taken
            The proposal for setting up of advanced centre in Ayurveda at NIMHANS has been sanctioned by the
Department of ISM&H.  It is felt that patients should get the benefit of both the Ayurvedic System of medicine and the
Modern Allopathic system of Medicine.
Recommendation
13.1     The Committee was also informed that aid for development plans is received from many foreign countries such
as Germany, Japan, U.S.A. etc.  The Director pleaded that such aid should be made available to NIMHANS also.  The
Committee recommends that the Department of Health may look into the matter.
Action Taken
As and when such assistance is available all efforts would be made to make NIMHANS also a recipient of such
assistance.
 CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
4.         Recommendation
            The Committee has noted that the Institute proposes to have collaboration with foreign universities and when
asked as to how far they are able to finalise the proposal, the Director informed the Committee that it has already
developed collaboration with a renowned University and for making further efforts in this direction the active support of
the Ministry of Human Resource Development is required.  The Committee feels that it is a premier Institute of its kind
in the country and collaboration with eminent and renowned foreign universities would further strengthen the Institute. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department  of Health should take up the matter with the Ministry of
HRD in this regard.
Action Taken
            The matter regarding collaboration with foreign  universities has been taken up with Ministry of Human
Resource Development.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee feels that collaboration with foreign universities  is very important because it provides additional
funds for being spent on plan-programmes.  The Committee is not satisfied with the effort of Department of Health in
this regard and strongly recommends that it should vigorously pursue the matter of foreign collaboration with the
Ministry of Human Resource Development.

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
6.        Recommendation
            The Committee has noted that the Staff Position in the Institute is as under:-
                                               
 Sanctioned Working Vacant
Teaching 143 122 21
Non-teaching 830 737 93
            As regards the vacancies on teaching side it was stated that for five faculty posts, interviews were already held. 
It was also stated that 14 posts are reserved for SCs/STs and recruitment is under process under special recruitment
drive.  Action is being taken to fill up the remaining posts, it was added.  The Committee recommends that immediate
steps may be taken to fill up the posts reserved for SCs/STs.  The Committee also desires that the vacancies on the non-
teaching side also may be filled up at the earliest.  The Director also informed the Committee that some posts have to be
kept vacant due to paucity of funds.  The Committee views this with concern and strongly recommends that in future no
post should be kept vacant just because of paucity of funds.
Action Taken
            All reserved posts on the non-teaching side have been filled up.  As regards the faculty posts, the  Institute is
facing difficulties in filling up the reserved posts  even after resorting to a special recruitment drive.  The  Institute has
re-advertised the posts and is in the process of conducting interviews.
Further Comments
            The Committee specifically wanted to know whether the teaching posts in the reserved category were vacant due
to paucity of funds or non-availability of qualified candidates.  The Additional Secretary clarified that paucity of funds
was not the reason for vacancies in the teaching category.  It was the non availability of qualified candidates due to
which these posts were vacant.  It was informed that out of 21 vacant posts on the teaching side, 14 posts were reserved
for SCs/STs and candidates with adequate qualifications were not available in spite of repeated advertisements.  The
Secretary subsequently informed the Committee that as per the reservation policy they had to keep attempting, by way
of advertisements, to fill up the reserved posts.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is anguished to note that in a prestigious institute like NIMHANS, which is a deemed university
and only one of its kind in the country, teaching has been allowed to be affected adversely for long because of non-
availability of suitable candidates from reserved category.  The Committee observes that such a situation cannot be
allowed to continue indefinitely, specially in a teaching institution.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that if
suitable candidates from reserved category are not available, the vacant posts should be filled up immediately on ad-hoc
basis, as per the guidelines laid down by Government of India.  The Committee may also be kept informed in the matter.
7.         Recommendation
            Research activity encompasses a large spectrum from cellular mechanisms to social systems associated with
various neurological and behavioural disorders.  However, the Committee learnt that it has not been possible to spend
adequate time for research in the Neuro-surgery Department.  When the Committee sought to know the reasons for this,
it was stated that the Department’s faculty are fully occupied with the operations and follow-up of the neuro-surgical
patients leaving them with very little time for research.  The gap can be bridged by increasing the staff strength, it was
added.  Neuro-surgery Department is a very important Department and research needs to be developed.  The
Department of Health may take necessary action to ensure that research activities are not hampered in the Neuro-surgery
Department.
Action Taken
            NIMHANS is initiating action to create posts by putting up proposals before the competent authorities.
Further Comments
            The Director General of Health Services was of the opinion that the operational type of research, namely, which
treatment is suited to what patient should be done by the surgeons themselves but basic research should be done by the

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
Physiologists and Pathologists.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee was earlier informed that neuro-surgeons, being very busy with the operations and the follow up
of the neuro-surgical patients, generally did not find much time for research.  Therefore,  some research issues were
incorporated in the training programme of the Institution.  The Committee, however, is of the view that a surgeon due to
his or her direct exposure in handling neuro-surgical operations, has got lot of first hand practical experience which
ought to be put to optimum use while carrying out basic research.  The Committee expresses its reservations for creation
of posts for such purpose.
Recommendation
10.1     The Committee also learnt that people with even small accidents come from long distances for treatment  in the
hospital.  This would only increase the burden of the Institute.  For this, some kind of screening should be done at the
local level General Hospitals from where a case should be referred to NIMHANS only if it requires specialized
treatment.  For this,  the Committee feels that the matter should be taken up with the State Government requesting them
to issue necessary circular to the general hospitals stating that whenever head injury cases come, they have to examine
and admit unless it needs a special neuro-surgical intervention.  The Director assured the Committee that needful would
be done in the matter.  The Committee desires that it should be pursued by the Institute at regular intervals.
Action Taken
            The matter regarding reducing the patient load on NIMHANS by screening the patients in the General Hospitals
of the State Government has been taken up with the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of
Karnataka, Bangalore.  They are in the process of establishing super-specialty hospital at Raichur.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee feels that NIMHANS should function as a referral Institute.  The matter should be taken up with
all the State Govts. that only such cases should be referred to the Institute which require special-neuro surgical
intervention.
13.       Recommendation
            The Committee noted that NIMHANS has been provided with Rs. 21.08 crores for 1996-97.  On being asked as
to whether this amount is sufficient to meet the requirements of the Institute, it was stated that a minimum of Rs. 30
crores was required.  The Director also informed the Committee that the main problem faced by the Institute is the lack
of funds for development.  The Institute needs special grants for this purpose, he stated.  Presently, the Institute is not
getting any grants from UGC and the Director requested that since it is a Deemed University it may also be given
development funds on the pattern of other Universities.  The Committee recommends that this may be considered.  He
further explained that in the routine grants, every year 10% growth is there and due to escalation of costs, they are not
able to meet the demand.  While the number of patients are increasing every year, the non-plan expenditure is kept at the
same level of 10% increase as per the Government norms.  Due to this, the Committee was told, the Institute has to keep
some posts vacant to have some non-plan money to spend for patient care.  The Committee is also constrained to note
that in view of this, it would be difficult to fill up all the posts and if all the posts are filled, there is no money for food
for patients, drugs and other hospital management.  The Committee feels that this would only hamper the activities of
the Institute from doing good work.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the full requirements of the Institute
may be taken care of by the Department of Health.  The Committee feels that NIMHANS, being the only National
Institute of its kind, should not starve for want of funds.  The Ministry should plead the case properly with the Finance
Ministry and Planning Commission for providing adequate funds.
Action Taken
            The Budgetary requirements of NIMHANS, Bangalore are met on a sharing basis by the Central Government
and the Government of Karnataka.  While the sharing of Plan funds by the Centre and State Government is 75% and
25%, for non-Plan funds it is 45% and 55% respectively.  Therefore, any increase in Central funds will have to be
matched by increase in State funds to the Institute.
            The budgetary allocation for NIMHANS, Bangalore during the last five years from Govt. of India has been as
under:

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
                                                                                                                        (Rs. in crores)
Year Plan Non-Plan Total
1993-94 4.42 4.38 8.80
1994-95 4.40 4.95 9.35
1995-96 6.50 5.20 11.70
1996-97 5.50 6.10 11.60
1997-98 7.00 6.50 13.50
1998-99 8.55 13.00 21.55
 
                        The Institute has been advised to take up the matter with the University Grant Commission for
development grants or project specific grants.
Further Comments
            Clarifying the matter of  contribution by the Karnataka Government to meet the Budgetary requirements of
NIMHANS, the Secretary replied that earlier NIMHANS was a mental hospital under the Government of Karnataka
which was later taken over by the Government of India and upgraded as a National Institute.  It was further clarified by
the Secretary that as per the agreement at the time of taking over the Karnataka Government was to put in one third of
the money and the Government of India was to put in two third.  The Secretary also stated that NIMHANS being an
autonomous body did not require matching funds from the state government.  Furthermore, the Central Government has
been contributing larger percentage towards plan as well as non-plan budget over the years.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes that the Central Government is meeting its part of financial obligation, so far as
NIMHANS is concerned.  The Committee is of the view that since NIMHANS has been taken over by the Central
Government and  upgraded as a National Institute, it has, therefore, the sole responsibility to ensure its smooth and
proper functioning.  Efforts should by made to make required funds available for the  Institute.
Recommendations
The Committee was surprised to find that different methods were being followed in the case of committed
expenditure of the previous plan.  According to the understanding of the Committee, committed expenditure will not get
reflected in any shape or form in the subsequent plan.  What is termed as a non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan
becomes relevant only to the expenditure of new non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan period.  This applies in
the case of both autonomous as well as deemed university institutions.  In order to get further clarification in the matter
the Secretary and the Financial Advisor of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare were specially called to clarify as
to whether this view of the Committee is correct or not.  The Secretary could not come because of illness.  The Financial
Advisor appeared before the Chairman and he confirmed that the non-plan committed expenditure of the previous plan
should not get reflected into the non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan.  He also confirmed that they are not
making any distinction between the Government institution and other autonomous and deemed university institutions
which   naturally means that the confusion which is prevailing in some of institutions in treating committed expenditure
as part of the new non-plan expenditure should be clarified by the department concerned to all the institutions in the
country so that there should be uniformity in matters of procedure of not including the committed non-plan expenditure
in the subsequent plan’s non-plan expenditure.
Action Taken
            Specific guidelines of Planning Commission in this regard have been brought to the notice of all institutions
under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
Recommendations
13.3     The Committee also noticed that in some of the Institutions where vacancies were available, they were utilizing
the funds meant for vacancies, for the purpose of non-plan expenditure, which according to the Committee is not a
desireable  feature.  Plan money can not be diverted for non-plan side or even the non-plan expenditure should not  have
any element of the scheme provided under the plan.  All the vacancies prevailing in different institutions will have to be
filled in against the non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan as the burden of the expenditure will not be there.
Action Taken
            The observations of the Committee have been noted for guidance.
Further Comments
            The Financial Advisor informed the Committee that in respect of transfer of committed liability, the Department
had taken up the matter with the Ministry of Finance and got the following response:-
“The proposal of the Department of Health has been considered and it has been decided with the approval of
Secretary (Expenditure), that a provision of additional Rs. 110 crores to the Department of Health under non-plan in lieu
of transfer of a committed liability of various Eighth plan schemes will be considered at RE stage by making an equal
cut in the Plan Outlay”.
            It was further clarified that in case of the Department of Health, the total committed liability of Rs. 110 crores
had been shifted from plan to non-plan side.  Out of this, the committed liability of NIMHANS was Rs. 5.13 crores
which had been shifted to Non-Plan side.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee expresses deep anguish at the entire approach, which is not only totally against the
recommendations of the Finance Commission but also against the mandate of the Constitution.  The Committee has
been repeatedly and strongly observing regarding committed liability but this issue has not been sorted  out as yet.  It
once again reiterates its earlier observation and hopes that the issue will be sorted out at the earliest in consultation with
the concerned Ministries/Departments.
 CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
NIL
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee feels that collaboration with foreign universities  is very important because it provides additional
funds for being spent on plan-programmes.  The Committee is not satisfied with the effort of Department of Health in
this regard and strongly recommends that it should vigorously pursue the matter of foreign collaboration with the
Ministry of Human Resource Development.(Para 4)
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is anguished to note that in a prestigious institute like NIMHANS, which is a deemed university
and only one of its kind in the country, teaching has been allowed to be affected adversely for long because of non-
availability of suitable candidates from reserved category.  The Committee observes that such a situation cannot be
allowed to continue indefinitely, specially in a teaching institution.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that if
suitable candidates from reserved category are not available, the vacant posts should be filled up immediately on ad-hoc
basis, as per the guidelines laid down by Government of India.  The Committee may also be kept informed in the matter.
(Para 6)
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee was earlier informed that neuro-surgeons, being very busy with the operations and the follow up

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
of the neuro-surgical patients, generally did not find much time for research.  Therefore,  some research issues were
incorporated in the training programme of the Institution.  The Committee, however, is of the view that a surgeon due to
his or her direct exposure in handling neuro-surgical operations, has got lot of first hand practical experience which
ought to be put to optimum use while carrying out basic research.  The Committee expresses its reservations for creation
of posts for such purpose. (Para 7)
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee feels that NIMHANS should function as a referral Institute.  The matter should be taken up with
all the State Govts. that only such cases should be referred to the Institute which require special-neuro surgical
intervention. (Para 10.1)
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes that the Central Government is meeting its part of financial obligation, so far as
NIMHANS is concerned.  The Committee is of the view that since NIMHANS has been taken over by the Central
Government and  upgraded as a National Institute, it has, therefore, the sole responsibility to ensure its smooth and
proper functioning.  Efforts should by made to make required funds available for the  Institute. (Para 13)
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee expresses deep anguish at the entire approach, which is not only totally against the
recommendations of the Finance Commission but also against the mandate of the Constitution.  The Committee has
been repeatedly and strongly observing regarding committed liability but this issue has not been sorted  out as yet.  It
once again reiterates its earlier observation and hopes that the issue will be sorted out at the earliest in consultation with
the concerned Ministries/Departments. (Para 13.3)     
 MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.00 A.M on Friday the 22
nd  September, 2000 in Committee Room `A`, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.  Shri S.B. Chavan                           ¾¾                Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.  Shri Mourice Kujur
3. Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”
4.  Shri Dina Nath Mishra
5.  Prof. R. B. S. Varma
6.  Shri Bratin Sengupta
7.  Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”
8.  Dr. C. Narayana  Reddy
 
LOK SABHA
 
9.    Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
10.  Shri Satyabrata Mookherjee
11.  Shri Baliram Kashyap
12. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
13. Shri G.S. Baswaraj
14.  Shrimati Shyama Singh

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
15.  Dr. D.V.G. Shankar Rao
16.  Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
17.  Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
 
  SECRETARIAT
 
              Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shrimati. Vandana Garg, Director
Shri C. B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Gurnam Singh, Committee Officer
 
WITNESSES
 
Representatives of the Department of Health
 
1.
      Shri J.A. Chowdhury, Secretary
2.      Dr. S.P. Agarwal, DGHS
3.      Shri JUR Prasada Rao, Addl. Secretary
2.                  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed  the Members of the Committee and officials of the Department of
Health.  The  Committee then took up for  discussion  the  Action Taken by the Government on the 54 th  Report of the
Committee on the Functioning of National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore. 
Members raised certain queries on the number of teaching posts lying vacant, particularly in the reserved categories and
shortage of funds.
3.         Thereafter,  the Committee discussed  the Action Taken by the Government on the 73
rd Report of the Committee
on Dreaded Diseases.  The Secretary and other officials of the Department answered the queries put by the Members.
4.         The Chairman informed that the Committee could taken up Higher Education and UGC in its subsequent
meetings, besides other business.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting  was kept. 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at  12.30 P.M.
FIRST MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.30 A. M. on Monday, the 22 nd  January, 2001 in Committee Room `D`,  Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  The following were present:
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1. Shri S.B. Chavan                                  ¾¾                Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Eduardo Faleiro
3. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
4. Shri Bratin Sengupta
5. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
6. Dr. C. Narayana  Reddy
 
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
8. Shri Ramakant Angle
9. Shri Baliram Kashyap
10. Shri Dileep Sanghani

98th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/98threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:14]
11. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
12. Shri G. S. Baswaraj
13. Shri V. M. Sudheeran
14. Shrimati Shyama Singh
15. Shri Sunil Dutt
16. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
17. Shri Samik Lahiri
18. Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
19. Shrimati Renu Kumari
20. Shri Shivaji Mane
21. Dr. A.D.K. Jayaseelan
22. Shri Vanlal Zawma
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri .Satish Kumar  Additional Secretary
Shrimati. Vandana Garg, Director
Shri C. B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Gurnam Singh, Committee Officer
 
2.       The Committee considered the Draft Action Taken Reports on 54
th Report on National Institute of Mental Health
and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore and 73 rd  Report on Dreaded Diseases. The Committee, after some
discussion, suggested some  modifications in the Draft Reports and authorised the Chairman of the Committee to effect
them.
2.                 The Committee then decided that both the Reports   may be presented/laid in both the Houses on 27th February,
2001.   The Committee,  in this connection, authorised Shri Eduardo Faleiro  and Prof. R.B.S.Verma   to present the
Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Ramakant Angle and Smt. Shyama Singh  to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
3.                 The Committee also directed the Secretariat to get  copies of Draft National Health Policy from the  Deparment
of Health for circulation to the Members of the Committee.
4.                The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at  12.45  P.M.
 
 
 
 
 
 