188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED EIGHTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN
THE HUNDRED SEVENTY-FOURTH REPORT ON
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2006-2007 (DEMAND NO. 56)
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 1ST MARCH, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 1ST MARCH, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
 
1.      COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE          
2.      PREFACE
3.      REPORT  
CHAPTER IRecommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the  
                                    Government
CHAPTER II            Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
                                    desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply    
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee
 
CHAPTER IVRecommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government are still awaited
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE
5. MINUTES.
6.      ANNEXURES.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2006-07)
      Shri Janardan Dwivedi            --            Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
1
        Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
2        Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3        Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
4        Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
5        Shri Uday Pratap Singh
6        Shrimati Brinda Karat
7        Shri S. Anbalagan
8        Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
9        Shri Ali Anwar

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
LOK SABHA
10    Shri Ashok Argal
11    Shri Basudeb Barman
12    Shri Harishchandra Chavan
13    Shri Harisinh Chavda
14    Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
15    ^Shri R.L. Jalappa
16    Shri Ramswaroop Koli
17    Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
18    ##Shri Manjunath Kunnur
19    Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
20    Smt. Archana Nayak
21    Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
22    Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
23    #Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
24    Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
25    Shri Chengara Surendran
26    Dr. Meinya Thokchom
27    Shri K. Virupakshappa
28    #Dr. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
29    *Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
30    @Shri Rahul Gandhi
31    @Shri Ram Lakhan Singh
^ Ceased to be a member of the committee w.e.f .28.11.2006
## Ceased to be a member of the committee w.e.f. 31.8.2006
# Ceased to be a member of the committee w.e.f. 25.09.2006
* nominated w.e.f. 25.09.2006
@ nominated w.e.f. 10.10.2006
(i)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji, B., Committee Officer
(ii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorised by the Committee do hereby present on its behalf, this Hundred Eighty-eighth Report on Action
Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Hundred Seventy-fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(Demand No. 56) of the Department of Higher Education for the year 2006-07.
 
2.         The Hundred Seventy-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 22
nd May, 2006. Replies
of the Government to the recommendations/observations contained in the Report were considered by the Committee at its
meeting held on the 25th January, 2007.
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the 25th January, 2007.
NEW DELHI;
JANARDAN DWIVEDI
January 25, 2007, Chairman,
Magha 5, 1928(Saka)
Department-related ParliamentaryStanding Committee on
Development Human Resource
(iii)
REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
its One Hundred Seventy-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No.56) of the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education (Ministry of Human Resource Development) for the year 2006-2007.
2.         Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the 174 th
Report, have been categorized as follows:
(i)                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
2.6, 4.5, 15.4, 16.3, 18.5 and 20.1
(Chapter I) Total – 06
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
2.4, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 5.7, 7.2, 8.4, 9.3, 9.4, 9.7, 9.8, 12.5, 12.7, 14.4, 15.2, 17.5, 17.6, 18.4, 18.8, 19.2, 21.2 and
21.3
             (Chapter II)  Total – 22
(ii)
                Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
4.2, 6.7, 8.3, 9.2, 10.2, 11.4, 12.4, 13.3, 14.2, 16.4, 16.5, 16.6, 16.7, 16.8 and  20.3
 (Chapter-III)  Total - 15
(iii)
               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:
(Chapter – IV) Total - Nil
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
II.            BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.6            Committee’s attention has been drawn by a disturbing trend gradually taking roots along with the increase in
allocation and utilisation of funds.  The Committee observes that as on 1.4.2004, there were as many as 4652 pending
Utilisation Certificates for an amount of Rs.5510.85 crore.  While appreciating the persistent efforts made by the
Department in getting reduced the pending UCs to 2903 amounting to Rs.535.62 crore, the very fact that there are pending
UCs highlights the inadequacies of the accounting procedure as well as incapacity of the implementing agencies.  Another
comparatively more serious fall-out being noticed is increasing unspent balances lying with various Grantee institutions. 
The Committee is constrained to observe that there were unspent balances of Rs. 505.53 crore as on 1.4.2005 which
reached the figure of Rs. 928.86 crore within a short span of 6 months.  The Committee cannot but conclude that this
figure must have increased further by the closing of 20.5.06.  What is more worrisome is that major portion of these
unspent balance is from Plan funds that too with other implementing agencies (NGOs)/autonomous bodies.  The
Committee is of the firm view that along with the projection for enhanced funds, the Department needs to take every
precaution not to allow such a tendency of unspent balances which is against all the financial norms.
Action Taken
            As far as the receipt of Utilization Certificates are concerned, additional checks have been introduced at the pre-
payment stage in the light of MoF. O.M. No.7(3)/E.Coord/2006 dated 8.8.2006, to ensure that no grant is released to a
grantee against whom Utilization Certificate is pending. A Utilization Certificate Monitoring System has been placed
(giving details of pending Utilization Certificates) on the internet to facilitate checks at sanction stage.
            Unspent balances lying with State Governments and other implementing agencies are invariably taken into account
while making further releases.  In this connection, it may be mentioned that during the period from 1.4.2005 to 30.9.2005,
the grants released were of the order of Rs.2584.08 crore (Plan - Rs.1063.22 crore and Non-Plan - Rs.1520.86 crore).
During the same period the various implementing agencies had utilized an amount of Rs.2160.75 crore, thus leaving an
unspent balance of Rs.928.86 crore.  The level of unspent balance came down to Rs.697.82 crore (Rs.282.78 crore with
State Governments and Rs.415.04 crore with other implementing agencies) as on 31.03.2006.  It may be mentioned that an
amount of Rs.342.74 crore was available only after the 3rd and final batch of supplementries and funds could be
transferred only in the last week of March, 2006.  It may also be mentioned that funds lying with other implementing
agencies are mostly with various autonomous bodies like IITs, NITs, IISc, NVS, KVS etc.  However, every effort is made
to ensure that unspent balances are kept to the minimum.
IV.            NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING (NCERT)
Recommendations/Observations
4.5       The Committee recommends that NCERT should take all possible steps to plug the loopholes in the distribution of
textbooks, as they are already aware of the weak areas in the distribution of textbooks and ensure that students get
textbooks on time.

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
Action Taken
            The present position of distribution and proposed steps to ensure easy availability of NCERT textbooks from the
coming academic session 2006-2007 are as follows:
(i)         There are 235 distribution outlets of wholesale agents all over the country for             NCERT publications,
catering to 7904 schools.
(ii)        A large number of non-recognized schools are also using NCERT textbooks.              These books are also used by
candidates appearing for various competitive             examinations.  Therefore, a cushion is proposed to be maintained by
adding 20%             more than the requirement by CBSE affiliated schools. 
(iii)       States using NCERT textbooks are advised to take the copyright from NCERT to         print the number of books
themselves as per their requirement.
(iv)            NCERT textbooks are proposed to be sent to far flung areas first so that they can             be released
simultaneously from all the outlets.
(v)            Textbooks are proposed to be printed in adequate quantity by February, 07 to             ensure that they are
available before the start of the academic session 2007-08 in    April, 07.
(vi)            Instructions will be issued to all distribution outlets to collect their requirement of             NCERT textbooks
from the month of January, 07 instead of waiting for the             seasonal demand in March/April.
XV.            NATIONAL COUNCIL OF RURAL INSTITUTES
Recommendations/Observations
15.4     The Committee has strong reservations on the way the Council is being run.   The Committee strongly feels that
final view needs to be taken and basic requirements for the effective functioning of the Council need to be fulfilled without
any further delay.
Action Taken
            The observation of the Committee has been noted. The Council is fully functional even though for technical
reasons and pending finalization of Recruitment Rules in consultation with the Ministry of Law, the Recruitment Rules are
yet to be notified. The Council has approved 09 projects proposal during the year 2005-06 including setting up of Center
of Excellence in Gandhian Studies in three Vidyapeeths at Pune, Banaras and Ahmedabad. Therefore, the Ministry would
reassure the Committee that in keeping with Committee’s desire and suggestions to see that the institute starts functioning
effectively on a regular basis, the Council has also been reconstituted with eminent persons.
XVI.    ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION (AICTE)
Recommendations/Observations
16.3     The Committee is given to understand that for management courses the institutions/universities are under the dual
control of UGC and AICTE.  Many a times, this dual control creates problems for smooth conduct of the management
courses.  The Committee feels that the Department should come up with a framework to ensure that there is no conflict in
the working of any statutory bodies.
Action Taken
            The Council through the Act of Parliament is vested with the powers and functions to:
-
         lay down norms and standards for courses, curricula, physical and infrastructural facilities, staff pattern, staff
qualifications, quality instructions, assessment and examination [section 10 (i)];
 
-
         Grant approval for starting new Technical Institutions and for introduction of new courses or programmes in
consultation with the Agencies concerned [section 10 (k)];
 
-
         Inspect, cause to inspect any Technical Institutions [section 10 (p)];
 
-
         for the purposes of ascertaining the financial needs of technical institution or a University or its standards of
teaching, examination and research, the Council may cause an inspection of any Department or Departments of
such Technical Institution or University to be made in such  manner as may be prescribed and by such person or
persons as it may direct [11(1)].
 
            However as per Hon’ble Supreme Court Judgment in Bharathidasan University and Another v/s AICTE and others
“AICTE Act 1987 section 10 (1) (k), 2(h), (i) & 23 Act does not required a university to obtain prior approval of AICTE
for starting a department or unit as an adjunct to the university itself to conduct technical education courses of its choice-
Regulations framed under Act requiring the University to obtain such approval, held, void and unenforceable- However,
University obliged to conform to the standards and norms laid down by AICTE-All India Council for Technical Education
(Grant of Approval for Starting New Technical Institutions, Introduction of Courses or Programmes and Approval of
Intake Capacity of Seats for the Courses or Programmes)”. Therefore it has been observed that some Universities are

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
starting Technical Education Programmes without the involvement of the Council.  The Universities come under the
control of UGC.
            The norms of the Council in respect of universities including deemed to be universities as per its notification dated
November 28, 2005 state “No University including Deemed University shall conduct technical courses/programmes
without ensuring maintenance of the norms and standards prescribed by AICTE”.
            The MHRD has also issued notification no. F. 2-1/2006 U.3 (A) dated April 7, 2006 clarifying this issue
(Annexure-V).
XVIII.    INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT (IIMs)
Recommendations/Observations
18.5     The Committee was informed that currently, IIMs at Ahmedabed, Bangalore and Kolkata are generating their own
resources for their functioning.  Government provides financial assistance both under plan and non-plan to IIMs at Indore,
Lucknow and Kozhikode.  The Committee recommends that the government should chalk out a plan in consultation with
IIMs to ensure that over a period of time the IIMs become                 self-supporting and not depend on government for
normal functioning. 
Action Taken
            As a measure to provide greater autonomy in the functioning of the Centrally funded Higher Educational
Institutions of importance, the Ministry, with the approval of the Competent Authority, has decided to introduce, inter-
alia, in IIMs, a Scheme of Block Grant (Non-Plan) for a period of five years from 2005-06. These IIMs shall be allowed to
retain the Internal Revenue / Income generated by them and their entitlement for annual grant-in-aid during the Block
Grant period shall not be adjusted against any increase in income. The Government would provide matching grant
equivalent to the annual savings from the regular non-plan grant and other receipts including internal revenue and earnings
from consultancy, entrance examination like CAT etc. and other continuing education programmes but, excluding receipts
earmarked for designated purposes in accordance with the terms & conditions of such donations with due approval of the
Finance Committee & Board of Governors. The matching grant would be available till the Endowment Fund has reached
the level of Rs.50.00 crore in respect of each of the IIMs. Matching grant equivalent to the total savings transferred to the
Endowment Fund in a Financial Year shall be sanctioned to the Institute in the following Financial Year.
XX.            GRANT-IN-AID SCHEME OF SCHOLARSHIPS TO STUDENTS FROM             NON-HINDI SPEAKING
STATES/ UTS FOR POST-MATRIC STUDIES             IN HINDI
Recommendations/Observations
20.1     Under this scheme, scholarships are awarded to students from non-Hindi speaking States/UTs for pursuing post-
matric studies in Hindi. The Committee notes that 2426 scholarships involving an expenditure of Rs.89,63,519 were
awarded to students of different States during 2005-06. The Committee has been given to understand that under this
scheme the States are reporting only total expenditure incurred by them each year.  The Committee is not aware whether
any exercise has been undertaken so far for making an assessment about the implementation of this scheme as per the
prescribed norms. The Committee would also like to point that as per the records available for 2005-06, only 7 renewal
scholarships were awarded. This clearly shows that students are not showing an inclination for pursuing the study in Hindi
in the next year. If that be so, the Committee strongly feels that there is a need for taking up this issue with those States
where maximum number of such scholarships have been granted.
Action Taken
            For making the scheme more effective and popular, the Scheme of Scholarships to Students from Non-Hindi
speaking States/UTs for Post-Matric Studies in Hindi was revised during the year 2004-05. Since then the Scheme is
circulated to the States/UTs every year regularly. In such circulars, the States/UTs were requested to furnish proposals for
sanction of fresh as well as the renewal scholarships in respect of those scholarships holders, who had been sanctioned
scholarships in the earlier years and funds were released to the States/UTs in terms of proposal received from them for
fresh scholarships as well as for renewal scholarships. The pace of renewal has been slow on account of the fact that the
State/UTs concerned have not furnished adequate proposals for renewal of scholarships for reasons best know to them.
The matter is being taken up with various States/UTs, to whom maximum number of scholarships are allocated, requesting
them to ensure that scholarships once granted to the students in the initial year of a particular stage of education are
invariably renewed during the subsequent years, within the same stage of education.
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
II.            BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.4       It was emphasized that the allocation needed to be reviewed in terms of the various suggestions given by the
Planning Commission in its Mid-Term Appraisal document and commitment made by the Government in National

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
Common Minimum Programme (NCMP). The Committee on CABE on “Financing of Higher and Technical Education”
has also stressed the need for investment to strengthen the infrastructure in Higher Education for addressing the issues like
access, equity, relevance, and quality in higher education and observed that poor infrastructure, both in teaching and
research, need to attract talented persons to take up teaching and research as career in our universities, vacant faculty
positions were some of the major factors affecting standards of higher education in the country.
Action Taken
            Allocation  of Plan resources for higher education sector by the Planning Commission is subject to availability of
financial resources and approval of budgetary provision by the Parliament. The plan allocation during 2006-07 has been
enhanced to Rs.1403.50 crore in comparison to allocation of Rs.875.00 crore during 2005-06 to improve the infrastructure
in Higher Education. For maintaining high quality of education in basic sciences, the Ministry has accepted the
recommendations contained in the report of the Prof. M.M.Sharma Task Force which was set up to assess the status of
scientific research and training in Indian universities and to suggest strategies to revive and enhance excellence of Indian
Universities in the field of basic sciences. 10 Rajiv Gandhi Chairs in Contemporary Studies have been created in selected
Central and State Universities on different themes. The University Grants Commission (UGC) in its efforts to fill up the
teacher’s posts has exempted National Eligibility Test (NET) for Ph.D. degree holders for UG and PG level, M.Phil degree
holders for UG level teaching in the subject concerned. However, the NET will be compulsory for those with only Post-
Graduate Degree. The Ministry has taken up the need for filling vacant posts of teachers with all State Governments and
reiterated the need for regular, rather than temporary, appointments in order to maintain quality of teaching and standards
of higher education.
III.             UNIVERSALISATION OF SECONDARY EDUCATION
Recommendations/Observations
3.2            Allocation of Rs.1067.00 crore for secondary education sector in 2006-07 is on enhanced level when compared
with the allocation of Rs.787.51 crore during 2005-06. However, this is much below the requirement for secondary
education projected by the CABE Committee. Massive funding is being made for universalisation of elementary education
by implementing SSA in a mission mode. The Committee feels that universalisation of secondary education is an
achievable target in the near future if the government of the day has the will power to do it. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the entire planning should concentrate to achieve the Universalisation of Elementary and Secondary
Education simultaneously.
Action Taken
            A Concept Note for universalisation of access to and improvement of quality of secondary education has been
prepared and sent to the Planning Commission in November 2005 for their ‘in principle’ approval. In August, 2006,
Planning Commission has suggested certain modifications in our proposal and we have replied to the same in September,
2006. All efforts will be made to give final shape to the scheme for its implementation during the 11th Five Year Plan.
Recommendations/Observations
3.3       The Committee would like the Department to reorient its planning and evolve a time bound strategy with strong
infrastructure back up to ensure that the students passing out of the SSA continue their education in secondary level lest
the entire money spent on SSA will be a national waste. Quality oriented approach towards Universalisation of Secondary
Education could help in producing skilled human resources which will become a national asset.
Action Taken
            This aspect has been addressed to in the concept note sent to the Planning Commission.
Recommendations/Observations
3.4       The Committee endorses the suggestion of the CABE Committee that we should not wait till 2010 to implement
the universalisation of secondary education. The Department should seize the opportunities and gear up all the
administrative machinery including that of the State Governments to ensure that universalisation of secondary education
becomes a reality from the next financial year (2007-08).
Action Taken
            A time frame for launching of the scheme can be finalized after the “in-principle” approval of Planning
Commission is obtained and the matter is further processed for approval by EFC and the Cabinet.
V.
                 KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN (KVS)
Recommendations/Observations
5.7        The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Government to augment the plan allocations to KVS and
desire that the increased allocation may be utilized in time for the purposes for which it is allocated.
Action Taken
            The Sangathan is taking all steps needed for the utilization of enhanced plan allocation during 2006-07.
VII.      ICT @ SCHOOLS
Recommendations/Observations

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
7.2       The Committee observes that it has taken almost three years of 10th Plan in getting the approval of CCEA for the
revised ICT in School scheme. As a result, funds allocated at the beginning of the year continued to be reduced in the RE
stage and actual expenditure reported was even less. Although the scheme was launched on 15.12.2004, it was only in the
financial year 2005-06 that first installment of grant-in-aid amounting to Rs.30.88 crore could be released to 2580 schools
in the country. The Committee hopes that benefit of this scheme would be reaching to more schools in view of enhanced
allocation of Rs.67 crore for 2006-07. The Committee feels that information about internet facility installed in schools
covered by the scheme during the 2005-06 must be now available with the Department. The Committee would like to have
full details, state-wise.
Action Taken
            The Scheme was made operational only in the middle of December, 2004, i.e, close to the last quarter of the
financial year 2004-05. Since proposals including Computer Education Plans were required from States/ UTs, there was
not enough time left during that financial year and the first set of sanctions were made in 2005-06. During 2005-06, an
amount of Rs.14.09 crore was sanctioned for 2720 schools in 18 States/ UTs. In 2006-07 (upto October 17, 2006), an
amount of Rs.8.44 crore has been further sanctioned for 406 schools in 3 States/UTs. The States/UTs are being requested
periodically to utilize funds and also to send progress reports.
            Under the ICT @ Schools Programme, Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti has developed 33 JNVs, one in each State/UT
as “Smart Schools” by providing in each such school about 40 Computers, needed computer peripherals and software.
Similarly, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan has converted 31 schools as "Smart Schools" under this programme.
            JNVs are organizing Computer Literacy classes to local schools children drawing them from their neighbourhood.
As on date, more than 35000 children of local schools are trained on computers in JNVs.
VIII.            ACCESS AND EQUITY
Recommendations/Observations
8.4       The Committee notes that the Tenth Plan outlay for the Access and Equity scheme was Rs.305 crore, out of this
Rs.33.80 crore were utilized during the first four years of the plan period. This shows that the scheme has fewer takers in
the States. The Committee feels that the other States are not coming forward to utilize the scheme due to the inherent
weakness in the scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the scheme needs to be thoroughly revamped to
ensure its acceptability by other States as well. Further, the Committee desires that the Department look into the efficacy
of the scheme making a cost-benefit analysis and ensure optimal use of the scarce resources of the nation.                  
Action Taken
            It is true that there is concentration of the NGOs availing of the benefits of this scheme in some States. Greater
involvement of the State Governments in the scheme is necessary. Utility of this scheme has been brought to the notice of
State Governments during various interactions, particularly during the series of regional meetings with Education
Secretaries in charge of School Education during 2005-06. While revamping the scheme for the Eleventh Five Year Plan,
further improvements will be considered.
IX.            QUALITY IMPROVEMENT IN SCHOOLS (QIS)
Recommendations/Observations
9.3       The Committee finds that while the composite scheme was being formulated, funds were being duly released year
after year with the expenditure level going down. Not only this, the main implementing agency NCERT along with sub
agencies continued to have unspent balances. The Committee fails to understand the logic behind the allocation and would
like the Department to explain this release of funds and the benefits accrued therefrom. 
Action Taken
            While the scheme was being formulated, Ministry of Finance was requested from time to time, for its approval for
continuation of scheme on existing terms and conditions. However, Ministry of Finance approved for continuation of
scheme from time to time but imposed a condition that during the extended period only expenditure by way of discharge
of committed liabilities should be incurred and no fresh commitments should be made. This led to reduced level of
expenditure.
Recommendations/Observations
9.4       The Committee is surprised to note that the component of `Improvement of Science Education in Schools’ is now
to be transferred to State Governments and the other four components will remain with NCERT.   The Committee fails to
understand the rationale behind the latest move and desires that the Department explain the same.  
Action Taken
            While considering the proposal of revised scheme, EFC, in its meeting held on 28.7.04, noted that under the
proposed scheme, the largest share of outlay is meant for ‘Improvement of Science Education in Schools’, for which funds
are released to States/UT Governments and decided that this component may be transferred to States as a State Sector
Scheme and suitable mechanism may be worked out for transfer of funds to States/UTs in consultation with Planning
Commission.

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
            The Committee also decided that the other four components of the proposed scheme are intended to bring about
enrichment of curriculum, development of teaching learning material and teacher’s training, which are the primary
functions of NCERT.
INTRODUCTION OF YOGA IN SCHOOLS
Recommendations/Observations
9.7       The Committee notes that during the financial year 2004-05, financial assistance to the tune of Rs.10.77 lakh under
Plan scheme was released for five voluntary organizations and Rs.65.00 lakh was released to Kaivalyadhama SMYM
Samiti, Lonavala under Non- Plan. The Committee has no information regarding the utilization of these funds. The
Committee is also apprehensive about the proper utilization of funds under the scheme. This fear of the Committee arises
from the fact that Kaivalyadhama SMYM Samiti, Lonavala was also earlier provided with Rs.65.00 lakh under Non- Plan
during the financial year 2003-04. The Committee finds such a pattern of financing unwarranted and desires that the
Department explain the position to the Committee.
Action Taken
            As regards, funds released to five voluntary organizations during 2004-05, utilization certificates from all the five
organizations have been received.
            Regarding providing funds to Kaivalyadhama SMYM Samiti, Lonavla, it is informed that the working of the
Samiti and its programmes and activities have been assessed by expert committees specially constituted for the purpose,
by the Government of India from time to time, the last such committee being constituted in 2001. All these committees
were of the opinion that the grants to the Samiti should be continued so as to develop it into a Centre of Excellence for
Scientific Research and Training so as to become an institution of national importance. 
Recommendations/Observations
9.8       The Committee is of the opinion that yoga is one stream of education, which will make a permanent and positive
impact on a student’s life. Yoga has been gaining immense popularity due to the short term as well as long-term benefits
that it provides.  Yoga helps one to achieve all round development. Considering the immense potential of this ancient
knowledge of India, the Committee recommends, that yoga be made compulsory for all school going children in the
country.
Action Taken
            The National Curriculum Framework for School Education – 2005 prepared by the National Council of
Educational Research and Training provides for Health and Physical Education as a compulsory subject from primary to
secondary stage and as an optional subject at higher secondary stage. Yoga is one of the core components of Health and
Physical Education.
XII.            UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
Recommendations/Observations
12.5     The Committee notes that the Plan allocation for UGC has been substantially stepped up from Rs.785.40 crore in
2005-06 to Rs.1269.80 crore in 2006-07 representing an increase of 61.68 %. The Committee hopes that the UGC would
be utilizing the funds optimally helping the state universities grow qualitatively and also promote quality research in
universities.
Action Taken
            The Plan allocation to the University Grants commission has been increased to              Rs.1269.80 crore during
2006-07 from Rs.786.30 crore during the year 2005-06.  The break up is as follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Central Universities in North Eastern Region 122.96
Other Central Universities 392.04
State University of the North Eastern Region 7.37
Other Universities and Inter-University Centres etc. 747.43
Total 1269.80
One-third of allocation of the Central Universities and one quarter of the allocation to State Universities has already been
released as development grant to them. The universities have been informed that the next installment will be released only
after the Utilization Certificate for the first installment is received in UGC. Since the UGC was in position to release these
grants in the first quarter of the financial year 2006-07, it is likely that the State Universities shall make use of these grants,
submit Utilization Certificate and ask for the next installment. It is hoped that the additional grant made available to the
universities will help them grow qualitatively and also promote quality research in particularly to State Universities.
Recommendations/Observations
12.7     The Committee feels that gender studies appears to be a neglected area in the Higher Education sector. The women
studies centres are still not existing in a number of universities. Given the increased role and contribution of women in
every sphere of life, Government needs not only to popularize these centres but also advocate opening of such centres in

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
all universities.   This gesture should begin with the Central universities. Necessary funding for that purpose should be
arranged. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the University Grant Commission should give more thrust to the
development and progress of the Women Study Centres of various Universities and Institutes.               
Action Taken
At present, there are total 72 Women’s Studies Centres which are being assisted by the UGC. About 100 proposals
received from the Universities/ colleges are under consideration of the UGC for establishment of Women’s Studies
Centres.  Short listed Institutes will be visited by the Standing Committee on Women’s Studies for ‘on the spot’ evaluation
and final recommendations.  As regards the opening of Women’s Studies Centres in Central Universities, at present there
are 7 Women’s Studies Centres established in such Central Universities.  For opening Centres in the remaining Central
Universities, proposals are being invited by the UGC.
XIV.            INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY (IGNOU)
Recommendations/Observations
14.4     The Committee while appreciating the contribution being made by IGNOU for the educational advancement of our
youth, feels that there is an urgent need for having a review of the vast network of IGNOU, nature of its coordination with
DEC along with the work being done by the Council, comparative analysis of performance level and quality of education
in State Open Universities vis-à-vis Correspondence Course Institutes in conventional universities.   The Committee would
like to be apprised about the findings of any such exercise, even in a limited level done so far.   The Committee would also
like to be apprised about the problem areas being noticed both by the University/Council authorities and student
community.  
 Action Taken
            On the guidance of the Board of Management, the apex Executive Body of the University, review of the
functioning of IGNOU has been undertaken from time to time. It included the review of its network as well as other
activities towards the fulfillment of its objectives. The last such review was undertaken in the year 1999 under the
Chairmanship of Prof. R.V.R. Chandrasekhara Rao.
            The important findings and recommendations of these review committees relating to monitoring, coordination and
strengthening the quality of distance education were as under:
1.         DEC should be a relatively autonomous body with enhanced functional authority,             both in relation to
funding and monitoring of distance education throughout the             country. This requires a major augmentation of staff
and facilities.
2.         DEC should be entrusted with task of Quality Assurance in distance education,             and a comprehensive
apparatus for the purpose is needed. The monitoring of             training requires close collaboration and supervision.
3.         DEC should be responsible for developing and updating Performance Indicators             for Teachers, Distance
Education Institutions and the Career Advancement for all             categories of staff.
4.         In long run, DEC should be given an exclusive and independent status and             accordingly amendment in the
IGNOU Act may become necessary.
Revision of IGNOU Statutes
            An amendment to IGNOU Act incorporating a more forthright mission statement would be appropriate. Such a
statement would highlight IGNOU’s apex role in the Distance Education System especially entrusted with the task of
catering to the functional areas and continuous educational concerns ensuring sustained access to disadvantaged sections
of the people and areas of the country.
            IGNOU as well as the Distance Education Council, one of its authorities, have experienced certain challenges in
fulfilling its mandate pertaining to the promotion, coordination and maintaining the standards of education through
distance mode. The Hon’ble Committee in its 172nd Report, perhaps appreciating certain constraints that DEC has,
recommended for an independent statutory body to be established by an Act of Parliament.
 XV.            NATIONAL COUNCIL OF RURAL INSTITUTES
Recommendations/Observations
15.2     The Committee has been observing the functioning of this Council for considerable period of time.   There seem to
be some inherent constraints in the set up of this Council, established for fulfillment of a noble ideal of Father of the
Nation.   The Committee has been noticing a very disturbing trend of allocation of funds for the Council during the entire
Tenth Plan.  Since 2002-03 funds are being duly allocated at the beginning of the year, to be brought down drastically at
the RE stage and finally that also remain unutilized.   It was only towards the end of the year 2005-06 that some activity
has started in the Council with four Nai Talim Gandhian Basic Education Institutions being released an amount of
Rs.10.80 lakh.   It is also learnt that the Governing Body in a meeting held on 20.1.2006 has approved financial assistance
to nine institutions for a total amount of Rs.2.97 crore. 
Action Taken
            The observation of the Committee has been noted. It is submitted that during the year 1995-96 and 1996-97, a sum

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
of Rs.600.00 lakh was released to NCRI under Plan. Due to unspent balance at the disposal of the Council and non-
submission of Utilization Certificates, further grant was not released till 2004-05. However, a token provision was kept
every year to meet any eventuality. The UCs from 1995-96 to 2004-05 received during the year 2005-06 were issued as
per the prescribed conditions.  After receiving the UCs, grant-in-aid amounting to Rs.24.00 lakh was released in the month
of March 2006. During the year 2006-07, Rs.90.00 lakh has been kept at the B.E. stage.
XVII.            SCHEME OF COMMUNITY POLYTECHNICS
Recommendations/Observations
17.5     The Committee notes that more than 300 polytechnics are having unspent balances lying with them. Therefore, the
budget allocation was reduced at the RE stage in 2005-06. Non-utilization of the allocations to that extent indicates that the
scheme is plagued with constraints/drawbacks. The Committee recommends that if need be, the scheme may be revamped
to ensure that the entire allocations are utilized by the polytechnics. A serious review of the scheme of things would help
in finding the utility of the scheme for the targeted beneficiaries and also the aspect of fund utilization. 
17.6     The Committee is also disappointed to note that the Community Polytechnics are not evenly distributed across the
country. The situation is particularly poor in the Eastern Region which has the maximum rural populace but this region has
been accorded with only 97 Community Polytechnics of the total 669 existing in the country. The Committee would like
the Department to ensure that there is an even regional distribution of the Community Polytechnics so that technology
becomes the real carrier of community/rural development.  
Action Taken
            The Ministry has initiated action to review the Scheme. A meeting was held with all State Government
representatives in December, 2005 to explore various options for continuing the scheme beyond the 10th Plan, including
restructuring the scheme, or transferring this Scheme to the State Sector at the end of the 10th Plan. It was decided in the
meeting to constitute a Working Group under AICTE to review the Scheme. The working group has submitted its
recommendations and the matter is being considered in the Ministry.
            The Scheme of Community Polytechnics is implemented only through AICTE approved Diploma Level
Institutions (Polytechnics) which are under the Administrative Control of State Governments. As there are less number of
approved polytechnic level institutions in the Eastern Region compared to other regions, the number of Community
Polytechnics are also less. Further, since AICTE has delegated the powers to open new Polytechnics to the State
Governments, the action for opening new Polytechnics will have to be taken by the State Governments. As per the
information received from the State Directorates of Technical Education, most of the Govt./Govt. Aided Polytechnics of
the States of Eastern Region have been covered under the Scheme. As and when new Polytechnics are opened in the
Eastern Region, the Ministry can consider including these under the Scheme of Community Polytechnics, after
restructuring the Scheme.
            The issue of expanding the Scheme's coverage in the Eastern Region was also raised by the Department related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on HRD previously, in it's 145th Report. Pursuant to the Committee's observation, the
Department had engaged in an exercise to consult the concerned State Governments as well as AICTE on this issue and a
meeting was also organised by AICTE with representatives of State Directorates of Technical Education of the concerned
States. The State Government representatives observed that increasing the number of Polytechnics in the Region may not
be possible. However all of them were of the view that more extension centers may be allowed in the region under existing
Community Polytechnics to cover a larger area. This option will be considered at the time of restructuring the Scheme.
XVIII.       INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT (IIMs)
Recommendations/Observations
18.4     The Committee recommends that the Government should create more opportunities for students in the country by
opening at least one IIM in each state and also increase the number of seats in existing IIMs.                                               
Action Taken
The Govt. has been advising the IIMs to increase their student intake and expand their intake capacities. The Government
is also setting up seventh IIM in Shillong (Meghalaya).
Recommendations/Observations
18.8     The Committee notes that almost 15 to 20 percent of the faculty posts are lying vacant in the IIMs. The vacancies
which will arise due to retirement can always be accounted in advance and steps can be taken in advance to fill the
vacancies as soon as it arises. The Committee, therefore, wonders what prevents the IIMs from filling up the vacancies.
Interestingly, the Department admits that there is no shortage of trained faculty. The Committee recommends that the
Government and IIMs should ensure that all the faculty positions are filled up at the earliest.  If the IIMs could not fill the
vacancies the Committee may be apprised about the reasons for the delay. 
Action Taken
            The IIMs are autonomous premier educational institutions. The institutions are governed by their respective
governing bodies. The Government rarely intervene in the functioning of these institutions. The respective Institute is

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
expected to  ensure to fill up the faculty position as per their requirement from time to time. However it  is also a fact that
due to retirement /resignations / promotion and otherwise due to mobility of faculty,  some positions in IIMs generally
remain vacant. In the IIMs, selection of faculty against the vacancies, however, is a continuous process. Whenever any
vacancy of faculty arises, recruitment action is initiated well in time to fill up the vacant position. Some of the IIMs have
put a permanent announcement in their website regarding availability of faculty positions and are also holding selection
seminars/ interviews on regular intervals.  The IIMs, by and large, take expeditious action to fill up vacant faculty
positions even by resorting to fast track selection process.
            With regard to difficulties in filling up of vacant faculty positions, the IIMs are of the view that they being the
country’s top most management institutions with substantial international recognition, require competent and highly
qualified faculty members with relevant industry experience and international exposure for teaching and research
programmes which they sometime find it difficult to recruit suitable faculty members, who would meet the exact
standards set by them.
XIX.            NATIONAL MERIT SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME
Recommendations/Observations
19.2     Under the scheme out of the proposed 10976 total scholarships, 9012 scholarships for class IX and 13830 out of
proposed 17000 scholarships of class XII were granted during 2005-06, incurring an expenditure of Rs.7,50,61,198.  The
Committee appreciates that this scheme has finally taken off, specially in view of its non-performance under the two
erstwhile schemes till 2004-05.  The Committee observes that almost all the States/UTs have been covered under this
scheme with varying number of scholarships granted.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that number of
renewal scholarships granted in 2005-06 is only 788, out of which as many as 713 going to Haryana.  The Committee
would like to emphasize that the very objective of the scheme would be lost if the meritorious students getting scholarship
in class IX or XI do not get the benefit in the next class.  The Committee is not aware about the past experience in this
regard.   The Committee would, however, like to emphasise that this aspect needs to be given due consideration.   The
Committee would appreciate if monitoring mechanism is evolved whereunder performance level of students getting
scholarships can be kept under watch.  The Committee is also of the view that there is a need for making the student
community as well as the parents aware about this kind of schemes so that  the maximum number as well as the most
deserving cases can be covered.
Action Taken
            Since the National Merit Scholarship Scheme, which was effective from 01.04.2004, was notified only by
16.02.2005, i.e. at the fag end of the financial year 2004-05, the proposals for release of funds under the National Merit
Scholarship Scheme could be processed only with effect from the financial year 2005-06.  Hence, the renewal scholarships
in respect of this scheme will mainly materialize during the current financial year 2006-07. As regards non-renewal of
scholarships granted under erstwhile National Scholarship Scheme (NSS) and Scheme of Scholarships at Secondary Stage
for Talented Children from Rural Areas, it is stated that renewal of scholarships is sanctioned on the basis of specific
proposals received from the States/UTs in this regard. Here, it may also be added that the guidelines of the National Merit
Scholarship Scheme (NMSS) and of its predecessor schemes, viz. National Scholarship Scheme (NSS) and Scheme of
Scholarships at Secondary Stage for Talented Children for Rural Areas were circulated to the States/UTs every year,
regularly. In such circulars, the State/UTs were requested to furnish proposal for sanction of fresh as well as the renewal
scholarships in respect of those scholarships holders, who had been sanctioned scholarships in the earlier years and funds
were released to the States/UTs in terms of proposal received from them for fresh scholarships as well as for renewal
scholarships. The National Merit Scholarship Scheme is implemented through States/UTs. As per the guidelines of the
Scheme, the continuance/renewal of scholarship under the scheme is performance dependent and depends on the
promotion of the awardee to the next class, provide he/she secures 60% or more marks in aggregate in Science/Commerce
Stream and 55% or more marks in aggregate in the Arts/Humanities Stream in Semester/Annual Examination, which
determines his/her promotion to the next class. Further, good conduct and regular in attendance is a pre-requisite for
continuance of the scholarship. The decision of the State Government/UT Administration in this regard, is final and
binding in all such matters. The pace of renewal has been slow on account of the fact that the State/UTs concerned have
not furnished adequate proposals for renewal of scholarships for reasons best know to them. 
            The National Merit Scholarship Scheme and the Grant-in-aid Scheme of Scholarships to Students from Non-Hindi
Speaking States/UTs for Post Matric Studies in Hindi have been placed on the Ministry’s Website
www.education.nic.in/scho.htm
 to make the students community/their parents aware of the benefits of available under the
Schemes.
            The HRD Ministry has also compiled a compendium on scholarships, fellowships and freeships for study in India
offered by the Government, private and other agencies. This compendium will help the students and scholars to utilize the
opportunities available to them. The National Book Trust (NBT) has already printed the compendium, which is a priced
publication and is available for sale from the outlets of National Book Trust at a cost of Rs.165/-. The compendium on

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
scholarships/fellowships and freeships has already been put on the website www.educationsupport.nic.in. to enable
students community/their parents to access the relevant information, free of cost.
XXI.    BOOK PROMOTION
Recommendations/Observations
21.2     The Committee notes that during the first three years of the Tenth BE allocation for these schemes has been
invariably decreased at RE stage and the actual expenditure was even less.
21.3     The Committee notes that during 2005-06 total provision of Rs.9.54 crore were enhanced to Rs.14.04 crore at RE
stage. The major enhancement was meant for grants to NBT/institutions for book promotion from Rs.3.24 crore to Rs.9.74
crore. The Committee is, however, surprised to note that till December 2005 against RE allocation of Rs.14.04 crore,
expenditure reported is only Rs.1.48 crore that too for one scheme i.e. grant to NBT. The Committee wonders whether any
review so far has been made about these schemes formulated in the name of book promotion. The Committee is of the
view that there is a need for reassessment and formulation of one composite scheme for book promotion.
Action Taken
            The Budget Estimates for the year 2005-06 in respect of the Plan Schemes of the National Book Trust of India,
New Delhi was  Rs.324.00 lakh. During 2005-06, the outlay was increased to Rs.974.00 lakh from Rs.324.00 lakh.
            The expenditure position on Book Promotion in the year 2005-06 was as follow:                                                 
            (Rs. in lakh)
Scheme B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure Expenditure till
31.12.2005
NBT 324.00 974.00 965.00 148.00
Reasons for increase in Expenditure:-
Out of Rs.974.00 lakh, an amount of Rs.650.00 lakh was released during 2005-06 for incurring expenditure for
India’s participation in Frankfurt Book Fair, 2006 as a Guest of Honour Country.
Reasons for slow pace of expenditure upto 31.12.2005:
(i)
                  As already indicated above, the major component of increase was on account of the amount approved to be
spent on India’s participation in Frankfurt Book Fair (FBF). The fair was to be held only in September, 2006
and hence reasonable expenditure could only be made in the last quarter of 2005-06.
(ii)
                Most of the book festivals worldwide take place in the month of October/November onwards. As such the
expenditure under this head is usually incurred only in the last quarter. Hence the lower expenditure till     31-3-
2006.
(iii)
               The committed expenditure for the 3rd quarter [ending Dec. 2005] was also paid during the next quarter and
as such was not reflected in the December figures.
            Details of the budget estimates, revised estimates and expenditure incurred on BP Activities during the last three
years is given below:
 
(Rs. in lakh)
Year B.E. R.E. Expenditure
2002-03 603 380 235.41
2003-04 670 670 400.65
2004-05 300 200 299.55
Reasons for decrease in the expenditure:
(a)    Reason for decrease in the expenditure is mainly because of increase in the revenue on account of the rental of
stalls collected from the participating publishers in the various book fairs organized by the NBT throughout the
country.  Further a number of titles to be subsidized by the NBT could not be finalized due to technical reasons,
such as finalization of manuscript.
(b)
   The titles projected to be published under the Punjabi language could not be finalized.
(c)    A new series of publications namely, informative and innovative activities books which was initially approved
under the plan scheme was subsequently merged with the National Publication activities under the Non-Plan
Scheme.
 
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
IV.            NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND             TRAINING (NCERT)
Recommendations/Observations
4.2       The Committee has been observing the very slow progress being made in the construction of building for

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
PSSCIVE, Bhopal and NERIE, Shillong. Proposal for construction of building    of PSSCIVE, Bhopal was approved at an
estimated cost of Rs.18.54 crore on 13.10.2004. However, in spite of release of initial installment of Rs.6.82 crore to
CPWD for starting the construction in 2004-05, not much progress seems to have been made thereafter. It took almost a
year   to decide the rate of consultancy fee to be paid to the School of Planning and Architecture. As per the latest
information, complete architectural and structural design and detailed estimate were to be made available by SPA by the
first week of March, 2006. With regard to NERIE, Shillong to be constructed at an estimated cost of Rs.15.62 crore,
approval for which was given by SFC on 29.4.2005, preliminary exercise for structural designs are under preparation by
SPA. The progress so far made clearly indicates that buildings for both the institutes will not be ready by the end of Tenth
Plan. The Committee is not very happy with the handling of these two prestigious projects. It would be appropriate if
NCERT plays a more pro-active role and gets the building constructed within a prescribed time schedule at the earliest.
Action Taken
            In respect of construction of Pandit Sunderlal Sharma Central Institute of Vocational Education (PSSCIVE)
building at RIE campus Bhopal, a review meeting was held on 19.6.2006 by Joint Secretary (SE), M/o Human Resource
Development Deptt. of Secondary Education & Literacy, with School of Planning & Architecture (SPA) and PSSCIVE.
Seven blue prints each (total 210 blue prints) along with the originals on tracing paper of all the drawing-plans, sections,
elevations duly stamped and signed by the Project Coordinator were handed over by S.P.A. to PSSCIVE, Bhopal for
obtaining sanctions/approvals for construction of building from Municipal Corporation, Bhopal.
            The detailed architectural and structural and services (plumbing and electrical services) drawings for tenders have
been completed to an extent of 80% for the Main Administrative building and Hostel building.
            The detailed specifications and estimates for civil works, sanitary works and electrical installation and landscape
works for the above building are in progress side by side along with the preparations of the drawings in consultation with
the respective expert consultants. The progress of work is about 60%.
            Testing of Water Sample and Strata & Yield Test Report had been done by CPWD, Bhopal.
 
            As soon as approval is received from Municipal Corporation Bhopal, the construction work of PSSCIVE building
will be started.
            In respect of construction of North East Regional Institute of Education (NERIE) building at Shillong, the sets of
drawings/designs for construction of residential and non-residential buildings of NERIE, Shillong have been got prepared
by the School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi. The CPWD, Shillong have prepared the cost estimate amounting
to Rs.15,61,94,100/-. A sum of Rs.1.41 crore has also been deposited by the Council with CPWD. The detailed cost
estimates and specifications of each building (Non-residential & residential) are still under preparation by SPA, New
Delhi. Before the starting of construction work, the CPWD Department, Shillong has sought earth quake report of North
Eastern Region for the last 200 years from the Central Seismological Department, Govt. of India. The same has also been
obtained from the Competent Authority and submitted to SPA for further necessary action in this matter at the earliest.
            The delay in construction of buildings for North East Regional Institute of Education (NERIE), Shillong was
discussed on 19.06.2006 in a meeting taken by Joint Secretary (SE), M/o Human Resource Development, Deptt. of
Secondary & Higher Education, and wherein firm time schedule for submission of structural designs and detailed cost
estimates have been agreed to between SPA and NCERT.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee expresses its serious concern about the inordinate delay in setting up of the PSSCIVE, Bhopal and
NERIE at Shillong, despite consistent reiterations by the Committee for expediting works relating to them.  These are the
classic examples of bureaucratic red-tapism/complicated procedures inherent in our system that allows little scope for
expeditious and timely disposal of projects.  The Committee also notes that review meeting about these projects was taken
in June 2006 only after the Committee pointed about it.
 
            The Committee, in view of the importance of these institutions, recommends that the Department must take up the
matter urgently for making special efforts to expedite clearances from concerned agencies including the SPA and CPWD. 
These projects should not be allowed to linger on like this any further. 
VI.            NAVODAYA VIDYALAYA SAMITI (NVS)
Recommendations/Observations
6.7       The Committee recommends that new schools may be sanctioned only after assessing the possibility of obtaining
the required land. The Committee also recommends that the matter of allotment of land to 32 schools may be taken up at
the highest level to ensure that land is allocated without any delay. The Committee notes that as many as 28 new schools
are to be set up in 2006-07 and hopes that the target of construction of Navodaya Vidyalayas supposed to be completed by
March, 2006, must have been achieved. The Committee desires that the Department provide the Committee a status report
in this regard within one month of the presentation of this Report.                                      

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
Action Taken
            New schools are being sanctioned only after assessing the availability of permanent sites. The matter regarding
allotment (transfer) of permanent site in favour of Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti is being pursued actively with the
concerned State Governments.
Total number of districts 583
Total number of JNVs sanctioned till 31.5.2006 553
Total number of functional JNVs 508*
Construction works sanctioned 484
Total number of Vidyalayas shifted to permanent buildings 388
Total Phase-A sanctioned 484
Phase-A completed 388
Phase-A works in progress 96**
Phase-B works sanctioned 348
Phase-B completed 275
Phase-B in progress 73
*   24 more JNVs have been made functional in 2006-07.
** Apart from 96 JNVs, there are 45 JNVs where JNVs shifted to permanent    
     buildings but minor works (Phase-A) is in progress.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee wishes to emphasize that the slow pace of civil construction in respect of JNVs needs to be
monitored carefully for expediting it.
VIII.            ACCESS AND EQUITY
Recommendations/Observations
8.3        The Committee notes that during 2004-05 and 2005-06, NGOs from around 12 States were covered. However, the
Committee notes that the scheme is not spreading to other States though there is underutilization of the allocated funds. In
the year 2004-2005, out of the 89 NGOs selected for the scheme, 25 each are from the States of Andhra Pradesh and
Karnataka. In the year 2005-2006 also, there are 31 NGOs from Andhra Pradesh. Further, there is concentration of NGOs
in particular districts of these two States. The Committee recommends that these facts need to be verified through
appropriate authorities to see that these NGOs are actually existing and the funds are utilized for the purpose it is
allocated.  The Committee further recommends that the Department should popularize the scheme and implement it in
more and more States.                                        
Action Taken
(a)        There has been some imbalance in coverage of States and Districts as proposals             received from NGOs are
scrutinised for sanction and there is an imbalance in             receipt of proposals due to uneven concentration and capacity
of NGOs in various             areas.
(b)        Pending a review, proposals from existing NGOs were considered for sanction of             grant up to the year
2004-05. It was decided not to release any grant for the year             2005-06. Inspection of the hostel is also being got
done through the State             Governments to minimize the possibility of misappropriation of funds.
(c)        Tata Institute of Social Science has been entrusted with a thorough evaluation             study of the scheme. Their
report is expected by the end of 2006. The existing             scheme will be improved in the light of the evaluation report.
(d)        A Committee has also been constituted on 23.8.2006 to suggest inter-alia  ways to             ensure sanction of grant
only for genuine organizations and to find ways to weed             out unscrupulous and ineligible organization. The
Committee has been asked to         submit their report within two months. Their recommendations will also be            
considered while revamping the scheme.
Comments of the Committee
            Access and equity remain to be one of the major problems in higher education before the nation. The Committee
has failed to understand that access and equity in higher education was sought to be achieved by the Department by two
schemes of girls hostels and setting up of schools with peanut allocations of about    Rs.9.0 crore. These amounts also were
not being utilized properly.  The Committee in this situation has its own apprehension about the utility of the Department’s
attempt for revamping this scheme. The Committee earnestly suggests the Department either to change the name of this
scheme or prepare a more comprehensive scheme with significant allocation to achieve the targets of access and equity.
IX.            QUALITY IMPROVEMENT IN SCHOOLS (QIS)
Recommendations/Observations
9.2       The Committee notes that a conscious decision based on experience in the implementation of the above mentioned
existing schemes separately was taken at the beginning of the 10th Plan itself to have a composite scheme. However, it
took almost three years to get the new scheme formally approved. The Committee disapproves such a tardy pace in

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
implementing a policy decision and hopes that such tendency would not recur. The Committee also wants to emphasize
that there is a need for having a review of all existing small schemes under the secondary education sector and
streamlining the same for attaining optimal benefits.
Action Taken
            It took time to get the draft Cabinet Note approved by the concerned authorities as well as CCEA. The Cabinet
approval was obtained in November 2005 and all States/UT Governments and NCERT have been informed about the new
composite scheme in January, 2006.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee hopes that such delays in getting schemes approved by the Cabinet would be avoided in future. The
Committee also notes that the Department has not commented on the need for having a review of all existing small
schemes under the secondary education sector and streamlining the same for attaining optimal benefits. This, the
Committee feels, needs urgent attention and hopes that the Committee’s concern in the matter would be given due
consideration.
X.            INTEGRATED EDUCATION FOR DISABLED CHILDREN (IEDC)
Recommendations/Observations
10.2     While appreciating the more focused approach of the revised scheme, the Committee would like to emphasize the
need for having active coordination between the agencies handling the education of disabled children under SSA and
secondary education sector. The Committee notes that as many as 309 NGOs were released varying amount of central
assistance under IEDC scheme during 2003-04 and 2004-05. Details about 2005-06 are not available with the Committee.
The Committee also observes that the Rs.33.84 crore, Rs.38.46 crore and Rs.36.57 crore were released both to the State
Governments and NGOs during 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05. The Committee would like to have a statement on
pending utilization certificates under the schemes during the first three years of the 10th Plan, State-wise. The Committee
hopes that drawbacks of the earlier scheme would not be there in the proposed new scheme.                                        
Action Taken
            Expenditure statement for the year 2005-06 is placed at Annexure-I. Position regarding pending UCs during first
three years of the 10th Plan is given in the Annexure-II. A Statement of pending UCs as on 21.08.2006 is enclosed at
Annexure-III. All efforts will be made to have active coordination between SSA and Secondary Education Sector and to
remove drawbacks of the existing Scheme while preparing the new Scheme.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is surprised to find that no expenditure was incurred by as many as 12 States/UTs on account of
IEDC during the year 2005-06. The Committee would like the Department to examine the reasons for the non-utilisation
and take immediate corrective steps so that this situation may not recur in future.
            The Committee also notes that 21 Utilization Certificates are pending for the year 2004-05.  This is a matter of
great concern and the Committee stresses again that all out efforts be made to obtain Utilization Certificates within the
concerned financial year as the norm.
XI.       AREA INTENSIVE AND MADARSA MODERIZATION PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
11.4     The Committee notes that for infrastructure development only U.P and A.P were selected. The Committee fails to
understand as to why other states were not allocated money for the purpose. Similarly, the rationale behind selecting only
seven states for madrasa modernization programme is also not known. Further, the Committee is at a loss in drawing out
conclusions as the actual utilization figures have not been supplied by the Department. The Committee recommends that
the utilization of the allocation be closely monitored and the scheme be implemented in all the states. The Committee
would like the Department to furnish an explanatory note on the shortcomings pointed out as above within one month from
the presentation of this report.  
Action Taken
            The Area Intensive & Madarasa Modernization Programme is a voluntary scheme which has been provided
Rs.83.92 crore as outlay in the Xth Plan. The scheme is being implemented by the state Governments and the details
regarding the Madarasas and the number of students enrolled in each are not being maintained by the central government.
            To ensure maximum utilization of funds and to give assistance to Madarasas which are willing to teach modern
subjects the central government has written to all state governments to give wide publicity to the scheme and send more
proposals  (copy enclosed) since there is no state wise allocation of funds it has been possible to use the funds available to
meet the requirements of states from which proposals are received. The states of AP and UP have a sizable Muslim
population and the proposals of the state governments have been financed in phases with in available allocation of funds.
Because of the voluntary nature of the scheme no prior state wise target of allocation of funds is possible.
            Details in respect of proposals considered for assistance by the Department during 2006-07 are at Annexure –IV.
Comments of the Committee

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The details provided in respect of proposals
considered for assistance during 2006-07 hardly reveals any picture.  It does not reflect the grants released to different
States for infrastructure development. The Committee, therefore, directs the Department to collect a statement indicating
the State-wise and component-wise release of funds during the last three years.  The Committee also emphasises the need
to encourage the States having sizeable number of minorities to avail of the benefits of this scheme by sending more
proposals.
XII.
            UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
Recommendations/Observations
12.4     The Committee was informed that out of the total UGC expenditure amounting to Rs. 1943.56 crore for the year
2004-05, an amount of Rs. 460.04 crore was disbursed to the state universities and colleges which constitute 23.67% of the
total expenditure.  The Committee notes that the financial position of the state universities is poor so much so that a major
chunk of allocated funds goes to salary and allowances and maintenance expenditures.  There is little left for these
universities to undertake research and quality improvement of education.  Unfortunately, University Grants Commission is
not maintaining any data regarding the fund allocation by the State Governments to the State Universities which prevents
in getting a clear picture of the financial position of the State Universities. The Committee recommends that the UGC
should maintain a database of the funding pattern of the state universities. 
Action Taken
            Resource Crunch in State Universities is a matter of concern. The University Grants Commission provides
development assistance to the State Universities under Section 12.B of the UGC Act, 1956.  At present, there are 217 State
Universities, out of which 119 Universities are being given development grant. The outlay for 2006-07 to the UGC has
been considerably increased to enable higher assistance by the Commission to universities by way of development grants.
            The development (Plan) grant by UGC to the State Universities is for supplementing general infrastructure viz.
buildings, purchase of equipments, books and journals and, to some extent, for teaching faculty for the given plan period. 
The UGC does not make any grants for salaries or maintenance to State Universities as these institutions are to be
maintained by the respective State Government. 
            It is true that the University Grants Commission was not maintaining any data hitherto regarding the fund
allocation by the State Governments to the State Universities.  The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
The University Grants Commission has written to all the State Universities to furnish information regarding the fund
allocated by the State Government to them and the major items on which the said amount is spent.  The Universities will
also be requested by the Commission to include such information in their XI Plan proposals.  The information would
thereafter form the database on the funding pattern of State Universities.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee appreciates the efforts to collect information about funds allocated to and the expenditure of the
State universities.  But the Committee notes that hardly Rs. 3 - 4 crore were given to 119 State Universities out of about
Rs. 460 crore in 2004-05 as Development Grant. Whatever fund is given by the State Governments are used up in paying
salaries, pensions and other non-plan expenses. The purposes for which UGC gives money are all highly capital-intensive. 
This situation, the Committee, feels needs to be considered by the Centre, States and the UGC for coming out with
comprehensive proposals.
XIII.            VACANCIES IN COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
Recommendations/Observations
13.3      In this connection, Committee’s attention has been drawn by the observation of the Committee on CABE on
Financing of Higher and Technical Education that vacant faculty position is one of the major factors affecting standards of
higher education in the country. The Committee observes that the tendency to allow vacancies is seriously compromising
efforts on quality of higher education. Chronic shortage of faculty members too adversely affects the quality of education
in colleges and universities. The Committee was given to understand that all Central Universities have been directed to fill
up the backlog vacancies by 31.12.2005. The Committee would like to be apprised about the latest position in this regard. 
 
Action Taken
            The Ministry of Human Resource Development has taken many steps in order to fill up backlog vacancies both in
general and in reserved categories.
(I)        A special Recruitment Drive to fill up backlog vacancies reserved for SCs and             STs in autonomous
organizations/Public Sector Undertakings under the             jurisdiction of various Ministries/Departments had been
launched by the             Department of Personnel & Training (DOP&T) in January 2005. Accordingly all             the
autonomous bodies under the administrative control of this Bureau were             requested to fill up the reserved vacancies
and furnish the action taken report. Being one of item in NCMP, it was emphasized to adhere to the time frame            
prescribed for the drive and the status report. The Ministry has since issued             directions to UGC in December 2005

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
to ensure effective implementation of the             reservation policy. On 18th April 2006, a letter has been issued to the
Chief             Secretaries of all the States and Union Territories by the Education Secretary to             fill up the vacant
posts on expeditious manner.
            On perusal of the information received from these autonomous bodies, it was             observed that the policy of
reservation is not being implemented in the matter of             recruitment to both direct and promotion posts as per laid
down policy. The             Registrars of all the Central Universities have been informed vide this Ministry’s             letter
No.F.4-124/2004.U-5 dated 23rd May 2006 that UGC may not release the             financial assistance under the Plan funds
for the second quarter without obtaining             a certificate that all the vacancies in respect of posts under direct            
recruitment/promotion by way of backlog vacancies reserved for SCs/STs have             been duly advertised and filled.
(II)       The Ministry of Human Resource Development had appointed a Committee under    the Chairmanship of Prof.
Bhalchandra Mungekar to review the National             Eligibility Test (NET). The Committee has given its interim report
and             recommended as under:-
(i)
                 So far the post-graduate level teaching is concerned, the candidates having Ph.D. degree should be
exempted from acquiring NET qualifications for being considered for the post of Lecturers.
            (ii)            As regards the undergraduate level teaching, the candidates having M.Phil                            or Ph.D
degree should be exempted from acquiring NET qualifications for                    being considered for the post of lecturers.
The Commission approved the recommendations, in principle, and authorised the Chairman, UGC, to finalize
further details in the matter on receipt of communication from the Ministry of HRD. The MHRD has informed that the
UGC is empowered to make/amend the regulations under Clause (c) & (d) of Sub-Section (1) of Section 26 of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956. Therefore, the UGC has been authorized to amend UGC (Regulations on
Minimum Qualification for Appointment and Career Advancement of Lecturers, Readers and Professors in the
Universities and Colleges), 2000.
Comments of the Committee
The major issues - existing vacancies and shortages of teachers in Central universities - raised by the Committee
have brought out another serious issue of non-implementation of reservation policy in respect of SCs/STs. Reply of the
Government does not reflect any serious attempt being made on these counts. It appears that the Department has restricted
itself mainly to issuing directions to the concerned agencies. The reply also does not speak about the outcome of directions
issued to the Central Universities to fill up the backlog vacancies by 31.12.2005. From the details provided by the
Department, it is but apparent that the backlog vacancies are yet to be filled up and there remains a lot to be done in this
regard. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered opinion that the Department should take up the matter with the
concerned agencies in a mission mode and ensure that all backlog vacancies are filled up during the first-half of 2007.  
XIV.            INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY (IGNOU)
Recommendations/Observations
14.2     The Committee observes that allocation for IGNOU in 2006-07 is at an enhanced level of Rs.100 crore when
compared with Plan allocation of Rs.60 crore in 2005-06. Trend of allocation of Plan funds and utilization thereof for
IGNOU during the Tenth Plan so far reveals a discouraging picture. As per the details made available to the Committee,
there has not been judicious and optimum utilization of allocated funds. During 2003-04, provision of Rs.67.00 crore had
to be reduced drastically to Rs.20.00 crore at RE stage and these utilized funds also included an adjustment of Rs.3.44
crore unspent balance available with the University. The Committee is constrained to observe that in 2004-05 and 2005-06
also, utilized funds amounting to Rs.67.00 crore and Rs.60.00 crore included unspent balance of Rs.2.35 crore and Rs.2.60
crore respectively.  
The Committee apprehends that during the current year also keeping in view enhanced provision of Rs.100.00
crore, chances of under utilization is very much there in spite of adjustment of unspent balance of previous year. The
Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for monitoring of achievement level of both physical and financial
targets set by the University on a quarterly basis to ensure optimum and judicious utilization of funds as per the prescribed
norms.
Action Taken
The Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) has informed that the funds could not be utilized due to the
fact that the proposal for 10th Plan itself was approved in October 2004 by the Govt. i.e., almost two and half years of the
10th Plan period had already lapsed at the time. During this period release of grants to IGNOU were adhoc in nature. It
was only after this period, that the activities were chalked out, staff appointed and the funds provided (by MHRD) could
be utilized, which is evident from the expenditure incurred by IGNOU during the year 2005-06, amounting to Rs.63.23
crore (prov.) as on 31.3.2006.
During the year 2006-07, Grant-in-aid approved is Rs.100 crore, out of which 60 crore has been earmarked for
Grants to State  Open Universities (S.O.Us) and DEC and the balance of Rs.40 crore (Rs.36 crore + Rs.4 crore) is for
activities under IGNOU and NER respectively. Keeping in view the broadbase of Plan activities, the grant-in-aid

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
component is far less than the planned estimates, and may not be sufficient to meet the required level of expenditure.
Comments of the Committee
Expanding and strengthening of distance education, the main mandate of the IGNOU, has been emphasized for
increasing the access to higher education.  Development/significance of IGNOU, therefore, can hardly be over-
emphasized.  The Committee is dismayed to note that the Tenth Plan proposals of the IGNOU were approved by the
Government only after two and half years of the Plan period had lapsed. In the mean time, IGNOU managed from adhoc
grants.  The Committee hopes that such a lapse do not take place in the case of the Eleventh Plan. 
XVI.    ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION (AICTE)
Recommendations/Observations
16.4     The Committee was informed that the States are competent to evolve mechanism to fill up the seats, which remain
unfilled. The information regarding vacant seats has been called for from State Governments by the AICTE, while some of
the States have furnished the information, it is awaited from others. The information furnished by some of the States is
given below:
State Approved intake Seats filled Vacant seats % vacant
M.P. 22030 21523 507 2.3
Meghalaya 180 126 54 30
H.P. 900 815 85 9
Karnataka 45065 42729 2336 5.2
Kerala 13036 10582 2454 18.8
Maharashtra 44987 42256 2731 6.1
Total 126198 118031 8167 6.5
Action Taken
The number of vacant seats in different States depends upon various factors such as prevailing demand and supply
situation, quality of facilities provided by the Institution, faculty appointed by the institution etc. Moreover, the number of
vacant seats varies from discipline to discipline based on market forces. However, the Council through its approval process
insists upon maintenance of norms and standards in terms of faculty and infrastructure.
Recommendations/Observations
16.5     The Committee notes that the number of seats vacant in various states is quite significant, prominent among them
being Kerala and Maghalaya where 18.8% and 30% of the seats respectively are lying vacant.  
Action Taken
The responsibility of admissions rests with the State Governments.
Recommendations/Observations
16.6     The Committee observes that when the entire nation has geared up for producing more and more qualified and
skilled human resources, the tendency of keeping the seats in technical institutions vacant is an unpardonable crime. Such
indifferent attitude of the authorities is quite retrograde and predatory; and above all it is wastage of scarce national
resource. The Committee, therefore, recommends that under no circumstances the seats in the technical institutions should
be left unfilled. A mechanism should be evolved where under those candidates who have attained the qualifying marks in
the entrance exams but are placed low in the merit list can be selected to fill the vacancies.                                                  
Action Taken
As already stated that seats remain vacant in the institution due to various factors such as prevailing demand and
supply situation, quality, connectivity with infrastructure distance from the main cities etc. Different State Governments
evolve different mechanism to fill the vacant seats.
 
Comments of the Committee [paras  16.4, 16.5 and 16.6]
 
The Committee is aware that admissions are primarily the responsibility of the States and in many cases, the
students do not come forward to get admission in such colleges due to poor faculty, infrastructure, distance, etc.  The
Committee does not expect that the Government to force the parents/students to go to these colleges/institutions.  It
certainly expects the Government to force the AICTE to ensure that no colleges having substandard infrastructure/faculty,
etc. are approved and these are asked to improve their quality.  The Committee feels that it is not a situation of supply
exceeding the demand, it is infact otherwise today.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
16.7     As per the Expenditure Budget of the Department for 2005-06, an amount of Rs.91.48 crore has been allocated
under the Plan head for reorganising, restructuring and strengthening AICTE, Bureau of Technical Education and its

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
Committee and Boards.  On a query, the Department informed that there was no such proposal. Thereafter the Committee
sought further clarification in this regard from the Department. In response, the Department has clarified that “the
functions of the AICTE is to ensure coordinated and integrated development of technical and management education and
maintenance of standards. Government supports the activities of AICTE through budgetary supports. Grants are released
on lump sum basis to AICTE and AICTE in turn allocates fund under various schemes”.
 
16.8     The Committee is not satisfied with the comments of the Department. The reply of the Department does not clarify
why the fund was allotted to a non-existent programme. It is amply clear that a provision of Rs.91.48 crore was made in
the budget without any purpose. This, according to the Committee is a clear case of financial/budgetary irregularity. An
enquiry may be made into the entire episode and the findings may be furnished to the Committee. 
 
Action Taken
 
               The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee has observed that the reply of the Ministry that the 
Government supports the activities of the AICTE through budgetary support and grants are released to the Council for 
funding their various schemes does not clarify as to why the funds were allotted to the non-existent programme.
 
               In this regard it is stated that the AICTE was established by an Act of the Parliament i.e. the All India Council for 
Technical Education Act, 1987. The powers and functions of the Council include ensuring coordinated and integrated 
development of technical and management education and maintenance of standards etc. Section 16(1) provides that the 
Council shall have its own Fund and also sums which may from time to time be paid to it by the Central Government, shall 
be credited to the Fund and all payments by the Council shall be made therefrom. The AICTE has its own mechanism of 
approval of schemes i.e., approval of Executive Council etc. Section 10(c) provides that the Council may allocate and 
disburse out of the fund of the Council such grants on such terms and conditions as it may think fit to:
 
(i)               Technical Institutions, and 
 
(ii)               Universities imparting technical education in coordination with the                Commission. 
 
               The Funds to the AICTE are allocated under Plan schemes on lump sum basis after internal discussion on the 
proposals in this Ministry and the Planning Commission. Then the AICTE allocates the Funds Schemes-wise. It is not that 
a sum of Rs.91.48 crore was released to AICTE for the first time. During 2004-05, a sum of Rs.54 crore was released to 
the AICTE.  Not only at the BE stage, the progress of expenditure of the Council is reviewed even at the RE stage also. 
During 2004-05 there was an unspent balance of Rs.6 crore, therefore, the budgeted provision of Rs.60 crore was reduced 
to Rs.54 crore. The Government, during the last four years, has released funds on lump-sum basis to the AICTE as under:
 
Year Rs. in crore
2002-03 90
2003-04 50
2004-05 54
2005-06 91.48
With regard to specific release of fund during the year 2005-06, it is stated that the AICTE had forwarded Plan proposals 
for a sum of Rs.136.14 crore for taking up various schemes during that year. As against that, a sum of Rs.91.48 crore was 
provided for AICTE  schemes as Plan funds. 
 
               AICTE incurred an expenditure of Rs.96.80 crore by way of releases to various Technical 
Institutions/Universities/Organizations under various approved funding schemes, as per its power under Section 10 (c) of 
the AICTE Act.  Similarly during the earlier year i.e. 2004-05, AICTE had incurred an expenditure of Rs.54.63 crore 
against the release of funds of Rs.54 crore. The details of funds allotted by the AICTE to different Schemes during 2004-
05 and 2005-06 are enclosed at Annexure VI.
 
               It is therefore, not correct to say that Rs.91.48 crore sanctioned by MHRD during the financial year 2005-06 to 
AICTE as Plan fund was without any purpose. 
 
In view of exercises involved in the process of release of funds to AICTE and keeping in view the statutory
provisions of the AICTE Act, the releases of a sum of       Rs.91.48 crore to AICTE during 2005-06 cannot, in any way, be

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
termed as a financial/budgetary irregularity.
 
Comments of the Committee [paras 16.7 and 16.8]
 
The Committee forms its opinion about a thing based mainly on the facts and information supplied to it by the
Departments/Ministries.  Impression of the Committee emanated from position given in the Expenditure Budget and
subsequent vague reply given by the Department in this regard. While the Expenditure Budget said that Rs.91.48 crore was
for reorganizing, restructuring and strengthening AICTE, Bureau of Technical Education and its Committees and Boards,
the Department later on informed the Committee that there was no such proposal. Now that being so, who is responsible
for this, Department, AICTE or the Committee? The Ministry’s Action Taken Note is silent about this aspect. The
Committee, therefore, would like to have a separate note on this aspect for further clarification.
XX.            GRANT-IN-AID SCHEME OF SCHOLARSHIPS TO STUDENTS FROM             NON-HINDI SPEAKING
STATES/UTS FOR POST-MATRIC STUDIES IN             HINDI
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
20.3     The Committee welcomes the introduction of the new scholarship schemes and hopes that wide publicity would be
given to these schemes so that maximum number of students can be covered.
  
Action Taken
 
            The University Grants Commission (UGC) which introduced the Indira Gandhi Post Graduate Scholarship for
Single Girl Child in the year 2005, whereby each girl child receives a scholarship of Rs.2000/- per year, has declared 1325
girls as eligible for the scholarship and disbursed an amount of Rs.1,23,60,000/- benefiting 618 girl children.  The process
of making payment to the remaining 707 girl children is in progress.
 
            In the academic year 2005-06, UGC identified 166 scholars for the Post Graduate Scholarship for University Rank
Holders at undergraduate level and disbursed an amount of Rs.16.40 lakh benefiting 82 scholars. The process of making
payment to the remaining 84 scholars is in process.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            While appreciating the introduction of new scholarship schemes, the Committee is constrained to observe that
considerable time is being taken in disbursal of scholarship amount to selected students.  Out of 1325 girl students found
eligible under the Indira Gandhi Post Graduate Scholarship for Single Girl Child, 707 girl students are yet to get the
benefit.  Similarly, under the Post Graduate Scholarship for University Rank Holders at Under-Graduate level, process of
making payment to 84 scholars is in process.  The Committee strongly feels that undue delay in such schemes defeats the
very purpose for which they have been formulated.  The Committee would, therefore, appreciate if immediate steps are
taken for removal of bottlenecks under the scholarship schemes so as to ensure timely receipt of scholarship amount by the
selected students.
CHAPTER – IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
 
 
-Nil-
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
IV.            NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND             TRAINING (NCERT)
 
            The Committee expresses its serious concern about the inordinate delay in setting up of the PSSCIVE, Bhopal and
NERIE at Shillong, despite consistent reiterations by the Committee for expediting works relating to them.  These are the
classic examples of bureaucratic red-tapism/complicated procedures inherent in our system that allows little scope for

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
expeditious and timely disposal of projects.  The Committee also notes that review meeting about these projects was taken
in June 2006 only after the Committee pointed about it.
 
            The Committee, in view of the importance of these institutions, recommends that the Department must take up the
matter urgently for making special efforts to expedite clearances from concerned agencies including the SPA and CPWD. 
These projects should not be allowed to linger on like this any further.                      (Para 4.2)
 
VI.            NAVODAYA VIDYALAYA SAMITI (NVS)
 
            The Committee wishes to emphasize that the slow pace of civil construction in respect of JNVs needs to be
monitored carefully for expediting it.
       (Para 6.7)
 
VIII.            ACCESS AND EQUITY
 
            Access and equity remain to be one of the major problems in higher education before the nation. The Committee
has failed to understand that access and equity in higher education was sought to be achieved by the Department by two
schemes of girls hostels and setting up of schools with peanut allocations of about    Rs.9.0 crore. These amounts also were
not being utilized properly.  The Committee in this situation has its own apprehension about the utility of the Department’s
attempt for revamping this scheme. The Committee earnestly suggests the Department either to change the name of this
scheme or prepare a more comprehensive scheme with significant allocation to achieve the targets of access and equity.
                                                                                                         (Para 8.3)
 
IX.            QUALITY IMPROVEMENT IN SCHOOLS (QIS)
 
            The Committee hopes that such delays in getting schemes approved by the Cabinet would be avoided in future. The
Committee also notes that the Department has not commented on the need for having a review of all existing small
schemes under the secondary education sector and streamlining the same for attaining optimal benefits. This, the
Committee feels, needs urgent attention and hopes that the Committee’s concern in the matter would be given due
consideration. 
        (Para 9.2)
 
X.            INTEGRATED EDUCATION FOR DISABLED CHILDREN (IEDC)
 
            The Committee is surprised to find that no expenditure was incurred by as many as 12 States/UTs on account of
IEDC during the year 2005-06. The Committee would like the Department to examine the reasons for the non-utilisation
and take immediate corrective steps so that this situation may not recur in future.
 
            The Committee also notes that 21 Utilization Certificates are pending for the year 2004-05.  This is a matter of
great concern and the Committee stresses again that all out efforts be made to obtain Utilization Certificates within the
concerned financial year as the norm.                                                                                        (Para 10.2)
 
XI.       AREA INTENSIVE AND MADARSA MODERIZATION PROGRAMME
 
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The details provided in respect of proposals
considered for assistance during 2006-07 hardly reveals any picture.  It does not reflect the grants released to different
States for infrastructure development. The Committee, therefore, directs the Department to collect a statement indicating
the State-wise and component-wise release of funds during the last three years.  The Committee also emphasises the need
to encourage the States having sizeable number of minorities to avail of the benefits of this scheme by sending more
proposals.                                                              (Para 11.4)
 
XII.            UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
 
            The Committee appreciates the efforts to collect information about funds allocated to and the expenditure of the
State universities.  But the Committee notes that hardly Rs. 3 - 4 crore were given to 119 State Universities out of about
Rs. 460 crore in 2004-05 as Development Grant. Whatever fund is given by the State Governments are used up in paying

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
salaries, pensions and other non-plan expenses. The purposes for which UGC gives money are all highly capital-intensive. 
This situation, the Committee, feels needs to be considered by the Centre, States and the UGC for coming out with
comprehensive proposals.                                      (Para 12.4)
 
XIII.            VACANCIES IN COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
 
The major issues - existing vacancies and shortages of teachers in Central universities - raised by the Committee
have brought out another serious issue of non-implementation of reservation policy in respect of SCs/STs. Reply of the
Government does not reflect any serious attempt being made on these counts. It appears that the Department has restricted
itself mainly to issuing directions to the concerned agencies. The reply also does not speak about the outcome of directions
issued to the Central Universities to fill up the backlog vacancies by 31.12.2005. From the details provided by the
Department, it is but apparent that the backlog vacancies are yet to be filled up and there remains a lot to be done in this
regard. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered opinion that the Department should take up the matter with the
concerned agencies in a mission mode and ensure that all backlog vacancies are filled up during the first-half of 2007. 
      (Para 13.3)
 
XIV.            INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY (IGNOU)
 
Expanding and strengthening of distance education, the main mandate of the IGNOU, has been emphasized for
increasing the access to higher education.  Development/significance of IGNOU, therefore, can hardly be over-
emphasized.  The Committee is dismayed to note that the Tenth Plan proposals of the IGNOU were approved by the
Government only after two and half years of the Plan period had lapsed. In the mean time, IGNOU managed from adhoc
grants.  The Committee hopes that such a lapse do not take place in the case of the Eleventh Plan. 
      (Para 14.2)
 
XVI.    ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION (AICTE)
 
The Committee is aware that admissions are primarily the responsibility of the States and in many cases, the
students do not come forward to get admission in such colleges due to poor faculty, infrastructure, distance, etc.  The
Committee does not expect that the Government to force the parents/students to go to these colleges/institutions.  It
certainly expects the Government to force the AICTE to ensure that no colleges having substandard infrastructure/faculty,
etc. are approved and these are asked to improve their quality.  The Committee feels that it is not a situation of supply
exceeding the demand, it is infact otherwise today.
      (Para 16.4, 16.5 and 16.6)
 
The Committee forms its opinion about a thing based mainly on the facts and information supplied to it by the
Departments/Ministries.  Impression of the Committee emanated from position given in the Expenditure Budget and
subsequent vague reply given by the Department in this regard. While the Expenditure Budget said that Rs.91.48 crore was
for reorganizing, restructuring and strengthening AICTE, Bureau of Technical Education and its Committees and Boards,
the Department later on informed the Committee that there was no such proposal. Now that being so, who is responsible
for this, Department, AICTE or the Committee? The Ministry’s Action Taken Note is silent about this aspect. The
Committee, therefore, would like to have a separate note on this aspect for further clarification.                             
                                                               (Para 16.7 and 16.8)
 
XX.            GRANT-IN-AID SCHEME OF SCHOLARSHIPS TO STUDENTS FROM             NON-HINDI SPEAKING
STATES/UTS FOR POST-MATRIC STUDIES IN             HINDI
 
            While appreciating the introduction of new scholarship schemes, the Committee is constrained to observe that
considerable time is being taken in disbursal of scholarship amount to selected students.  Out of 1325 girl students found
eligible under the Indira Gandhi Post Graduate Scholarship for Single Girl Child, 707 girl students are yet to get the
benefit.  Similarly, under the Post Graduate Scholarship for University Rank Holders at Under-Graduate level, process of
making payment to 84 scholars is in process.  The Committee strongly feels that undue delay in such schemes defeats the
very purpose for which they have been formulated.  The Committee would, therefore, appreciate if immediate steps are
taken for removal of bottlenecks under the scholarship schemes so as to ensure timely receipt of scholarship amount by the
selected students.                             (Para 20.3)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
 
 
MINUTES
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 25th January, 2007 in
Committee Room 'E', Basement, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1.         Shri Janardan Dwivedi                        ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
                  Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.                  Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4.                  Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5.                  Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6.                  Smt. Brinda Karat
7.                  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
8.                  Shri Ali Anwar
 
LOK SABHA
 
9.
                  Shri Ashok Argal
10.              Shri Basudeb Barman
11.              Shri Harishchandra Chavan
12.              Shri Harisinh Chavda
13.              Shri Ramswaroop Koli
14.              Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
15.              Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
16.              Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
17.              Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
18.              Dr. Thokchom Meinya
19.              Shri K. Virupakshappa
20.              Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
21.              Shri Francis K. George
22.              Shri Anantkumar Hegde
23.              Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
 
     SECRETARIAT
 
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.  The Committee then considered the
following draft reports:

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
 
(i)     *********
(ii)    Action Taken Report on recommendations/observations contained in the 174th Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of Higher Education;
(iii)  *********
(iv)  *********
(v)   *********
 
3.         The Committee adopted the reports with certain modifications. The Committee decided to present/lay the Reports
to both the Houses of Parliament in the ensuing Budget session.
 
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.10 P.M. to meet again on 19th February 2007.
NEW DELHI  
25th January, 2007
VIMAL KUMAR
UNDER SECRETARY
 
 
________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matter
ANNEXURE-I
 
State wise details of expenditure for the year  2005-06  (Rs. in lakh)
 
Sl no. Name of the State/ UT State NGO Total
1. Andhra Pradesh -- 39.02 39.02
2. Arunachal Pradesh    
3. Assam  39.61 39.61
4. Bihar 54.37 0.92 55.29
5. Chattisgarh  7.45 7.45
6. Gujarat 690.66  690.66
7. Goa    
8. Haryana 41.56 34.93 76.49
9. Himachal Pradesh    
10. Jharkhand    
11. Karnataka    
12. Kerala 499.02 3.83 502.86
13. Madhya Pradesh 1496.72 21.78 1518.50
14. Maharashtra 77.50 14.56 92.07
15 Manipur 9.79 8.61 18.41
16 Meghalaya    
17 Mizoram 50.27  50.27
18 Nagaland 4.18  4.18
19 Orissa  79.99 79.99
20 Punjab    
21 Rajasthan 102.04 1.00 103.04
22 Sikkim    
23 Tamil Nadu  149.87 149.87
24 Tripura    
25 Uttar Pradesh  50.20 50.20
26 West Bengal 598.08  598.08
27 A & N Islands 17.01  17.01
28 Dadar & Nagar Haveli    
29 Daman & Diu    
30 Chandigarh    
31 Delhi 9.16 40.74 49.91
Pondichery 4.94

188th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/188threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:32:36]
32 - 4.94  
 TOTAL 3650.44 497.52 4147.96
Annexure-II
 
Position of pending Utilisation Certificates during the first three years
 
 2002-03
 
2003-04 2004-05 Total
UCs to be issued on receipt of documents
inspection reports from NGOs
 
2 3 21 26
Files being traced
 
1 2 -- 3
Total
 
3 5 21 29
 
 
ANNEXURE-IV
 
MADARSA MODERNISATION PROGRAMME
 
            In 2006-07 the grant-in-aid Committee of the Deptt. has so far considered the following proposals for assistance as
detailed below:-
 
S. No. State No.of Madarsas
(assisted earlier)
No.  of
Teachers
No.of Madarasas
(new applications)
No. of
Teachers
1. Kerala
 
-- -- 429 858
2. M.P.
 
-- -- 442 698
3. Chhattisgarh
 
-- -- 142 235
4. Karnataka
 
72 72 --- ---
5. J&K
 
20 35 --- ---
6. Uttaranchal 25 46 --- ---
 
 