Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
REPORT NO.
295
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th January, )5 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on )5 2018th January,
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations ontained in
ty Report on the
/C the Two Hundred
Eigh Fourth Subject ‘Issues
and Challenges before Higher Education
Sector in India’
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIFTH REPORT
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

34
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred
Eighty  Fourth  Report  on  the  Subject  ‘Issues
and Challenges Before Higher Education
Sector in India’
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-27
Chapter-I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government ......................................................................................... 2-8
Chapter -II Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply ................................ 9-16
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ..................... 17-26
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the
Government is still awaited ............................................................................. 27
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 28
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 29-32

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2017)
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya    —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
5. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
6. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Dr. Sasikala Pushpa
9. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
10. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
12. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
13. Shri Nihal Chand
14. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali (Patil)
15. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
16. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
17. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
18. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
19. Shri Ramachandran Mullappally
20. Shrimati Neelam Sonker
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri N.K. Premachandran
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
25. Shri M.I. Shanavas
26. Dr. Nepal Singh
27. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
28. Shri Satyapal Singh
29. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
30. Shri P.R. Sundaram
31. Shrimati P.K Sreemathi Teacher
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred Ninety Five Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by Government on the
observation/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty Fourth Report on Subject ‘Issues and
Challenges before Higher Education Sector in India’.
2. Two Hundred Eighty Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 8
th February, 2017 and simultaneously laid
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th February, 2017. Replies of the Government to the Observation/
Recommendations/contained in the Report were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 4th
January, 2018.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same In its meeting held on 4th January,
2018.
DR. SA TYANARAY AN JATIYA
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
4 January, 2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Pausa 15, 1939 (Saka) Committee on Human Resource Development
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in its Two hundred eighty-fourth Report on the subject “the Issues and Challenges before Higher Education
Sector in India” pertaining to the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Higher  Education.
The 284th Report was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 8th February, 2017. The Ministry of
Human Resource Development, Department of Higher Education vide its communication dated 5th July,
2017 furnished its Action Taken replies to the Committee.
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in
the 284th Report have been categorized as follows:
(i) Chapter-I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government
Paras - 269, 271, 275 and 276
Total – 4
 (ii) Chapter-II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s reply Paras -  270, 272 and 277
Total – 3
(iii) Chapter-III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee Paras - 267, 268, 273 and 274
Total – 4
(iv) Chapter-IV: Recommendation/ Observation in respect of which reply of the Government is still
awaited. Paras –
Total - Nil

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
Recommendations/Observations
269. The Committee observes that all these Schemes are meant for providing an opportunity to students
belonging to marginalized sections to get proper coaching so as to enable them to compete for higher studies
and become eligible for teaching in higher educational institutions and for getting gainful employment in
Central/States/ private sector services. The objective behind all these Schemes is very laudable. The Committee
can only emphasize that these schemes need to be administered in the real sense, with the benefit reaching the
targeted beneficiaries. The Committee would like to have a status note on all the schemes.
Action Taken
The following steps have been taken with a view to ensure implementation of welfare measures for
SC/ST/OBC and minorities students:
The UGC is continuously monitoring the progress of implementation of Reservation Policy for SCs,
STs and OBCs and minorities in the teaching and non-teaching posts as well in admission to courses at all
levels in Universities/Institutions.
The UGC has been contributing towards social equity and social economic mobility of the under
privileged sections of the society through special coaching schemes in universities and Colleges. In the initial
period of XII Plan, Grant was released to colleges through Regional Offices of the UGC. After 2014-15, the
Coaching Schemes for universities and colleges were shifted to an Independent section of UGC i.e. SC/ST/
OBC Section.
The UGC had introduced Remedial Coaching for the benefit of SCs, STs, OBCs (non-creamy layer)
and Minority students with a view to improve and strengthen their knowledge, academic skills and linguistic
proficiency in various subjects.
The Commission also introduced Coaching for NET/SET examination with the objective to prepare
SC/ST/OBC & Minority students for such examination.
In order to gain useful employment in Group A, B and C positions in Central and State Government
services or equivalent positions in the private sector, the UGC has introduced a coaching scheme for facilitating
entry into these services.
During XIIth Plan period, 137 State Universities are assisted under Coaching Scheme for SC/ST/OBC
(non-creamy layer)/Minorities.  Further, UGC constitutes Expert Committees to study the impact of Coaching
Schemes related to SC,ST and OBC (non-creamy layer) and Minorities from time to time.
Establishment of Equal Opportunity Cells in CUs: The Equal Opportunity Cell run specific scheme
of coaching for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, OBC (non-creamy layer), Minorities in order to enhance
their employability and success.
Remedial coaching for SC/ST/OBC (Non-creamy layer) & Minority  students: Remedial Coaching
is organized at Undergraduate and / or Postgraduate level with objectives to:
2

3
(a) improve the academic skills and linguistic proficiency of the students in various subjects.
(b) raise their level of comprehension of basic subjects to provide a stronger foundations for further
academic work.
(c) strengthen their knowledge, skills and attitudes in such subjects, where quantitative and qualitative
techniques and laboratory activities are involved, so that necessary guidance and training provided
under the programme may  enable the students to come up to the level necessary for pursuing
higher studies efficiently and to reduce their failure and dropout rate.
(d) provide career guidance and psychological counselling for capacity building to those who are in
need of such counselling.
Coaching classes for entry into services for SC/ST/OBC (Non-creamy layer) & Minority  students-
Coaching scheme for entry into services is to be organized with objectives to:
(i) prepare students to gain useful employment in Group ‘A ’ , ‘B’ and ‘C’ in Central services, State
services and equivalent positions in private sector.
(ii) orient students for particular examination conducted for selection to services such as Union
Public Services, State Public Services, Bank recruitments etc.
(iii) focus on the specific requirements of a particular competitive examination.
The University may develop Employment Information Cell for providing information about various
competitive examinations in the area of their operation.
Coaching for NET/SET for SC/ST/OBC (Non-creamy layer) & Minority  students-
The main objective of the scheme is to prepare Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes OBC (non-
creamy layer) and Minority communities candidates for appearing in National Eligibility Test (NET) or State
Eligibility Test (SET) so that sufficient number of candidates becomes available for selection as teachers in
the university system.
Residential Coaching Academy (RCA) for Minorities and SC/ST/ Women in Universities
The main objective behind establishment of Residential Coaching Academy is to run schemes like
‘Coaching for students at UG/PG level’, ‘Coaching for students to prepare for NET’, ‘Coaching for students
for entry in services covered under Central and State Governments’.  The aim of these schemes is to
prepare students for NET and all India & State Services examinations and UG/PG level examinations.
Centres in Universities for study of Social Exclusion and Inclusive Policy
Social exclusion not only generates tension, violence and disruption, but also perpetuates inequality
and deprivation in society. In India, certain communities such as Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
religious minorities experience systemic exclusion in the matter of getting advantages of development.
Social exclusion is a complex and multidimensional concept having social, cultural, political and economic
ramifications. The consequences of macroeconomic factors such as poverty, unemployment and involuntary
migration exclude the victims from economic, cultural, and political activities. The primary space where
‘exclusion’ can be studied, understood, and first transcended, are our universities, which can and must act

4
as a beacon for society. The UGC therefore supports research on the issue of social exclusion, which has
theoretical as well as policy importance. The centre approved by UGC in universities undertake following
activities.
Functions
z Teaching Courses at the M.A and M.Phil levels, leading eventuality to full-fledged M.A and even
M.Phil programmes in Social Exclusion Studies.
z Undertaking M.Phil and Ph. D. supervision.
z Undertaking empirical studies with theoretical perspective and build time series data bank for comparative
studies and policy/programmes evaluation.
z Carrying out detailed rigorous analyses based on the socio-economic data generated by government
agencies.
z Organizing conferences, seminars and symposia on the theme of Social Exclusion.
z Publishing regularly the research findings of the faculty and students.
z Organizing public lectures on the subject by eminent scholars.
z Reaching out to scholars, especially young scholars, in other universities and colleges through an
active programme of inviting Visiting Faculty.
z Establishing links with Civil Society Organizations engaged in combating Social Exclusion.
Conducting short-term Orientation courses for political leaders, Parliamentarians, government officials,
trade unionists and media personalities.
AICTE- OPPORTUNITY FOR MARGINALIZED SECTIONS
Skill and Personality Development Programme Centre For SC/ST Students
The broad objectives of the centre shall be to provide opportunity to SC/ST students in the Institutes
to reorient themselves in the light of emerging employment opportunities in Engineering undergraduate/
Diploma students at all level. It is to empower the SC and ST students by providing special skill trainings
apart from regular study. To enhance the skills of Scheduled Caste (SC)/Scheduled Tribe (ST) candidates
with help of modules on communication, personality development and proficiency in English language. It
will boost the confidence of SC and ST students and provide them with better career opportunities so that
their employability in the industry increases.  Duration of the project-3 Years and maximum limit of funding
` 25,00,000/-. 4-proposals were considered for financial support.
Hostels For SC/ST Students
The scheme aims to support Government / Government-aided engineering colleges for construction
of girls / boys hostels for providing residential accommodation for students / researchers belonging to SC/
ST category.  Duration of the project-2 years and maximum limit of funding ` 2,00,00,000/-.  Financial
support to 63 institutions has been given so far.
Prerana
AICTE has launched a scheme entitled PRERANA for enabling SC/ST Students to get admission in

5
technical education fields by way of coaching by experienced faculty. The objective of the scheme is to help
aspiring SC/ST students seeking higher education through admission test like GATE/GPAT/CAT/CMAT/
TOEFL/ IELTS and GRE. Under this scheme financial support would be given to institutes who are willing
to put extra efforts for encouraging and imparting training to SC/ST students for appearing in GATE/GPAT/
CAT/CMAT and GRE. The AICTE shall provide a limited one time financial assistance of Rs.10.00 lakh
under recurring head, required for meeting the expenditure on honorarium etc. to the Eminent Faculty
Members  invited for conducting sessions @` 2000/- per class of minimum 2 hours. No TA/DA will be paid.
Students will be paid the application fee for such exams through this Scheme.
Share and Mentor Institutions (Margdarshan)
An Institute of repute as a Mentor within an existing facility to serve as the hub to guide and disperse
knowledge to and between around ten technical institutions to encourage best practices. The secondary
branches, the spokes, are additional services provided to faculty for self improvement. Eventually, the Hub
‘n Spoke system will allow for inter-hamlet information sharing, such as technical education, research and
sharing of resources to the entire system.  Duration of the project-3 years and maximum limit of funding
` 50,00,000/-.
A number of schemes including Online Courses on SWAYAM Platform are specifically meant for
marginalized section of the society, to get proper coaching so as to enable them to compete for higher
studies and become eligible for appearing in competitive examinations in higher educational institutions and
for getting gainful employment. A learner can take online course without making payment and a regular
student requiring credits to be transferred to his/her institute from Online Courses (on SWAYAM), has to
appear in final proctored exam.
The Management Institutes are also providing all professional and financial support to students of
special needs. There is a dedicated cell for the purpose to provide counseling as and when required. IIM
Kashipur has initiated special drive for admission of candidates for SC/ST/OBC category in doctoral (FPM)
admissions with an aim to engage them as faculty on completion of the course.
Recommendations/Observations
271. The Committee is happy to note that a number of initiatives have been taken for integrating the
differently-abled students towards mainstream higher education. These initiatives are indeed major steps for
providing equal opportunities to such students. The Committee, however, feels that initiatives will have
more impact if awareness about such facilities is there among the targeted students. Every conceivable effort
has to be made to sensitize such students towards the kind of opportunities waiting for them. Details of all
schemes for differently-abled students should be mandatorily displayed on the websites of UGC, the regulatory
bodies and also all the categories of universities and institutions. In addition, strict and constant monitoring
at all level is also required so as to ensure that all such initiatives for differently abled students are being
implemented in the real sense. For both these aspects, higher education department being the nodal authority
for higher education in the country will have to take the lead role.
Action Taken
To create awareness wide publicity of scheme has been given through National dailies, Web portal and
SMS/ E-mails to institutions and students, so that more students can take benefit of the scheme.

6
All AICTE approved institutions have been instructed to:
1. Facilitate admission of differently-abled persons in various courses;
2. Provide guidance and counseling to differently abled individuals;
3. Create awareness about the needs of differently abled persons, and other general issues
concerning their learning; and
4. Assist differently-abled graduates to gain successful employment in the public as well as private
sectors.
A special unit may be constituted by institutes, coordinated by a faculty member to be nominated by
the head of the institution. The major functions of the Unit will be:
1. To provide counseling to differently - abled students on the types of courses they could study at
the higher education institutions.
2. To ensure admission of as many differently-abled students as possible through the open quota
and also through the reservation meant for them.
3. To gather orders dealing with fee concessions, examination procedures, reservation policies,
etc., pertaining to differently-abled persons.
4. To assess the educational needs of differently abled persons enrolled in the higher education
institutes to determine the types of assistive devices to be procured.
5. To educate them regarding Govt. and AICTE schemes like SAKSHAM.
6. To celebrate World Disabled Day in the institute and also in the neighbor-hood in order to create
awareness about the capabilities of differently-abled persons.
The persons with Disabilities Act, 1995 indicates that differently abled persons should have access to
education at all levels. In the higher education sector, the University Grants Commission has been supporting
universities and colleges in the country and involving them in special education activities to empower differently
abled persons.
The UGC, from time to time, has been conveying to the Universities and Deemed Universities, the
policy decisions, including reservations in admissions and employment in the Government of India pertaining
to the persons with disabilities. In addition, the decisions taken and the guidelines framed at the level of the
Commission in this regard have also been circulated to all universities form implementation. The Commission
had also circulated the Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation ) Act,
1995 to the universities requesting them to strictly follow the provisions contained therein.
Besides, the UGC is also implementing plan schemes for the benefit of persons with disabilities. The
Chairman, UGC has constituted a committee to monitor the effective implementation of the reservation
policy for Persons with Disabilities in employment and in admission in Universities/College.
Equal Opportunity Cells in Universities/Colleges:  To make colleges and Universities more
responsive to the needs and constraints of the disadvantaged social groups, the UGC had planned to establish
Equal Opportunity Cell (EOC) in colleges and Universities to oversee the effective implementation of policies

7
and programmed for these groups and to provide guidance and counselling in academic, financial, social and
other matters.
Specific  schemes being operated by SCT Section of UGC  are as follows:
1. Higher Education for Persons with Special Needs (HEPSN)
The HEPSN scheme is basically meant for creating an environment at the higher education
institutions to enrich higher education learning experiences for differently-abled persons. Creating
awareness about the capabilities of differently-abled persons, construction aimed at improving
accessibility, purchase of equipment to enrich learning, etc., are the broad categories of assistance
under this scheme.
2. Financial Assistance to Visually Challenged Teachers
The Scheme has been formulated to help visually challenged permanent teachers to pursue
teaching and research with the help of a Reader and by using teaching and learning aids by way
of providing Reader’s Allowance and funds for purchase of Braille books, recorded materials
etc. the objectives of the scheme is to provide facility to help visually challenged permanent
teachers to achieve self- dependence by using various aids for teaching, learning and research.
Allowance to visually challenged permanent teachers will be ` 36000/- p.a.
3. Teacher Preparation in Special Education (TEPSE)
The Teacher Preparation in Special Education (TEPSE) scheme is meant for assisting Departments
of Education to launch special education teacher’s preparation programmes, to prepare special
teachers to teach children with disabilities in both special and inclusive settings. The scheme
provides financial assistance to offer B.Ed. and Med. Degree courses with specialization in one
of the disability areas.
Objectives
To encourage Universities to start M.Ed. special education courses, to prepare teachers educators to
serve in higher education institutions offering special education teacher preparation
Recommendations/Observations
275. The Committee recommends that the Government of India may undertake exercise to encourage credit
rating agencies, reputed industry associations/media houses and professional bodies to carry forward the
process of rating of Indian Universities/Institution in scientific, transparent and fair manner. A robust rating
system would give rise to healthy competition amongst the Universities/Institutions to improve their ratings
by enhancing their performance in the desired fields.
Action Taken
With a view to improving the competitiveness and performance of the higher educational institutions,
the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) has been launched on 29.09.2015. This framework
outlines a methodology to rank higher educational institutions across the country.
The methodology draws from the recommendations of a core committee set up by the Ministry to
identify the parameters for ranking various universities and institutions. The parameters broadly cover

8
“Teaching, Learning and Resources,” “Research and Professional Practices,” “Graduations Outcomes,”
“Outreach and inclusivity” and “Perception”.
The first ranking of Indian Universities, Institutes of Engineering, Management and Pharmaceuticals
has been released by NIRF on 04.04.2016 wherein top 100 Engineering Colleges and Universities and 50
Pharmaceutical and Management Institutes of the country have been ranked based on the above-mentioned
parameters. The rankings for the year 2016 are available on https://www.nirfindia.org/Ranking
The second ranking, i.e., India Rankings – 2017 were released on 03.04.2017, in which the main
ranking parameters remain the same. However, there are a few significant changes in a few sub-parameters.
In addition, this year every large institution has been given a common overall rank as well as a discipline
specific rank as applicable. Details are in the Ranking Document available at https://www.nirfindia.org/
Docs/Ranking_Methodology_And_Metrics_2017.pdf
Recommendations/Observations
276. The Committee recommends that this situation could be improved through allocation of research funds
based on student strength, funds for ICT infrastructure to promote better research and more scholarship
scheme for basic and applied research.
Action Taken
Funds for improving ICT Infrastructure are allocated to a number of projects, sanctioned under
NMEICT; such as Virtual Labs, National Digital Libraries & many more, for promoting better research in
Higher Education.
Following Institutions will be provided Super Computer facilities:-
z One peta flop supercomputer to be built at IIT-Kharagpur for launch in August 2017.
z Three 100 teraflop supercomputers to be purchased and deployed at NIT-Trichy, NIT-Nagpur
and IIEST Shibpur.
z Two 300 teraflop supercomputers to be purchased and deployed at IIT-BHU and IISER-Mohali.
z One petaflop supercomputer to be purchased and deployed at IIT-Madras.
One peta flop supercomputer to be provided to IIT-Bombay and IIT-Kanpur.
           AICTE also strives to create research ambience in the Institutions by promoting research in engineering
sciences and innovations in established and newer technologies; and to generate Master’s and Doctoral
candidates to augment the quality of faculty and research personnel in the country. Maximum grant per
research scheme is ` 25,00,000/- for a duration of three years.

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
Recommendations/Observations
270. The Committee feels that a major concern is the lack of employable skills in our students having
technical education. We are looking at the country’ s large youth population as an advantage point. But in
order to leverage this demographic factor, we need to ensure that our youth is empowered with the right skills
to meet the challenges of knowledge based market economy. The Committee observes that based on the
identification of the skill gaps in different sectors, possible approaches, such as, setting up of finishing
schools, offering courses for enhancing employability are proposed. Some strategies for increasing
employability factor, which are either faculty-centric or student-centric are: Industry Institute Student Training
Support, Industrial Challenge Open Forum, Long Term Student Industry Placement Scheme, Industry-Institute
Continuous Interaction Scheme-Industry, Industry-Institute Continuous Interaction Scheme-Faculty, Intensive
Interaction-Train the Teachers, Industry Training Programme and Support Scheme, Centre for Qualified
manpower, National Employability Portal, tax Benefit for Teaching Laboratory Support. Some strategies
for the Skills component with focus either on institution or students are: Skills Requirement Assessment
Revitalizing the Diploma Education, Lateral Entry of ITIs to Diploma programme, Vocation based
Certification Programme, Industrial Finishing Schools, Bridge Courses for Skill Enhancement, Special
Manpower Development Programme. The Committee’ s concern is how all the above mentioned strategies/
measures are translated in action in a structural and result oriented manner . The Committee desires that the
Department of Higher Education apprise the Committee of the progress made in this regard.
Action Taken
In order to make higher education skill-oriented and to make students graduating from university
industry-ready, UGC has introduced the following Schemes.
Community College: On a reference from the Ministry of HRD, UGC launched the scheme of
Community Colleges on pilot basis during the year 2013-14.  64 Community Colleges were approved under
the scheme.  Later on, UGC revised the guidelines of the scheme and adopted it as one of its independent
schemes.  The scheme is meant both for the universities and colleges.  However, it has been decided that the
scheme will be implemented in the existing universities and colleges receiving General Development Assistance
from the UGC. Further, UGC invited fresh proposals from the universities and colleges under the scheme
and approved 102 fresh Community Colleges in 2014-15.  64 Community Colleges which were approved in
2013-14 were reviewed in 2014-15 and 55 of them have been continued again.  Then, 157 were supported
by UGC. In the year 2015-2016. 111 new institutions have been approved under the scheme including
therein 20 Colleges with additional courses which have been merged into existing institutions.  Thus 91 new
institutions were counted in the earlier 157 Community Colleges and 27 Institutions have been subsumed
under the scheme of DDU Kaushal Kendras and 21 Institutions have been discontinued in the Review
Committee Meeting held in UGC office during 2016-17.  Thus total no. of institutions running under Community
College scheme are 200.
B.Voc. Degree Programme.
Under the framework of NSQF, UGC has launched a scheme on Skill development based higher
education as a part of college/university education, leading to Bachelor of V ocation (B.Voc) degree with
9

10
multiple exist such as Diploma/Advance Diploma. The guidelines for introduction of Bachelor of V ocation
(B.V oc) programme in universities/colleges were approved in 498th Commission’s meeting held on 27th
February, 2014.  As on date, UGC has approved 162 B.Voc degree institutions in 103 trades across the
country.
DDU Kaushal Kendras
The UGC in its Commission Meeting held on 22nd September, 2014 approved the guidelines for
establishment of Knowledge Upgradation Centre for Skilled Human Action and Learning (KUSHAL) in
Universities and Colleges during 12th Plan period. KUSHALS run the courses from certificate to PG degree
and research level in the field of Skill Development and V ocational Education and also coordinate between
the higher education system and industry to work as Centre of Excellence. Nearly 470 proposals have been
received till 30th March, 2015. As on date, UGC has approved 64 Universities/Colleges under the scheme of
DDU KAUSHAL Kendras.
OTHER DEVELOPMENTS
Developed Q.P (Qualification Packs), NOS (National Occupational Standards) based Curriculum in
45 trades
z Implementation of Credit system and Credit Banking in Skill based courses
z Notified M.Voc. Degree
z Constitutions of Advisory Committee for  KAUSHAL Centers.
z Assessment of Skill Component by Sector Skill Councils.
z UGC conducted VELT-II Phase-III programme of Australia-India V ocational Education Leadership
Training (VELT) Project.
z Conducted Phase-I of the UKIERI Skill Programmes
UGC has launched guidelines for establishing University-Industry Inter-Linkage Centres in Universities.
The objectives of the scheme are given below:
(a) Identify the expertise available in the university which can be of use for the industries in the
locality/region by way of consultancy services, evaluation of R & D activities of the industries,
etc.;
(b) Take the help of the expertise of the industries to improve/redesign the curriculum periodically
in tune with the requirements of the industries;
(c) Help create skilled manpower for industry requirements at various levels;
(d) Conduct Management Development Programmes (MDPs), Entrepreneurship Development
Programmes (EDPs), etc.;
(e) Initiate schemes for student/teacher training, joint research;
(f) Undertake R & D in the areas related to skill education and development, entrepreneurship,
employability, labour market trends, etc. at the postgraduate and research levels;

11
(g) Maintain ‘Labour Market Information’ for the region in coordination with government agencies
and industry associations;
(h) Help set up Science & Technology Entrepreneurs’ Parks (STEPs), Technology Business
Incubators (TBIs), etc.;
(i) Work for coordination between the University and industry/industries in the neighbourhood to
make the Centre a Centre of Excellence for skill development in specified areas;
(j) Conduct all other activities as are incidental or conducive to the functioning of the Centre.
AICTE- SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND ENHANCING EMPLOYABILITY OF STUDENTS
AICTE under its Skill development program is implementing following schemes.
Prime Minister Kaushal Vikas Yojna:- PMKVY by Technical Institutions  is a scheme to train the
unemployed youth in Engineering skills. Under this Scheme in next three years, 10.5 Lakh youth are to be
given Engineering Skills. The aim of the scheme is to encourage the institutions for making the best use of
available infrastructure of higher education for skill training and providing employable and certifiable skills to
school dropouts who want to pursue higher skills. The Scheme was officially launched on 2nd October,
2016 by Hon’ble MoS, MHRD, Government of India, Dr. Mahender Nath Pandey.
Objective:-
(1) Encourage the institutions for making the best use of available infrastructure of higher education
system during off hours for skill training.
(2) Provide employable and certifiable skills based on National Occupational Standards (NOS) with
necessary soft skills to the school dropouts who want to pursue attain higher order skills and
living in the vicinity of College.
(3) Provide for up-gradation and certificate of traditional/acquired skills of the learners irrespective
of their age;
(4) Provide opportunities for community-based life-long learning by offering courses of general
interest to the community for personal development and interest;
(5) Offer bridge courses to certificate holder of general/ vocational education, so as to bring them
at par with appropriate NSQF level.
(6) Provide entrepreneurial orientation along with required skill trained for self-employment and
entrepreneurship development.
(7) Provide Post Placement support, Tracking and Monitoring.
Eligibility:
All such existing Engineering College and Polytechnics will be eligible to participate in the scheme,
which are into existence for a minimum period of two years from the date of invitation of application for the
scheme. If any institute is already partner of NSDC, such institutes will not be eligible for participating in the
scheme.

12
Major Sectors:
In the first stage, 1273 Institutes were selected to give Skill Training to 80,468 students in 20 Sectors
with 206 Specializations.
Industry Institute Partnership Cell (IIPC)
The objective of the IIPC is to reduce the gap between industry expectations (practice) and academic
offerings (theory) by direct involvement of industry to attain a symbiosis. 47-IIC Centres are in operation so
far.
INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION;
AICTE-UKIERI Agreement
All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) signed an implementation agreement on 06.09.2016
with Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (DBEIS), UK, on the joint operation of the
activities under UK India Education and Research Initiative (UKIERI) Phase-III for a period from April 2016
to March 2021.
Following four stands of education collaboration at the level of Universities/Colleges will be taken
under UKIERI-III MoU:
Strand (1) Leadership and Faculty Development
Strand (2) Integration of Skills in Education System
Strand (3) e-Partnership and Research Incubation
Strand (4) Enhancing Mobility
Following activities will be undertaken as per the Implementation Agreement:-
1. To provide opportunities for the UK and Indian institutions/organizations to collaborate on mutually
agreed thematic areas relating to curriculum development, industry linkages, faculty development,
skills education, leadership, technical education, research and innovation. The subject areas/
themes will be agreed in consultation with All India Council for Technical Education and a joint
call will be announced.
2. To mobilize of young faculty across the two countries.
To organize Leadership Programme for technical and vocational institutions both at central Activities
during Phase – II
Further Education Leadership Development Programme (FELDP)
AICTE signed an MoU with UK-India Education and Research Initiative (UKIERI) with an aim to
bring forth a unique initiative that strengthens the bilateral relationship between India and UK and set example
of best practices in international cooperation. One of the stands of the MoU is to conduct a Leadership
Development Programme under the prospective academic administrators. The initiative works towards
developing programmes that meet the priorities and needs of both India and UK and bring about a systemic
change in the education sector of both the countries. The Council invited applications for participation in the

13
programme from faculties of Government and Government Aided Technical Institutions approved by AICTE.
UKIERI selected Dudley College, UK for imparting the leadership training programme. Four Workshops for
participants have been organized at NITTTR, Chandigarh and NITTTR, Chennai.
UKIERI - Community College:
The UK Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS) and the Indian Ministry of Human
Resource Development signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) in February 2013 for the development
of Community Colleges, facilitated by the UK India Education and Research Initiative (UKIERI).
As a part of this MoU, it was agreed that UKIERI and MHRD would collaborate to facilitate the
development of links between Community Colleges in the priority states and sectors as recommended by
MHRD, and further education colleges in UK. A maximum of 25 such partnerships will be supported over
the duration of this MoU.
UKIERI has identified UK Institutes for the proposed collaboration with 17 Community Colleges of
India.
Each college will have to undertake following indicative activities during the project period
I. Training modules towards achieving international occupational standards.
II. Associating industries from India and UK for the project.
III. UK & India Staff to visit the local industry to understand the role of industry in training.
IV . One to one teleconferencing of industrial trainers to further strengthen the link.
V . Students to work on joint project under the guidance of UK and Indian trainers.
VI. Local workshops to be organised at each Indian polytechnic to showcase community college
scheme.
VII. Minimum 5 master trainers to be developed in each Indian college in each sector.
VIII. At least 100 students to be trained during the project period.
IX. Indian Polytechnics will have to submit blue prints for accreditation of the programme by UK.
Australia-India Vocational Educational Leadership Training Program (VELT)
AICTE hosted the 1st phase of Vocational Educational Leadership Training Program during  21st to
23rd November 2016 organized by Australian High Commission. Objective of VELT Project are :
z Support cooperation between Australian and Indian vocational education and training institutions.
z Build leadership and organizational capacity in Indian VET institutions.
z Provide opportunities for Australian and Indian VET leaders to meet each other, to establish
relationships and foster institutional collaboration.
z Progress the Australia”India VELT and skills development cooperation agenda.
Major MoU
z AICTE – Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai  (TISS)

14
AICTE has signed a MoU with Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai (TISS)
Objectives:
z Research in V ocational Education.
z Studies on skill requirements and development in the country.
z Building content for various sectors based on NSQF.
z Developing teaching methodologies and pedagogy.
z Training the trainers.
z Methodology for skill assessment and skill accreditation.
z Creation of best practices in vocational education under NSQF.
Student Strength:
There are two cycles of admissions for B.V oc programmes. This makes it possible to admit students
in July and January. Our current student strength as on date is 6169.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee takes note of the reply submitted by the Department. The Ministry has however
not commented on the outcome of the said initiatives.  The Committee would like to know the
details if the Department has carried out any assessment to that effect.
Recommendations/Observations
272. The Committee would like to highlight another area of concern regarding the quality of education
being imparted in our universities, colleges etc. The Committee notes that at present there is no mechanism
for ensuring the accountability and performance of teachers in the universities and colleges. The Committee
finds that such a mechanism is a well established norm in foreign universities where the performance of
college professors/ teachers is evaluated by their peers and students. The Committee feels that it is high time
that such a mechanism is introduced in our University system. The Committee, accordingly, believes that in
order to ensure quality teaching, as system of Performance Audit of teachers may be evolved which would
be based on the feedback given by the students and peers of teachers. Gradually, other inputs like research
papers, publication brought out by teachers should be added in the Performance Audit. This Committee is of
the view that in this way, the faculty would also try to improve their quality of teaching which would be
assessed periodically and improve upon their teaching methods.
Action Taken
The University Grants Commission (UGC) undertakes maintenance of standards in teaching and research
and quality assurance in Universities, Deemed to be Universities and Colleges through the following
mechanisms, namely: framing regulations and schemes and; disbursing grants to the eligible institutions.
The UGC has notified and amended several regulations with the objective of sustenance and improvement in
the quality of higher education and for undertaking academic reforms. The regulations are available at http:/
/www.ugc.ac.in/page/ UGC-Regulations.aspx.
In order to encourage research and development in the country, the UGC is implementing several

15
schemes, awards, fellowships, chairs and programmes. These schemes are at http://www.ugc.ac.in/page/
XII-Plan-  Guidelines.aspx .
The Central Government has launched several initiatives viz. National Institutional Ranking Framework
(NIRF), Impacting Research, Innovation & Technology (IMPRINT), Uchchtar Avishkar Yojna (UAY), Global
Initiative of Academic Networks (GIAN) in the field of education for the qualitative development of education
in the country.
Under the NIRF, Educational Institutions are ranked by an independent ranking Agency on the basis of
objective criteria. The IMPRINT initiative seeks to address engineering challenges in ten technology domains
through the collaborative efforts of the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) and Indian Institute of Science
(IISc). The objectives of UAY scheme are to promote innovation in IITs addressing issues of manufacturing
industries; to spur innovative mindset; to co-ordinate action between academia & industry and to strengthen
labs & research facilities. Distinguished academicians, from premier institutions across the world, are invited
under the scheme of GIAN to conduct one week or two week course at Indian institutions.
Further, strategic funding and reforms in the State higher education sector are being undertaken
through the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA).
The Central Government in consultation with the University Grants Commission (UGC) has been
constantly striving to improve the quality of higher education based on the national needs and aspirations and
in tune with global trends. In order to realize this, the government through UGC allocates resources in such
a manner that higher education system in the country is streamlined and strengthened along the principles of
access, expansion, quality, equity and inclusion, research and relevance.
Further, UGC undertakes regular monitoring for improving the quality and compatibility of higher
education across institutions by constituting various in-house committees.
AICTE has constituted a committee to examine the recommendations of 7th Pay Review Committee
for revision of pay of Teachers, workshop superintendent, librarian, training and placement officer, physical
director, technical support staff, etc. in Degree Engineering, Diploma Engineering, Architecture, Pharmacy,
Town Planning, Applied Arts and Crafts and other Technical Institutions included under AICTE.
The Committee may go through the present scenario of career growth, performance review mechanism
existing under career advancement scheme and need to introduce performance audit of teachers.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee in its recommendation has favoured for performance audit of teachers based
on the feedback received from students and peers of teachers.  However, in the Action Taken
Report, the Government is silent on this aspect. The Department may clarify in its ATN whether
existing mechanism provides for the assessment of teachers by peers and the students and also
offer its comments on the efficancy of such a mode of assessment.
Recommendations/Observations
277. The Committee highlights that Indian Higher Education Scene is very dynamic and undergoing rapid
strides in quality improvement and has a complex, multi-layered structure, with each layer playing a very
important need and filling gaps. The Committee recommends that there was a need for quality assurance

16
agencies crucial to guarantee basic minimum standards of technical education to meet industry demand for
quality manpower and NBA should act as a catalyst towards quality enhancement and quality assurance of
higher technical education. NBA needs to continuously improve its own organisation and processes to meet
its obligations.
Action Taken
NBA organizes Awareness Workshops for the Institutions from time to time to educate them about
accreditation process and outcome based accreditation. NBA has recently revised its documents based on
the Outcome based accreditation which are in line with International Standards. NBA is also in the process
of strengthening the organization to meet its obligations.
The Uchchtar Avishkar Yojana (UAY) has also been formulated to promote innovation-based, industry-
sponsored research in the premier institutions like IITs and IISc. under this research projects of direct
relevance to industry are funded jointly by Government and the industry.  The project cost is met to the
extent of 50% by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) and 25% each by the Industry
and the participating Ministry/Department.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee appreciates the launch of Uchchtar Avishkar Yojana (UAY) to promote innovation
in the premier educational institution.  However, the Committee recommends that apart from
funding the cost of project the Department should also help the researchers to market their
innovation and also promote entrepreneurship among them.  The Committee feels that encouraging
the researchers to become entrepreneur would not only help in mitigating unemployment but also
inculcate various skills among the students.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendations/Observations
267. The Committee has been voicing its concern from time to time on the acute shortage of faculty in
higher educational institutions across the country. The Committee is anguished to find out that right from
well established Central Universities to those set up recently, State universities as well as private universities,
premier institutions like IITs, NITs and IIMs, this problem has emerged as the biggest handicap for the
development and growth of Higher Education vis-a-vis maintaining the quality of education. Situation
continues to be grim with no improvement foreseen in the near future. The Committee points out that the
availability of adequate and qualified faculty is a pre-requisite for quality education. The Committee
appreciates the steps taken by Department like increase in the retirement age up to 65 years, improvement of
salary structures. The Committee points out that there can be only two possibilities, either our young students
are not attracted towards the teaching profession or the recruitment process is a prolonged one and involves
too many procedural formalities. In either case, the Department being the nodal authority for the entire
country so far as higher education sector is concerned has to take proactive role so as to expedite the filling
up a existing vacancies.
268. The Committee recommends that recruitment process should start well in advance before the post is
vacated so that after retirement the newly recruited person takes up position immediately. The Ministry
should work in tandem with Institutions to have this exercise on yearly basis and recruitment must be done
in advance so that shortage does not develop into crisis. While appreciating the steps taken up by the
Department for filling vacancies but recruitment of faulty is a continuous process,the Committee recommends
that to make the teaching profession more attractive, the faculty should be encouraged to undertake
consultancy and are given start-up financial support.
Action Taken
The Universities are autonomous bodies created either under the Central Act or State Acts and the
onus of filling up the vacant posts lies with them. However, to make the teaching profession more attractive
and to draw in good talent at the entry level, the UGC Regulations, 2010 has prescribed norms for improvement
in service conditions for the new entrant, in terms of better working and leave conditions, career advancement
prospects, retirement benefits etc.
UNIVERSITIES
The total number of sanctioned teaching posts in various Central Universities is 16600 (2376 Professor,
4708 Associate Professor, 9521 Assistant Professor). Out of the total sanctioned teaching posts of 16600,
5928 teaching posts are lying vacant (1277 Professor, 2173 Associate Professor, 2478 Assistant Professor).
While approving the Budget Estimate (Non-Plan) and Revised Budget Estimate (Non-Plan), from the
year 2010-11 onwards twice in a year, all the Central Universities have been requested by the UGC to fill up
the teaching positions at the earliest.
17

18
Further, in order to meet the situation arising out of shortage of teachers in universities and other
teaching institutions and the consequent vacant positions therein, the age of superannuation for teachers in
Central Educational Institution has already been enhanced to sixty five years; vide Department of Higher
Education letter No. F.1-19/2006-U.II dated 23.3.2007.
Besides, subject to availability of vacant positions and fitness, teachers can also be re-employed on
contract appointment beyond the age of sixty five years upto the age of seventy years. Re-employment
beyond the age of superannuation shall, however, be done selectively, for a limited period of 3 years in the
first instance and then for another further period of 2 years purely on the basis of merit, experience, area of
specialization and peer group review and only against available vacant positions.
UGC requested all Vice Chancellors of Central Universities, State Universities and Deemed to be
Universities vide its letter dated 12.11.2014 to make a serious effort to ensure that all vacant positions are
filled by the University before the start of the next academic session.
Further, the UGC supports ‘operation faculty recharge’ through strengthening high quality research in
science related disciplines and promoting innovative teaching in the universities through induction of fresh
talent at the level of Professors, Associate Professors, and Assistant Professors. Many universities require
the support of professionals and experts beyond those available to the university in its regular faculty
especially in strengthening high quality research in science-related disciplines, at internationally competitive
level and in promoting innovating teaching in universities. Besides, it has provided positions of Adjunct
Faculty and Scholars-in-Residence to enrich the teaching and research programmes of the university system
at M.Phil and Ph.D levels.
UGC  implements a Travel Grant Scheme that provides financial assistance to permanent teachers and
librarians of colleges and vice-chancellors of state universities, deemed to be universities and central
universities, recognized under section 2 (f) and 12 (B) of the UGC Act, to present research papers at
international conferences abroad.
UGC provides financial assistance to teachers teaching in universities and colleges to promote excellence
in teaching and research. Research project may be undertaken by an individual teacher or a group of teachers.
The ceiling of assistance under the scheme is ` 20 lakhs for sciences including Engineering & Technology,
Medical, Pharmacy and Agriculture etc. while for humanities, Social Science, Languages, Literature, Arts,
Law and allied disciplines, the assistance is ` 15.00 lakhs.
DEEMED TO BE UNIVERSITIES
The UGC conducted a comprehensive review of 124 Deemed to be Universities in the year 2009.  The
review included availability of faculty as per the norms and standards of the Statutory Council(s) concerned.
The Committees found that faculty was inadequate in 17 Deemed to be Universities and needed further
augmentation in 8 Deemed to be Universities.  The observations/suggestions of the UGC Expert Committees
were sent to the Deemed to be Universities concerned for compliance. These Deemed to be Universities
have submitted compliance in respect of faculty.  Out of the 25 Deemed to be Universities, 24 have taken
corrective measures for augmentation of faculty as suggested by the UGC Expert Committees.
PRIVATE UNIVERSITIES
The UGC has so far inspected 62 Private Universities. A new procedure has been adopted for inspection
of these Private Universities. The Expert Committees are requested to evaluate and comment whether the

19
faculty is well qualified and well trained; the proportion of permanent faculty adequate, the university followed
due process for recruitment of faculty, etc.  After adoption of the new process, 9 Private Universities have
been inspected and the reports are being placed before the Commission.  The Universities would be asked to
comply with the deficiencies pointed out by the UGC Expert Committees.
IITs
Arising of vacancies and filling them up with suitable, qualified candidates is a continuous process.
The IITs have been taking measures to attract quality faculty, which include year-round open advertisements,
invitation through search-cum-selection procedures to alumni/scientists/faculty, advertisements in international
journals, and appointment of NRIs and PIOs to faculty positions on the same terms as applicable to regular
faculty.  In addition, Institutes are engaging contract, adjunct and visiting faculty.  The Government has also
launched the Global Initiative for Academic Networks (GIAN) to enable foreign faculty to teach some
courses in the higher educational institutions.  Steps such as outstanding young faculty awards, mobility of
faculty from one Central Educational Institute to another, and pay parity to faculty have also been taken to
attract best faculty in these Institutions.  There is no adverse effect on studies in the institute due to shortage
of faculty, as the same is adequately compensated by the research scholars, contract, adjunct and visiting
faculty.
OTHER TECHNICAL INSTITUTIONS
AICTE is conscious  of the shortage and availability of qualified faculty in technical institutions and
have launched various schemes to attract young generation towards teaching profession and skill upgradation
of existing faculty.  The faculties are given enormous chances to improve their educational qualification
under Quality Improvement Programme (QIP), Research Promotion Scheme (RPS) and Modernization and
Removal of Obsole Science (MODROBS). Faculty Development Programme (FDP) provides opportunities
to faculty member of AICTE approved Colleges / Institutions to facilitate upgradation of their knowledge
and skill. In addition, under Travel Grant Programme (TG) meritorious faculty gets opportunities to interact
at International Level Seminars, and Symposia, both within and outside India.  Teachers from AICTE approved
Technical Institutions / University departments are eligible for this grant. Proposals are received from
Government/Government aided Engineering Colleges/University Department and self financing AICTE
approved technical institutes which are considered and entitled for the grant. Grants are released for supporting
research and other aspects of technical education.
Various Schemes for providing financial assistance to faculty members for quality education/ research
and capacity building programmes are summarized as follows:-
Trainee Teacher Scheme:- Trainee Teacher Scheme was launched in 2016. The scheme   is intended
towards atattracting bright Undergraduate and Postgraduate students to teaching profession by providing
scholarships for pursuing M.Tech/Ph.D Program and assured job for advancing their professional growth.
The maximum funding is ` 2.5 lakhs maximum for three years over and above other financial assistance/
scholarship, if any.
Under this scheme 50 Proposals were received from Undergraduate and Postgraduate students out of
these 50 Proposals 01 Proposal was recommended by the Expert Committee and is under process.
Quality Improvement Program(QIP):- The objective of the scheme is to upgrade the expertise and
capabilities of the faculty members of the degree level institutions in the country. The aim is to enable the

20
teachers to acquire Master’s/Doctoral degrees. Scholarships are paid @ ` 9000/- per month for M. Tech
and Rs.15,000/- per month for Ph.D. for a maximum period of two and three years respectively.
Year wise breakup; Nos. of Faculty completed/ enrolled, M.Tech, Ph.D
Sl. No. Name of Course 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
1. Ph.D 552 466 382
2. M.Tech 267 188 102
Scheme of Travel Grant (TG):- The scheme is aimed at promoting research and development activities
in various areas of Technical Education for meritorious faculties to interact at international level to update
the global changes in the field of concerned fields of specialization. Total funding of ` 1.5 lakh (reimbursement
of Airfare, Registration fee and per Diem) once in three year.
Adjunct Faculty (ADF):- With a key objectives to have a strong and robust collaboration between the
educational Institutions and industry & to encourage quality involvement of persons working in industry,
academicians, scholars, practitioners, policy makers in teaching, research, and related services on a regular
basis, a Scheme of Adjunct Faculty has been initiated from the financial year 2015-16. Such involvement
helps in bringing external perspective to regular teaching to make classes more interesting and to further
enrich existing knowledge of faculty members. Maximum Budget of the Scheme is 96 lakhs.
188 proposals were received online & the same were placed before the Committee of Experts to
evaluate. Expert Committee recommended 16 proposals. These proposals are processed in the current
financial year 2016-17.
Research Promotion Scheme (RPS):-  is aimed to create research ambience in the institutes by
promoting research in engineering sciences and innovations in established and newer technologies; and to
provide opportunities to Master’s and Doctoral degree holders faculty members to augment the quality of
faculty and research personnel in the country.
A grant to the tune of Rs. 23.73 Crores was given to 254 beneficiaries institutes in the last 3 years for
implementation of RPS Scheme.
Research Park Scheme:- The Scheme promotes Industry and Institute partnership. Grant of
Rs.1.00Crore (per State/UT) is being given under this scheme to each beneficiary. The duration of project
is 3-year.
During the financial year 2016-17 the council had released a sum of Rs. 34,50,667/- under Research
Park Scheme.
         The Government has launched the Global Initiative for Academic Networks (GIAN) to enable foreign
faculty to teach courses in the higher educational institutions during Summer/Winter Breaks. In addition,
Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya National Mission on Teachers and Teaching (PMMMNMTT) also addresses
issues like teacher preparation and their professional development.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry/Department of Higher Education
for filling up of faculty positions in the Higher Education Institutions. However, the fact remains

21
that the situation has not improved significantly and vacancy positions in the Central universities,
IITs, NIT s, IIMs etc. continue to present a grim scenario affecting the quality of education being
imparted.  Raising the age of superannuation, encouraging faculty to undertake consultancy, hiring
contract, adjunct and visiting faculties are at best temporary solution to overcome faculty shortage.
The Committee again reiterates its observation that availability of adequate and qualified faculty is
a pre-requisite for quality education and the Department of Higher Education being the nodal
authority should take a proactive role in expediting the filling up of vacant positions/vacancies in all
the Higher Education Institutions.  The Committee recommends that a distinctive time frame
should be drawn which could successfully reflect the pace by which existing vacancies in faculties
can be filled.  Side by side the retiring faculty member should be kept in mind in formulation of
initiatives for target achievement. Para 267 & 268
Recommendations/Observations
273. The Committee considers Higher Education as an increasingly global enterprise; hence Indian institutions
should embrace internationalization that could provide them with new opportunities. While most of our
universities and colleges are required to build human resources to reach desired levels of competence, we
also need to go beyond this to ensure that the country has several institutions of higher education that strive
to achieve excellence in both teaching and research. Universities and colleges should be encouraged to
engage more intensively than before with wider society and contribute to local and regional development
and provide intellectual leadership to society.
Action Taken
The Government is in the process of formulating a New Education Policy (NEP), for which it carried
out a highly participative, inclusive and multi-pronged consultation process, through online, grassroots and
thematic expert consultations across 33 identified themes. The Ministry had constituted a Committee for
Evolution of the New Education Policy which submitted its report in May, 2016. Thereafter the Ministry has
formulated ‘Some Inputs for the Draft National Education Policy (NEP), 2016’, wherein it has been stated
that:
“Internationalisation is an inevitable dimension of higher education in this era of globalisation, and
generation of new knowledge and its application and some of the policy initiatives suggested therein to
be taken include selected foreign universities, from the top 200 in the world, be encouraged to establish
their presence in India through collaboration with Indian universities; Indian institutions will also be
allowed to set up campuses abroad; Indian HEIs will be encouraged to work towards internationalisation
of curricula aligned with international levels so as to make it globally compatible with best ranked
institutions of the world etc.
Further, it has been stated that over the next decade, at least 100 new centres/departments of excellence,
in the field of higher education, both in the public and the private sector, will be established to promote
excellence in research and encourage innovations; Steps will be taken to promote generation of new
knowledge and their applications and introduction of these new domains into the curricula of higher
education.”
Recommendations/Observations
274. The Committee recommends that certain universities and institutions should be converted or upgraded

22
by creating centres of excellence within the universities/institutions building on their existing strength.
Accreditation should be at core of regulatory arrangement and must have clear incentives and consequences.
There should be more funding for university based research and policies that create right incentives for
quality research and promote collaboration among institutions.
Action Taken
To ensure excellence in teaching and research in Universities & Colleges  and to provide intellectual
leadership to the society, the following initiatives have been taken by UGC:
1. Hari Om Ashram Trust Awards
The University Grants Commission with the help of an endowment made by Hari Om Ashram Trust,
Nadiad, has instituted following awards to be awarded every year to outstanding scientists from 1974
onwards:
1. The Jagdish Chandra Bose Award for Research in Life Sciences.
2. The Sir C.V. Raman Award for Research in Physical Sciences.
3. The Meghnad Saha Award for Research in Theoretical Sciences.
4. The Homi J. Bhabha Award for Research in Applied Sciences.
5. Award to outstanding Scientists / Social Scientists in the field of Interaction between Science
and Society.
Nominations are invited from the universities, institutions of national importance, etc. and the nominations
received are scrutinized by a Committee of experts in the specified areas. The scientists thus shortlisted are
requested to supply   the requisite documents in support of their work. The Committee may also suggest
other names of outstanding scientists who could be considered for the awards.
The members of the Committee and the members of the University Grants Commission are not eligible
for nomination under the scheme. The recommendations made by the Committee are then considered by the
Commission finally.
General Guidelines for Governing the Awards :
i. Only contributions by Indian Scientists individual or by a team of 2-3 persons would be eligible
for this award. The institutions or organisations are not covered under the scheme.
ii. The prize would be awarded to an individual or a team for outstanding contributions to the
development of interaction between science (including Technology) and society and which has
made conspicuously important contribution to the development of Indian Society.
iii. In deciding the award attention would be focused on the specific contributions made during the
last five to seven years period
iv. The work to be assessed would cover books, monographs, papers or any other published
account of research work, inventions, discoveries etc. for which the nominee has not already
received a similar award from any other agency.
v. The work should have been carried out in India.

23
2. The University Grants Commission, on behalf of the Government of India, has been implementing
various collaborative academic programmes between India and foreign countries. UGC has been running
Joint Research Programmes with countries like USA, UK, Israel, Norway and New Zealand, and has also
facilitated Indian faculty / scholars to realize their research potential through fellowship and research
programmes, such as Raman Fellowships for Postdoctoral research in USA, Project based Personnel Exchange
Programme and Exchange of Scientists Programme.
Fellowships, Scholarships and Exchange of Scholars:
z Raman Fellowships for Postdoctoral
z Research in USA
z Commonwealth Medical Fellowships
z Exchange of Scientists Programme with Germany
z Project Based Personal Exchange Programme (PPP)
z South Asian Institute, Heidelberg Fellowship
3. JOINT RESEARCH PROGRAMMES
UGC-UKIERI Thematic Partnerships
UGC, on behalf of Indian universities and institutions of higher learning and supported by the Ministry
of Human Resource Development and British Council (BC)  through the UKIERI Secretariat based in New
Delhi are the implementing agencies.
UGC-UKIERI Thematic Partnerships are intended to be between institution based research teams in
UK and India of proven research ability. The Partnerships facilitate exchange visits of faculty and research
scholars/students.
Indo-US 21st Century Knowledge Initiative
UGC announced an open competition under Indo-US 21st Century Knowledge Initiative and invited
proposals for Joint Research from the faculty of institutions recognized under Section 2(f) and 12B of
UGC Act and Institutions of National Importance. Under the Initiative, there are provisions for exchange
visits, to hold international conferences, seminars etc.
Indo-New Zealand Joint Research Projects
Under the auspices of India-New Zealand Education Council, University Grants Commission, India
and Education New Zealand invite applications from Indian and New Zealand academics seeking funding for
Joint Research Projects.
Indo-Israel Joint Research Programme:
The Joint Research Programme aims to encourage research cooperation between Israeli and Indian
scientists/faculty. The programme is activated through an agreement of cooperation between University
Grant Commission (UGC) and Israel Science Foundation (ISF), and is funded by the Indian and Israeli
governments, through the two funding agencies, each funding its own scientists according to their respective
regulations. The programme is open to all disciplines.

24
Indo-Norwegian Cooperation Programme (INCP)
Indo-Norway Cooperation Programme in Higher Education and Research (INCP) is a new initiative
that aims at enhancing higher education links between India and Norway. The programme is based on the
MoU on Cooperation in Higher Education between India and Norway, signed on February 14, 2014, and on
the Agreement on Academic Cooperation between the University Grants Commission
4.  TRA VEL GRANT SCHEME
UGC  implements a Travel Grant Scheme that provides financial assistance to permanent teachers and
librarians of colleges and vice-chancellors of state universities, deemed to be universities and central
universities, recognized under section 2 (f) and 12 (B) of the UGC Act, to present research papers at
international conferences abroad.
5.  MAJOR RESEARCH PROJECT IN HUMANITIES, SOCIAL SCIENCE, LANGUAGES, SCIENCES
& ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY
UGC strives to promote teaching and research in emerging areas in Humanities, Social Sciences,
Languages, Literature, Pure sciences, Engineering & Technology, Pharmacy, Medical, and Agricultural
Sciences etc.
The Government has a network of science and technology laboratories for research and development.
The major base of researchers in science and technology remains with the universities and colleges.
To promote innovative ideas in major thrust areas of research in higher education, the UGC provide
support for to permanent / Retired teachers in the Universities and Colleges under section 2(f) and 12(b)
only.
The UGC provide assistance in MRP for Science and Engineering & Technology including Medical,
Pharmacy and Agriculture is ` 20.00 lakhs and in Humanities, Social Science, Languages, Literature, Arts,
Law and allied disciplines- ` 15.00 lakhs. The tenure of the project is 3 years.
6.  SPECIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAMME (SAP)-
The SAP scheme was initiated in 1963 by University Grants Commission keeping in view the
recommendations of the Education Commission to facilitate the selected number of university departments
having some potential in research and teaching. The programme is intended to encourage the pursuit of
excellence and teamwork in advanced teaching and research to accelerate the realization of international
standards in specific fields. The first such programme was initially started as the “Centre of Advanced
Study (CAS)” in 1963.Some of these Centres also received recognition and financial support from UNDP/
UNESCO. The “Department of Special Assistance (DSA)” and “Departmental Research Support (DRS)”
programmes were started in the Departments during 1972 and 1977 respectively to create feeder departments
for CAS.
7.  BASIC SCIENCE RESEARCH
With a view to providing an opportunity for continuance of research contributions in Basic Science
Research by talented Science and technology scholars /teachers, UGC has rolled out various schemes for
boosting scientific research.

25
Further, UGC provides financial assistance to selected candidates for pursuing PG in general/
professional/technical courses, M.Phil./Ph.D. research and post-doctoral research on full time/regular basis
in universities/Institutions/Colleges in India and abroad under various schemes.
8.  RESEARCH AWARD
The objective of the scheme is to provide opportunities to regularly appointed permanent teachers of
universities/institutions to pursue research in their area(s) of specialisation for a period of three years without
undertaking any research guidance. Eligibility Criteria - Regular appointed permanent teachers who have a
doctorate degree. - They must have published papers/articles in reputed journals.
Tenure: 2 years. A provision for extension of tenure of Research Award has been made for one year
only on the recommendation of the subject experts, in exceptional cases.
9.  STRENGTHENING SOCIAL SCIENCE AND HUMANITIES TEACHING AND RESEARCH CAPACITY
The establishment of Academic Staff Colleges is to serve as nodal centres in certain identified universities
for the purpose to offer orientation and refresher courses for academic and professional development of the
faculty of universities and colleges to newer concerns in educational thought and pedagogy besides advanced
level programmes in university disciplines of teaching and research.
Further, UGC has increased in the number of research fellowships for M.Phil, Ph.D and Post Doctoral
Program to create potential faculty for universities and colleges and also increase the expenditure in last
three years as under:
2014-15 2015-16 Percentage 2016-17 Percentage increase
increase in in 2016-17
2015-16 over over 2015-16
2014-15
Beneficiaries 51545 74754 45.02 83235 11.34
Expenditure 877.06 1 177.62 34.26 1443.44 22.57
(in crore)
The Government has emphasized the need for promoting research that is socially relevant and is
of use to the end users. For this purpose, two schemes namely Impacting Research Innovation and
Technology (IMPRINT) and Uchhatar Avishkar Yojana (UAY) have been launched.  IMPRINT focuses
on research in higher educational institutions, with an allocation Rs.487.00 crore for a period of three
years beginning 2016-17.  The cost of the project is met to the extent of 50% by the Ministry of Human
Resource Development (MHRD) and the remaining 50% by the participating Ministry/Department.
UAY promotes industry sponsored, outcome-oriented research projects with an outlay of ` 475.00
crore for a period of two years beginning 2016-17.  The project cost is met to the extent of 50% by the
Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) and 25% each by the Industry and the participating
Ministry/Department.
Comments of the Committee (Paras 273 &274)
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Government and would like to know that by

26
when the Department would be able to implement the National Education Policy.  Further, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps that the Department has envisaged to make
Indian higher education institutions globally competitive and how far the progress has been made
in improving global ratings.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED.
-NIL-
27

OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry/Department of Higher Education
for filling up of faculty positions in the Higher Education Institutions. However, the fact remains
that the situation has not improved significantly and vacancy positions in the Central universities,
IITs, NIT s, IIMs etc. continue to present a grim scenario affecting the quality of education being
imparted.  Raising the age of superannuation, encouraging faculty to undertake consultancy, hiring
contract, adjunct and visiting faculties are at best temporary solution to overcome faculty shortage.
The Committee again reiterates its observation that availability of adequate and qualified faculty is
a pre-requisite for quality education and the Department of Higher Education being the nodal
authority should take a proactive role in expediting the filling up of vacant positions/vacancies in all
the Higher Education Institutions. The Committee recommends that a distinctive time frame should
be drawn which could successfully reflect the pace by which existing vacancies in faculties can be
filled.  Side by side the retiring faculty member should be kept in mind in formulation of initiatives
for target achievement. (Para 267 & 268)
The Committee takes note of the reply submitted by the Department. The Ministry has however
not commented on the outcome of the said initiatives.  The Committee would like to know the
details if the Department has carried out any assessment to that effect. (Para 70)
The Committee in its recommendation has favoured for performance audit of teachers based
on the feedback received from students and peers of teachers.  However, in the Action Taken
Report, the Government is silent on this aspect. The Department may clarify in its ATN whether
existing mechanism provides for the assessment of teachers by peers and the students and also
offer its comments on the efficancy of such a mode of assessment. (Para 72)
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Government and would like to know that by
when the Department would be able to implement the National Education Policy.  Further, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps that the Department has envisaged to make
Indian higher education institutions globally competitive and how far the progress has been made
in improving global ratings. (Para 273 & 274)
The Committee appreciates the launch of Uchchtar Avishkar Yojana (UAY) to promote innovation
in the premier educational institution.  However, the Committee recommends that apart from
funding the cost of project the Department should also help the researchers to market their
innovation and also promote entrepreneurship among them.  The Committee feels that encouraging
the researchers to become entrepreneur would not only help in mitigating unemployment but also
inculcate various skills among the students. (Para 77)
28

MINUTES

31
V
FIFTH  MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 4th January,
2018 in Committee Room No. ‘62’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK  SABHA
5. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
6. Shri Nihal Chand
7. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
8. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
9. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
10. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
11. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
12. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt the draft (i) 294
th Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations /
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty third Report on “Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and
Mid-Day-Meal Scheme”, (ii) 295 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Observations /
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty fourth Report on “Issues and Challenges before
Higher Education Sector in India”, (iii) 296 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2017-18)
of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, (iv) 297 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants
(2017-18) of the Department of Higher Education, (v) 298 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty Ninth Report on Demands for
Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development and (vi) 299 th Report on the National
Sports University Bill, 2017.

32
3. The Committee considered the draft 294 th, 295th, 296th, 297th, 298th and 299th Reports and adopted them
after some discussion.
4. The Committee, then, decide to present/lay the 294 th, 295th, 296 tth, 297th, 298 th and 299 th Reports to
both the Houses of the Parliament on 5th January, 2018. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his
absence, Shri Partap Singh Bajwa, M.P ., Rajya Sabha to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and
Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P., Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati, M.P., Lok
Sabha to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 11.00 A.M.