PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA >

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SEVENTY-FIRST REPORT

ON
THE PROBLEM OF DROP-OUTS

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH DEC., 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8TH DEC., 1998)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

OCTOBER, 1998/ASVINA, 1920 (SAKA)

4301/RS/F—1-A


CONTENTS

Paces
1. COMPOSITIONOR THE COMMINTER! 6055, Pig ce oetses olla 5५ nga % | Jalan eaten slay ou (i)—(iii)
QAPRERAGES 35 355 ४४ ७» ४३४ eG ७ 6४७ ४? ५७ # ५ ४७५४ ४ ः Rag God ५ % जे % की के (v)
3. REPORT OP THE: COMMINTEE. 3, ७ ४5 5४5८४ ५७5६४ ७४5 Tao be ee 1—12

4QMINUTES ८5 ४) ७४७ + ६ # ४-५४ aaa | ह ge al ७ को oe tan ४ ४ 5 ४ जब मे कक अप 13—22


2 Xe अफाएणाशं bi



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1998-99)

. Shri S.B. Chavan — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
. Shri Balkavi Bairagi

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

“Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri 0. Rajagopal

. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Shri‘ Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Shri M. P. A. Samad Samadani

. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

. Dr. Akhtar Hasan Rizvi

LOK SABHA

. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
. Shri Sartaj Singh
. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
Shri Chinmayanand Swami

. Dr. Sanjay Singh

. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

. Shri Ashok Singh

. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
. Shri Ashok Gehlot

. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
. Shri Ajit Jogi

. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

. Shri Laxman Singh

. Shri Shankar Pannu

. Shri Abdul Hamid

. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

. Dr. (Smt.) ५. Saroja

. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

. Shri H.P. Singh

@

4301/RS/F—2-A


41.
42.
43.
. Shri S. Arumugham

Gi)

Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
Shrimati Krishna Bose
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

4301 /RS/F—2-B


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1997-98)

. Shri 5.8. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
. Dr. B. 8. Dutta

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Shri Raj Nath Singh

५ Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr. Mohan Babu

. Shri M.P.A. Samad Samadani

LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shri Jai Prakash (Hardoi)

. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Maharani Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

. Dr. C. Silvera

. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda

. Shri Dutta Meghe

. Shri 1G. Sanadi

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy

. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Pawan Diwan

. Shri Krishna

. Shri Shivanand H. Kovujalgi

. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri S.K. Kaarvendhan

. Shri Mukhtar Anis

. Dr. M. Jagannath

. Dr. Bali Ram

. Shri Ranen Barman

. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

(iii)


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventy-first Report of the Committee on the
Problem of Drop-Outs.

2. The Committee in this connection appointed a Sub-Committee under the convenor-
ship of Shri Samik Lahiri in its meeting held on 16th January, 1997 to look into the various
aspects of the Problem of Drop-Outs for making an in-depth study on the subject and to
present a report thereon to the Committee at an early date.

3. The Sub-Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received
from the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development and also
heard oral evidence of the Officials of that Department and also the officials of the state
Govts. of U.P., Bihar, Punjab, Haryana and Delhi on the subject and got the first hand
information during its visits.

4. The Draft Report submitted by the Sub-Committee was considered and adopted on
9th October, 1998. The Committee at its meeting held on 19th November, 1998 decided to
present the Report in the House during the Winter Session of Parliament.

New De.u; S.B. CHAVAN
9th October, 1998 Chairman,

Department-Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development.

Asvina 17, 1920 (Saka)

(v)

4301 /RS/F—3-A


REPORT

I. INTRODUCTION

1.1. Universalisation of Elementary Education (UEE) has been accepted as a
national goal since 1950. The Directive Principles of the Constitution of India envisage
provision of free and compulsory elementary education to all children until they complete
the age of 14 years. In pursuance of the constitutional Directive, the need for a literate
population and provision of elementary education as a crucial input for nation building,
the National Policy on Education, 1986 as revised in 1992, states that free and
compulsory education of satisfactory quality should be provided to all children upto 14
years of age before the commencement of 21st century. The targets for 8th Five Year
Plan were set in keeping with these policy objectives. Though considerable progress has
been made towards achieving the targets, yet more vigorous and sustained efforts are
required to be made to achieve UEE at least by the end of 9th Five Year Plan.

1.2 The Sub-Committee on the Problem of Drop-outs was initially constituted on
16th January 1997 for making an in-depth study on the Problem of Drop-outs.
Subsequently, the Sub-Committee was reconstituted on 6th August, 1997. The Sub-
Committee, thereafter, called for a detailed comprehensive background note on the
subject from the Department of Education. After receiving the status report, the Sub-
Committee heard the oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of
Education, National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) and
National Institute of Educational Planning and Administration. In addition, the Sub-
Committee also heard the views of the Education Secretaries of the Government of
States/UTs of U.P. and Delhi on 12th June, Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and
Union Territory of Chandigarh on 13th June, Andhra Pradesh on 8th and Tamil Nadu on
9th July, Rajasthan on 13th October, Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar Islands on
11th November, Orissa and West Bengal on 14th November, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh,
Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Sikkim, on 17th November, 1997
respectively.

1.3 The Sub-Committee on the Problem of Drop-Outs has endeavoured to fulfil, to
the best of its ability, the objectives of the terms of reference set before it. The Sub-
Committee tried to study a wide perspective, including all the aspects affecting the
retention and progression of the students in the schools all over the country.

1.4 Since this was the first investigation of its kind, the Sub-Committee has no model
or material to use as a framework of reference. As the assessment of the problem of
Drop-Out could not be possible without making field visits, the Sub-Committee visited
Hyderabad and Chennai from 7th to 11th July, Jaipur from 13th to 16th October and
Port Blair, Calcutta and Guwahati from 11th to 18th November, 1997 to get first hand
information on the subject. The Sub-Committee had planned to visit these States/UTs
keeping in mind the diversities and inequalities that are prevailing in the field of
education and also with a view to know the latest position of the drop-out rate, retention
rate and also the progression rates of the students from Classes I to VIII.

1.5 During its field visits, the Sub-Committee had exchanged views with Village
Education Committees, Parents Teachers Associations, Mothers’ Associations, Mahila
Samoohas and the Members of the Village Panchayats and tried to know the role being
played by them in the field of education. The Sub-Committee also tried to ascertain the
attitudes of the villagers towards education.


2

1.6 The Sub Committee during its visits also made assessment of the quantitatives as
well as qualitative aspects of retention and achievement of children studying from Classes I
to VIII. To find out the level of achievement, the Sub-Committee has given oral or written
tests to the students of all the schools wherever it visited. For the retention study, the Sub-
Committee checked the records maintained by the schools on enrolment, grade to grade
promotion alongwith number of students enrolled, promoted, repeaters, drop-outs, and
transferred to other schools.

1.7 Written information about the Problem of Drop-Out from the Ministry of Human
Resource Development (Department of Education) and the State Governments where the
Sub-Committee visited was obtained to know the reasons from large number of Drop-Out.
The background note furnished to the Sub-Committee reveals the progress made in
universalisation of elementary education since the commencement of plan development from
1950 as under:—

No. of Institutions (in Lakhs)

(1950-51) (1996-97)

Primary Schools (Class I-V) 2.10 5.98
Upper Primary Schools (Classes VI-VIII) 0.13 1.77
TOTAL 2.23 7.75

No. of Teachers’ (in Lakhs)

(1950-51) (1996-97)
Primary Schools (Class I-V) 5.38 17.90
Upper Primary Schools (Classes VI-VIII) 0.86 11.96
TOTAL 6.24 29.86
Gross Enrolment 1950-51 1996-97
Primary Stage
Total Enrolment (in lakhs) 191.54 1103.90
Gross Enrolment Ratio (percentage) 42.60 104.00
Upper Primary Stage
Total Enrolment (in lakhs) 31.19 410.60
Gross Enrolment Ratio (percentage) 12.7 67.0

1.8 The Indian elementary education system has become one of the largest in the world.
At the primary stage 8.76 lakh habitations covering 94 percent of the Country’s rural
population now have schooling facilities within one km. distance. At the upper primary stage
also 7.26 lakh habitations covering 83.98 percent of the rural population have a school within
three km. distance. But the Committee is not of the same opinion after making field visits.


3

1.9 The 8th Five Year Plan envisaged UEE to mean universalising access, retention and
achievement. The plan goals were set as following:

(a) Universal enrolment of all children, including girls and children belonging to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

(b) Provision of primary school within 1 km. of walking distance and facility of non-
formal education for school drop-outs, working children and girls who cannot attend
formal schools.

(c) Improvement of ratio of upper primary schools to primary schools from existing
1. : .4,to-1.: 2.

(d) reduction of drop-out rates between classes I to V and I to VIII from the existing
46% and 60% to 20% and 40% respectively.

(e) Achievement of minimum levels of learning by all children at the primary level and
introduction of this concept at the upper primary stage.

1.10 The studies have indicated that even after the end of the Eighth Five Year Plan,
6.3 crore children in the age group of 6—14 years are still out of school. The majority of out
of the school children are girls and children belonging to SCs and STs in rural areas. The
Sixth All India Educational Survey (1993) has shown that there are still 11,574 schoolless
tural habitations in the country.

1.11 Eighth Five Year Plan had envisaged that the ratio of upper primaty schoois to
primary schools will be improved from the existing 1 : 4 to 1 : 2, However, there has been
marginal improvement in the ratio. which was 1 : 3.4 in 1995-96.

1.12 In order to improve retention, it was targeted that drop out rates will be reduced
to 20% in case of primary classes and 40% in case of upper primary classes. However
though declining, the drop out rates are still high at 34.5% for primary classes and 51.6%
for upper primary classes in 1995-96.

1.13 Reasons for children dropping out from schools include socio-economic, cultural,
lack of access to schools, uninspiring school environment etc. The 42nd round of National
Sample Survey (1986-87) provides reason-wise analysis of distribution of drop-outs as shown
in the Table below:—

Percentage distribution of Drop-Outs by reason for Discontinuance

Reason for Discontinuance Rural Urban

Male Female Male Female
Not interested in education/further study 26.6 33.3 23.6 28.5
Participated in household economic 26.8 9.4 22.8 6.7
activities
Other economic reasons 20.6 15.0 24.2 15.4
Domestic chores 2.0 14.3 2.2 15.9
Failure 18.4 16.7 21:3) 18.8
Others 5.6 115 6.0 | 14.7

ALL 100.0 3100.0 100.0 100.0

4301/ RS /F—4-A


4 .

1.14 While no systematic study to analyse reasons of high drop-out rate has been done in
the recent past, it is believed that the above analysis of the 42nd Round of National Sample
Survey is still not outdated. It provides valuable information on the reasons for non-
enrolment and drop-out. According to this survey, a large number of children drop out from
school because of economic reasons. The other reasons given by the above mentioned survey
for children discontinuing education include lack of interest in education and further studies,
domestic chores, gender discriminations and failure.

Drop-out Rates in Classes I-V (TOTAL) 1993-94

Drop out rates States/UTs
intervals

70% or more

60—69% Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Manipur, Sikkim and Tripura.

50—59% Mizoram and Orissa. :
40—49% Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka,
Rajasthan, West Bengal, Dadra & Nagar Haveli.

20—39% Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya,

Nagaland, Punjab and Delhi.

Less than 20% Goa, Haryana, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, A&N Islands,
Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep, Pondicherry.

National Average 36.32%.

1.15 Drop-Out rate in classes I to V is more than 60% in five states namely; Arunachal
Pradesh, Bihar, Manipur, Sikkim and Tripura. It is between S0—59% in two States namely
Mizoram and Orissa and between 40 to 49% in eight States/UTs namely Andhra Pradesh,
Assam, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Rajasthan, West Bengal and Dadra &
Nagar Haveli. The Problem of Drop-out becomes more pronounced in the case of girls in
these states.

Drop-out Rates in Classes I to VIII (Total) 1993-94

Drop out rates States/UTs
intervals

70% or more Bihar, Manipur and Sikkim.

60—69% Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Karnataka, © Orissa,
Rajasthan, Tripura and Dadra & Nagar Haveli.

50—S9% Gujarat, Jammu and Kashmir, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Lakshadweep.

40—49% Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and West Bengal.

20—39% Haryana, Nagaland, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Andaman &

Nicobar Islands and Delhi.

Less than 20% 0609, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Daman & Diu, Pondicherry and
Chandigarh.

National Average 52.80%.

4301/RS/F—4-B


1.16 The Committee has noticed that the drop-out rates in classes I to VIII is more than
that of classes I to V. Drop-out rate in classes I—VIII is more than 70% in three States
namely Bihar, Manipur and Sikkim and from 60—69% in eight States/UTs namely, Andhra
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Karnataka, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tripura and Dadra &
Nagar Haveli. It is between 50—59% in five States/UTs namely, Gujarat, Jammu and
Kashmir, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Lakshadweep. The Problem of drop-out becomes more
pronounced in case of girls in these States. Bihar topped the list with a drop-out rate: of
82.73%.

II. OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

I. Methods of computing drop-out rate:

1.1 Fhe Committee during its visit had held discussions with many NGOs and experts
working in the field of education and felt that there is a lot of ambiguity about the method
of computing the drop out rate. In view thereof the Committee wishes here to redefine the
definition of the popular methods which are used for computing drop-out rates. The three
methods for determining drop-out rates are as under:

(a) method based on grade-to-grade progression rates.

(b) method based on ratio of grade V enrolment to grade I enrolment of 5 years
before; and

(c) method based on individual students data on their year to year progress in schools.

The Committee recommends that the three above mentioned methods may be used as
parameters to locate drop-outs for which a Retention Register should be maintained.

Il. ENROLMENT RATIO

2.1 The Committee is of the opinion that enrolment ratio and drop-out rates are co-
related. Accurate drop-out rate can be arrived at only on the basis of actual enrolment ratio.
However, the Committee understands that this is not the position in most of the States. At
present, what is happening is that Headmaster of a, primary school simply shows all school-
going children in the village as enrolled in his school in Class I. No consideration is being
given to the percentage of children actually attending the school on a regular basis. Besides
that, problem of double enrolment was often found in evidence by the Committee during its
State visits. The Committee feels that accurate enrolment figures can be easily arrived at by
involving the Village Education Committees and local youth in this task. The Committee
also recommends that the admission age of the child in Class I should be strictly adhered to
in order to avoid the instances of fictitious enrolment.

Ill. MAINTENANCE OF ENROLMENT, PROGRESSION AND RETENTION REGISTERS

3.1 The Committee during its visits noticed that except the schools being run by the
Shiksha Karmi and Lok Jumbish Projects in Rajasthan, and in some parts of Assam no other
schools of the State Governments are maintaining the Enrolment, Retention and Progression


6

Registers to monitor the drop-outs rates in the primary and upper primary schools. The
Committee finds that no corrective action has been taken by the concerned State
Governments. The Committee expresses its serious concern over this State of affairs.

3.2 The Committee has noticed that in the past the emphasis has been only on
enrolment due to which large number of fictitious enrolment figures in Class I were noticed.
These fictitious figures of enrolment not only affect the policy making but also make it
extremely difficult to estimate the correct drop-out rates. The Committee has seen that the
data available in the official documents appears to have been given only as estimated data
because whatever data procured during the field level visits was found contrary to the data
available in the official documents.

3.3 The Committee feels that there is a need to convince the administrators and
teachers about the need for correct enrolment figures. Guidelines should be issued for
regular monitoring of absent students and planned efforts should be made to ensure
continued participation of every child in the schools to prevent drop-out. The Committee
recommends that the task of monitoring the Enrolment, Retention and Progression Registers
should be assigned to the Village Level Education Committees.

IV. OPENING OF MORE PRIMARY AND UPPER PRIMARY SCHOOLS

4.1 The scheme of ‘Operation Black Board’ was launched in 1987 with the objective to
bring about both qualitative and quantitative improvement in primary education. Central
Government has extended financial assistance to the extent of Rs. 1551.68 crores from 1987-
88 till 31st March, 1995. However till 31st March, 1995 only 81% of the total central funds
1.6. Rs. 1253.09 crores could be utilised by the States.

4.2 Even after a decade of the launching of ‘Operation Blackboard’ the Committee finds
that so far as basic infrastructure is concerned, it cannot be said that all the primary schools
all over the country are fully provided for. The Schools visited by the Committee during its
study tours were selected in advance by the State Governments. So, they cannot be said to
be true reflection of the physical state of primary schools. Even then the Committee is
constrained to state that these pre-arranged schools were also lacking in basic facilities. No
doubt, by and large school buildings were there and in some cases extensions were also
being carried on. But these were insufficient to the needs of school-going children. Drinking
water and toilet facilities were also inadequate. In some of the schools which the Committee
visited, the students were being made to sit on bare floors. The Committee also observed
that in majority of primary schools, two or three classes were being held in one room under
the supervision of only one teacher. The Committee feels that this state of affairs is
responsible to some extent in non-retention of children in schools. Urgent steps, therefore,
need to be taken for creating facilities so that every class has its separate room. The
Committee during its visits noticed that due to non-availability of infrastructure and lack of
schools very large number of children perhaps 20% do not have access to school. The
problem is particularly more grave at the upper primary stage from class VI to VIII specially
in the case of girls. On ascertaining the reasons for not opening new schools, the Committee
was informed that the rigid norms for opening new schools and increase in the population of
the States are the main barrier, resulting in. more out of school children.

4.3 The Committee recommends that the norms for opening new schools in remote,
hilly and desert areas should be relaxed and the Village Education Committees (VEC)
should be empowered to make survey of the existing situation, identificaiton of non-
schooling areas and preparation of plan for facilitating the State Governments to open good
quality non-formal education centres. Keeping in view the growth rate of population, the


a

Central Government should also make plans for creating extra upper primary schooling
facilities equal to the primary schools in the country.

4.4 The Committee hopes that a funding pattern under JRY worked out by the
Department of Education in consultation with the Ministry of Rural Development would
accelerate the pace of construction of school buildings.

V. JOYFUL LEARNING

5.1 The Committee during its visits has seen that the present system of imparting
education to the children is very traditional and rigid and is not based on scientific pattern.
The Committee is of the view that Text-books should be colourful and attractive from the
children point of view and oral joyful teaching learning mechanism should be introduced
atleast upto IIIrd standard as the Committee observed that the maximum rate of drop-out is
from Class I to Class III.

5.2 The Committee feels that school can be made an attractive place and learning a
joyful experience, if teaching is made child centred and activity oriented as has been done in
the ““Anandapath” schooling system adopted by the Government of West Bengal and also by
production. of colourful and attractive textbooks and low cost teaching aids. The creation of
these items would automatically result in improving the retention rate.

VI. MOTIVATION OF TEACHER

6.1 The Committee feels that lack of motivation on the part of a section of teachers is
indirectly responsible for dismal retention rate of students in the schools. Dedicated teachers
are required for making the stay of a child in school a joyful experience. However, at
present, this is not very much visible primarily in the Government set up of schools. The
Committee is of the considered view that inculcation of motivation can be successfully,
attempted by making it an essential component of teacher’s training programme.

6.2 The Committee finds that almost all the States have the required strength of
teachers. But mere filling up of the existing vacancies of teachers is not the end, but it is just
the beginning. The Committee feels that motivated, dedicated and fully trained teachers are
the need of the hour. The Committee finds that all the State Councils of Educational
Research and Training (SCERT) are not fully equipped to impart adequate training to the
teachers. Even many of the SCERTs Personnel require training by master trainers. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that NCERT should launch a pilot programme in close
collaboration with the SCERTs for the training of teachers. This becomes all the more
necessary as studies have pointed out that the utilisation of teaching learning material has
not been very satisfactory because of lack of training of teachers. The Committee is of the
considered view that if teachers are imparted training on how to use available equipment
effectively in a classroom teaching situation, it is bound to have a positive impact on
improvement in quality of teaching.

6.3 The Committee is in full agreement with the findings of evaluation of the ‘Operation
Blackboard’ that there is a need to:—

(i) Streamline the purchase procedures with inbuilt quality controls;
(ii) provide for greater involvment of teachers in selection of teaching aids;
(iii) develop better linkage between teaching aids and curriculum requirements; and

(iv) motivate teachers to improve teachers aids from inexpensive locally available
materials.


6.4 The Committee is of the considered view that the working environment and work -
load of teachers, particularly those working in rural primary schools are far from satisfactory
and contribute to a large extent, to lack of motivation on their part. Following factors can be
cited as responsible for this situation:—

(a) Schools without adequate buildings and devoid of essential facilities;

(b) Lack of teaching aids and libraries;

(c) Heavy curriculum and workload, particularly for rural primary teachers;
(d) Multi-grade teaching responsibilities without adequate supervisory support;
(e) Commuting from long distances;

(f) Lack of proper housing facilities; and

(g) Non-instructional and administrative duties such as supervising elections,
participating in census operations, conducting family planning activities etc.,
producing adverse impact on the main task of teaching.

6.5 The Committee feels that State Governments should initiate immediate action so as
to bring about over all improvement in the working conditions of teachers.

VII. Change in Examination System

7.1 The Committee finds that in many States, students even in primary classes are
promoted to the next class only on the result of the annual examination. This indirectly acts
as a demotivating factor so far as retention of children in schools is concerned. There are a
couple of States viz. Andhra. Pradesh and West Bengal where there is no examination system
upto the level of Classes V and VI. Students are being promoted only on the basis of
attendance.

7.2 The Committee, however, recommends that annual examination system as the
criteria for promotion to the next class should continue.

शा. IDENTIFICATION OF HIGH DROP-OUT RATE AREA

During the visit of the Committee to certain States, it observed that there were some
districts maintaining very high drop-out rates and among the low level drop-out districts,
there were some blocks having high drop-out rate. There are also some villages with high
drop-out rate in such districts. Thus, the drop-out problem is prevalent throughout the
country. The Committee feels that there is a need to locate the exact area of high drop-out
rates. In Shiksha Karmi and Lok Jumbish Projects, at the village level, the school mapping
system exercise has proved very fruitful in enrolling all out of school children in the age
group of 6—14 years. The Committee feels that this kind of school mapping exercise should
be undertaken in all the States in order to get the exact picture of the enrolled and drop-out
children. The Committee recommends that the local bodies/PRIs/PTAs should be involved
in this task.

IX. NON-FORMAL EDUCATION PROGRAMME/PREHAR PATHASHALA AS A BACK
UP_ METHOD
9.1 Out of school children are being taken care of under the Non-Formal Education
Scheme since 1979. Almost all the States are running NFE centres. NGOs are also

contributing a lot in this field. However, even after two decades, the NFE Scheme could not
achieve the desired target to bring back the Non-Formal students to the mainstream


9

education. There are a varied number of factors responsible for it. Poor infrastructure, lack
of motivated and trained instructors, very low honorarium for instructor, lack of community
participation, no linkage between Formal and Non-Formal System of education, NFE being
treated as second grade education can be cited as the major reasons for NFE Schemes’
failure.

9.2 The Committee is of the considered view that revamping of entire NFE Scheme with
special emphasis on the following points is urgently required:

(a) Creation of basic facilities at NFE Centres.
(b) Increase in honorarium for instructors.
(c) Involvement of community and PRIs.
(d) Training of Instructors.
(e) Mechanism for effective supervision and monitoring of NFE Scheme.
X. SETTING UP OF JUNIOR TECHNICAL/VOCATIONAL EDUCATION INSTITUTE

10.1 The Committee was given to understand during the field visits, by the State
Governments that the drop-out rates are very high in classes VII or VIII. The primary
reason for this situation is that there is a general feeling among parents/students that no
purpose would be served by continuing studies after class VIII. To check this high drop-out
rate, the Committee is of the opinion that some technical/vocational education institutes
should be set up for imparting two years certificate courses in the field of craft, carpentry,
mechanical, food processing and poultry farms etc. after VIIIth Standard. The Committee
feels that setting up of such institutes would not only give a pragmatic approach towards the
educational system but it will also help in earning their livelihood and for inculcating an
attitude towards vocationalisation.

10.2 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Education and the
Planning Commission should initiate action for setting up of technical/vocational education
institutes parallel to the secondary stage in some selected districts on an experimental basis
and make a budgetary provision accordingly in the Ninth Five Year Plan.

XI. ESTABLISHMENT OF RESIDENTIAL PRIMARY SCHOOLS FOR CHILDREN OF
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS AND MIGRATORY POPULATION

11.1 The Committee during its visits has observed that in many states large number of
Nomadic Tribe, Construction and agricultural workers move from one place to another due
to the very nature of their profession and also in search of work. Because of their frequent
mobilisation, their children suffer a lot in the field of education due to which they are either
not admitted in school or if in case, children are admitted in school, the drop-out rates are
very high amongst such children.

11.2 The Committee understands that a Scheme for Residential Upper Primary/
Secondary Schools in Rural Areas already exists. Govt. should take effective steps to
implement the same without further delay. Besides that, NGOs can be effectively involved
in the task of motivating migratory labour in sending their children to the nearby schools.

XII. MID-DAY MEAL SCHEME

12.1 The Mid-Day Meal Scheme was launched by the Central Government on 15th
August, 1995 to give a boost to the universalisation of Primary Education by impacting upon
enrolment, attendance, retention and the nutrition needs of children in Primary Classes. The


» 10

Committee has noticed that cooked meal is not being served in all the States and instead 3
kg. wheat/rice is being distributed to the children in many states without adhering to the
stipulated condition of 80% attendance, once in a month. The Committee was apprised that
the attendance rate on the day of distribution only remained very high.

12.2 The Committee feels that to have a direct impact of the Mid-day Meal Scheme on
the retention side, to check the problem of absenteeism and drop-out and also to provide
nutrition to the school going children instead of distributing 3 kg. wheat/rice, cooked meal
should be served.

12.3 During the study visits, the Committee also noticed that pilferages are taking place
and the distribution system of foodgrains has also not been developed systematically due to
which untimely and short supply are the frequent phenomena which could be judged from
the fact that in some of the States/UTs like Rajasthan, West Bengal and Andaman &
Nicobar Islands, foodgrains have not been distributed to the targetted group even once in
the academic session of the 1996-97.

12.4 The Committee makes the following recommendations to correct the above
mentioned situation:- fe

(1) Cooked meal should be served;

(2) Strict monitoring system delegating the power to Village Level Education
Committee or PTA should be evolved;

*(3) Co-ordination between the Civil Supply and Education Departments of State
Governments needs to be strengthened;

(4) Local youth may be involved for the preparation of the cooked food; and

(5) Mid-day Meal should be provided through a separate mechanism without disturbing
the normal academic work of Teachers.

The Noon Meal Programme of Tamil Nadu Government may be adopted as a model for
implementing Mid-Day Meal Scheme:

XIII. INCENTIVES TO SC/ST, OBC AND MINORITIES COMMUNITY

13.1 The Committee finds that all the States are providing special incentives to SC/ST/
OBC students of Government Schools so as to motivate them towards studies. As a result, ©
there has been gradual increase in the enrolment ratio and gradual decrease in the drop out
rates of these categories of children.

13.2 The Committee feels that the incentives being given to SC/ST/OBC students may
be extended to the children who belong to the weaker sections of the society so as to bring
them into the arena of education. There is a need to revise the present incentive scheme.
The Committee also feels that children from the Minority Community are not so interested
in education. Therefore to spread the light of education and to check the drop-out rate
among them, more madrasas should be set up and special incentives should be given to
them.

XIV. DISTRIBUTION OF FREE TEXT BOOKS

14.1 In most of the States, free text books are being distributed amongst the children
upto Class V but the Committee during its visits noticed that there are cases of late supply
of text books. Even in some places, it reaches at the fag end of the academic session. The
Committee recommends that strict monitoring system should be evolved to check this


11

problem. The Committee also feels that the contents of the text books should be at par with
the MLL.

XV. GIRLS EDUCATION/WOMEN’S DEVELOPMENT

15.1 The survey carried out in the field of education reveals that the education has been
an intervention for women’s equality and the time has now come that Government should
make its utmost efforts so that the existing gap between the girls and boys is bridged.
Unfortunately, in India girls’ education deprivation is the most glaring manifestation of
India’s educational backwardness and the educational indicators are very adverse in classes I
to V and I to VIII. The All India drop out rate for 1995-96 amongst the girls in classes I to
V is 38.35% and in classes I to VIII it is 52.77% which is very high. The main reason for
this large number of drop-out rate is that the girls are engaged in house hold work such as
fuel and fodder collection, fetching of water and care of siblings etc.

15.2 The Committee recommends for giving suitable incentives to girl child, like
providing free uniform, free teaching/learning materials and construction of toilet and
providing drinking water facilities particularly in the girls schools/Co-education schools. The
Committee also recommends that a Special Management structure should be set-up wherein
women should be placed in the key position and at the micro level women’s groups should
be engaged for the development of the girl child.

15.3 As women have traditionally played a subordinate role in sotiety, so they have
been conditioned into thinking of themselves as inferior to men, to be tolerated only if they
toil, fetch, carry and procreate. Financial burden is only a hurdle in the education of boys
but it becomes an insurmountable barrier when the question of education of girls arises.
Sending her to school would also mean an additional loss of income because the mother will
have to stay away from work to look after the younger ones and to do the household chores.
But education can be an enduring and strong factor in women’s empowerment.

15.4 The Committee feels that unless a systematic effort is made to improve women’s
access to education it will not be possible to achieve the objective of education for all by the
year 2000. Experience has shown that the rural women have not kept pace with the
‘Sathin’s’ progress. It is now a recognised fact that instead of focussing on just one women,
‘Sathin’ village level activity should be central around a Group of women. The Committee is
of the view that this collective, the Samooh, after adequate orientation and training would
enable the village women to take an interest and play an effective role in community
activities especially related to Education.

XVI. CONTINUATION OF PLAN PROJECTS

16.1 The Committee was given to understand by Secretaries of the State Governments
during the discussions that many schemes which were introduced during the plan period
were not continued in the next Plan due to which the State Governments had to face a lot of
problems to continue that project because of non-availability of funds. The State
Governments were of the opinion that ‘before discontinuing any schemes in the next Plan
period the viability of the existing schemes should be reviewed and they should be carried
forward on merit basis. The Committee recommends that view-point of the State
Governments may be examined by the Centre.

XVII. COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT

17.1 The Committee during its field visit observed that local people are little bit
indifferent to the present system of education due to lack of people’s mobilisation, school


12

community interaction, centralisation and also due to concentration of management powers
in the hand of the bureaucracy. To correct the present system, the Committee feels that
there is a need for creation for mechanism of community involvement, decentralisation of
powers and reimposing faith in grass root-level people. The Committee also interacted with
the management body of the Lok Jumbish and Shiksha Karmi Projects at Rajasthan. The
Committee has seen that people’s movement activities for the development of education are
really getting their root of Rajasthan. The Committee was also very impressed by the
activities of Village Education Committee functioning in the villages of Andhra Pradesh.

17.2 The Committee feels that there is a need for formation of Village Core Teams to
mobilise the people which will ultimately form the Village Education Committee. The
Committee understands that Panchayati Raj Institutions have been given sufficient powers
by 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments to have an effective say in the functioning of
schools in their area. But so far, this has been only on paper. State Government have still to
show their willingness to implement these constitutional amendments by handing over all the
powers and required funds as envisaged. In West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh, the
Committee during its visit noticed that these Panchayati Raj Institutions are discharging a
pivotal role in the rural economy and also in spreading education. The Committee hopes
that in the very near future, scenario in the field of elementary education would definitely
change in the light of all the constitutional amendments made. The Committee, however,
urges upon the Department of Education to call a meeting of the Education Ministers of all
the State Governments to work out modalities to provide a legal status to the Panchayati
Raj Institutions in this regard.


MINUTES


"xX
TENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 16th January, 1997 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.8. Chavan—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
Dr. M. Aram

Shri Raj Nath Singh

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma
Dr. Mohan Babu

LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
9. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
10. Shri Jai Prakash
11. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Chaudhary Paragi Lal
14. Dr. C. Silvera
15. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
16. Shri I.G. Sanadi
17. Shrimati Krishna Bose
18. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
19. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi
20. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
21. Shri Samik Lahiri
22. Dr. Bali Ram
23. Shri Ranen Barman
24. Shri Surender Singh
25. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri S.C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
ies e

3. = * *

4. The Committee, thereafter discussed about its future programme and appointed
seven Sub-Committees on different subjects for detailed examination thereon. The subjects
allotted to. each Sub-Committee and the tentative composition of the seven Sub-Committee
are as under:

*Minutes of the Ist to Ninth meeting of the Committee relate to other matters.
***Relate to other matters.

15


16

@ * * *
(i) * * *
(iii) * * *
(iv) Sub-Committee on the Problem of Drop-Outs

1. Shri Samik Lahiri Convenor

2. Shri Jai Prakash Member

3. Shri I.G. Sanadi 7

4. Shri P. V. Rajeshwar Rao Py

5. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal ‘3

6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma rf
(y),.* : *
(vi) * * *
(vii) * * *

5. The Committee then discussed about the role of the Sub-Committees and also
decided that the Sub-Committees after the detailed examination of the respective subjects
would submit their Reports to the main Committee.

6. * * *

7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 Noon.

***Relate to other matters.


I
FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Monday, the 4th August 1997 in Committee Room

‘C’ First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

ANSwWn

2:

PRESENT MEMBERS

. Shri 5.8. Chavan—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
Dr. B.B. Dutta

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Shri Krishna

. Dr. Bali Ram

. Shri Ranen Barman

. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

. *

*

3. The Committee then reviewed the work done by the previous Committee. The
Chairman informed the Committee that the following subjects were taken up by the previous
Committee for detailed study and a separate Sub-Committee on each of the subjects was
appointed:—

ie

Value Based Education;

2. Vocational Education;

9० :3 9 ७ + ९०

. Non-Formal Education;
. Adult Education;

. Problem of Drop-Outs;
. Dreaded Diseases;

Drug Control; and

. National Family Welfare Programme.

***Relate to other matters.

17


18

The Committee, after some discussion, decided that since none of the Sub-
Committees has completed the work, it was necessary to identify the same subjects
again. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to constitute the Sub-
Committees on each of the subjects identified. The Chairman informed the
Committee that he would re-constitute the same Sub-Committees.

4. * * * *

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

***Relate to other matters,


“XII
TWELFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10,00 a.m. on Friday, the 9th October, 1998 in Committee

Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

9०:०9 ए७ | ७ ९७

4.
2
3

PRESENT MEMBERS
Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav

LOK SABHA

Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
Shri Sartaj Singh

Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
Shri Chinmayanand Swami
Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
Shri Indrajeet Mishra

Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
Shri Ajit Jogi

Shri V.M. Sudheeran

Shri Shankar Pannu

Shri Abdul Hamid

Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja

Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
Shri H.P. Singh

Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES

Representatives of Ministry of Human Resource Development
(Department of Education)

Shri P.R. Dasgupta, Secretary
Shri M.C. Satyawadi, Addl. Secretary
Prof. S. Rame Gowda, Chairman (AICTE)

*Minutes of the Ist to XIth mectings of the committee relate to, other matters.

19


20

4. Prof. D.V. Singh, Vice-Chairman (AICTE)
5. Shri J.P. Aggarwal, Member Secretary (AICTE)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
2.” . *

3. The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft Reports of the Sub-
Committee on Problem of Drop-Outs and Dreaded Diseases and adopted the same
with some modifications.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m. to meet again on 23rd October,
1998.

***Relate to other matters.


“XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 19th November, 1998 in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

2.

PRESENT MEMBERS

. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

. Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi
. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy कु |

Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
LOK SABHA

. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam }
. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh ‘
. Shri Indrajeet Mishra :

. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

. Dr, Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil

. Shri Shmanur Shiv Shankarappa

. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

. Shri Abdul Hamid

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Prof. $.P. Singh Baghel

. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja

. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy

» Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES

*
* *

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri 0.8. Rai, Under Secretary

* * *

*Minutes of the XIIIth mecting of the Committee relate to other matters.
***Relate to other matters.

21


22

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate requisite number of Members
for presentation of some Reports of the Committee to the Rajya Sabha and lay the same in
the Lok Sabha during the ensuing session of Parliament.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 p.m.