Sa «बा

i.
|
|
i

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
ON

THE UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL,
1995

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 16.8.1995)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16.8.1995)

Raha जयते

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING li
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
ON i
THE UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1995

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION ‘
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT) H

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha’ on 16.8.1995)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16.8.1995)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW. DELHI



Errata to the Twenty-Ninth Report of the Comittee on
The University Grants Comisaion (Amendment) 8111, 199, University Granta Comnisaio: ndment) B 4

On page 8 at serial no, 34 for ‘Mr, ४.2, Kulkarni' read
'M,P, Pharmeist Association’,

On page 10 para 2 line 5 for ‘list' read 'gist',


CONTENTS

I. Composirion OF THE COMMITTEE ...... 636 ३०३ ute
Il. PREFACE...
गा, Rerort......

IV, ANNEXURES
(i) Press 1016886/00000 00000 40000 27000 Sean

(ii) List of persons who gave memorandam ...

(iii). List of fake Universities/Institutions ...
(iv) Minutes..

RS3323


ie

COMPOSITION

Shri P.. Upendra——Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

Miss Saroj Khaparde

Shri O.P. Kohli

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Md. Salim

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. 1.0, Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof: Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

. Dr. Vasant Pawar

. Prof 9.1. Kurien

. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
. Shri K.T. Vandayar

. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

. Shri Inder Jit

५ Shri Anna Joshi

. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

. Shri Rambadan

. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

. Shri Ramchandra Dome

@F THE COMMITTEE

(1995-96)

(i)


(ii)
42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal
45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Subhash C, Jarodia, Director

3. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

4. Shri Om Datta Sharma, Under Secretary
5. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

6. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee, do hereby
present, on its behalf, the Twenty-ninth Report on the University Grants Commission
(Amendment) Bill, 1995.

2. The Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 2nd June, 1995. It was referred to
the Committee by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, vide Bulletin Part I! dated June 6, 1995, for
examination and report.

3. The Amendment Bill aims at enhancing the penalty for violation of Sections 22 and
23 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, by amending Section 24 of the same
Act. The penalty for violation of these sections at present is a maximum fine of. Rs. one
thousand. This is proposed to be enhanced to a minimum punishment of imprisonment of
not less than six months, which may extend to three years, and also a fine of not less than
Rs. one lakh, which may extend to Rs, 10 lakhs. The amendment also provides that the
court may award lesser punishment for reasons to be recorded in the judgement.

4. A Press Release, inviting suggestions from individuals, organisations and institutions
interested in the subject matter of the Bill, was issued. (Annexure-I), 46 memoranda,
containing views, opinions, comments and suggestions, were received by the Committee in
response thereto. (List at Annexure-II).

5. The Committee considered the Bill in two sittings and heard the oral evidence of the
Secretary, Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development and the
Chairman, University Grants Commission, and also of the representative of the Legislative
Department, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs.

6. The Committee, in its meeting held on August 9, 1995, considered the draft report
on the Bill and adopted the same for presgntation/laying in both the Houses of Parliament.

New De tut; P. UPENDRA
August 9, 1995 Chairman

Committee on Human Resource Development
Sravana 18, 1917 (Saka)

(iii)



REPORT

The problem of fake universities awarding unrecognised degrees has been engaging the
attention of the University Grants Commission and the Government of India for the past
few years. A ‘Fake’ university is an institution which is not entitled to call itself a university
or award degrees. According to Section 2(f) of the University Grants Commission Act 1956,
a “University” means, ‘‘a University established or incorporated by or under a Central Act,
a provincial Act or a State Act, and includes any such institution as may, in consultation
with the University concerned, be recognized by the Commission in accordance with the
regulations made in this behalf under this Act.”

2. Thus, any University, which has not been created under an Act of Parliament or of a
state Legislature or has not been granted the status of a deemed university, under section 3
of the University Grants Commission Act 1956, cannot call itself a University or award
degrees. Since the penalty available in the Act to check the growth of ‘fake’ universities/
institutions is only Rs. 1,000 (maximum), a large number of fake institutions/organisations’
have been operating in various parts of the country, duping the gullible students.

3. As per the information furnished by the University Grants Commission, there are, at
present, 27 such institutions, which style themselves as ‘universities’ and award degree
illegally. A list of such institutions is given at ANNEXURE-III.

4. The Committee on Petitions (VIII Lok Sabha), in its 9th Report, had dealt with this
subject while discussing the question of recognition of ‘Maithili University’ in the year, 1989
and made the following two important recommendations in this regard for implementation
by the Government:

(i) The machinery for watching implementation of the provisions of the UGC Act
may be streamlined and made more effective and purposeful. If need be, the
provisions of UGC Act miay be suitably amended so that there is a self-working
system aimed at checking the activities of institutions/organisations which tend to
exploit the gullible youth by resorting to illegal methods;

(ii) The penalty envisaged in Section 24 appears to be too mild. In order that it may
have a deterrent effect, it may be suitably enhanced and even imprisonment may
be provided for by amending the relevant Section of the Act.

5. The Deptt. of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, had introduced
in the Rajya Sabha on 11.12.1991, a Bill titled ‘the University Grants Commission
(Amendment) Bill, 1991, with the object of:—

(a) empowering the UGC to specify, by regulations, the terms and conditions of
service, including the scales of pay of the Officers/employees and teachers of
central universities; and

(b) providing for deterrent punishment for persons establishing and running fake
universities.

6. Since there were sharp reactions from the teaching and non-teaching employees of
Central Universities, the Government decided to refer the Bill to the University Grants
Commission for examination and report. The University Grants Commission constituted a

1

53323



2

Committee under Chairman, University Grants Commission, which made, inter-alia, the
following recommendations:—

(i) the existing Act, barring amendment to Section 24 does not need, in principle,
any substantial amendment at the present;

(ii) there should be a coordinating/consultative mechanism between central
universities and the University Grants Commission;

(iii) In Section 24 of the principal Act, for the words ‘which may extend to Rs. 1,000
(Rupees one thousand)’, wherever they occur, the words ‘imprisonment for a
term which may be a minimum of six months and shall also be liable to a fine of
not less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to ten lakh rupees, shall be
substituted.

7. In view of the ‘above recommendations, the University Grants Commission
(Amendment) Bill, 1991, was withdrawn from the Rajya Sabha on 1.6.1995, and a fresh Bill,
titled ‘the University Grants Commission (Amendment)Bill, 1995’ has been introduced in
the House on 2.6.1995. the new Amendment Bill has now been referred to the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development by the
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, for examination and repoft.

8. Keeping in view the concern of the Government and the general public over the
mushrooming of self-styled ‘universities’ functioning in different parts of the country, the
Committee has immediately taken up considesation of the bill and issued a Press
Communique as well as an advertisement, in leading newspapers inviting the views/
suggestions of individuals/organisations/institutions on the subject under discussion. The
Committee received 46 representations/suggestions from the members of the public.

9. In the meantime, a questionnaire was also prepared on the subject and sent to the
Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, for its comments/
views. The Deptt. of Education sent a note on the various points raised in the
questionnaire. Suggestions received from the public were also sent to the Ministry for
examination and comments. The Committee wishes to place on record its appreciation of the
promptness with which the .Ministry sent its comments/replies on the representations,
although the time given to it was very short. At the same time, the Committee is at a loss to
understand why, after so many years during which there has been no effective law against
fake universities, the Ministry has come up with an Amendment Bill which does not take
into account the first recommendation of the Committee on Petitions and remains limited to
a very narrow scope.

10. Initiating the discussion in thé Committee at its sitting on August 3, 1995, the
Chairman narrated the background to the introduction of the Amendment Bill and stated
that some of the doubts had already been clarified by the Deptt. of Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development in their replies/comments furnished to the Committee.
Members of the Committee felt that a large number of fake universities/institutions were
operating all over the country and there was no regular mechanism or system, either with
the University Grants Commission or the Deptt. of: Education, to detect such institutions
and curb their activities. Surprisingly, with a large organisational network available with the
University Grants Commission and the Ministry of Human Resource Development, no
survey has been carried out so far, by either of the two countries, other than the 27
mentioned in the ANNEXURE-III. This list also is based on the complaints received from
the public or the aggrieved persons and not as a result of any survey conducted by the
Government or the UGC. There seems to be a big lacuna in the University Grants
Commission Act 1956 which requires to be rectified with utmost priority. It should not be
difficult for the University Grants Commission or the Deptt. of Education to prepare a

)rs3323



‘a, the
10916,
central

1,000
for a
‘ine of
all be

jission
1 Bill,
ced in
ment-
y the

or the
/, the
Press
views/

The

० the
qents/
1 the
y for
of the
tions,
dss to
zainst
take
ed to

» the
tated
ry of
ittee.
were
with
itions
h the
:, no
e727.
from
7 the

rants -

ot be
rea

183323

3

comprehensive list of all such fake universities/institutions and publish them for the
information of the general public so that innocent youth do not fall prey to the activities of
these so-called universities/institutions.

11. The Committee is pained to note that even today many institutions are taking undue
advantage of the lacuna in the Act. There are many institutions which get themselves
registered under the Societies Registration Act and start using the title of a ‘University
without even informing the University Grants Commission

12. Some institutions have been associating the word ‘Vidyapeeth’ in the nomenclature
of the institute to create an impression of ‘University’ in the minds of the general. public.
The Chairman, University Grants Commission, informed the Committee that the definition
of the ‘University’. in the Hindi version of the Act does not mention the: word and it
mentions only “Vishwavidyalaya”, Therefore, action against the institutions using the ward
‘Vidyapeeth’ in their nomenclature cannot be taken within the ambit of the definition of the
‘University’ contained in Section 2(f) of the Act. Unless a suitable amendment is carried out
in the definition of the word ‘University’, as given in the Act, the Government would not be
able to restrain the unscrupulous elements from take advantage of the ambiguity prevailing
in the existing Act. This is more so because there are some reputed institutions with the
name of ‘Vidyapeeth’ which are either Universities or Deemed-Universities e.g ‘Gujarat
Vidyapeeth’, ‘Kashi Vidyapeeth’ and ‘the Lal ‘Bahadur Shastri Kendriya Sanskrit
Vidyapeeth’, etc. The unsuspecting student community falls prey and becomes a victim of
the fake universities using the word ‘Vidyapeeth’ after their names. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that a separate Schedule may be annexed to the Aét
mentioning the words ‘University’, ‘Vishwavidyalaya’, and such other words as may be used
in other regional languages so as to cover them under the definition of ‘University’, as
contained in the Section 2(f of the Act

13, As mentioned earlier, the Committee on Petitions (VIII Lok Sabha), in its 9th
Report given in the year 1989, had made two important recommendations. Of the two
recoramendations, the Department of Education and the University Grants Commission
have 109 brought forward amendmént to Section 24 of the University Grants Commission
Act, only proposing to enhance the penalty for violation of Sections 22 and 23 of the Act.
The officials of the Ministry and the University Grants Commission could not come out with
any satisfactory explanation as to why no action has so far been taken on the first
recommendation of the Committee on Petitions regarding creation of a self-working system,
which was equally important for arresting the activities and the growth of fake institutions/
organisations mushrooming in the country. The Committee strongly feels that unless a self-
working system within the University Grants Commission is created to act as a vigilance
machinery/cell and also to monitor the activities of such institutions, the objective sought to
be achieved by the present Amendment will not be accomplished in its true spirit. Therefore,
the Committee feels that there is an urgent need to bring in a more comprehensive
amendment so as to encompass the various facets of the problem within the ambit of the law
to arrest the nefarious activities of these institutions/organisations.

14. At present, neither the University Grants Commission nor the Deptt. of Education
owns the responsibility for taking action against the fake institutions coming to their notice
The University Grants Commission feels that the State Government machinery will take
cognizance of the offence suo motu. The State Government machinery, particularly the
police authorities, are already preoccupied with other problems and seldom take cognizance
of these offences. Therefore, neither the University Grants Commission nor the State
Government takes action against these institutions. It is only when a complaint is made,



4

either to the Deptt. of Education or the University Grants Commission, some kind of action
is initiated, which is neither effective nor considered to be deterrent. The University Grants
Commission often writes to the State Governments to take action against such institutions,
Very rarely, prosecutions are launched against these institutions and the University Grants
Commission officials could not cite any case where prosecution launched had resulted in
conviction of the persons responsible for these illegal activities. In most of the cases, we find
that the legal process continues for years and the ‘fake’ universities continue to flourish in
the meantime. The Committee, therefore, feels that there should be some mechanism or
machinery to find out the existence of these institutions and the Act should specify the
authorities responsible to take action against these institutions. The authorities, so specified in
the Act, should be made accountable and responsible for taking action in these matters. In
case these authorities failed to act at the appropriate time, there should be provision for
suitable action against them, as their in action also contributes to the growth and rise of these
fake institutions ruining the careers of thousands of youth,

15. The University Grants Commission/Deptt. of Education could not cite cases
wherein they had acted effectively and launched prosecution proceedings against these
institutions. Even in the cases where prosecutions have been launched, such as in the case of
“Maithili University’ the State Government has failed to pursue the matters with the court
vigoruosly, resulting in the continued existence of these institutions. For example, a case is
reported to have been registered against ‘Maithili’ University’. The self-styled University has
filed a suit against the University Grants Commission in the court of First Munsif,
Darbhanga. The counter affidavit was filed on behalf of the University Grants Commission
and the case was fixed for hearing for 24th April, 1992. The University Grants Commission
or the Deptt. of Education does not know the present fate of the case. Similar is the
position in respect of complaints against Mahila Gram Vidyapeeth/Vishwavidyalaya, Paryag,
Allahabad; Uttar Pradesh Vishwavidyalaya, Kosi Kalan, Mathura (U.P.); DDB Sanskrit
University, Puthur, Trichi (Tamil Nadu) and Testator Research University, Bodinay-Kanur
(Tamil Nadu). These are only a few illustrations of the laxity shown by the University
Grants Commission and the Deptt. of Education in tackling this problem. The Committee,
therefore, recommends creation of a separate cell in the University Grants Commission to
follow-up such cases in courts and with the State Governments. Additional funds should be
made ayailable to the UGC for this purpose.

16. On being asked as to how the University Grants Commission will ensure the closure
of these fake institutions even after the enhancement of the penalty proposed in the present
Amendment Bill, neither the University Grants Commission nor the Deptt. of Education
could come out with any plausible explanation. This means that even after this Amendment
Bill is passed by the Parliament, these institutes will continue to operate despite their
conviction by the courts. The Committee is very much disturbed over this prospect and

ould be a provision in the Act to order closure of these fake

oon as their existence comes to the notice of the authorities. The
onus in that event, will be on the institution concerned to prove its bonafides and legitimacy.
The Committee feels that besides taking penal action, including imposition of fine, closure of
these institutions is very important as otherwise the very purpose of bringing this Amendment
gets defeated. There should also be a provision for confiscation/seizure of the documents,
connected with the running of these institutions, at the time of their closure and confiscation
of properties and assets in case of failure to pay the fine imposed by the court.

17. At present, the so-called ‘fake’ universities/institutions have been liberally giving
advertisements in newspapers tempting the unsuspecting youth of the country to join their



5

institutes for obtaining degrees/diplomas very easily. There is no check by the University
Grants Commission or the Government on such advertisements. Even the newspapers do not
observe any restraint on publishing such advertisements even when they are aware of their
dubious character. Since these advertisements are meant to facilitate the illegal activities of
these institutions, their publication in the newspapers should be banned. The University
Grants Commission and the Deptt. of Education should take up the matter with the Press
Council of India and the Editors Guild, etc. to finalise the modalities for excercising restraint
by newspapers on the publication of such advertisements. The Press cannot shy away from
their social responsibility in this regard, The recognised Universities, while advertising about
their courses, should invariably mention in ‘their advertisements that they are
U.G.C.—recognised universities, so that advertisements relating to the fake universities can
easily be identified by the public.

18. on being asked as to why the Government has made provision in the proposed
Amendment to section 24 of the University Grants Commission Act, giving powers to the
courts to reduce the penalities, as well as imprisonment, for reasons to be recorded in the
judgement, the officials of the Ministry/University Grants Commission stated that this has
been done on the advice of the Union Law Ministry. The representatives of the Ministry of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs. Legislative Deptt. informed that this has been done
keeping in view the legislative practice in vogue at present in such cases. When the
Committee asked as to why the Law Ministry was so kind to the criminals who are bent
upon ruining the careers of the gullible youth, the representative of the Law Ministry could
not come out with any satisfactory reply and agreed that the proviso could be dropped, The
Committee feels that dropping of the proviso is essential if the objectives of the proposed
Amendment are to be achieved.

19. The Committee recommends the Bill for being passed with the modifcation/
recommendations suggested in the preceding paragraphs.



ANNEXURE-I
Press Release

The University Grants Commission (Amendment) Bill, 1995, as introduced in the Rajya
Sabha on the 2nd June, 1995, has been referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development, headed by Shri P. Upendra, M.P., for examination and
report. :

2. The Bill proposes to deal with the problem of ‘fake’ ‘universities (i.e. those
universities which are not established under the act of Parliament or a State Legislature or
not granted “deemed to be university” status) by enhancing penalty provision for running
such universities and awarding degrees. The penalty for this at present, is a maximum of Rs,
1,000 under Section 24 of the UGC Act, 1956

3. In view of a large number of ‘fake’ universities operating and duping students all over
the country, the Bill seeks to amend Section 24 of the UGC Act, 1956, to provide that who-
soever contravenes the provisions of Sections 22 and 23 of the said Act shall be liable to be
punished with imprisonment for a term not less than six months which may extend to three
years and would be liable to a fine of Rs. one lakh which may extend to Rs. Ten lakhs. It
further seeks to provide that the Court may, however, award a lesser punishment for reasons
to be recorded in writing

4. The Committee seeks written mefnoranda containing views/suggestions from
individuals, organisations/institutions, etc. interested in the subject matter of the Bill
Accordingly, all those interested are requested to send their views latest by 31st July, 1995,
to Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director (HRD), Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House
Annexe (Room No, 228), New Delhi.

5. Copies of the Bill can be obtained on requisition from the address given above.



2 Rajya
amittee
on and

those
ture or
unning
of Rs.

1 over
t who-
: to be
» three
chs, It
sasons

from
Bill.
1995,
House

bove.

10.
11.
12.
13,
14.
15,
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
31.
23;

23;

ANNEXURE-II

List of Persons who gave Memoranda

. Mr. Rishi

INDORE

. Mr. Arvind Bhattanagar

JAIPUR

. Mr. Balbir Singh

AMBALA CANTT,

. Mr. Laltesh Trivedi

MUTAUR, U.P.

. Mr. Kapil Chawla

DELHI

. Ms. Lipika Bhattacharya

NEW DELHI

. Mr. Ved Parakash

DELHI

. Dr. Munish Kumar Sethi

BALLABGARH

. Ms. Rita Singh

NEW DELHI

Mr. Umesh Chandra Shrivastava
BAREILLY, U.P.

Mr. Gyaneswar Sharma
ALIGARH

Mr. Mahindra Avasthi
JHUNJHNU

Mr, Ram Parsad Sharma
KATHUA

Mr.Mahendra Kumar Mishra
ROURKELA

Mr. B.S. Raghuwanshi
BETUL :

Ms. Mamta Raghuwanshi
BHAINSDEHI (M.P.)_ '
Mr. Aeltemesh Rein
DELHI

Mr. V.R. Abhayankar
GWALIOR

Mr. Shyam Bihari

NEW DELHI

Mr. Vinod Singh Chandel
BANDA

Mr. Harishchandra
FAFUND, ETAVA

Mr. Arvind Chaturvedi
NEW DELHI

Mr. Anand K. Alsisriya
DUMKA


24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
30
34,
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

46.

Mr. Atul: Kumar
DELHI

Dr. Shayam Sunder Joshi

NEW DELHI
Dr. O.P. Garg
AJMER

Prof: Dr.) 0.7. Singh Pal

KANPUR

Dr. Piyush Kumar
DEHRADUN

Dr. B.S. Rao
BANGALORE

Mr. S.C, Bhattacharya
NEW DELHI

Mr. L. Joychandra Sin
IMPHAL

Mr. Sunil Kumar
GAZIABAD

gh, President, Joint Administrative Council

Mr. Balmiki Chaurashiya

MAHOBA

Mr. K.L. Kulkarni
BHOPAL

Mr. Monazir Ahmed
GUNTUR

Col. Tej Bhan Singh
NEW DELHI

Mr. K.S. Nair
COCHIN

Dr. Himat Singh Sinha

KURUKSHETRA
Ms. Mudita Gupta
NEW DELHI

Mr. I. Narsing Rao
HYDERABAD

Mr. Babu Lal Mali
JAIPUR

Mr. Gora Lal Shukla
BHOPAL

Mr. Shambu Dayal
SIKANDRA (Raj.)
Dr. B.K. Chatterjee
NEW DELHI

Mr. Bharat Bhushan
FEROZEPUR CITY (
Mr. K.K. Sharma
KULLU

Punj.)



ANNEXURE-III

List of fake Universities/Institutions

1. Maithili University/Vishwavidyalaya, Darbhanga (Bihar)
2. Takshila Kendriya Vishwavidyalaya, Uttam Nagar, New Delhi

Mahila Gram Vidyapith/Vishwavidyalaya, (Women’s University) Prayag, Allahabad
(U.P.)

w

. Varanesaya Sanskrit /Vishwavidyalaya, Varanasi (U.P.)
. Commercial University Ltd., Darya Ganj, Delhi

. Testator Research University, Bodinaya-Kanur (Tamil Nadu)

. Sree Narayana Open University, Quilon (Kerala)
. Gandhi Hindi Vidyapith, Prayag, Allahabad (U.P.) |

Wir 60: HA Sto बे, कं.

- National University of Electro Complex Homoeopathy, Kanpur (U.P.)
10. University Newjerusalem, Kuthuparamba, Cannore (Kerala) i | |
11. World Social Work University, Perunguzhi (Kerala)
12. Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose University (Open University) Achaltal, Aligarh (U.P.) |
13. Shrimati Mahadevi Verma Open University, Mughal Sarai, (U.P.) i
14. D.D.B. Sanskrit University, Puthur Trichi (Tamil Nadu) bt
15. Amritsar University, Amritsar |
16, Arya University, Srinagar

17. Bible University, Ambur (North Arcot)

18. Eastern Orthodox University,’ Ambur (North Arcot)
19. Globe University of Science, Kumbakonam

20. St. John’s University, Kizhanattam : 1

21. National University, Nagpur

22, Self-Culture University, Kizhanattam

23. United Nations University, Delhi

24. Vocational University, Amritsar & Delhi
25. Western University, Kapurthala
26. Uttar Pradesh Vishwavidyapith, Kosi Kalan (Mathura)

27. Maharana Pratap Shiksha Niketan Vishwavidyalaya, Pratapgarh (U.P.)

9



ANNEXURE-IV

Minutes of the meetings of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
: Resource Development

XI
“ELEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Thuesday, the Ist August, 1995, in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman 4 1!
RAJYA SABHA i

Dr. M. Aram

Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

Shri ५. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Prayat Kumar Samantaray

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani :
Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 4
Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
10. Dr. Vasant Pawar
11. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
12. Shri Aslam Sher Khan
13. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
14, Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
15, Shri Anna Joshi
16. Shri Ramachandra Dome
17, Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
SECRETARIAT 5
- Shri 5. C. Jarodia, Director
. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
» Shri N. K. Singh, Deputy Director
- Shri 0. D. Sharma, Under Secretary
- Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman informed the Committee that the UGC (Amendment) Bill, 1995 has
been referred to the Committee for examination and report. A press communique inviting
suggestions/views of the individuals/institutions/organisations, interested in the Bill had
been issued and several representations have been received in response thereof. The
Committee directed that a list of important suggestions be made and a copy each of the
representations may be circulated to the Members.
3,9 कक ++

4. ** कक कक

5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. to meet again at 4.00 p.m. on 2nd
August, 1995.

कलर

(७ # ५० ७ ++

{Minutes of 1 to X meetings of the Committee relate to matters not included in this report,
**Relate to other matters.

10


XI
‘THIRTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 3rd August, 1995 in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

३, Shri O.P. Kohli

4. Prof. I.G. Sanadi

5. Shri'Ashoke Kumar Sen

6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma

LOK SABHA

» Dr, Viswanatham Kanithi

. Prof. (Smt.) Savithiri, Lakshman

. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

. Dr. Vasant Pawar

. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

. Shri Inder Jit

» Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Dr. K.D, Jeswani

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya

» Shri Anna Joshi

. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
WITNESSES

’

The Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education)

1. Shri. S.V. Giri, Secretary

2. Shri P.R. Das Gupta, O.S.D.
3, Shri P. Thakur, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Durga Das Gupta, Director
5. Smt. Arti Kant, Director

The University Grants Commission

. Prof. (Ms.) Armaity S. Desai, Chairman
. Prof. N.C. Mathur, Vice-Chairman

. Shri Inderjit Khanna, Secretary

. Dr.(Mrs.) P. Mittal, Deputy Secretary

“Minutes of XII meeting of the Committee relates to matters not included in this Teport.

ll



12

The Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Legislative Department)
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Joint Secretary

SECRETARIAT

1, Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri O.D. Sharmia, Under Secretary

‘ 4. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

5. Shri P.P,K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the above mentioned witnesses in connection with the
University Grants Commission (Amendment) Bill, 1995

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept

4. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. to. meet again at 4.00 p.m. on 9th
August, 1995



9th

XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING 1

The. Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 9th August, 1995 in Committee :
Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. :

PRESENT MEMBERS : 1
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram |
3. Shri O.P. Kohli है

4. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

5. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani Pe
7, Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma i

LOK SABHA i

8. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

9. Prof. (Smt.) Savithiri Lakshman
10. Dr. Vasant Pawar

11. Shri Inder Jit

12. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

13, Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

15. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

16. Shri Anna Joshi

17, Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

SECRETARIAT |

1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary : है
. Shri 0.0. Sharma, Under Secretary , i
Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director H
. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer i

पक + ०१७

2. The Committee took up for consideration and adoption the draft report on the
University Grants Commission (Amendment) Bill, 1995, and with suggestions for some
modification, adopted the same. af

5,788 + ax

4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram, ‘i
Shri O.P. Kohli and Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma to present to the Rajya Sabha, the
29th, 30th & 31st reports on the University Grants Commission (Amendment) Bill, 1995,
functioning of Central Government Health Scheme and functioning of Central Government
Hospitals respectively on the 16th August, 1995. The Committee also authorised Shri Inder
Jit and Dr. Vasant Pawar to lay the said reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the above
mentioned date.

5. The Committee then adjourned. at 6.00 p.m.

**Relates to other matter.