148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED – FORTY EIGHTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE HUNDRED THIRTY FIFTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS 2003-2004 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
 (MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   4th FEBRUARY, 2004)
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4th FEBRUARY, 2004)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRURY, 2004/MAGHA, 1925 (SAKA)
                                                       E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
                                                              Website: http//parliamentofindia.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.         PREFACE
3.          REPORT       
CHAPTER  I   Recommendations/Observations which have been  accepted by the Government
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the                   Government’s replies
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted
                        by the Committee
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final replies of the Government are still
awaited     
3.          MINUTES     
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
(2004)
 
Shri Arjun Singh           ¾¾                Chairman
 
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Dr. Abrar Ahmed        
Dr. Akhilesh Das
Shri B.P. Apte 
Shri Bachani Lekhraj
Shri Eduardo Faleiro 
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
Shri Lalhmingliana
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi
Shri R. Sarath Kumar
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Smt. Vanga Geetha
Shri Dara Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri Ambareesh
Shri Ramakant Angle
Shri Kirti Jha Azad
Shri G. S. Basavaraj
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
Shri R.L. Jalappa
Shri Bali Ram Kashyap
Shri Brij Lal Khabri
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Y.G. Mahajan
Dr. Manda Jagannath
Smt. Nivedita Mane
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik
Smt. Renu Kumari
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao
Shri Sunil Dutt
Shri Ramsheth Thakur
Dr. N. Venkataswamy
Smt. Ganti Vijaykumari
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
Shri .G. J. Javia
Prof. Kailasho Devi
 

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this
Hundred Forty Eighth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Hundred
Thirty Fifth Report onDemands for Grants (Demand No.46) of the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare for the year 2003-2004.
2.         The Hundred Thirty Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23
rd  April, 2003.  Replies
of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Health, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 29
th January, 2004.
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the 29th  January 2004  
NEW DELHI;
January 29 , 2004
Magha9, 1925 (Saka)
ARJUN SINGH
Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on         Human Resource Development
REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in its One Hundred-Thirty-Fifth Report onDemands for Grants (Demand No.46) of the Department of Health, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2003-2004.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in
the Report.  They have been categorized as follows:-
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 5.1&5.2, 7.2, 9.1&9.2, 11          
(Chapter I) Total- 4
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
NIL (Chapter II)  Total- NIL
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:  2.2, 3.3&3.4, 3.6&3.7, 3.8&3.9, 3.10, 4.7, 7.1,8.3, 10.2&10.3,      (Chapter-III)  Total-9
 Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited: 3.11, 6.1&6.2   
(Chapter – IV) Total- 2
 
The final  replies in respect of  the recommendations/observations made in Chapter IV of the Report are still awaited
from the Department. The Committee may be apprised of the same as and when action is taken.
 
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 I          CANCER RESEARCH
Recommendations/Observation
5.1       Plan allocation under Cancer Research was Rs. 55.00 crores during RE 2002-2003 which has been reduced to
Rs. 49.00 crores in BE 2003-2004.   Explaining the reasons for decrease, the Department has informed thatthe allocation
for 'National Cancer Control Programme' consists mainly of allocation to the Regional Cancer Centres (both existing
and proposed), grants-in-aid to State Govts. for Oncology Wing Development in Medical College Hospitals, grants-in-

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
aid for Cobalt Therapy Units in Govt. and NGO-run Hospitals, and grants to NGOs for IEC activities on early detection
and health education. Even though the allocation for 2002-03 for Cancer Research was kept at Rs. 55.00 crores, the
provisions had to be scaled down to Rs. 49.65 crores in the final estimates 2002-03. The provisions under National
Cancer Control Programme (NCCP) were kept as per norms provided in the EFC memorandum on NCCP which is
under the consideration of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. However, the EFC with revised norms
has not yet been approved. Moreover, the provisions under the subheads of Development of Oncology Wing", "Cobalt
Therapy Unit" and "IEC grants to  NGOs" were made expecting the sufficient number of proposals to utilize the
allocated budget would be approved by the Standing Committee on Radiotherapy Development. However, because of
various lacunae in the proposals, the Standing Committee could clear only lesser number of proposals for release of
grant. In view of these, the provisions had to be scaled down in the final estimates 2002-2003 and BE 2003-2004 was
also reduced to Rs. 49.00 crores. 
Recommendations/Observation
 
5.2       The Committee notes with concern the reduction in the budgetary allocation in the field of cancer research,
whatever be the reasons. The number of patients suffering from cancer is on the increase. The Committee feels that the
situation calls for increased research facilities irrespective of the advances made in this area in countries abroad. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that fund allocation should be suitably increased keeping in view the need for such
facilities.
Action Taken
 
5.2       The suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The issue of increase in fund allocation for National Cancer
Control Programme shall be taken up at the time of revised estimates 2003-04.
 
II         NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
7.2       The Committee notes with concern the progress made at snail’s pace over a period of more than 15 years. The
Committee observes that there is a need to speed up the programme.
 
Action Taken
 
7.2As per National Health Policy 2002 the goal is to reduce the prevalence of blindness to 0.5% by the year 2010. Based
on the findings of various evaluation studies, the scheme is being revamped from the year 2003-04 with the following
features:
 
The scheme will cover all leading causes of blindness in the country including cataract, refractive errors, glaucoma,
corneal; blindness, childhood blindness etc.
Targets for cataract surgery, school eye screening and
Corneal blindness have been increased during the Xth Plan.
Focus in the Xth Plan would be on underserved areas where backlog of cataract blind persons is still high.
Quality of eye care will be given higher importance to improve sight restoration of operated cases.
The proposal for the Xth Plan has been reviewed by the Expenditure Finance Committee on 28
th April, 2003 and the
proposal will be submitted for approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs.
 
III        NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME:
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
9.1       Plan allocation for National Mental Health  Programme in BE 2003-2004 is Rs. 28.00 crores.  The Committee
notes that during 2002-2003, allocation for the Programme in BE was Rs. 27.00 crores which has been substantially
reduced to Rs. 3.50  crores at the RE stage.  Explaining the reasons the Department has given the information that “an
amount of Rs 27 crores was proposed at BE stage to implement a comprehensive National Mental Health Programme
th

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
during the year 2002-03. However, the EFC meeting to consider the said programme for the 10   Five Year Plan was
held only on 26.12.2002 and the minutes received in February, 2003. Further, the approval of the CCEA for the scheme
is being taken. Therefore, the activities proposed for the year 2002-2003 viz; expansion of District Mental Health
Programme, Strengthening of Psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric departments of Medical colleges, IEC and Research
activities, could not be undertaken during 2002-2003, which led to drastic cut in the Revised Estimate stage for the year
2002-2003. However, during the year 2002-2003, as per the decision taken by EFC, it is now proposed only to sustain
the District Mental Health Programme in districts which are already under implementation under IX Plan and which
have not received the full five year assistance subject to submission of utilization certificate in respect of assistance
provided during the previous years. Apart from sustaining the District Mental Health Programme, it is proposed to
undertake further expansion of the programme strengthening or psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric departments of
Medical Colleges IEC and Research activities during 2003-2004, on receipt of approval of CCEA; hence budget
allocation has been increased.”
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
9.2       The Committee is aware that due to ever increasing materialization, and consequent changes in life style, the
cases of mental and psychological aberration are on the increase. The Committee notes with concern the delay in
implementation of the comprehensive Mental Health Programme caused solely due to delay in holding the EFC
meeting. The EFC meeting should have been held as per the requirements of the situation and not vice-versa. The
Committee deprecates such delays and recommends that all out efforts should be made to ensure that such a situation
does not recur and the comprehensive Mental Health Programme be fully implemented in the current year.
 
Action Taken
 
9.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
11.       It appears that there is some discontentment among the staff particularly in CGHS dispensaries. The Committee
has been given to understand that Pharmacists have not been granted Assured Career Progression on a uniform basis.
While pharmacists of Ayurvedic, Homoeopathic and Unani systems of medicines have been given the benefit of
completion of 12 and 24 years of service, the same has been denied to Allopathic Pharmacists. Hence the legal battles.
 
 Action Taken
 
There is some anomaly, as the pay scale of Allopathic Pharmacist and its promotional post of Assistant Store
Superintendent were the same i.e.  Rs.4500-7000. The position has been rectified in consultation with Ministry of
Finance and the promotional hierarchy for Pharmacist (Allopathic) in the CGHS has now been established. The ACP to
Pharmacist (Allopathic) in CGHS is now being given as per the existing hierarchy.
 
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENTS’ REPLY
 
 
NIL
 
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
I           BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Recommendations/Observation

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
 
2.2       The Secretary, while deposing before the Committee informed that   it is the objective of the Government to
increase the investment in the health Sector up to 2% of GDP by the year 2010. At present,  the level of investment is
only approximately 0.8-0.9% of the GDP. The Committee is constrained to observe that even the ‘priority’ area such as
Public Health have not been spared from the cuts imposed by the planning Commission or the Ministry of Finance as
the case may be. The Health of the people is of extreme importance. There should be an increase in the budgetary
allocation every year commensurate with the size of the population and the requirements in respect of infrastructure,
medication etc. which should provide adequate healthcare to people. Unless this is done, the Government’s objective to 
provide primary health care at the door steps of the people will stand defeated. At the same time, Department of Health
must ensure optimum utilization of funds on plans and activities for which they are meant.
 
Action Taken
 
2.2       According to National Health Policy,2002 it is envisaged that the level of public health investment will be
increased from 0.9% of GDP by the year 2010. However, annual plan allocation of Department of Health for the year
2003-04 was pegged at the same level as in the year 2002-03 i.e. Rs.1550 crore. This in fact amounts to a decline in real
terms. If the goal of National Health Policy, 2002 has to be realized, the plan allocations for the health sector need to be
increased substantially.
Constant efforts are made by the Department for optimum utilization of plan funds. Some of the steps taken include
close monitoring of implementation of national disease control programmes and other plan schemes through holding
regular meetings both at the Center and in the States field visits by officers, submission of periodic reports and timely
procurement of goods by the Center for distribution to States.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. It appears that the Committee's recommendation has not been given a
serious consideration. What has been stated regarding the increase in the allocation is already on record. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation and expects a serious consideration on the part of the government rather than a
stereotyped reply.
 
II.   CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME:
 
Recommendations/Observation
3.3    In reply to a question as to what is the outflow of funds on CGHS, the amount (also in terms of percentage)
received by way of contribution from employees and the amount (also in terms of percentage) spent by Government and
the manner in which contribution from employees is utilized, the Department replied that the actual amount of outflow
of funds for CGHS shown in the book for Demand for Grants 2003-2004 in respect of the Department of Health relates
to the year 2001-2002 only. During 2001-2002, the CGHS had spent Rs.11,52,83,000/- under Plan allocation  and
Rs.3,44,96,58,000/- under Non-Plan allocation. The CGHS contribution paid by the Central Govt. employees working
in the various Ministries/Departments of the Govt. of India is credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and therefore,
the said contribution is not directly utilised by the CGHS.
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
            The Committee observes that the explanation given by the government with regard to the non-availability of
figures in respect of contribution received from CGHS beneficiaries and its utilization etc is not satisfactory. The
Committee observes that without this basic information the Department is groping in dark. The Committee fails to
understand how the Department functions in the absence of these statistics. The entire planning in respect of a
department is based on inflow and outflow of funds and such other basic data. The entire functioning would be
unrealistic in the absence of these figures. It should be possible for the Department to compute the total inflow and
outflow of funds.
 
It appears, with the passage of time, more and more sections of beneficiaries have been brought under CGHS with the
result, the interests of original beneficiaries are getting sidetracked. It also appears that the benefit of the entire
infrastructure is not available to all beneficiaries uniformly e.g. the ambulances purchased by CGHS are not provided to

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
bulk of beneficiaries. Further, CGHS dispensaries are awfully ill-equipped to deal with emergencies. It is an irony that
the CGHS beneficiaries who, by virtue of their contribution, provide bread and butter to the entire CGHS set up are
given raw deal in many respects. They have to run from pillar to post to get their medicines recommended by
specialists.  In case of emergency treatment, while a beneficiary is struggling with his life, CGHS sits comfortably in
issuing ‘No objection Certificate’ for pursuing the treatment from a nearby hospital or clinic. Then come the unkind cuts
in reimbursement of bills. The woes of the beneficiaries are endless. What to speak of these, the Department has not
even been able to restore the double shift functioning of CGHS dispensaries which was discontinued several years
back.  In these circumstances, the Committee feels that there is need for organizational management exercise of CGHS
from a private preferably an international agency.
 
            The Committee, therefore, feels that CGHS beneficiaries may be allowed to pursue treatment whatsoever in a
hospital/clinic etc. of his/her choice in emergency without the requirement of any permission/reference from DGHS.
The emergency in this context should mean any situation where the need for such a treatment is felt. The beneficiary in
such cases should not be required to meet any expenditure whatsoever from his pocket. The bill for entire expenditure
should be sent to the office of the beneficiary or in case of pensioners and others to DGHS. The beneficiary should only
be required to sign the documents without any conditionality whatsoever.
 
Action Taken
 
3.4      In the original orders of Government of India, Ministry ofHealth dated 1
st May, 1954 notifying the Presidential
decision to introduce the contributing Health Scheme for Central Government Servants and their families in Delhi and
New Delhi, under Chapter 17(a) it is stated that the Head of the Office shall be responsible for recovery of contribution
at the prescribed rates from the non-gazetted Government servants employed under him. He will also, in addition, be
responsible for the contribution recoverable in cash from Government Servants, both gazetted and non-gazetted, on
extraordinary leave, temporary transfer outside New Delhi and Delhi, or on retirement up to a period of one month from
the date of such retirement and for the deposit of the contributions, thus collected, in the treasury in the usual manner.
 
This practice is still in vogue and the contribution thus collected and deposited by the respective Departments are
credited to the consolidated fund of India. Such contributions are ploughed back to CGHS for its use directly so it
cannot be taken as direct inflow of funds to the CGHS. The statement indicating Revenue Receipts of CGHS (in respect
of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) and expenditure incurred by CGHS from 1999 to 2002-03 are placed at are
not available for the time being Annexure I and II respectively. The present system of inflow of funds to CGHS is from
the budget estimate allocation from the Ministry of Health.
 
Originally the CGHS scheme was started for providing comprehensive medical care facilities to the Central Government
Employees and their family members in Delhi and New Delhi. Over the years the scheme has been extended to 23 cities
in the country, and new categories have also been included for CGHS facilities e.g. Member and Ex-Members of
Parliament, Judges of Supreme Court and High Court (Sitting and Retired), Freedom Fighters, Central Government
Pensioners, Employees of Semi Government Organisations, Accredited Journalists, Ex-Governors and Vice-President
etc. thus straining the limited resources/infrastructure of CGHS. The Health care delivery system in the CGHS
dispensaries to all the beneficiaries is uniform. Provision of Ambulance services to all the beneficiaries all over the
country is beyond the limited budgetary allocations as it will involve purchase of large number of vehicles and creation
of posts of drivers/attendants. As CGHS dispensaries provide only OPD services to its beneficiaries the seriously ill
patients are referred to the hospitals after necessary medical attentions in emergencies. The medicines prescribed by the
Doctors/Specialists are given from dispensary, the drugs not available in the dispensary, are procured from Authorized
Medical Chemists and for urgently needed medicines authority slips are issued for immediate procurement of drugs
from the authorized chemists so that the beneficiary does not go without medicines.
 
In case of emergency the beneficiaries can go to any private recognized hospital of his choice and the hospital shall not
refuse the beneficiaries and shall provide treatment to the concerned patients on production of valid CGHS cards so
there is no question of issuing no objection certificate for pursuing treatment at nearby recognized hospital in
emergency.
As per the agreement signed with the private hospitals recognized under CGHS they cannot charge more than the CGHS

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
approved rates and hence it effectively amounts to full reimbursement.
 
In addition, the pensioner beneficiaries can obtain prior permission for treatment/investigations as advised by
CMO/CGHS/Govt. Specialists at recognized hospitals/diagnostic centres of his/her choice and the recognized centers
provide credit facilities to the pensioner beneficiaries.
If pensioner goes to the CGHS recognized private hospital for treatment of " other than approved line of treatment
procedure" then hospital will charge from pensioners. In such cases pensioners are submitting their claims to CGHS.
 
An analysis of the statement placed at Annexure I and II regarding CGHS contribution and expenditure it is submitted
that CGHS is highly subsidized scheme and the Government is trying to meet the rising expectations of the beneficiaries
within the limited resources placed at its disposal.
 
Opening of CGHS dispensary in two shifts will involve deployment of large number of additional staff and other
expenditure, which is not possible in view of manpower and resource constraints. Moreover, on functional consideration
also, it is not justified to open all the CGHS dispensaries from 7.30 AM to 7.30 PM. Working hours for the 
Central Government employees in Ministries is from 9AM to 5.30 PM whereas in the case of attached and subordinate
offices it is from 9.30 AM and 6 PM. Therefore, employees have adequate time at their disposal in the morning to avail
CGHS facilities before attending offices. Further the dispensaries not only provide the facilities to the Central
Government employees but to their family members and pensioners too for whom these timings are convenient.
 
The timings of the CGHS dispensaries had been changed with the approval of the then Hon'ble MOS in 1985.
Emergency Services are also available round the clock in Multi-shift dispensaries, which are attached to the nearby 2 or
3 single shift dispensaries. There are 42 multi-shift (functional) dispensaries under CGHS Delhi. It may not be possible
to revert back to the broken shifts in CGHS dispensaries as it would give rise to dissatisfaction among the CGHS
employees and may lead to agitation from the Employees Associations of CGHS.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
3.4      From the Reply of the Department the Committee understands that in terms of availability, the medicines
prescribed in a CGHS dispensary fall under three categories:-
(1)        Medicines which are available and can be handed over to the patient immediately.
(2)        Medicines which are not available and are to be indented. In this case the patient is able to get the medicines
only after three and in some cases even after four days.
(3)        Medicines which are urgently needed and for which authority slips are issued for their immediate procurement
from an authorized chemist.
            The Committee feels that the indenting mechanism (category No. 2) compels the patient to either go without
medicine for a couple of days or to purchase them from his own pocket. This arrangement requires the beneficiary to
visit the dispensary a number of times as sometimes some medicines are not given because this may not be available
with the chemist at that point of time.  The patient is asked to collect the medicine some other day and repeat the entire
process of obtaining from the doctor special medicine slips, date stamping, diarising the prescription etc. All this
consumes a lot of time of the patient/visitor and this may delay his reaching the office.   The Committee therefore
recommends that this entire system of supplying medicines to the patients (including procurement of medicines) needs
to be simplified drastically to the satisfaction of the patients.
            While the Committee is aware that in case of emergency, a beneficiary can go to any private recognized hospital
of his choice and as per the agreement signed with private hospitals, they cannot charge more than the CGHS approved
rates.  However,  the Committee has been given to understand that the private hospitals are generally not very
enthusiastic about giving treatment to CGHS patients as they have to charge less amount from the CGHS beneficiary.
There have been instances of recognized/ private hospitals/labs charging more from beneficiaries than  approved rates.
The Committee therefore, feels the need for strict and prompt action if any such instance comes to its notice.
The Committee does not agree with the view that the timings of the CGHS dispensary are convenient for the Central
Govt. Employees and their family. Given the fact that the CGHS dispensary is not always very near, the beneficiary, has
to spend at least 15-20 minutes to reach his dispensary that too depending on the mode of conveyance one has, then the
doctors and other staff in the CGHS dispensaries generally start attending the patients at around 8-8.30 a.m.  As a result
beneficiaries are not able to take advantage of the timings particularly in far flung areas and in dispensaries located in
resettlement colonies and hence the delay in reaching office.  Traffic hold ups in Delhi further add to their woes in this

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
regard.
In fact the Dispensaries, years back, had two-shift system which is more convenient.   Having changed this Government
has reportedly been finding it difficult to restore the two-shift system because of the resistance from doctors and staff.  
As a result Government has not met with much success in this regard.   At the same time not much attention has been
paid to the timely functioning of dispensaries.    As large number of dispensaries do not start functioning till as late as
8.30 a.m. hence   the need for two shift system.  Government must seriously consider restoring two shifts system.   At
the same time CGHS dispensaries must be strengthened to cope with emergencies instead of merely functioning as
forwarding/recommending agencies for the case being taken to a nearby Government hospitals.   Much crucial time is
wasted in this process. Dispensaries must be strengthened to cope with the emergencies and these need to be defined as
to what kind of emergencies they can deal with.   In rest of the cases patients can be directly taken to a nearby Govt.
/private hospitals.   Attempts should be made to provide instruments for all  pathological tests in all the dispensaries.
Committee would also like to place on record that not many doctors and staff are aware of the Govt. instructions of
treating a Govt. employee, in emergency, in any dispensary other than the one to which he is attached.   Consequently,
emergency treatment in a number of such cases, is refused because an employee does not posses the CGHS token at that
point of time or any other reason.    These instructions need to be repeated every six months and an employee may be
allowed to orally give his token number instead of its physical possession being insisted.    At best he could be asked to
produce his identity card and that should be sufficient proof of his being a beneficiary of CGHS Scheme.
Recommendations/Observation
 
3.6       Due to the strike of the authorised local chemists of CGHS Delhi, there was a shortfall in the availability of
medicines in CGHS dispensaries and therefore the beneficiaries were allowed to purchase the medicines from open
market on the basis of valid prescription and authorisation by the Medical Officer of the dispensary and get
reimbursement of the expenses incurred on this account from the Govt. Arrangements were also made for making
reimbursement to CGHS pensioner beneficiaries in the concerned CGHS dispensary itself. The matter relating to
overcharging by the authorised local chemists of Delhi and payment of Sales Tax to them was referred to the C&AG for
their advice. The immediate issue relating to Sales Tax has since been settled in consultation with the C&AG.
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
3.7       The Committee feels that reimbursement of medical expenses incurred by CGHS beneficiaries by their
concerned office during the currency of the chemist’s strike, was an unprecedented situation and with their limited
manpower such offices were not geared up for disposing of ever increasing reimbursement cases expeditiously thus
resulting in lot of inconvenience to the beneficiaries. The Committee also fails to understand as to why the Department
didn’t sort out the matter in the month of January itself when the chemists went on strike for the first time. The
Committee feels that had the matter been settled early, the amount of sufferings that the CGHS employees underwent
could have been easily avoided.  The Committee also finds it difficult to understand as to why the issue of payment of
sales tax arose after so may years after signing of Memorandum of Agreement with the local chemists. Had this been a
part of the agreement, the Department would not perhaps have been required to suddenly stop the payment. The
Committee recommends that the Department should make an enquiry as to how so much of Government money
continued to be paid to the local chemists for such a long time and the responsibility should be fixed in the matter with a
view to punish the culprit.
Action Taken
3.6 & 3.7         In the month of January, 2002, the authorized local chemist of Delhi had gone on strike for only five
days from 21st to 25th January, 2002, to press for early payment of their pending bills. These were however settled by
way of additional budget allocation through re-appropriation, etc. during the financial year 2001-02. However, as the
problem of budget for CGHS under the relevant Supplies & Materials Head (from which payment is made to the
Authorized Local Chemists) continued during the subsequent financial year 2002-03, the chemists went on strike on
1.11.02 which continued upto 15.1.2003.  Prior to the authorized local chemists of CGHS Delhi going on strike in
January, 2002 for early payment of their bills, a number of representations were received in the Department of Health to
exempt life saving medicines from Customs Duty (when imported), Excise Duty (if manufactured locally) and Sales
Tax, based on which exemptions are given in taxation. Therefore, in a meeting held in the Department of Health, the
Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax Delhi stated that Sales Tax in Delhi is levied at the first point of sale and that the
Authorized Local Chemists of CGHS Delhi cannot levy and collect Sales Tax on drugs as this stands levied and
collected at first point and the practice of charging from CGHS is prima facie illegal. Accordingly, a decision was taken

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
in the Department of Health on 1.10.2001 to withhold 10% of the bill amount.
 
Meanwhile, complaints were received from the CVC/PMO against the chemists alleging (a) overcharging by the
chemists and (b) levying of Sales Tax by the Authorized Local Chemists appointed under CGHS Delhi. This was put up
to the then HFM who ordered that the matter be referred to the C&AG. Accordingly, both these issues were referred to
the C&AG on 24.12.2001.
 
From the above, it would be clear that the matter of Sales Tax was already under reference to the C&AG in December,
2001 before the authorized local chemists went on strike in January, 2002. Since the advice of the C&AG was not
available at that time, the matter could not be sorted out at that time.
 
In response to the request of the Department of Health, the C&AG sent its first report on 3.12.2002 containing the
details of the sample check done on the accounts of the Local Chemists and advised the Department of Health to get the
accounts of these chemists checked in detail through the Internal Audit of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
The letter of C&AG stated that the sample check of 20% of the indents/bills and records in respect of 50 chemists for
the month of April 2001 had revealed that there were 1074 cases in which the local chemists charged more than the
listed prices of individual medicines involving Rs.33,357.48. The second report of the C&AG was received in the
Department of Health on 23.12.2002 wherein the C&AG sent a detailed report on the mechanism involved regarding
levy of Sales Tax by the Delhi Government. The letter inter-alia stated that out of the 1703 bills test checked, in 45%
cases, break-up of sales price into retail price and sales tax was not shown separately. Hence audit could not vouchsafe
correctness of the sales tax charged and paid. Scrutiny of the remaining bills did not reveal any instance of tax being
charged on a tax free item. In view of this, the Department of Health sent a letter the Chief Controller of Accounts of the
Ministry on 13.12.2002 requesting for Audit of the bills submitted by the Chemists for the last three years and the
current year.
In the meantime, a Public Interest Litigation (PIL) was filed by a CGHS pensioner beneficiary in the Hon’ble Delhi
High Court stating that since the Authorised Local Chemists of CGHS Delhi have gone on strike, the pensioners have to
purchase medicines from the open market and get reimbursement later. Further, this process of reimbursement by the
CGHS is taking a long time.  The Hon'ble Delhi High Court took up the case for hearing on 8.1.2003 wherein directions
were given inter-alia stating that the Government would ensure that reimbursement is made to the CGHS pensioner
beneficiaries within a period of 15 days and the Government take a decision on the C &AG's report dated 23.12.2002
regarding the levy of Sales Tax by the Authorised Local Chemists of CGHS Delhi. The Hon’ble Court also directed the
Government to take a decision on the said C&AG report before the next date of hearing on 20.1.2003.
 
In view of the above, a meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Health) on 16.1.2003 wherein
representatives of C&AG, Sales Tax Delhi and the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority among others were called
for deciding whether the Retail Price indicated on the medicines strip/Phial includes Sales Tax or whether Sales Tax is
to be charged over and above the Retail Price and if so, whether payment of Sales Tax is to be separately made to the
Authorised Local Chemists appointed under CGHS Delhi and also whether the payment of Sales Tax should be the
same amount which the first seller has collected or is it to be charged on the Retail Price. The minutes of the meeting
containing the decisions taken on the issue of 
Sales Tax are enclosed at Annexure-III
.  Subsequently, it was decided that a total of 6% instead of 10% of the bills of
the Authorised Local Chemists of Delhi will be withheld for the period 1.10.2001 to 28.12.2003 till such time the
detailed Audit is conducted by the Internal Audit of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to establish the extent of
overcharging by the authorized local chemists of CGHS Delhi. The Audit Report is to bring out the extent of
overcharging by the authorized local chemists of CGHS Delhi. Incidentally, the tenders for fresh appointment of
authorized local chemists under CGHS Delhi  for 2003-05 had clarified that the Government will not bear any tax
burden for the supplies made by the chemists and the authorized local chemist would have to bear all the taxes.
 
Due to the strike of the authorized local chemists of CGHS Delhi, the beneficiaries were allowed to purchase the
medicines from open market and get reimbursement of the expenses incurred on this account from the Government.
Arrangements were made for making reimbursement to CGHS pensioner beneficiaries in the concerned CGHS
dispensary itself.
Steps have been taken to procure generic as well as proprietary medicines through the Hospital Services Consultancy
Corporation (India) Limited and the MSO.

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
 
Due to strike call given by the local chemist Association and non-supply of medicines w.e.f. 1.11.2002 a list of
commonly indented medicines from local chemist in CGHS was submitted to HSCC for procurement. The medicines so
received were then distributed through CGHS dispensaries to mitigate the suffering of CGHS beneficiaries caused by
the aforesaid strike. The drugs mentioned in the formulary of NCT of Delhi are procured by HSCC (a Government of
India Undertaking). The parameters to ascertain effectiveness of drugs before procurement are suitably laid down by the
Government. However random laboratory tests by CGHS (MSD) in Government authorized laboratories reveals that the
drugs are of standard quality.
 
A committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. R.K. Srivastava, Addl. Director General in the Dte, General of Health
Services has been constituted to prepare the combined drugs formulary of the CGHS and MSO and its report is being
examined now. Once the new drugs formulary is formally notified, the procurement of drugs for the CGHS would be
based on the same.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee feels that the issue of charging sales tax on medicines sold in Delhi, whether to CGHS or general public,
is so officially worded that it is beyond the comprehension of an average person.  More so, it is not clear as to what is
the first point with regard to retail sale and whether the selling chemist, who has been permitted to reimburse to himself
the sales tax paid by him, is fleecing the customer.  The Committee, therefore, feels that the Ministry of Health should
undertake the responsibility of making it known to the general public through published advertisements in newspapers
as well as through electronic media by giving therein sufficient examples whether a buyer of medicines is to pay sales
tax and, if so, to what extent. If the Ministry of Health appropriately feels that such clarificatory advertisement should
be issued by the Government of Delhi, it may ensure that these are issued by Government of Delhi.
Recommendations/Observation
3.8       The Department has informed that the CGHS had also prepared a list of 65 commonly indented medicines in
addition to the 138 Generic medicines available in the formulary of the Government of NCT of Delhi. As regards the list
containing 203 drug items prepared by CGHS, it was decided by the Government to procure the medicines through
Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation(HSCC),  which is a Government of India Undertaking. The Government has
also adopted approved formulary for generic drugs of the Government of NCT of Delhi for procurement of drugs.
 
3.9       Recommendations/Observation
The Committee feels that the above-said formulary of the Government of NCT of Delhi will serve purpose only if the
medicines available in the formulary are effective. The experience of the Committee is that most of the drugs under the
present formulary are totally ineffective. Another problem with the existing formulary was that medicines which are
very effective but costly are left out of it.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should look into
all the aspects, before adopting the new formulary.
Action Taken
3.9     Due to strike call given by the local chemist Association and non-supply of medicinesw.e.f. 1.11.02 a list of
commonly indented medicines from local chemist in CGHS was submitted to HSCC for procurement. The medicines so
received were then distributed through CGHS dispensaries to mitigate the suffering of CGHS beneficiaries caused by
the aforesaid strike. The drugs mentioned in the formulary of NCT of Delhi are procured by HSCC (a Government of
India Undertaking). The parameters to ascertain effectiveness of drugs before procurement are suitably laid down by the
Government. However random laboratory tests by CGHS (MSD) in Government authorized laboratories reveals that the
drugs are of standard quality.
A committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. R.K. Srivastava, Addl. Director General in the Date, General of Health
Services has been constituted to prepare the combined drugs formulary of the CGHS and MSO and its report is being
examined now. Once the new drugs formulary is formally notified, the procurement of drugs for the CGHS would be
based on the same.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE- 
3.8 & 3.9         It has been a common complaint that drugs   procured though  CGHS  system are of sub-standard 
quality.   In some cases substitutes are provided even in critical cases of heart ailments, diabetes and the likes where the
imperative need is to provide relief or provide an effective management so that blood sugar level remains normal.   The
Committee feels that to start with details should be worked out, disease-wise or medicine-wise where substitutes need

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
not be allowed.
Recommendations/Observation
3.10     It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that though there is provision for treatment in private
recognized Hospitals/Diagnostic Centres, the specialists of CGHS/Govt. Hospital/CMOs in-charge of the dispensaries
are generally reluctant to refer the beneficiaries to private recognized Hospitals/Diagnostic Centres. Instead, the
beneficiaries are constantly cajoled to get treatment in a Government hospital. Thus, except for few VIPs and influential
persons, the facility for treatment in private recognized Hospitals/Diagnostic Centres remains largely on paper. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that getting treatment in private hospitals/Diagnostic centres should be left
to the free will of the beneficiary and not to the whims of the specialists of the CGHS or the CMOs in-charge of the
dispensary. In fact there should be no room left for discretion of CGHS functionaries. Rather, the system should be self
regulatory to the benefit of CGHS beneficiaries.
Action Taken
3.10     As per Department of Health’s O.M. dated 24.10.2000, the CGHS beneficiaries have an option of getting
treatment at any recognized hospital/diagnostic centres once the diagnosis is established and a particular procedure has
been recommended by the CGHS/Govt. specialist or CMO In-charge of the dispensary.
There is no question to cajole the beneficiaries to take treatment in Govt. hospitals as the beneficiary is free to choose
any of the recognized hospitals and diagnostic center. However, the CGHS beneficiary cannot be given unhindered
access to obtain indoor treatment for planned medical procedures in private hospitals without obtaining the
recommendation regarding the line of treatment from the CGHS/Govt. specialist as stated above since obtaining medical
opinion of doctor is a technical exercise which can only be given by a technically competent person.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee feels that there is a need to liberalise the procedure after initial reference from a CGHS
dispensary, a specialist in a Govt. Hospital, after such tests as may be prescribed, has come to a conclusion about the
existence of a serious disease or a period of 3 months having passed after an initial reference was made to a hospital by
a CGHS dispensary, a CGHS beneficiary be allowed to consult for a second opinion or for a treatment, surgery etc. in a
private, approved clinic/hospital of his choice provided he has regularly pursued his case with dispensary/Hospital
during the aforesaid  period of three months.
 
III        SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCE, LADY HARDING
MEDICDAL COLLEGE AND SMT. SUCHETA KRIPLANI HOSPITAL
Recommendations/Observation
 
4.7       The Committee is constrained to observe that the State of these hospitals, referral institutions is woefully bad.
Long queues in OPDs and CGHS sections, wherever they exist, unhygienic conditions in Emergency and Wards- these
are all pointers that Govt. have never sincerely addressed to the difficulties faced by visiting patients. Added to these is
hopelessly inadequate parking arrangements, particularly in AIIMS, in respect of vehicles. A visiting patient is first of
all expected to care for his health and if he is able to park his vehicle on the road side without obstructing the traffic, that
should be enough. But AIIMS authorities have their own definition of disciplining the traffic and have their own parking
arrangements. Consequently, cranes are always on the lookout for vehicles which are not parked in the contractor’s
parking lot and are seen removing such vehicles immediately without realizing the plight or the age of victims. The
Committee, is inclined to believe on the possibility of connivance among unscrupulous officers of the Institute’s
Administration, Parking Contractor and the Traffic Police. This matter needs to be looked into not only in AIIMS but in
all other hospitals as it would be unwise to trade on the hassles of the visiting patients. Considerations of revenue are not
always important. Parking should be totally free and adequate space should be provided therefor.
 
The Government must ensure that the waiting time for patients in OPDs/CGHS should not be more than half an hour.
Long waiting period breeds corruption and patients are tempted to use the influence of hospital staff. This too must be
put to an end. If necessary, staff and their bonafide relatives may be attended after normal working hours.
 
The Committee observes that much of the budgetary support is spent on peripheral or incidental matters and not for
requirements of patients on medicines etc. The Committee is of the view that a realistic assessment of the requirements
of patients be made and priorities rearranged accordingly.
In reply to a question, the Committee has been informed that tap water is used in Safdarjung Hospital for Haemodialysis
by using de-ionizing machines.  The reverse osmosis and de-ionizing machines are used for dialysis purpose and in both

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
the processes tap water is used.  The Committee has been informed that procurement of reverse osmosis machine is in
process.  The Committee recommends that the procurementof reverse osmosis machine be expedited as use of tap water
for dialysis does not appear to be safe.
            The Committee is of the view that mere cosmetic renovation of a hospital is not the remedy to patients’ woes. 
There is need to address  the unhygienic conditions which exist in all the hospitals/institutions.  Wards are seen stinking
and totally unclean.  Toilets are found stinking which suggests that there is no authority whatsoever in these
institutions.  The Committee feels that there is dire need to change this scenario and make the entire system user
friendly.  At the same time attention should also be paid to horticultural aspect with clean and green surroundings.
The Committee has been given to understand that the telephone facilities are totally inadequate and whatever PCO
booths exist in these institutions, the telephones in them are deliberately kept out of order to generate business for a
nearby private operator.  The Committee recommends that an officer be designated for this purpose to ensure that PCOs
remain in working order round the clock.
 
Action Taken
 
4.7       C.G.H.S.
  As far as CGHS is concerned, Dr. RML Hospital has a separate CGHS wing for Medical and surgical
patients and Safdarjung Hospital also has a separate CGHS wing in most of the specialties. The patients attending these
OPDs are examined on the same day and there are separate queues for senior citizens for preferential treatment.
Specialists also visit nodal points in various CGHS dispensaries to deliver specialist Medical treatment to the patients
near their place of residence.  All efforts would be made to reduce the waiting period to less than half an hour. There is
an impression of over crowding in CGHS wings of Government hospitals due to space constraints.
AIIMS: As regards parking arrangements at the AIIMS are concerned, it is stated that all over the Institute, there is a
parking space available for approximately 1200 cars and keeping in view  the number of patients/visitors, this parking
space is inadequate. However, in the proposed Master Plan 2025, it is planned to create integrated parking lots on
surface and basement of the planned buildings for parking of approximately 7600 vehicles. In light of this, it is hoped
that this problem can be addressed in future.
As regards over crowding, long queues and long waiting list of patients are concerned, it is stated that patient care
system is severely constrained with a very heavy load of patients. Large number of patients from almost all over the
country comes to OPDs, which has resulted in over crowding, long queue and long waiting list for admission and
surgical procedures etc. Efforts of the Institute to make it a completely referral hospital have not yielded any result, even
though the Institute body and many Parliamentary Committees have recommended the implementation of referral
system at the Institute many a times. If AIIMS becomes a completely referral hospital, these constrains could be
removed. AIIMS as a referral tertiary care hospital will have a better efficiency inpatient care services.
The Institute has, however, devised both long term plan as well as contingency plan to provide better patient care
service by exploring existing resources:
 
There is a proposal for construction of the Screening OPD block in the New Master Plan 2025 which will reduce the
OPD patient load considerably.
There is another proposal to improve the Emergency Services with an addition of a 60 bedded emergency ward which is
likely to become functional soon. It will enable the Casualty to admit another 25-30 patients every day and will reduce
the patient load to a great extent.
There is a proposal to augment Lab. Facilities by providing additional space to the Lab. Medicine Department so as to
start an additional shift in this Department to double the output and provide round the clock coverage.
 
            As regards assistance to elderly patients is concerned, it is mentioned that assistance in all such cases is being
provided by the Medical Social Services Officers of the Institute who are available in the OPD block. Necessary
instructions have been issued from time to time to provide all necessary help and assistance to the senior citizen when
they report to AIIMS  for any medical checkup/aid. For elderly patients, an exclusive Geriatrics Clinic Facility is also
functioning in the Medicine OPD of the Institute.
 
Safdarjung Hospital:  At present the tap water is treated with de-ionizing machine before it is used for Dialysis. The
supply order/notification of award for Reverse Osmosis Machine have since been issued. The firm is likely to supply
and install the machine in a period of six weeks.
 

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
One Addl. M.S. is in charge of Sanitation and Waste Management of the hospital. The total buildings of the Safdarjung
Hospital and VMMC and open areas are divided into three zones. Each zone is under the supervision of the Sr. CMO.
The Chief Sanitary Superintendent alongwith Sanitary Supervisor and sanitation workers are responsible for upkeep of
the entire hospital. For each building, a Nodal Officer has been assigned the responsibility of sanitation and waste
management of that building. Some of the areas of the hospital has been put under contract with Sulabh International for
sanitation. An office Order to that effect has been issued.  A special cleaning drive is undertaken on Saturdays and 
Sundays in different areas of the hospital.
 
The Medical Superintendent and Addl. M.S. take frequent rounds of the different areas of the hospital to observe
sanitation and waste management amongst other issues.
 
The horticulture aspect is being looked after from time to time. The CPWD is reminded of adding shade tree, flowering
shrubs & plant lawn grasses in open spaces.  However, there is shortage of water supply to the hospital. Harvesting of
rain water and recycling of water waste from the laundry is being considered.
 
The hospital has a telephone exchange with 600 lines which is open 24 hours to receive the calls. There are seven
number of PCO’s installed by MTNL at various locations and all are in working condition. There is also free call facility
in the Causality. One CMO (NFSG) rank has been designated as In charge Telephones.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee is constrained to observe that no sincere attempt appears to have been made to consider the
recommendation made by it. Had it been considered, the Government  would have come with a detailed reply. In the
circumstances, the Committee presumes that its observations on the parking arrangements and indiscriminate use of
cranes by Traffic Police allegedly in connivance with the AIIMS authorities and parking contractor are correct. The
Committee would therefore like to have a detailed reply on this.  Even vehicles of the persons visiting   a bank located
in the premises  of AIIMS are removed  even though they are parked in a road side space opposite the Bank. Do the
authorities want that the Bank customers  carrying  large amounts  of cash be exposed to pick pockets and robbers in the
event of their  parking the vehicles far away from the Bank? 
            Likewise, the observations of the Committee in respect of facilities available at different hospitals for CGHS
beneficiaries, OPD patients, sanitation  & hygiene in various government hospitals in Delhi, telephone facilities for
patients & other people visiting government hospitals  & other people visiting Government hospitals do not appear to
have been given a serious thought.  Not that these problems are not known to the Government for they have been there
for decades and are aggravating with every increase in number of patients visiting these hospitals, there appears
complete apathy and lack of concern on the part of the Government to address to these problems in a manner that cheers
the visitors or earns the Government an applause from the visitors. The Committee would therefore like to be apprised
of the steps taken from time to time to improve the lot of these hospitals, facilities available for visitors, hygiene and
sanitation and facilities in general.  
 IV       NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
 7.1      The programme was launched in 1976 as a 100% Centrally Sponsored Scheme. Its aim was to reduce blindness
in the Country from 1.4% to 3% by 2000 A.D. The Department has further informed that National Survey on blindness
undertaken in 2001-02 in 15 randomly selected districts located in 15 major states indicated that the prevalence of
blindness has come down from 1.49% (1986-89 survey) to 1.1%.
 
Action Taken
 
The programme division has planned to conduct survey in remaining states of the country during the year 2003-04 to get
a national aggregate.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
           

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
            The Committee feels that implementation of national programme for control of blindness is moving at a snails
pace.   There is thus a need to increase its tempo so that the curse of blindness is removed at the earliest.    To that end,
national survey on Blindness should be completed at earliest by conducting  surveys in the remaining states as well.
 
V         NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME:
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
8.3       The Committee observes that the number of AIDs and HIV positive cases in the Country are constantly on the
increase. Situation is more alarming in the six states namely Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh,
Manipur and Nagaland. As the state AIDs Control societies are instrumental for implementation of the Programmes, the
Committee feels that the Department should closely monitor the functioning of these societies and identify the states
where the State AIDS Control Societies are not functioning effectively and take remedial steps in the matter.
 
Action Taken
 
8.3      The performance of State AIDS Control Societies is being closely monitored through computerized information
system, which includes monthly progress reports of various components of the programme. Besides, officers of NACO
make field visits in states to gather first hand information on the level of implementation of the programme activities.
Regular review meeting are also held with Project Director, State AIDS Control Societies on six monthly basis, to
assess the performance of State AIDS Control Societies. Independent review of selected SACS has also been carried out
by IIHMR, Jaipur.  Observations made about the functioning of SACS are communicated to them for remedial
measures.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
            In view of the dimensions which AIDS has acquired in the country, there is need to gear up the efforts to control
the menace.   There is thus a need to step up the efforts to educate people and at the same time to speed up the research
and devise new strategies to combat the disease.
(X)       IMPLEMENTATION OF HEALTH PROGRAMMES IN NORTH EAST SECTOR
 
Recommendations/Observation
10.2
          The scheme wise expenditure  under Lump sum Provision for projects /schemes of NEA and Sikkim is as
follows :
 
                  (Rs. in crore)
S.No. Name of the Programme/scheme Funds earmarked Amount re-
appropriated
for exp.
1. National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme   38.00   29.05
2. National Leprosy Eradication Programme   2.50     2.50
3. National TB Control Programme   5.00       -
4. National AIDS Control Programme   27.00   26.96
5. Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme     -       -
6. National Blindness Control Programme   3.50     0.90
7. National Cancer Control Programme   5.00       -
8. National Mental Health Programme   1.00       -
9. Drug De-addiction Programme   0.50     0.28
10. New Initiatives in the Tenth Plan     -       -
11. National Iodine Deficiency Disorder Programme   1.00     0.50
12. Assistance to States for Capacity Building   4.50     4.44
13. C.G.H.S.   3.00     3.00
14. NEIGRIHMS  40.00   40.00
15. Indian Council of Medical Research.    6.50     3.00

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
 Total 137.50 110.63
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
10.3     The Committee notes that in respect of programmes such as National TB Control, National Blindness Control,
National Cancer Control, National Iodine Deficiency Disorder and Indian Council of Medical Research, the amounts re-
appropriated for expenditure are much below the funds earmarked for them. The Committee observes that these border
states need to be assured that they are a part of national mainstream and need to be provided what is due to them. At the
same time efforts be  made to ensure optimum utilization of funds to bring them at par with the rest of the country.
The Committee observes that the country is way behind in providing state-of-the-art facilities and an efficient and
responsive Health Care system in the country. There is need for tremendous improvement all round and people must
have the feeling that being a welfare state, it cares for the people.
 
Action Taken
 
10.3     National Mental Health Programme: The amount re-appropriated for expenditure has been indicated as nil.
The fact is that a sum of Rs.4.04 lakhs have been re-appropriated vide letter No.G.23011/1/2002-Budget dated 31
st
March, 2003 and was utilized.
 
Drug De-addiction Programme:
 
Under the drug De-addiction Programme an assistance of Rs.8.00 lakh (one time grant) to States/UT Governments
towards construction of building for establishment of Drug De-addiction Centres in identified Medical Colleges and
District Level Hospitals is provided and 118 Drug De-addiction Centres have been established under the scheme out of
which 43 are in NE Region(Including Sikkim). The Scheme, in addition to above mentioned grant, also provides for
recurring grant of Rs.2.00 lakh per annum to the Centres in North-Eastern States to meet the cost of medicines, linen,
diet etc. The recurring grant is released to Drug De-addiction Centres in North Eastern Region only after the utilization
of grants released in the previous year and on receipt of utilization certificate.
 
No fresh request from NE Region for opening of drug De-addiction Center was received during the year 2002-03 and
also many centres in the North Eastern Region have not furnished Utilization Certificates in respect of grant-in-aid
released to them during previous year. This has been the main reason for under utilization of funds in NE region.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee observes that in cases of non-receipt of utilization certificates from State
Governments/Programme/Project authorities Government may consider sending a team of officers to inspect the project
etc. and ascertain whether the funds have been fully spent.  Their report may be considered final on the utilisation of
funds. That may ensure continuity of the project or ensure its timely completion.
National Cancer Control Programme: During the year 2002-03 even though a total provision of Rs.5.00 crores was
made for the North Eastern States including Sikkim, due to less number of proposals received, it was possible to spent
only Rs.93.90 lakhs, resulting in surrender of Rs.406.10 lakhs. These states have been requested to send proposals under
various sub-schemes of National Cancer Control Programme and it is expected that it would be possible to utilize the
full amount of Rs.5.00 crores earmarked for North-eastern states in 2003-04 under National Cancer Control Programme.
The suggestions made by the Committee is well taken and all out efforts are being made to utilize the entire allocation
for these States.
 
National TB Control Programme: Under the National TB Control Programme the funds earmarked for NE States
were re-appropriated and fully utilized. Special attention is paid to provide better TB care facilities to the NE States by
way of implementing Revised National TB Control Programme with an objective of achieving a cure rate of 85% of
new sputum positive cases and detection of at least 70% of such cases. Five NE States-Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur,
Mizoram, Sikkim and Nagaland (except Dimapur district which is under preparation)-have been fully covered under the
revised strategy. In 7 districts of Assam have started services delivery and the remaining districts are under going
preparatory activities. All districts of the Meghalaya and Tripura are under going preparatory activities. The total

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
population of NE States would be covered under the revised strategy by 2005. Under the revised strategy, the norms for
establishing treatment unit and microscopy center have been relaxed for tribal and hilly areas. The treatment unit is
established per 2.5 lakh population as against the norm of 5 lakh population for normal areas and a microscopy centre
per 50 thousand population as against the norm of 1 lakh population. Similarly, norm for appointment of Senior
Treatment Supervisor (STS) & Senior TB Laboratory Supervisor (STLS) has also been relaxed from 5 lakh population
to 2.5 lakh population for tribal and hilly areas.
 
As regards, providing an efficient and responsive health care system in the country, it is stated that the Revised National
TB Control Programme which is a WHO recommended DOTS strategy is being implemented in the country in a phased
manner. Under this strategy, the onus of administering medication to the patients till completion of treatment lies on the
health functionary. Presently more than 650 million population has been covered under the revised strategy and the
project district have reported a cure rate of 85% of new sputum positive cases which is the national target. It is
envisaged to cover 850 million population by 2004 and the whole country by 2005 under the revised strategy.
 
National Iodine Deficiency Disorder Programme: The allocation of funds to NE States was reduced from R.1.00
crore to Rs. 50.00 lakhs during the year 2002-03 in view of the fact that the financial assistance being provided covers
mainly the salary component of the staff engaged in implementation of the programme in Iodine Deficiency Disorders
Cells and Iodine Deficiency Disorders Monitoring Laboratories of these States. Hence, there is no scope of providing
extra funds under this component. Resultantly, the funds were reduced to Rs.50.00 lakhs. Even the actual expenditure
incurred by all the NE States was about  Rs.21.74 lakhs against the allocation of Rs.50.00 lakhs during the year 2002-
03.
 
Indian Council of Medical Research: During the year 2002-03 total grant released to Indian Council of Medical
Research (ICMR) for activities in the north-eastern region including Sikkim was Rs.6.50 crores. Initially a grant of
Rs.3.00 crores was sanctioned on 31.1.2003. Subsequently on 28.3.2003 another Rs.3.50 crores was sanctioned. ICMR
has informed that this grant has been utilized by ICMR for conducting research, meeting the traveling costs of scientists
for training in sophisticated techniques as well as for equipment and strengthening. In addition, expenditure has also
been incurred on the infrastructure strengthening of RMRC. Dibrugarh. Details of the expenditure incurred by ICMR
during 2002-03 is as under:-
 
RMRC, Dibrugarh                                        Actual Expenditure
                                                                        2002-03 (Rs. In thousands)
 
1. Intra-mural (Plan)                         Rs.4,84,42,660
 
2. Extra-mural                                    Rs.1,65,57,340
 
 Total                                                              Rs.6,50,00,000
 
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
III.   CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME:
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
3.11    It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that four private hospitals in Hyderabad in collusion with the
officials of the CGHS siphoned off a lot of Government money through inflated bills, and the Department, taking
cognizance in the matter, has ordered an enquiry. The Committee deprecates the criminal misappropriation of
Government funds and recommends that the enquiry should be completed in a fixed time frame and follow-up action be
taken accordingly.
Action Taken
3.11     A CBI case has already been instituted and the CBI has recently intimated the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare that the investigation is in progress and in consultation with the legal wing of CBI, a decision would be taken

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
regarding action against private hospitals. Meanwhile, the then Addl. Director, CGHS, Hyderabad has been placed
under suspension  till further orders.
(VI) KALA AZAR CONTROL PROGRAMME:
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
6.1       Plan allocation under  Kala Azar Control Programme in BE 2003-2004 is Rs. 37.00 crores.  The Committee
notes that plan allocation under the programme for BE 2002-2003 was Rs. 20.00 crores which was drastically reduced
to Rs. 4.00 crores at the RE stage.  Explaining the reason for the decrease, the Department has informed that at BE stage
an amount of Rs.20 crores was allocated under Kala-Azar Control Programme to provide insecticide (DDT 50% wdp)
and anti Kala-Azar drugs to the identified States of Bihar, West Bengal, Jharkhand and U P. However the State of Bihar
and Jharkhand could not lift the allocated DDT due to non provision of freight charge to be met by the States. Hence the
allocation was cancelled and resulted reduction in R E. 
 
Recommendations/Observation
6.2       The Committee observes that Government is well aware of the resource position  of the States of Bihar and the
newly created State of Jharkhand which are the most Kala Azar endemic states that have failed to lift their allocated
quota of insecticides. The Committee feels that Government should not have taken a rigid stand on a relatively
insignificant component of freight charges and should have helped the States to lift the allocated DDT in the larger
interest of the people.
 
Action Taken
6.2       Government of India has already taken initiative to address this issue and proposal to meet the freight charges by
the Centre has been included in the EFC Memorandum for National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme for 10
th
Five Year Plan. This is under consideration. Further action will be taken immediately after approval of the proposal.
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
I           BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. It appears that the Committee's recommendation has not been given a
serious consideration. What has been stated regarding the increase in the allocation is already on record. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation and expects a serious consideration on the part of the government rather than a
stereotyped reply.(Para 2.2)
 
II.   CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME:
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
3.4      From the Reply of the Department the Committee understands that in terms of availability, the medicines
prescribed in a CGHS dispensary fall under three categories:-
(1)        Medicines which are available and can be handed over to the patient immediately.
(2)        Medicines which are not available and are to be indented. In this case the patient is able to get the medicines
only after three and in some cases even after four days.
(3)        Medicines which are urgently needed and for which authority slips are issued for their immediate procurement
from an authorized chemist.
            The Committee feels that the indenting mechanism (category No. 2) compels the patient to either go without
medicine for a couple of days or to purchase them from his own pocket. This arrangement requires the beneficiary to
visit the dispensary a number of times as sometimes some medicines are not given because this may not be available
with the chemist at that point of time.  The patient is asked to collect the medicine some other day and repeat the entire
process of obtaining from the doctor special medicine slips, date stamping, diarising the prescription etc. All this
consumes a lot of time of the patient/visitor and this may delay his reaching the office.   The Committee therefore
recommends that this entire system of supplying medicines to the patients (including procurement of medicines) needs

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
to be simplified drastically to the satisfaction of the patients.
            While the Committee is aware that in case of emergency, a beneficiary can go to any private recognized hospital
of his choice and as per the agreement signed with private hospitals, they cannot charge more than the CGHS approved
rates.  However,  the Committee has been given to understand that the private hospitals are generally not very
enthusiastic about giving treatment to CGHS patients as they have to charge less amount from the CGHS beneficiary.
There have been instances of recognized/ private hospitals/labs charging more from beneficiaries than  approved rates.
The Committee therefore, feels the need for strict and prompt action if any such instance comes to its notice.
The Committee does not agree with the view that the timings of the CGHS dispensary are convenient for the Central
Govt. Employees and their family. Given the fact that the CGHS dispensary is not always very near, the beneficiary, has
to spend at least 15-20 minutes to reach his dispensary that too depending on the mode of conveyance one has, then the
doctors and other staff in the CGHS dispensaries generally start attending the patients at around 8-8.30 a.m.  As a result
beneficiaries are not able to take advantage of the timings particularly in far flung areas and in dispensaries located in
resettlement colonies and hence the delay in reaching office.  Traffic hold ups in Delhi further add to their woes in this
regard.
In fact the Dispensaries, years back, had two-shift system which is more convenient.   Having changed this Government
has reportedly been finding it difficult to restore the two-shift system because of the resistance from doctors and staff.  
As a result Government has not met with much success in this regard.   At the same time not much attention has been
paid to the timely functioning of dispensaries.    As large number of dispensaries do not start functioning till as late as
8.30 a.m. hence   the need for two shift system.  Government must seriously consider restoring two shifts system.   At
the same time CGHS dispensaries must be strengthened to cope with emergencies instead of merely functioning as
forwarding/recommending agencies for the case being taken to a nearby Government hospitals.   Much crucial time is
wasted in this process. Dispensaries must be strengthened to cope with the emergencies and these need to be defined as
to what kind of emergencies they can deal with.   In rest of the cases patients can be directly taken to a nearby Govt.
/private hospitals.   Attempts should be made to provide instruments for all  pathological tests in all the dispensaries.
Committee would also like to place on record that not many doctors and staff are aware of the Govt. instructions of
treating a Govt. employee, in emergency, in any dispensary other than the one to which he is attached.   Consequently,
emergency treatment in a number of such cases, is refused because an employee does not posses the CGHS token at that
point of time or any other reason.    These instructions need to be repeated every six months and an employee may be
allowed to orally give his token number instead of its physical possession being insisted.    At best he could be asked to
produce his identity card and that should be sufficient proof of his being a beneficiary of CGHS Scheme.(Para 3.4& 3.5)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee feels that the issue of charging sales tax on medicines sold in Delhi, whether to CGHS or general public,
is so officially worded that it is beyond the comprehension of an average person.  More so, it is not clear as to what is
the first point with regard to retail sale and whether the selling chemist, who has been permitted to reimburse to himself
the sales tax paid by him, is fleecing the customer.  The Committee, therefore, feels that the Ministry of Health should
undertake the responsibility of making it known to the general public through published advertisements in newspapers
as well as through electronic media by giving therein sufficient examples whether a buyer of medicines is to pay sales
tax and, if so, to what extent. If the Ministry of Health appropriately feels that such clarificatory advertisement should
be issued by the Government of Delhi, it may ensure that these are issued by Government of Delhi. (Para3.6&3.7)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE- 
3.8 & 3.9         It has been a common complaint that drugs   procured though  CGHS  system are of sub-standard 
quality.   In some cases substitutes are provided even in critical cases of heart ailments, diabetes and the likes where the
imperative need is to provide relief or provide an effective management so that blood sugar level remains normal.   The
Committee feels that to start with details should be worked out, disease-wise or medicine-wise where substitutes need
not be allowed. (Para 3.8&3.9)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee feels that there is a need to liberalise the procedure after initial reference from a CGHS
dispensary, a specialist in a Govt. Hospital, after such tests as may be prescribed, has come to a conclusion about the
existence of a serious disease or a period of 3 months having passed after an initial reference was made to a hospital by
a CGHS dispensary, a CGHS beneficiary be allowed to consult for a second opinion or for a treatment, surgery etc. in a
private, approved clinic/hospital of his choice provided he has regularly pursued his case with dispensary/Hospital
during the aforesaid  period of three months. (Para 3.10)
 

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
III        SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCE, LADY HARDING
MEDICDAL COLLEGE AND SMT. SUCHETA KRIPLANI HOSPITAL
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee is constrained to observe that no sincere attempt appears to have been made to consider the
recommendation made by it. Had it been considered, the Government  would have come with a detailed reply. In the
circumstances, the Committee presumes that its observations on the parking arrangements and indiscriminate use of
cranes by Traffic Police allegedly in connivance with the AIIMS authorities and parking contractor are correct. The
Committee would therefore like to have a detailed reply on this.  Even vehicles of the persons visiting   a bank located
in the premises of AIIMS are removed even though they are parked in a road side space opposite the Bank. Do the
authorities want that the Bank customers carrying large amounts of cash be exposed to pick pockets and robbers in the
event of their  parking the vehicles far away from the Bank?
            Likewise, the observations of the Committee in respect of facilities available at different hospitals for CGHS
beneficiaries, OPD patients, sanitation  & hygiene in various government hospitals in Delhi, telephone facilities for
patients & other people visiting government hospitals  & other people visiting Government hospitals do not appear to
have been given a serious thought.  Not that these problems are not known to the Government for they have been there
for decades and are aggravating with every increase in number of patients visiting these hospitals, there appears
complete apathy and lack of concern on the part of the Government to address to these problems in a manner that cheers
the visitors or earns the Government an applause from the visitors. The Committee would therefore like to be apprised
of the steps taken from time to time to improve the lot of these hospitals, facilities available for visitors, hygiene and
sanitation and facilities in general. (Para 4.7)  
 
IV        NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
           
            The Committee feels that implementation of national programme for control of blindness is moving at a snails
pace.   There is thus a need to increase its tempo so that the curse of blindness is removed at the earliest.    To that end,
national survey on Blindness should be completed at earliest by conducting surveys in the remaining states as well.
(Para7.1&7.2)
 
V         NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME:
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
            In view of the dimensions which AIDS has acquired in the country, there is need to gear up the efforts to control
the menace.   There is thus a need to step up the efforts to educate people and at the same time to speedup the research
and devise new strategies to combat the disease. (Para 8.3)
 
(X)       IMPLEMENTATION OF HEALTH PROGRAMMES IN NORTH EAST SECTOR
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee observes that in cases of non-receipt of utilization certificates from State
Governments/Programme/Project authorities Government may consider sending a team of officers to inspect the project
etc. and ascertain whether the funds have been fully spent.  Their report may be considered final on the utilisation of
funds. That may ensure continuity of the project or ensure its timely completion.(Para 10.2&10.3)
 MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARYSTANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
I
FIRST MEETING
 

148th Report of HRd
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/148threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:23]
The Committee met at 12:00 noon on Thursday, the 29th January 2004 in Committee Room No. 63 First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
Shri Arjun Singh                       Chairman
 
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Dr. Abrar Ahmed        
Shri B.P. Apte 
Shri Bachani Lekhraj
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Smt. Vanga Geetha
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri Ramakant Angle
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
Smt. Renu Kumari
Shri Ramsheth Thakur
Dr. N. Venkataswamy
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
               
2.           The Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee to the meeting. The Committee then took up for
consideration the Report on Functioning of NCERT and NCFSE, 2000 and the Action Taken Report on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Reports of the Committee on Demand-for-Grants (2003-04) relating to
the Department of Health. The Committee adopted the Action Taken Report and decided to present it to the
Houses of Parliament on the 4
th February 2004.  As regard  the Report on Functioning of NCERT and NCFSE, 2000,
the Committee decided to take it up for further consideration on 3rd February, 2004.
 
3.          The Chairman, then, informed the Committee that two Bills, namely, National Commission for Children Bill,
2003, and the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2003, as introduced and pending in the Lok Sabha have been
referred to this Committee for examination and report.  However in view of the impending dissolution of Lok Sabha, the
Committee was informed that the said bills will  automatically lapsed.  
 
The Committee, then, adjourned at 12:50 p.m. to meet again at 5:00 p.m. on 3
rd February, 2004.
 
 
New Delhi
29TH January, 2004
N.K. SINGH
JOINT DIRECTOR              