PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FORTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1996-97 (DEMAND NO. 40) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF INDIAN SYSTEMS
OF MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 29.8.96) ,
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 29.8.96)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 1996/Bhadra, 1918 (Saka)


Pr re

spt

a
ee कम

i ee ,

बना

ne

ee

So babes ‘of batadear'l)
-९/8.७५ का रे eo ae शाह),

i
‘
है
it
i
i
1]



CONTENTS

. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

. PREFACE

(3 ७ oe

. RePort
(i) Non-Availability of Herbs and Medicinal Plants
(ii) Poor Quality of Drugs
(iii) National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur
(iv) National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta
(v) National Institute of Yoga
(vi) Strengthening of Research and Development
(vii) Siddha :
(viii) Setting up of Patent Cell
(ix) Educational standards
4. MINUTES

PAGES
(i)-Gi)
(ii)

9—13


‘ # 998 (8५)
MNT 16 qu-gniise fits)
1812 “hinetisiahd (ap
- -ज्थ्यःछए

fot te! हा 0 2 गा,

-

:

——

oe a ae



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Dr. B.B. Dutta

4. Dr. M. Aram

5. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

6. Dr. Shrikant’ Ramchandra Jichkar
7. Shri Raj Nath Singh

8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

9. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
10. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

11. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

12. Shri R. Margabandu

13. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

14. Dr. Mohan Babu

15. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
17. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

18. Shri Sartaj Singh

19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Shri Jai Prakash

21. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

22. Shrimati Divya Singh

23. Shri Mahant Abedyanath
24. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

25. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

26. Dr. ९. Silvera

27. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
28. Shri Dutta Meghe

29. Shri I.G. Sanadi

30. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
31. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao
32. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
33. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

34. Shri Pawan Diwan

35. Shri Krishna

36. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
37. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
38. Shri Samik Lahiri

39. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

40. Shri Mukhtar Anees

41. Dr. M. Jagannath

42. Dr. Bali Ram

43. Shri Ranen Barman

44. Shri Surender Singh

45. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal


(i)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Forty-second Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 40) of the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
and Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 1996-97.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the
said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 10th August, 1996.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 24th August,
1996.

New DELHI; S.B. CHAVAN,
August 24th, 1996. Chairman,
are ee Department-related Parliamentary
Bhadra 2, 1918 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development.

(iii)


REPORT

The National Health Policy of 1983 envisages the necessity to initiate organised
measures to enable each of the systems of Indian Medicine. i.e., Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani,
Yoga and Naturopathy as well as Homoeopathy to develop in accordance with its genius,
and find an appropriate role and place for these different systems in the overall health care
delivery system for the benefit of the people. In order to achieve the said goal, a new
Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) has been set up to
promote and develop the Indian Systems of Medicine (Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani,
Homoeopathy & Drugless Therapies like Yoga and Naturopathy).

2. The new Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H)
aims at strengthening the educational and research institutions of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homoeopathy, Drug Standardisation and Quality Control, Cultivation of
Medicinal plants including research, Establishment of Specialised ISM&H Centres, etc.

3. People of our country have faith in the traditional systems especially as the services
provided are generally cheaper and available everywhere and the remedies are known to be
generally free from side-effects. Further, India has a large resource of about 4.06 lakh
practitioners of Indian Systems of Medicine and 1.63 lakh practitioners of Homoeopathy,
whose services need to be fully utilised in the national health care delivery system. There are
about 273 Under-graduate and 43 Post-graduate Colleges of Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy producing about 11,796 graduates including diploma holders in Homoeopathy
and 491 Post-graduates every year.

4. The basic concept in all the three Indian Systems relates to maintaining a balance in
the body between different elements of humors, of which the body is made up of. Any
disturbance in the balance leads to disease and the therapy lies in restoring the balance
through use of medicines of natural origin based on herbs and minerals. Yoga and
Naturopahty, which are being practised in the country as a way of living for maintenance of
health have also been included under Indian Systems of Medicine. Yoga is a unique system
which views health in totality, emphasising both the physical and mental well being of
human beings.

5. The Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy have practically grown and
developed in the Indian society on the basis of learning through family traditions and Guru
Shishya Parampara, although a few colleges had come up in the late 19th century and the
earlier part of the 20th century. There was practically no Governmental support to this
system. There were no regulations either, regarding the practice and education standard.
Patients used to approach these indigenous physicians on the basis of faith in their skill,
knowledge and integrity.

6. However, after Independence, Institutions like Central Council of Indian Medicines
and Central Council for Homoeopathy were established to register practitioner in these
Systems and to lay down minimum standards for education. The Central Council of
Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, the Central Council of Unani Medicine, the Central
Council of Research in Homoeopathy and the National Institute of Ayurveda at Jaipur and
the National Institute of Homoeopathy at Calcutta have been set up as apex bodies for
research and teaching. In order to formulate Standards for Drugs, Pharmacopoeia
Committees for each of these Systems were set up and supported by the Pharmacopoeia
Laboratories for Indian Medicine (PLIM) and the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia Laboratory
(HPL) both located at Ghaziabad, U.P. The Central Council of Indian Medicine (CIM) and

1


the Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH) are responsible for laying down and
maintaining uniform standards of education and regulate the professional practices of the
Practitioners in the field of Indian Systems of Medicines and Homoeopathy, respectively.

7. The Committee was given to understand that out of the Plan Budget of Rs. 2309
lakhs for the year 1995-96, an amount of Rs. 15 crores has been spent on the establishment
of Central Research Councils and the National Institutes leaving an amount of Rs. 8 crores
(Approx.) for the implementation of various programmes by the Department. For the year
1996-97, the Department has been allocated only 2319 lakhs. The Department had asked for
an allocation of Rs. 29 crores from the Planning Commission at the time of finalisation of
the annual Plan for 1996-97. During the course of the plan discussions, the Planning
Commission had indicated an allocation of Rs. 26 crores to the Department for the year
1996-97. But, unfortunately, the Department has received only Rs. 2319 lakhs allocations for
the current financial year.

The Secretary while explaining the position of financial constraint informed that about
Rs. 15 crores will be spent on salaries and running the 5-6 Councils of Research and
National Institutions. The remaining amount of Rs. 8 crores would be hardly sufficient to
support any sizeable scheme, create infrastructure and strengthen the medical services in the
various parts of the country. Even this small amount of Rs. 8 crores would be further
distributed in the 6 Systems of Ayurveda, Siddha, Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani and
Homoeopathy. The Secretary informed that the Department is completely starved of funds
and requires adequate financial support for its survival and expansion.

7.1. The budgetary allocations during the last and the current financial year are as
follows:

(Rs. in lakhs)

BE 1995-96 RE 1995-96 BE 1996-97

Plan 2309.00 2250.00 2319.00
Non-plan 1785.00 1900.00 2100.00
ToTaL 4094.00 4150.00 4419.00

7.2. The Budgetary provision for the year 1995-96 for the Department of ISM&H was
Rs. 2309 lakhs which was curtailed to Rs. 2250 lakhs at the RE stage 1995-96 due to
economy measures imposed by the Government. The Committee is of the view that
whenever any cut is made in the allocations due to economy measures, the Department
concerned should be allowed as to where the cut should be made.

7.3. There are some schemes where the Department has not been able to make full
utilisation of the budgetary allocations made during the year 1995-96. For example, a sum of
Rs. 200 lakhs was allocated to National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur at BE 1995-96 which
was ‘slashed down to 170 lakhs at the RE stage due to slow pace of construction in the
Institute. Similarly, the Pharmacopoeia Laboratories for Indian Medicines (PLIM),
Ghaziabad, was allocated a sum of Rs. 40 lakhs in BE 1995-96 which was reduced to Rs. 30
lakhs at the RE stage of 1995-96.The Department could utilise only Rs. 4 lakhs during the
year.The reasons advanced for surrendering Rs. 36 lakhs was due to non-filling up of the


5

vacant posts by the Institute.Thus, out of the total allocation of Rs. 2309 lakhs made in the
Budget Estimates of 1995-96, the Department has spent only Rs.2200 lakhs, thereby
surrendering an amount of Rs. 109 lakhs in the financial year 1995-96. Interestingly, an
amount of Rs. 50 lakhs was diverted from the Department of ISM&H to the Department of
Health during the Financial Year 1995-96. Under utilisation of funds would not lead the
system to success. The Department should plug the loop holes and ensure full utilisation of
funds. Full utilisation will be possible only when physical targets are achieved intime. No,
since a separate Department has been created, the Committee hopes that all out efforts
should be made in this direction.

7.4. The total allocation for the Eighth Five Year Plan for the Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) was initially fixed at Rs. 88 crores. Out of
this, the amount utilised upto 1995-96 was Rs. 68.96 crores. An additional amount of Rs. 20
crores was approved by the Cabinet for this Department for establishment purposes after its
bifurcation from the Department of Health. The Secretary, Department of ISM&H,
informed the Committee that this enhanced allocation of Rs. 20 crores have not been given
to the Department either in the last year’s budgetary allocations or in the current year’s
allocation, The Committee is rather surprised to note as to why the allocation of Rs. 20
crores have not been given to the Department, particularly when a Cabinet decision has
already been taken in this regard. When the higher outlay was cleared by the Cabinet, there
should be no reason for withholding this amount. The Committee desires that the Planning
Commission should release the funds at RE stage provided the Department assures to utilise
the funds.

7.5. The Committee was given to understand that the Indian Systems of Medicine,
particularly Ayurveda has developed a number of new medicines like Ayush-64 for Malaria,
Ayush-66 for Epilepsy, Ayush-82 for Diabetes and Oil 777 for Psoriasis, etc. These
medicines, the Committee was given to understand, have proved very effective and can play
a meaningful role, particularly in the circumstances when allopathic medicines do not have
permanent remedy to cure many of the diseases like Piles, Polio, Diarrhea, etc. In the case
of Malaria, mosquitoes have become immune to the insecticides being used at present. The
Committee was informed that Ayush-64, an Ayurvedic medicine has proved to be quite
effective in curing the patients from malaria in a period of 7 to 8 days. Thus, many of the
Ayurvedic medicines can play a very vital role to supplement the allopathic medicines. It is
precisely for this reason that people have now started turning towards Ayurvedic and
Homoeopathic Systems of Medicines.

7.6. The potential of Indian Systems of Medicines is very well known. The atmosphere
is encouraging. People have got tired of taking allopathic medicines and they are turning
towards the Indian Systems of Medicine. The treatment and the medicines do not have any
side effects. But this potential and the strengths have not been tapped and exploited fully so
far. We have not been able to mount programmes to harness these systems and convert
them either into treatment facilities or preventive health facilities. A time has come now for
the country to take full advantage of the encouraging atmosphere.

7.17. The Committee is constrained to note that the Students of the Indian Systems of
Medicine are taught on the lines of modern methods. Much stress is not laid on the
traditional system. Further, after completing training under Indian Systems of Medicine, the
physicians practise under allopathic system. This should not be allowed to continue if the
Indian Systems of Medicine are to grow and flourish.


4

NON-AVAILABILITY OF HERBS AND MEDICINAL PLANTS

8. The Committee notes that availability of herbs and medicinal plants sufficiently is the
basic ingredient of the Indian systems of medicines. The forest and arid land can be made
better use of by plantation of herbs and medicinal plants. There are as many as 150 plants
on the endangered list. The Committee, feels that in order to maintain the efficacy of
traditional medicines, it is essential to preserve and cultivate the medicinal plants and herbs
by starting plantation on a large scale. The State-Governments should made the land
available for such plantations. This is particularly necessary to check the use of spurious
plants in place of genuine herbs. Unless this problem is checked firmly, the traditional
systems of medicines will become ineffective and people will lose their faith in the System.

POOR QUALITY OF DRUGS

9. The manufacturers of these drugs do not have sophisticated and latest technology for
ensuring meticulous standards required for the preparation of drugs. The Committee was
given to understand that lot of spurious material is being used by the manufacturers of
traditional drugs. There is a strong need to take specific decision by which it would be
possible to determine the quality and standard of drugs being used in the ISM&H. Proper
laboratories and research facilities are required to be created for developing the requisite
standards and carrying out the necessary tests, he added. The pharmacopoeia work in this
sector is still reported to be incomplete due to shortage of funds. The Committee agrees
with the plea made by the Secretary and recommends that the allocation for the Department
should be suitably enhanced at the RE stage. The Department should, however, ensure full
utilisation of the scarce resource placed at its disposal. The 9th Five Year Plan is now under
formulation. The Committee hopes that at least in the 9th Plan a new approach and thrust
would be given to these neglected areas.

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA, JAIPUR

10. The National Institute of Ayurveda was established in the year 1976 at Jaipur by the
Government of India in collaboration with the Government of Rajasthan. The Institute was
established to develop high standards of teaching, training and research in all aspects of
Ayurvedic System of Medicine. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the
Institute is suffering from a number of problems. There are no research activities in the
Institute. Many of the posts are lying vacant for years together. Even the post of Director
has been recently filled up after many years. The Institute is not able to cater to the needs
of the students. The Department only is responsible for these problems. No attention has
been given to solve the problems. It was allowed to languish in problems. The Department
should take all out efforts to’ activate the Institute.

10.1. The Committee was constrained to note that the Institute could not utilise the
allocation of Rs. 200 lakhs made to it in the year 1995-96 fully as a sum of Rs. 30 lakhs had
to be surrendered due to slow pace of construction in the Institute. The Committee is of the
firm view that there is no monitoring of the programmes undertaken by the Institute. The
Department should fix a time frame for completing construction work’ and should ensure
completion n of the work as per schedule. If this is done, then there would be no scope for
under utilisation of funds. There should also be a regular monitoring. The Committee
reiterates its earlier recommendations and impress upon the Department for full and proper
utilisation of funds already placed at its disposal.

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY, CALCUTTA

11. This is the only Homoeopathy Institute in the country which is run by the Central
Government. Today, many patients are turning towards Homoeopathy due to reasons of low


cost in treatment with little or no side effects. But the Committee is constrained to note that
the National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta is really in a very bad shape as there are
only 10 permanent teachers available with the Institute against the requirement of 64
teachers. There is no permanent Director in the Institute.

11.1. The Secretary, Department of ISM&H informed the Committee that the post of
Director of the National Institute of Homoeopathy has been lying vacant as a result of the
stay order granted by the Calcutta High Court. The Department and the Institute have been
making efforts to have the stay order vacated at the earliest possible. The Secretry, admitted
the fact that many posts in the Institute are lying vacant and the level of facilities is not upto
the mark. The reason advanced by the Secretary for this state of affairs is that the
Governing Body of the Institute has not been meeting regularly as a result of which many of
its problems have been pending since long. The paucity of funds with the Department has
also been cited as one of the reasons for the poor state of affairs of this Institute. In view of
the problems and difficulties explained by the Department, the Committee recommends
suitable enhancement of budgetary allocations to this Institute at the RE stage. However,
the Department has not taken sufficient steps. The Department is responsible for this state
of affairs. The Committee strongly recommends that urgent steps may be taken in this
direction.

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOGA

12. There has been a proposal for quite some time to set up a National Institute for
Yoga. However, this proposal is tied up with the winding up of Viswayathan Yogashram and
Central Research Institute for Yoga. The Committee is constrained to note that just because
government has not been able to arrive at a decision that the NIY could not be set up. The
Committee feels that it is not necessary to set up the NIY in Delhi only. There are places
such as Nasik, Lonawala where Yoga has got good following. Therefore, the proposal may
be considered from this angle.

STRENGTHENING OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

13. There are four Research Councils, viz. Central Council for Research in Ayurveda,
Central Council of Research in Unani Medicine, Central Council for Research in Yoga and
Naturopathy and Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy. These councils initiate aid,
guide, develop and coordinate scientific research in the respective systems.

13.1. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that no research activity worth
the name is carred out by these institutes. The Committee strongly feels the need for
research and development in the medicinal plants within the country rather than importing
them from the multinationals 10 years later. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the
Department to. accelerate and strengthen the pace of research activities. The Committee also
feels that the research activities cannot be ignored due to resource constraints and,
therefore, the Committee recommends that sufficient amount needs to be earmarked to the
Institutes for this purpose.

SIDDHA

14. The Committee feels that very scant attention is being given for the development of
SIDDHA. This is evident from the fact that no separate allocation has been given for
SIDDHA in the budgetary allocations of the Department for 1996-97. Explaining this the
department stated that no separate allocation has been made for SIDDHA because
Ayurveda and Siddha are treated in a composite manner because of their many similarities.
The Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and SIDDHA is also for the same reason a


composite body for both Ayurveda and Siddha, the Department added. The Committee
however, does not agree with this contention of the Department and recommends that
separate allocation should be provided for SIDDHA.

14.1 There has been a proposal with the Government to set-up National Institute of
SIDDHA in Tamil Nadu. The proposal was sent by the State Government of Tamil Nadu.
On this, the Department informed the Committee that land has already been identified and
the construction work would be taken up only in the Ninth Five Year Plan period. The
Committee is constrained to note that the Government is taking unduly long on the proposal
to set up the Institute. Since, it is an important proposal, the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance should take a realistic view and provide necessary funds at the Revised
Estimates stage to enable the Department to go ahead with the proposal during the current
financial year itself.

SETTING UP OF PATENT CELL

15. The Committee was given to understand that some patents were taken out in the
Western countries, particularly U.S.A. on Neem and Turmeric. When the Secretary was
asked to clarify on this, he informed that no patent has been sought for Neem or Haldi as
such it appears that patent of one of the chemicals derived from neem has been obtained in
U.S.A. and similarly, patent from one of the treatments in which Haldi is being used has
been taken out in U.S.A. However, the subject of patents is allocated to the Ministry of
Industry and it is understood that the Department of Industrial Development is challenging
the patent granted in regard to Haldi. Since the Department of ISM&H has a vital stake in
the matter, the Department proposed to set up a patent cell consisting of experts in order to
help Indian Scientists in drafting and obtaining patents as well as for increasing awareness
amongst Indian scientists about the consequences / benefits of patents for motivating them.
This Cell will keep an aye on the application of patents field in different countries to
safeguard the Indian interests. The Secretary also explained that no patent can be sought or
acquired for naturally occurring substances medicinal plant or for treatments / drugs already
mentioned in the classical text. Patent can be sought for new drugs and treatments and the
Department proposed to safeguard this effectively as soon as additional resources are made
available.

15.1 The Committee also understands that some drugs in Ayurveda such as Ayush-64
for Malaria, Ayush-56 for epilepsy, Aysuh-82 for Diabetes, etc. have been patented.
However, the number of such drugs are very few. The Committee is of the view that
effective steps are required to be taken to help scientists in ISM&H in drafting and obtaining
patents. The Committee desires that steps should be taken to set up the Patent Cell at the
earliest. The Committee is also of the view that effective steps are required to be taken to
popularise the medicines which have been found to be effective.

EDUCATIONAL STANDARDS

16. The Committee is constrained to note that the standard of ISM&H education in the
country is very low. This is largely because both the infrastructure and manpower resources
available in the institutes are grossly inadequate. There is no mechanism on the pattern of
University Grants Commission to this sector to improve the status and standard of the
institutions. The problem is compounded because of meagre allocations made. The Central
Council of Indian Medicine and also the Central Council of Homoeopathy are responsible
for laying down and maintaining uniform standard of education in the fields of Ayurveda,
Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy and regulating practice in these sytems. There are about
273 under-graduate and 43 post-graduate colleges of ISM&H producing 11,795 graduates and


7

491 post-graduates respectively every year. There are four national institutes i.e. 1. National
Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur. 2. National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta. 3. National
Institute of Unani Medicine, Bangalore. 4. National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune. Besides
these, the Government also proposed to set-up National Institute of Yoga and National
Institute of Siddha.

16.1 The Committee is also constrained to note that more than 90 percent institutions
do not have the minimum facilities prescribed. Therefore, the assistance to medical
institutions is a very large area of urgent requirement.

16.2 The Committee feels that the efforts made by Central Councils of Indian medicine
and Homoeopathy are not sufficient enough to maintain and improve the standard of
education for various courses offered in the Institute/Colleges under ISM&H as the
infrastrucutre provided in the colleges is grossly inadequate, out-dated and these require to
be improved. The number of colleges offering under-graduate and post-graduate courses
under the ISM&H should also be increased. The Committee feels that it is urgently
necessary that the facilities and standards of ISM&H Education should be improved without
any delay. Otherwise these Institutions keep on producing substandard graduates who in
turn will continue to remain a liability rather than an asset to these disciplines.


MINUTES



I
FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. and again at 3.00 p.m. on Friday, the 9th August 1996
in Committee Room ‘63’ First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri S. 8. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

LOK SABHA

10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11. Shri Sartaj Singh

12. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
13. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

14. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

15. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
16. Shri 1. G. Sanadi

17. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
18. Shri Samik Lahiri

19. Shri S. K. Karvendhan

20. Shri Mukhtar Anees

21. Dr. M. Jagannath

22. Dr. Bali Ram

23. Shri Ranen Barman

24. Shri Surender Singh

9 9० :3 9४ (७ + ०

WITNESSES
I; i * *
II. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy

. Shri Y. N. Chaturvedi, Secretary

. Shri K. C. Chandramouli, Joint Secretary
. Dr. Alma Aman, Deputy Adviser Unani
Dr. Khalid, Director, Unani Council
Mrs. S. Kaila, CCA

WUPwWNE

***Relates to some other matter.

18


12

6. Dr. Rastogi, Director, Homoeo Council
7. Shri Bhandari, Financial Advisor
8. Dr. V. N. Pandey, Director, CCRAS
9. Shri B. L. Meena, Director
10. Shri Kanwar Rajinder Singh, Director
11. Shri S. K. Sharma, I / CAY
12. Shri Naresh Kumar, Director (Yoga and Naturopathy Council)
13. Shri M.S.P. Singh, Deputy Advisor (Homoeo)
ik :
SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J. G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the
Departments of Health, Family Welfare and Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy
in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants for the year 1996-97?

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.35 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on 10th
August, 1996.

***Relates to some other matter.


६3
“FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 24th August 1996 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri S. 8. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
Dr. B. B. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

SPAAVPwWN

9. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11, Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
12, Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

13. Shri S. K. Karvendhan

14. Dr. M. Jagannath

15. Dr. Bali Ram

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Demands for Grants for 1996-97
of the Departments of Health (Demand No. 39), Culture (Demand No. 49), Family Welfare
(Demand No. 41) and Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (Demand No. 40).
The Committee, after some discussions, adopted the same with some modifications.

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Dr. (Smt.) Bharati Ray
And Dr. M. Aram to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Mahadeepak Singh
Shakya and in his absence Shri S.K. Karvendhan to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha. The
Committee decided that the reports may be iaid / presented on 29.8.96 or on a subsequent
day subject to availability of Hindi version.

4. * * *

5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 p.m.

“Minutes of IInd, IIrd and [Vth meetings Relates to matters not included in this report.
**Relates to some other matter.

18


5 जेल्डिक 55 ज ०

Hoga ad ab batidloai