Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT
REPORT NO. 
261
The Indira Gandhi National University
for Women, Bill, 2013
(Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 30th January, 2014)
(Forwarded to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 30th January, 2014)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2014)

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT
The Indira Gandhi National University
for Women, Bill, 2013
(Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on  30 th January, 2014)
(Forwarded to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 30th January, 2014)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A BBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—14
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 15—19
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 21—28
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 29 —79

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 31st August, 2013)
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
6. Shri Derek O' Brien
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
9. Shri Tarun Vijay
10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suresh Angadi
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Sivasami C.
15. Shrimati Helen Davidson
16. Dr. Charles Dias
17. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
18. Shri Virender Kashyap
19. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
20. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
21. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
22. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
23. Capt. Jai Naraian Prasad Nishad
24. Shri M.K. Raghavan
25. Shri K. Chandrashekar Rao
26. Shri M.I. Shanavas
27. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
28. Vacant
29. Shri Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
30. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana
31. Shri Manicka Tagore
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred
and sixty first Report of the Committee on the Indira Gandhi National University for Women
Bill, 2013.
*
2. The Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013 was introduced in the Lok
Sabha on 20
th August, 2013. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with Speaker, Lok
Sabha referred
** the Bill to the Committee on 18 th September, 2013 for examination and report.
3. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Higher Education in its
meeting held on 5 th December, 2013. The views of the Chairman, UGC, Vice-Chancellor, Indira
Gandhi Delhi Technical University for Women and the representative of AIU were heard by the
Committee on 3
rd January, 2014.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in three sittings held on 5 th December 2013, 3 rd and
16th January, 2014.
5. The Committee, while drafting the report, relied on the following:-
(i) Background Note on the Bill received from the Department of Higher Education;
(ii) Detailed clause by clause note on various provisions of the Bill;
(iii) Details of consultation with all stakeholders;
(iv) Replies to the questionnaire sent by the Department of Higher Education;
(v) Verbatim record of the oral evidence taken on the Bill; and
(vi) Presentation made and clarification given by the Secretary, Department of Higher
Education.
6. The Committee considered its Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 16
th January, 2014.
7. For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters at the end of the report.
NEW D ELHI; BIRENDER SINGH,
January 16th, 2014 Chairman,
Pausha 26, 1935 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II Section 2 dated 20 th August, 2013.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 51264 dated 19 th September, 2013.

ABBREVIATIONS
GER : Gross Enrolment Ratio
UGC : University Grants Commission
MHRD : Ministry of Human Resource Development
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
DPR : Detailed Project Report
IIIT : Indian Institutes of Information Technology
IIT : Indian Institutes of Technology
NIT : National Institutes of Technology
IIM : Indian Institutes of Management
CBSE : Central Board of Secondary Education
DU : Delhi University
V C : Vice Chancellor
NDC : National Development Council
NET : National Eligibility Test
IESER : Institute for Environmental Science Education and Research
ICT : Information and Communication Technology
SC : Scheduled Caste
ST : Scheduled Tribe
OBC : Other Backward Class
JRF : Junior Research Fellowship
SRF : Senior Research Fellowship
(iv)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013 was referred to the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development by the
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, on
18 September, 2013 for examination and report.
1.2 The Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013 seeks to establish and
incorporate a University in the State of Uttar Pradesh to provide for avenues of higher education
and research facilities to the women in India and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
1.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as follows:
“Education is considered as prime driving force in elevating the status of women and it
is Government’ s commitment to ensure gender parity in all spheres of life. The making of
quality education available to everyone is the most fundamental basis for advancing gender
equality and women’ s empowerment. Armed with such an education, and the self-confidence
that comes with it, there is no limit to what women can do-provided they have equal access
to job and career opportunities and the determination to make positive changes in the
country.
There are some State Universities and Institutions deemed to be Universities which cater
exclusively to women students, but there is no Central University exclusively for women in
the country. In the Twelfth Five Year Plan while the focus is on consolidation of the
existing institutions, there is provision for new Central Universities to address the social
gap. The University shall be established exclusively for women with an objective to provide
for necessary support and supplement the efforts of the Government in women’ s
empowerment by giving them increased access to higher education and research. The
proposed women’ s University will cut across social and religious categories and facilitate
girls from disadvantaged sections to enter into higher education.
Establishment of a Central University for women would have a multiplier effect on
availability of empowered women in all walks of life. As a model Central University for
women, it will create standards of excellence to be followed by others. Such a Central
University will help in the fight to overcome discrimination and change perceptions about
what women can and should do.”
1.4 Giving a background of the Bill, the Department of Higher Education submitted that
education is considered the most potent tool for all-round socio-economic development of the
country and a key instrument for building an equitable and just society by imparting values that
foster social cohesion and national identity, by providing skills and competencies for economic
well-being as also by imparting to citizens the tools needed to fully participate in the governance
process. Elaborating further it was submitted that despite considerable progress during the Eleventh
Plan, less than one-fifth of the estimated 120 million potential students were enrolled in the Higher
Educational Institutions in India which was well below the world average of 26 per cent. There
were wide disparities in Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) among the States and between urban and
rural areas while the disadvantaged sections of society, particularly women had significantly lower
GER ratio than the national average. In this backdrop, the Twelfth Plan envisaged “a holistic

2
approach to the issues of expansion, equity and excellence so that expansion is not just about
accommodating ever larger number of students, but is also about providing diverse choices of
subjects, levels and institutions while ensuring a minimum standard of academic quality and
providing the opportunity to pursue higher education to all sections of society, particularly the
disadvantaged.” The strategic framework for the Twelfth Plan envisaged expansion of access by
scaling up capacity in existing institutions rather than increasing the number of institutions, with
the exception of new institutions needed to address critical regional and social gaps.
1.5 Giving an idea about the evolvement of the proposed legislation, the Department submitted
that the Indian social dynamics still hindered certain sections of the population who were not yet
open-minded to send girls/women to co-educational institutions of higher education, thus depriving
them of the benefits of higher education which was necessary for their own social and economic
empowerment. Positive discrimination in favour of disadvantaged sections had always proved
helpful and even the Constitution of India permitted such “discrimination”. Further, there have been
some State Universities and Institutions Deemed to be Universities which were catering exclusively
to women students but no central university exclusively for women in the country. It was,
therefore, considered essential to have a model Central University exclusively for women, which
will set the pace for all round growth and development of women in the country. The proposed
University would seek to graduate women who would be skilled and innovative professionals,
service-oriented leaders and promoters of sustainable human and economic development in India.
It would also cut across social and religious categories and facilitate girls from all sections to enter
into the higher education system. Further, the University would be innovative in character so that
the girl students do not get bounded by traditional disciplines supposedly preferred by women, like
Home Science, Child Care, Child and Maternal Health etc. Rather, it was proposed that the
University would develop into an institution which takes, among others, insights from women
issues and their relationship with other connected issues and opens new pathways for offering
innovative solutions. Setting up a university, exclusively for women, will provide the necessary
support in this direction and supplement the efforts of the Government for women’s empowerment
by giving them an increased access to employment-oriented basic courses to high end research.
1.6 On the reason to locate the proposed university in the State of Uttar Pradesh, the
Department submitted that the State had the largest population of women in the country. Of the
total population of 121 crore in the country, there were 58.6 crore women of which 9.5 crore i.e.
16 per cent were in Uttar Pradesh. Further, the sex ratio of Uttar Pradesh was 908, which was
almost the lowest amongst the States. Only small States like Punjab, Haryana, Sikkim, Delhi and
Jammu and Kashmir had lower sex-ratios than Uttar Pradesh. The total number of women in Uttar
Pradesh far exceeded the total population of these States. The GER in higher education in Uttar
Pradesh was 12.0 for men and 9.5 for women, both less than the national average of 17.1 and
12.7 respectively. As per 2011 Census, the literacy rate of women in Uttar Pradesh was only 59.26
per cent which was 6.20 per cent less than the national average of 65.46 per cent for women.
The gender gap in literacy was about 20 per cent. Of the 43.17 crore illiterates in the country,
about 25 crore were women and of this about 61 per cent of the illiterate women were in Uttar
Pradesh. Therefore, there was a strong justification for establishing the first ever Central University
for Women in the state of Uttar Pradesh.
1.7 Elaborating further on locating the proposed University in Rae Bareilly, the Department
submitted that Rae Bareilly, being an educationally backward district, was considered ideally suited
for location as it was the Karmabhoomi, the political constituency of the first ever woman Prime
Minister of India. Further, Rae Bareilly was near the major cities of Allahabad, Lucknow, Kanpur
and Varanasi, all of which had good air, rail and road connectivity as well as the necessary physical
and social infrastructure to attract good students and faculty from all over. The Committee was
informed that the State Government of Uttar Pradesh had offered 334.82 acres of land in two

3
tehsils in Rae Bareilly for the proposed Women University. A team comprising of representatives of
the MHRD, State Government, UGC and two Vice Chancellors of the nearby Central Universities
viz, Babasaheb Bhim Rao Ambedkar University, Lucknow and Allahabad University had inspected
the site and found it suitable for the establishment of the proposed Central University for Women.
1.8 The Secretary, Department of Higher Education in his deposition before the Committee on
the Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013 submitted that education was very
crucial for the development of both men and women. The Eleventh and Twelfth Plan have been
emphasizing on the comprehensive promotion of education. He further submitted that though the
ideal position would be to have joint education without any compartments but there were certain
sections in our multi-cultured society having reservations about sending their daughters to such an
environment. There was a demand for separate institutions and universities for Women so that they
could come forward without any inhibition and get themselves educated. Drawing the attention of
the Committee towards Department’s commitment to the national goal of achieving GER of 30 per
cent in Higher Education by 2020, the Secretary stated that as per the latest figures, GER for
women was 17.9 per cent whereas for men it was 20.2 per cent. With an overall literacy gap of
16 per cent, there were 43.17 crore (27 per cent) illiterates in our country of which 25 crore were
women. Further, 61 per cent illiterates were in UP alone. Therefore, UP was the State with a huge
number of illiterates. It was informed that the estimated expenditure of the proposed University
during the Twelfth Plan was said to be `500 crore. A detailed project report was being made based
on which further expenditure would be incurred. The Secretary also clarified that in the Twelfth
Plan though new institutions were not allowed but in exceptional cases of social gaps, new
institutions could be created. The Committee was informed that in-principle approval of the
Planning Commission in this regard had been obtained.
1.9 About the admission process and the courses to be offered by the University, the Committee
was informed that the admissions would be through a common entrance examination and initially
subjects in core courses, science and humanities would be offered. Gradually management schools,
medical and engineering colleges could also be started in the proposed Central University for
Women. It was further clarified by the Department that initially broad-based subjects were indicated
and it was left to the Academic Council or Board of the particular institution to decide about the
subjects/courses that would be offered in the university or institute. In the proposed legislation also,
courses to be offered had been left to the Academic Council to decide. The Committee, however,
would like to observe that the proposed University being first of its kind should have a non-
conventional character and should not get bounded by the traditional disciplines supposedly
preferred by women such as home science, child care, maternal health and nutrition etc.
The Committee recommends that specialized courses or advanced disciplines of education be
introduced in the proposed University with required impetus to innovative research in such
specialized courses or advanced disciplines.
1.10 Committee’s attention was also drawn to the statistics made available by the Department for
School and Higher Education of women in Uttar Pradesh including the drop out rates and
percentage of illiterates in the State. According to the Statistics of School Education 2010-11, the
GER in School (classes I-XII) for girls in the State is 88.4 while GER in higher education for
women is only 9.5. The drop out rates of girls at different levels of school in the State are 34.8
in classes I-V , 50.2 in classes I-VIII and 14.4 in classes I-X as per the Statistic of School
Education 2010-11. Further, the percentage of illiterate women as compared to men in UP, as per
the Census of 2011, is 42.82 as against 22.72 for men. About the number of Central and State
Universities in UP and the percentage of girl students in these universities, the Committee notes that
there are four Central Universities and 23 State Universities in UP. However, the percentage of girl
students in four Central Universities and 19 State Universities was said to be only 34.24 and 28.53
respectively. From the above data, it is evident that the status of female literacy in UP is worrisome

4
at school level and is particularly dismal at higher level. Perhaps that is the reason that inspite of
fourth largest State in terms of geographical area and adequate resources, Uttar Pradesh, the most
populous State, has been lagging behind many States in terms of social development indicators
including literacy.
1.11 On a query regarding the proposal Bill being formulated based on the Acts governing other
Central Universities and deviation in the proposed Bill, if any, the Department informed the
Committee that the governance pattern of the university has been made similar to the existing
universities and the powers and functions of the Visitor, Authorities and officers of the University
would generally be on the same pattern. However, following variances have been envisaged keeping
in view the status of the university:
– Since the proposal is for establishment of a Women University, it has been envisaged
as a residential University.
– It has been envisaged that the authorities of the University viz. the Court, the
Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Finance Committee etc. will have
adequate number of members from amongst the women.
– The University has been envisaged to be a comprehensive university. It will, subject
to Statutes, have power to establish at least one school as a model school for the
schools of the region. It will establish and maintain a health care center for the
benefits of the students and employees.
– There would be no concept of residual periods in respect of appointments/nomination
made under transitional provisions and the vacancies, if any that occur will be filled
in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
1.12 The Committee is aware that it is an undisputed fact that women literacy will always remain
the most crucial factor for all well being and progress of women of our country. This is all the
more relevant in higher education. More and more women going for higher education would make
a positive impact on gender parity, standard of living, improvement in their social and economic
status ultimately leading to women making inroads in their professional careers. In other words,
higher education is linked with women empowerment. Given the fact that the overall literacy rate
in Uttar Pradesh is nearly 59 per cent and female literacy being even on lower side with adverse
sex ratio, it is a welcome step that a Central University exclusively for Women is being
proposed to be set up at Rae Bareilly. The Committee believes that it would give required
impetus to higher education for women in the State. The Committee welcomes the objective
behind the proposed legislation. The Committee hopes that such a University once
established and having become functional would bring significant improvement in the status
of women, especially of the State. The Committee would appreciate if the process of making
the proposed University functional will be completed in a time-bound manner.
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
2.1 The Committee was informed that the Cabinet, in its meeting held on 11 July, 2013,
considered and approved the note of the Department of Higher Education regarding the
establishment of Indira Gandhi National University for Women at Rae Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh along
with the creation of statutory posts. The Committee was further informed that the Ministry of Law
and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) were consulted and they
concurred with the proposal contained in the Indira Gandhi National University for Women
Bill, 2013. Besides this, the consultations were also held with the Ministries of Women and Child
Development, Social Justice and Empowerment and the Ministry of Finance (Department of

5
Expenditure). Planning Commission was also consulted. The Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment supported the proposal whereas the Planning Commission and the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) and the Ministry of Women and Child Development made
some observations/comments which are as follows:
Ministry of Women and Child Development
– This Ministry concurs with the proposal regarding establishment of a Central University
for Women in Rae Bareilly, U.P. with the suggestion that the timeline for starting of
the first academic session, once the Act come into effect, may be provided in the
Cabinet Note.
Planning Commission
– Setting up a new university, exclusively for women, will provide the necessary support
and supplement the efforts of the Government in women’s empowerment by giving
them an increased access to higher education and research. While there are universities
for women in some States of the country, there is no such Central University for
Women and, therefore, it is essential to have a model Central University exclusively for
Women, which will set the pace for all round growth and development of women in
the country.
– The financial implications of the proposal have not been estimated and it is stated that
it will be submitted once approved by the Cabinet and after the appointment of the Vice
Chancellor. However, it would be procedurally appropriate; if the proposal is mooted
through Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) giving details of the estimated cost of
setting up of the university once the proposed Bill is passed by the Parliament.
– From the Bill, it is not clear that the admission to the university is exclusively for
women students. Therefore, in para 5, (2.ii) may include as:- “admission of students
exclusively women only shall made on merit....”
– Since the university is exclusively for women, a clause may be included saying that
only women candidate will be considered for appointment as Vice-Chancellor  of the
proposed university.”
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
– As per the existing practice, establishment of any new institution including Central
University under Plan Head needs to be considered by the Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Expenditure
initially. After the appraisal of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) along with cost
estimates, the EFC may recommend to the Cabinet for its approval. In the present
case, MHRD has directly prepared the Cabinet note bypassing the EFC appraisal.
– Current note does not provide any estimation of cost that is envisaged with regard
to the establishment of the University. It would be extremely difficult to evaluate any
proposal without fully knowing the detailed financial implications and their availability
over the entire Twelfth Plan. It is, therefore, requested that MHRD may prepare a
DPR with financial details. In this context, while calculating the cost estimates, the
MHRD may take lead from its on-going scheme of establishing 18 new Central
Universities, establishment of new 15 IIITs, 10 NITs, IITs, 5 IESERs and IIMs across
States.

6
– The need for establishing separate University exclusively for Women has not been
established adequately in the current note. As per the note, a few State Universities are
already there who cater exclusively to women. In this context, it is important to
establish that the existing States Universities are not adequate. Mere fact that there is
no Central University exclusively for women cannot and should not be justification of
establishing yet another new university.
– Establishment of exclusive university for women may not be the answer to the problem
of declining sex ratio and gender gap in literacy of about 20 per cent in UP.
– Current note is silent whether it would be a Central University with traditional Arts,
Science and Commerce Departments or it would have the Medical, Engineering
Sciences and Management Departments. Information regarding anticipated students and
faculty with financial details over next couple of year is also not there.
– As per the current note, “the University shall have the power to appoint persons
working in any other university or educational institution as teachers for specified
periods”. In this context, it may be pointed out that such provisions, without the
concurrence of borrowing institutions may clearly violate the rights and independence
of other institutions under Central/State Governments.
– It is also not understood how a University would have such regulatory power to recognize
other institutions. Such regulatory power should be with the UGC or similar body.
– Most of the Central Educational Institutions including IITs are facing severe shortage
of quality faculty. Current note is silent how this challenge is proposed to be
addressed. Also, MHRD has not explored any possibility to establish the University
under PPP or in collaboration with any Industry.
– In what sense the proposed University is going to be Model one is given nowhere in
the current note. The experience of other such universities such as Asian University
for Women, Chittagong, Bangladesh and elsewhere in the world may also be indicated.
2.2 Regarding the suggestion of the Ministry of Women and Child Development for providing
the timeline for starting the first academic session, once the Act comes into effect, the response
of the Department was that it would not be advisable to indicate the timeline for starting of the
first academic session in the Cabinet Note because once the University started functioning from a
temporary campus it would become difficult to get the land and other infrastructure facilities from
the State for development of the permanent campus. However, efforts would be made to start the
development of permanent campus at the earliest along with the academic session from suitable
temporary campus. Further, the Planning Commission and the Department of Expenditure had
expressed concern about the financial implications of the proposal not being estimated and the
procedure of proposal mooted through EFC being bypassed in this case. According to the
Department of Expenditure, as per the existing practice, establishment of any new institution
including the Central University under Plan Head needed to be considered by the Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC) under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Department of Expenditure
initially. After the appraisal of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) along with cost estimates, the EFC
may recommend to the Cabinet for its approval. In the present case, MHRD has directly prepared
the Cabinet Note bypassing the EFC appraisal. Further, concern of both the Planning Commission
and the Department of Expenditure was that the Cabinet Note did not contain any estimation of
cost for establishment of the proposed university without which evaluation of the proposal was
difficult. The Department of Expenditure had requested MHRD to prepare a DPR with financial
details taking a lead from its on-going scheme of establishing 16 new Central Universities, 15 new
IIITs, 10 NITs, IITs, 5 IESERs and IIMs across States while calculating the cost estimates.

7
2.3 The response of the Department to the concerns of the Planning Commission and the
Department of Expenditure was that while establishing 16 new Central Universities during the
Eleventh Plan, the EFC was held after the enactment. Before this, EFC was never held for
establishing a new Central University. After establishment of the University through an Act of
Parliament, UGC funded it from the consolidated grant received from the Ministry. Same
procedure was being followed in this matter also. Regarding the estimated financial
implications, the Department’s stand was that it would be known only after the Vice-Chancellor
was appointed, who would be preparing the vision document, obtain the approval of the
statutory bodies and submit the same for preparing the EFC memo and seek the approval of
the competent authority to incur the expenditure. The Department further submitted that for
understanding the magnitude of the financial implication for 16 new Central Universities during
the Eleventh Plan, the EFC approved an expenditure of `240 crore per Central University for
the last three years. For the proposed University, `500 crore ( `390 crore non recurring
expenditure and `110 crore recurring expenditure) for the remaining period of the Twelfth Plan
would be sufficient.
2.4 On the suggestion of the Planning Commission for including a clause in the proposed
legislation stating that only women candidates would be considered for appointment to the post of
Vice-Chancellor, the response of the Department was that this would be a consideration at the time
of appointment of VC and other positions. It was felt that appointment to various positions in the
University, including the post of VC should not be made gender specific as it would not be
practicable. Provisions have already been made in the draft Bill that the authorities of the University
such as Executive Council, Academic Council, Board of Studies, Finance Commission etc. shall
have adequate number of members from amongst the women.
2.5 One of the issues raised by the Department of Expenditure was that the need for
establishing a separate Central University exclusively for women had not been established adequately
in the Note. A few State Universities were already there which were catering exclusively to women.
It was important to establish that the existing State Universities were not adequate. Mere fact of
there being no Central University exclusively for Women should not be a justification for
establishing yet another University. To this reservation, the response of the Department was that
the Central Universities were expected to play a catalytic role and be a trend setter for the other
higher education institutions in the neighbourhood to emulate. They have to set standards for the
quality of research, innovation, academia-industries linkage, curriculum on which Universities were
rated. That were how the National Development Council (NDC) approved setting up of the 16 new
Central Universities in the Eleventh Plan in the unserved and underserved States. In the Twelfth
Plan, while the focus was on consolidation, there was provision for setting up new Central
Universities to address the social gap. The present proposal of establishment of a Women University
was a step in this direction. As a model Central University exclusively for women, it would create
standards of excellence to be followed by others.
2.6 Another concern raised by the Department of Expenditure was that establishment of
exclusive University for Women may not be the answer to the problem of declining sex ratio and
gender gap in literacy of about 20 per cent in Uttar Pradesh. To this, the Department submitted
that establishment of exclusive university for women would have a multiplier effect on availability
of empowered women in all walks of life. There was enough evidence to suggest that increasing
level of education among women had a positive impact on various indicators of human
development. As was commonly expressed, education of a man was the education of an individual
while the education of a woman was the education of the whole family. Education was considered
as prime mover in elevating the status of women and it was Government’s commitment to ensure
gender parity in all spheres of life. It helped them to know their rights and also gave them
confidence to claim them. Empowering such sections of women, who were hesitant to go to

8
co-educational institutions, through higher education by way of establishment of Central University
exclusively for Women would surely go a long way in solving the problems faced by women of
the country.
2.7 To the query of the Department of Expenditure whether the proposed University would be
a Central University with traditional Arts, Science and Commerce Departments or it would also
have the Medical, Engineering Sciences and Management Departments, the response of the
Department was that all Central Universities were autonomous bodies empowered to take all
academic and administrative decisions. The proposed Act envisaged similar provisions to enable the
University to offer any course as per the need. Regarding the information relating to the number
of anticipated students and faculty with financial details over the next couple of years not being
available, the Department’s reply was that it was not possible at this stage to indicate the
anticipated number of students, faculties and departments in the University. It would be known only
when the vision document was prepared under the leadership of the first Vice-Chancellor of the
proposed University.
2.8 The Committee observes that a few State Universities exclusively for women are
functioning in the country. The Department, has however, not consulted any of them while
formulating the proposed legislation. The Committee, therefore, besides hearing the Department of
Higher Education also heard the views of the Chairman, UGC and the Vice-Chancellor, Indira
Gandhi Delhi Technical University for Women. Both the Chairman, UGC and the Vice-Chancellor,
Indira Gandhi Delhi Technical University for Women welcomed the proposed legislation observing
that required impetus to women education would be given through this legislation and that it would
create an environment where women could shed their inhibitions and come forward to the domain
of higher education of their choices. The Committee observes that it would have been
appropriate if factual position and ground realities of the existing women universities in
terms of their overall functioning, courses offered, departments, faculties, fee structure,
student intake, placements and their consequent impact on the status of higher education
of the women and their empowerment was also taken into account while proposing the
present legislation so that shortcomings, if any, were addressed beforehand in terms of
outreach of the legislation to the weaker sections, disadvantaged groups of the society,
including the minorities.
III. ISSUES OF CONCERN
3.1 Faculty shortage and reasonable and equitable access of all sections of the society including
the minorities in the domain of higher education have been the two major concerns of the
Committee. The Committee feels that these two issues are of utmost importance requiring the
attention of the Department.
Faculty Shortage
3.2 Acute shortage of the faculty positions in all categories of the higher educational institutions
across the country has been one area of major concern for the Committee. There is no denying
the fact that right from the well-established Central Universities to those set up recently, State
Universities, private universities, premier institutions including IITs, NITs, IIMs and IIITs, the
problem of faculty shortage continues to be grim with no improvement foreseen in the near future.
It is believed that there is 40 to 50 per cent shortage of faculties in all categories of Higher
Educational Institutions in the country seriously affecting the quality of education being imparted
in these institutions. In the absence of qualified and experienced faculty, with no vision to develop
faculties, how a university intended to be a ‘model university’ setting standards for others to follow
in higher education could be set up is beyond the imagination of the Committee.

9
3.3 The Committee notes that this issue was also pointed out by the Department of
Expenditure during the consultation process observing that most of the Central Educational
Institutions including the IITs are facing severe shortage of quality faculty. The Department
is silent as to how it proposes to address this issue. The Department’s response that it was
taking several steps to address the issue of faculty shortage like increasing the number of
research fellowships, establishing coaching centres for NET aspirants belonging to the
disadvantaged groups, launching faculty recharge scheme, strengthening of Administrative
Staff Colleges, use of ICT etc was not very encouraging. The Committee is aware that
various strategies are being employed to attract and retain quality faculty which include
attractive pay structure, provision of good residential accommodation, medical facilities,
initial research grants, financial support for participation in National/International
conference, suitable scheme for sharing consultancy charges. The Committee also notes that
to mitigate the situation, the Department also has taken the measures like increasing the
age of superannuation, permitting universities to engage guest/contractual faculty to meet
shortfall, enhancing number of JRF and SRF and strengthening of science based research
and education in university etc. However, nobody can deny the fact that all such measures
will take considerable time and efforts for making their impact visible at the ground level.
The problem of acute shortage of faculty would be faced by the proposed University also.
3.4 The Committee is of the view that availability of quality faculty is critical for the
success of an institution as a model for others to emulate. There is a need to provide a
research-oriented environment, sustainable faculty development initiatives and good
compensation to attract and retain good faculty. The Committee strongly feels that the main
objective of an educational institution is to impart quality education to its students and this
could be done by a qualified and experienced faculty only. In other words, teachers are the
foundation stone on which the edifice of every institution is structured. Whether the
strategies and initiatives have resulted into any perceptible change remains to be seen. In
this context, the Committee reiterates its observation that the issue of faculty shortage be
addressed on top priority. Further, faculty development may be initiated in all categories of
higher educational institutions in a mission mode manner.
Representation of all classes
3.5 As per the statistics made available to the Committee, the GER of women in higher
education in UP is only 9.5. Given this very dismal GER in higher education, it is a foregone
conclusion that only a few classes/groups/communities are going up for higher education
leaving aside a vast section of women of weaker sections, disadvantaged groups and
minorities. Given the social and cultural diversities of these groups with their community
preferences attracting women of every social group to this university would be a challenge.
In this context, the Committee apprehends that upwardly mobile groups in every class, social
group and community may benefit from the establishment of a Central Women University in
the State, leaving behind the women of weaker sections and the minorities. How the
Department proposes to make it an all women inclusive university by including every group
in the domain of higher education has not been detailed anywhere. The Committee would like
the Department to provide a mechanism for giving equitable presentation to every section of
women in this University by employing every conceivable mechanism.
IV. The Committee takes note of the Central Universities Act, 2009 which has been enacted to
establish and incorporate universities for teaching and research in the various States. The objective
of the proposed legislation is also the same. The Committee made a comparative analysis of both
the legislations. The Committee observes that some of the provisions of the Bill were somewhat
different. Committee’s attention was also drawn in this regard by the Chairman, UGC. The
Committee, accordingly, makes recommendations on some of the provisions as follows:–

10
Clause 2: Definitions: Sub-clause (c)
4.1 Clause 2 deals with the definitions. Sub-Clause (c) of clause 2 defines the term “Board of
Studies” as the “Board of Studies of the University”. The Committee is of the view that instead
of Board of Studies of the University, it should be “the Board of Studies of a Department
of the University” as in the Central Universities Act, 2009. The Committee recommends
that necessary changes may, accordingly, be made in the provision.
Clause 2(p)
4.2 Clause 2(p) defines the term “Institution” as follows:
“Institution means an academic institution, not being a college, maintained by, or admitted
to the privileges of, the University”.
When compared with the definition of the term “Institution” as given in the Central
Universities Act, 2009, the Committee finds that the words,” or admitted to the privileges of” have
been added in the proposed legislation. This gives the impression that the proposed University is
perhaps being envisaged as an affiliated university . The Committee feels that there is lack of
clarity as objects of the university do not indicate that it will be an affiliating University.
The Committee also agrees with the UGC policy of reducing the burden of affiliation on the
University so that it can devote more time on academics and research and innovation
instead of being burdened with the governance of affiliated colleges.  The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that in the definition of the term, the words ‘or admitted to the
privileges of’ may be deleted.
Clause 2(t)
4.3 Clause 2(t) defines the term “teachers of the University”. Here again, the Committee
observes a difference when compared with the definition of the term as given the Central
Universities Act, 2009. As in the Bill, the provision of institutions/colleges maintained by the
University has been added, the definition of teachers should also be defined in respect of
institutions/colleges maintained by the University. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the
following addition in the above definition:
“or in any College or Institution maintained by the University and are designated as
teachers by the Ordinances”.
V. Clause 7: University open to all classes, castes and creed.
5.1 Clause 7 provides that the University would be open to women of all caste, creed, race or
class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose any test whatsoever of
religious belief or profession in order to entitle her to be admitted as a student in the University
or to graduate thereat. The second proviso to the clause empowers the University to make special
provisions for the employment or promotion of educational interests of women physically
challenged or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
5.2 The Committee notes that this clause empowers the University to make provisions
for weaker sections, SCs and STs. However, as is the norm in other Central Acts prescribed
norms of reservations for Other Backward Classes (OBCs) have been left out. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the provision for Other Backward Classes (OBCs)
may also be included in this provision.

11
5.3 Committee’s attention was drawn by the following proviso to Section 7 of the Central
Universities Act, 2009:
“Provided further that no such special provision shall be made on the ground of domicile”.
The Committee fails to understand the reason for omission of the above proviso in the proposed
legislation. The Committee observes that the objective behind setting up the Central
University is to offer avenues of higher education and research facilities to women in the
country. The Committee is of the view that this specific proviso should be made applicable
in the case of all Central Universities. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the
incorporation of the same .
VI. Clause 8: Residence of Students
6.1 Clause 8 of the Bill provides that every student of the University other than a student, who
pursues a course of the study by distance education system, shall reside in a Hall or hostel or
under such conditions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
6.2 The Chairman, UGC pointed out that such a provision does not exist in the Central
University Act, 2009. Further, though it may be desirable to make residential condition mandatory
for holistic development of student’s personality, it may create an avoidable financial burden on the
students residing locally. Therefore, a provision may be made to exclude the local girls from
compulsory stay on the campus. On this issue being taken up with the Department, it was
informed that provisions regarding residence of students as made in the Bill are similar to those
made in the Delhi University Act and there is no restriction for the day scholars in DU. The
Committee would, however, like to point out that this provision is there in the Central
Universities Act, 2009 which is envisaged as the model Act for all the Central Universities.
The Committee, feels that the provision lacks clarity. Further, local students should not
mandatorily be made to reside in the University as it would put them under considerable
financial burden.  Accordingly, the provision may be deleted.
VII. Clause 9: Power to establish and maintain schools
7.1 Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the University to establish at least one school as a model
school for the schools of the region.  The Chairman, UGC suggested that such a school on the
campus should be affiliated with a Central System like CBSE and not to a State Board. The
Committee finds merit in the suggestion and recommends the Department to provide the
affiliation of the campus school with the CBSE.
VIII. Clause 13: Vice-Chancellor
8.1 Clause 13 provides that the Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic
officer of the University and shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the
University and give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University. He shall be
appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
8.2 The Vice-Chancellor, Indira Gandhi Delhi Technical University for Women, while deposing
before the Committee, had suggested that since the proposed University was exclusively for
women, only women candidates should be considered for appointment as its Vice-Chancellor. Such
a suggestion was also made by the Planning Commission. The Department’s stand, however, was
that appointment to various positions of the university, including the post of VC should not be made
gender specific as it would not be practicable. It further submitted that the provisions have already
been made in the draft Bill that the authorities of the university such as the Executive Council,

12
Academic Council, Board of Studies, Finance Committee etc. shall have adequate number of
members from amongst the women. The Committee, however, would emphasise that it would
be justified to consider women candidates for appointment as Vice-Chancellor. Further, a
reasonable percentage may also be fixed for filling up the faculty positions and other
authorities by women candidates.
IX. Clause 24: Academic Council
9.1 Clause 24 provides for the Academic Council of the University and its composition. Second
proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 24 provides that “provided further that such number of
members as may be prescribed by the statutes shall be from among the elected members of the
Court who are teachers of the University”. The Chairman, UGC was of the opinion that the
constitution of the Academic Council should be open to all academicians and other eminent persons
and should not be restricted to teachers of the University only. The Committee also agrees with
the viewpoint of the Chairman, UGC and suggests that the words “who are teachers of the
university” may be deleted from the provision.
X. Clause 30: Power to make Ordinances
10.1 Clause 30(1) sub clause (j) of the Bill provides for setting up of a machinery for redressal
of grievances of employees.
10.2 The Committee is of the opinion that the students are the main stakeholders of the
University. Therefore, keeping them out of the Grievance Redressal Mechanism would not be
reasonable. UGC has already issued guidelines to the universities for timely action in ensuring
student’s grievances/entitlement . The Committee also notes that the Central Universities Act,
2009 provides Grievance Redressal Mechanism both for employees and students. Making an
exception in the proposed legislation is not called for. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the inclusion of students also in the Grievances Redressal Mechanism.
THE SCHEDULE
XI. Statutes 2: Vice-Chancellor
11.1 Sub Clause (1) of clause 2 of the Statutes relates to the appointment of the Vice-Chancellor
by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons . It was suggested by the Chairman,
UGC that the provision should be rephrased as “not more than three persons” because
otherwise the panel may contain a larger number of persons making it difficult for the
Visitor to make a considered choice. The Committee, agreeing with the suggestion,
recommends the Department to make necessary changes in the provision accordingly.
XII. S tatutes 11 and 13: Quorum for meeting of Executive Council and Academic Council
12.1 Clause 11 and 13 of the Statutes provide for quorum for the meetings of the Executive
Council and the Academic Council as five and seven members respectively. The Chairman, UGC
pointed out that instead of indicating or specifying numbers in both the clauses, it would
be desirable to indicate 1/3
rd of the members as quorum for the meeting. The Committee
finds merit in the suggestion of the Chairman, UGC and recommends the Department to
consider the same positively.
XIII. S tatute 12: Powers and functions of Executive Council
13.1 This clause authorises the University to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships etc.

13
The provision bars receipts below “ ` one crore from the donors”. The Committee feels that
limiting donation below ` one crore would not be a good idea because any amount of
donation could be received by the University. Hence, the words “not below rupees one crore”
in the provision may be deleted from the provision.
XIV. Statute 14: Powers and functions of Academic Council
14.1 S tatute 14 deals with the powers and functions of Academic Council. Sub-clause (b) of
clause 14 of the Bill empowers the University to make arrangements through Ordinances for
instruction and examination of persons other than those enrolled in the university. The Chairman,
UGC suggested that sub-clause (b) of clause 14 should be replaced by clause 14(D) of the
Central Universities Act, 2009 as under:-
“To frame such regulations and rules consistent with the statutes and the ordinances
regarding the academic functioning of the university, disciplines, residence, admissions,
award of fellowships and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life and attendance”.
The Committee finds merit in the above suggestion and accordingly, recommends suitable
modification in the statute.
XV. Statute 18: Selection Committees and Appointments
15.1 The Committee observes that under the Table under column 2 for the post of Professor the
word “Dean of School” should be as “Dean of Faculty” as there is no provision in the Act for
School. Maybe it is a typing error.
15.2 The Committee also notes that under the Selection Committee procedure, it has been
indicated that the Vice Chancellor, or in his absence, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor or the Dean shall
convene and preside at the meeting of the Selection Committee. The Committee finds that in the
Central Universities Act, 2009, there is a provision for Pro-Vice-Chancellor to preside the meeting
of the Selection Committee in the absence of Vice Chancellor. The Committee has also been given
to understand that as per UGC Regulations 2010, there is no provision to preside over the meeting
by Pro-Vice-Chancellor or Dean in the absence of Vice Chancellor. (Clause 5.1.1 of UGC regulation
2010 refers). Recently, UGC has not agreed to the proposal of University of Delhi for amendment
in the statute for making a provision of Pro-Vice-Chancellor to preside the Selection Committee in
the absence of Vice Chancellor.
15.3 The Committee strongly recommends that chairing of the Selection Committee
should remain restricted to the Vice-Chancellor and in his/her absence only Pro-Vice-
Chancellor and not the Dean, etc. Otherwise it would be counter productive. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends necessary modification in the Statute.
XVI. MISCELLANEOUS
No provisions for Sports and Games
16.1 The Committee feels that Sports and Games should also find mention in the
provisions of the Bill as major activities to be taken up by the students along with the
studies. This could become one of the ways to develop Sports and Games in the country.
Representation of Students in the Court and the Academic Council
16.2 The Committee feels that the modern trend is to give representation to students in
the various bodies of the University. Since the proposal university is envisaged to be a non-

14
conventional trend setting university, it would be appropriate that some representation is
given to students in the Court and the Academic Council of the University.
XVII. CONCLUSION
17.1 In conclusion, the Committee welcomes this Bill which intends to make India a
knowledge society and knowledge economy by empowering the women of our country
through education. It is expected that this University when established would facilitate
women to a great extent in the pursuit of knowledge, enabling them to gain equal status
in the society. Such a University for Women would also have a multiplier effect on
availability of empowered and skilled women in all walks of life and as a model university
for women. It would also create standards of excellence to be followed by others. The
Committee would appreciate if the proposed University is made functional from the
permanent campus at the earliest. The Committee also strongly feels that Government
should take this laudable initiative further by establishing more such Women exclusive
Universities in the country. The Committee would be happy if a ground level assessment of
status of women in higher education is made followed by having such Universities where the
need is the maximum.
18. The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
19. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the
amendments/additions suggested by it.
20. The Committee would like the Ministry to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill.

15
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
I. INTRODUCTION
The Committee would like to observe that the proposed University being first of its
kind should have a non-conventional character and should not get bounded by the
traditional disciplines supposedly preferred by women such as home science, child care,
maternal health and nutrition etc. The Committee recommends that specialized courses or
advanced disciplines of education be introduced in the proposed University with required
impetus to innovative research in such specialized courses or advanced disciplines.
(Para 1.9)
The Committee welcomes the objective behind the proposed legislation. The
Committee hopes that such a University once established and having become functional
would bring significant improvement in the status of women, especially of the State. The
Committee would appreciate if the process of making the proposed University functional will
be completed in a time-bound manner. (Para 1.12)
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
The Committee observes that it would have been appropriate if factual position and
ground realities of the existing women universities in terms of their overall functioning,
courses offered, departments, faculties, fee structure, student intake, placements and their
consequent impact on the status of higher education of the women and their empowerment
was also taken into account while proposing the present legislation so that shortcomings, if
any, were addressed beforehand in terms of outreach of the legislation to the weaker
sections, disadvantaged groups of the society, including the minorities. (Para 2.8)
III. ISSUES OF CONCERN
Faculty Shortage
The Committee is of the view that availability of quality faculty is critical for the
success of an institution as a model for others to emulate. There is a need to provide a
research-oriented environment, sustainable faculty development initiatives and good
compensation to attract and retain good faculty. The Committee strongly feels that the main
objective of an educational institution is to impart quality education to its students and this
could be done by a qualified and experienced faculty only. In other words, teachers are the
foundation stone on which the edifice of every institution is structured. Whether the
strategies and initiatives have resulted into any perceptible change remains to be seen. In
this context, the Committee reiterates its observation that the issue of faculty shortage be
addressed on top priority. Further, faculty development may be initiated in all categories of
higher educational institutions in a mission mode manner. (Para 3.4)
15

16
Representation of all classes
As per the statistics made available to the Committee, the GER of women in higher
education in UP is only 9.5. Given this very dismal GER in higher education, it is a foregone
conclusion that only a few classes/groups/communities are going up for higher education
leaving aside a vast section of women of weaker sections, disadvantaged groups and
minorities. Given the social and cultural diversities of these groups with their community
preferences attracting women of every social group to this university would be a challenge.
In this context, the Committee apprehends that upwardly mobile groups in every class,
social group and community may benefit from the establishment of a Central Women
University in the State, leaving behind the women of weaker sections and the minorities.
How the Department proposes to make it an all women inclusive university by including
every group in the domain of higher education has not been detailed anywhere. The
Committee would like the Department to provide a mechanism for giving equitable
presentation to every section of women in this University by employing every conceivable
mechanism. (Para 3.5)
Clause 2: Definitions: Sub-clause (c)
The Committee is of the view that instead of Board of Studies of the University, it
should be “the Board of Studies of a Department of the University” as in the Central
Universities Act, 2009. The Committee recommends that necessary changes may,
accordingly, be made in the provision. (Para 4.1)
Clause 2(p)
The Committee feels that there is lack of clarity as objects of the university do not
indicate that it will be an affiliating University. The Committee also agrees with the UGC
policy of reducing the burden of affiliation on the University so that it can devote more
time on academics and research and innovation instead of being burdened with the
governance of affiliated colleges. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that in the
definition of the term, the words ‘or admitted to the privileges of may be deleted.
(Para 4.2)
V. Clause 7: University open to all classes, castes and creed
The Committee notes that this clause empowers the University to make provisions
for weaker sections, SCs and STs. However, as is the norm in other Central Acts prescribed
norms of reservations for Other Backward Classes (OBCs) have been left out. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the provision for Other Backward Classes (OBCs)
may also be included in this provision. (Para 5.2)
VI. Clause 8: Residence of Students
The Committee would like to point out that this provision is there in the Central
Universities Act, 2009 which is envisaged as the model Act for all the Central Universities.
The Committee, feels that the provision lacks clarity. Further, local students should not
mandatorily be made to reside in the University as it would put them under considerable
financial burden. Accordingly, the provision may be deleted. (Para 6.2)

17
VII. Clause 9: Power to establish and maintain schools
The Chairman, UGC suggested that such a school on the campus should be affiliated
with a Central System like CBSE and not to a State Board. The Committee finds merit in
the suggestion and recommends the Department to provide the affiliation of the campus
school with the CBSE. (Para 7.1)
VIII. Clause 13: Vice-Chancellor
The Committee would emphasise that it would be justified to consider women
candidates for appointment as Vice-Chancellor. Further, a reasonable percentage may also
be fixed for filling up the faculty positions and other authorities by women candidates.
(Para 8.2)
IX. Clause 24: Academic Council
The Committee agrees with the viewpoint of the Chairman, UGC and suggests that
the words “who are teachers of the university” may be deleted from the provision.
(Para 9.1)
X. Clause 30: Power to make Ordinances
The Committee notes that the Central Universities Act, 2009 provides Grievance
Redressal Mechanism both for employees and students. Making an exception in the
proposed legislation is not called for. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Inclusion
of students also in the Grievances Redressal Mechanism. (Para 10.2)
THE SCHEDULE
XI. Statutes 2: Vice-Chancellor
It was suggested by the Chairman, UGC that the provision should be rephrased as
“not more than three persons” because otherwise the panel may contain a larger number
of persons making it difficult for the Visitor to make a considered choice. The Committee,
agreeing with the suggestion, recommends the Department to make necessary changes in
the provision accordingly. (Para 11.1)
XII. S tatutes 11 and 13: Quorum for meeting of Executive Council and Academic Council
The Chairman, UGC pointed out that instead of indicating or specifying numbers in
both the clauses, it would be desirable to indicate 1/3
rd of the members as quorum for the
meeting. The Committee finds merit in the suggestion of the Chairman, UGC and
recommends the Department to consider the same positively. (Para 12.1)
XIII. S tatute 12: Powers and functions of Executive Council
The Committee feels that limiting donation below `one crore would not be a
good idea because any amount of donation could be received by the University. Hence,
the words “not below rupees one crore” in the provision may be deleted from the provision.
(Para 13.1)

18
XIV. Statute 14: Powers and functions of Academic Council
The Chairman, UGC suggested that sub-clause (b) of clause 14 should be replaced by
clause 14(D) of the Central Universities Act, 2009 as under:–
“To frame such regulations and rules consistent with the statutes and the ordinances
regarding the academic functioning of the university, disciplines, residence,
admissions, award of fellowships and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life
and attendance”.
The Committee finds merit in the above suggestion and accordingly, recommends
suitable modification in the statute. (Para 14.1)
XV. Statute 18: Selection Committees and Appointments
The Committee strongly recommends that chairing of the Selection Committee
should remain restricted to the Vice-Chancellor and in his/her absence only Pro-Vice-
Chancellor and not the Dean, etc. Otherwise it would be counter productive. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends necessary modification in the Statute. (Para 15.3)
XVI. MISCELLANEOUS
No provisions for Sports and Games
The Committee feels that Sports and Games should also find mention in the
provisions of the Bill as major activities to be taken up by the students along with the
studies. This could become one of the ways to develop Sports and Games in the country.
(Para 16.1)
Representation of Students in the Court and the Academic Council
The Committee feels that the modern trend is to give representation to students in
the various bodies of the University. Since the proposal university is envisaged to be a non-
conventional trend setting university, it would be appropriate that some representation is
given to students in the Court and the Academic Council of the University. (Para 16.2)
XVII. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the Committee welcomes this Bill which intends to make India a
knowledge society and knowledge economy by empowering the women of our country
through education. It is expected that this University when established would facilitate
women to a great extent in the pursuit of knowledge, enabling them to gain equal status
in the society. Such a University for Women would also have a multiplier effect on
availability of empowered and skilled women in all walks of life and as a model university
for women. It would also create standards of excellence to be followed by others. The
Committee would appreciate if the proposed University is made functional from the
permanent campus at the earliest. The Committee also strongly feels that Government

19
should take this laudable initiative further by establishing more such Women exclusive
Universities in the country. The Committee would be happy if a ground level assessment of
status of women in higher education is made followed by having such Universities where the
need is the maximum. (Para 17.1)

MINUTES

IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the
5th December, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
2. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
3. Shri Derek O’ Brien
4. Shri Baishnab Parida
5. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
7. Shri P.K. Biju
8. Dr. Charles Dias
9. Shri Virender Kashyap
10. Shri Mahadeo Singh Khandela
11. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
12. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
13. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
14. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
15. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
The Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013
(i) Shri Ashok Thakur, Secretary, (HE)
(ii) Ms. Amita Sharma, Additional Secretary
(iii) Shri Alok Mishra, Director, (HE)
(iv) Prof. S.G. Deshmukh, Director, IIIT, Guwahati
(v) Shri Rajeeva Swarup, Principal Secretary, HE Government of Rajasthan
(vi) Prof. Rajeev Sangal, Director, IIT, BHE, Varanasi
(vii) Prof. P.J. Narayanan, Director, IIT, Hyderabad
(viii) Prof. S. Rajagopalan, Director, IIIT, Bangalore
23

24
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on ***  ***  ***
and also to have a presentation on the Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013.
3. The Committee, then, reviewed the status of the pending Bills before it i.e. ***  *** ***
and the Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013. The deadline for presentation of
Reports on both the Bills was 10
th December, 2013. The Committee felt that it would not be able
to meet the deadline on both the Bills. ***  ***  *** On the Indira Gandhi National University
for Women Bill, 2013, the Committee has started its deliberations by hearing the Secretary,
Department of Higher Education on 5
th December, 2013. The Committee, would be hearing a
number of stakeholders before finalizing its recommendations/observations on the various provisions
of the Bill. The Committee, accordingly decided to seek extension of time till the ***  ***  ***
and upto 31
st January, 2014 on the Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013 from
the Hon'b1e Chairman, Rajya Sabha. The Committee authorized the Chairman to approach the
Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in this regard.
4. *** *** ***
5. ***  ***  ***. The Secretary, then, made a presentation on the Indira Gandhi National
University for Women Bill, 2013. The Chairman and members raised some queries which were
replied to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to the Department
on the Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013 for its written comments.
6. The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.25 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

25
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the
3rd January, 2014 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Baishnab Parida
4. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
5. Shri Tarun Vijay
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P.K. Biju
7. Shrimati Helen Davidson
8. Dr. Charles Dias
9. Shri Virender Kashyap
10. Shri Mahadeo Singh Khandela
11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
13. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
The Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013
(i) Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman, UGC
(ii) Prof. Nupur Prakash, Vice-Chancellor, Indira Gandhi Delhi Technical University for Women
(iii) Prof. D.S. Chauhan, Secretary-General, Association of Indian Universities
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the Chairman, University Grants Commission, Vice-Chancellor,
Indira Gandhi Delhi Technical University for Women and Secretary-General, Association of Indian
Universities on the Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013.
25

26
3. The Committee first heard the views of the Chairman, University Grants Commission on the
Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013. The members raised some queries which
were replied to by the Chairman, University Grants Commission.
4. The Committee, thereafter, heard the views of the Vice-Chancellor, Indira Gandhi Delhi
Technical University for Women and Secretary-General, Association of Indian Universities on the
Indira Gandhi National University for Women Bill, 2013. The members raised some queries which
were replied to by the stakeholders.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.30 
P.M.

27
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the
16th January, 2014 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
2. Shri A. W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
6. Shri Baishnab Parida
7. Shri Tarun Vijay
LOK SABHA
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Shri Sivasami C.
10. Shrimati Helen Davidson
11. Dr. Charles Dias
12. Shri Virender Kashyap
13. Shri Mahadeo Singh Khandela
14. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
15. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
16. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
17. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
18. Shri M.K. Raghavan
19. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana
20. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
27

28
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt draft 261 st Report on the Indira Gandhi National University for
Women Bill, 2013 and ***  ***  ***.
3. The Committee, then, considered and adopted the draft 261 st Report on the Indira Gandhi
National University for Women Bill, 2013 and decided to present the Report to the Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha before 31
st January, 2014.
4. *** *** ***
5. The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 11.45 A.M. to meet again at 11.30 A.M. on
31st January, 2014.
*** Relate to other matters.

29
ANNEXURES

31
TO BE INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 131 of 2013
THE INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL UNIVERSITY FOR WOMEN
BILL, 2013
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Establishment of University.
4. Objects of University.
5. Powers of University.
6. Jurisdiction.
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed.
8. Residence of students.
9. Power to establish and maintain schools.
10. Visitor.
11. Officers of University.
12. Chancellor.
13. Vice-Chancellor.
14. Pro-Vice-Chancellor.
15. Deans of Faculties.
16. Registrar.
17. Finance Officer.
18. Controller of examinations.
19. Librarian.
20. Other officers.
21. Authorities of University.
22. Court.
23. Executive Council.
24. Academic Council.
25. Board of Studies and Academic Boards.
26. Finance Committee.
27. Other authorities of University.
28. Power to make Statutes.
29. Statutes how to be made.
30. Power to make Ordinances.
31. Regulations.
32. Annual report.
33. Annual accounts.

32
CLAUSES
34. Fund of University.
35. Returns and information.
36. Conditions of service of employees.
37. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.
38. Right to appeal.
39. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies.
40. Constitution of Committees.
41. Filling of casual vacancies.
42. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.
43. Protection of action taken in good faith.
44. Mode of proof of University record.
45. Power to remove difficulties.
46. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to
be laid before Parliament.
47. Transtional provisions.
THE SCHEDULE.

33
TO BE INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
ON 26 TH N OVEMBER , 2012
Bill No. 131 of 2013
THE INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL UNIVERSITY FOR WOMEN
BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to establish and incorporate a University in the State of Uttar
Pradesh to provide for avenues of higher education and
research facilities to the women in India and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indira Gandhi National
University for Women Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the
context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of
the University;
(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff as
are designated as academic staff by the Ordinances;
(c) “Board of Studies” means the Board of Studies of
the University;
(d) “Campus” means the unit established or constituted
for making arrangements for instruction, or research, or both,
33
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.

34
(e) “Chancellor”, “Vice-Chancellor”, and “Pro-Vice-
Chancellor” mean, respectively, the Chancellor, Vice-
Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the University;
(f) “College” means a college maintained by the
University.
(g) “Court” means the Court of the University;
(h) “Dean” means Head of a Faculty of the University;
(i) “Department” means a Department of Studies and
includes a Centre of Studies;
(j) “distance education system” means the system of
imparting education through any means of communication,
such as broadcasting, telecasting, webcasting, correspondence
courses, seminars, contact programmes or the combination of
any two or more such means;
(k) “employee” means any person appointed by the
University and includes teachers and other staff of the
University;
(l) “Executive Council” means the Executive Council of
the University;
(m) “Faculty” means a Faculty of the University;
(n) “Finance Committee” means Finance Committee of
the University;
(o) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life
for the students of the University;
(p) “Institution” means an academic institution, not
being a college, maintained by, or admitted to the privileges
of, the University;
(q) “Principal” means the Head of a College or an
Institution maintained by the University and includes, where
there is no Principal, the persons for the time being duly
appointed to act as Principal, and in the absence of the
Principal, or the acting Principal, a Vice-Principal duly
appointed as such;
(r) “Regulations” means the Regulations made by any
authority of the University under this Act for the time being
in force;
(s) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean, respectively, the
Statutes and the Ordinances of the University, for the time
being in force;
(t) “teachers of the University” means Professors,
Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and such other
persons as may be appointed for imparting instruction or
conducting research in the University;

35
(u) “University” means the Indira Gandhi National
University for Women as incorporated under this Act.
3. (1) There shall be established, in the State of Uttar
Pradesh a University by the name of “Indira Gandhi National
University for Women”.
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be in the district
of Raebareli.
(3) The first Chancellor, the first Vice-Chancellor and the first
members of the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic
Council, and all persons who may hereafter become such officers
or members, so long as they continue to hold such office or
membership, are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name
of “Indira Gandhi National University for Women”.
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a
common seal, and shall sue and be sued by the said name.
4. The objects of the University shall be,—
(i) to provide avenues of higher education and research
facilities to the women of India and thus to provide the
society with educated, competent and capable women to meet
the knowledge needs of the country;
(ii) to create and disseminate knowledge by providing
instructional and research facilities in such branches of
learning as it may deem fit;
(iii) to make provisions for various courses offering
educational programmes in humanities, natural and physical
sciences, social sciences, medical sciences, engineering and
technology and such other advanced disciplines of education
including vocational education;
(iv) to take appropriate measures for promoting
innovations in teaching-learning process, inter-disciplinary
studies and research;
(v) to develop women imbued with the spirit of
innovation and entrepreneurship with social and environmental
orientation for the development of the country;
(vi) to strive for the improvement of the social,
educational and economic conditions and welfare of women
of the country through their intellectual, academic, cultural
and overall personality development.
5. (1) The University shall have the following powers, namely:—
(i) to provide for instructions in such branches of
learning like natural and physical sciences, social sciences,
humanities, engineering, technology and medicine as the
University may, from time to time, determine and to make
Establishment
of University.
Objects of
University.
Powers of
University.

36
provisions for research and for the advancement and
dissemination of knowledge for furtherance of the objects of
the University;
(ii ) to grant, subject to such conditions as the
University may determine, diplomas or certificates to, and
confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of
examinations, evaluation or any other method of testing, on
persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates,
degrees or other academic distinctions for good and sufficient
cause in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;
(iii) to formulate women centric development models,
publish reports and monographs;
(iv) to organise conferences; seminars on issues
relating to women and to provide inputs to policy matters in
different spheres;
(v) to organise and to undertake extra-mural studies,
training and extension services;
(vi) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in
the manner prescribed by the Statutes;
(vii) to provide facilities through the distance education
system to women as it may determine;
(viii ) to institute Principalships, Professorships,
Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships and other
teaching or academic positions, required by the University and
to appoint persons to such Principalships, Professorships,
Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships or other
teaching or academic positions;
(ix) to recognise an institution of higher learning for
such purposes as the University may determine and to
withdraw such recognition in the manner prescribed by the
Statutes;
(x) to appoint persons working in any other University
or educational institution, including those located outside the
country, as teachers of the University for a specified period;
(xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts
and to make appointments thereto;
(xii) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any
other University or authority or Institution of higher learning,
including those located outside the country, in such manner
and for such purposes as the University may determine;
(xiii) to collaborate with any other college or university,
research institution, industry association, professional or any
other organisation, in India or outside India to conceptualise,
design and develop specific programmes as part of education

37
and research, training programmes and exchange programmes
for students, academic staff and others;
(xiv) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships,
studentships, medals and prizes;
(xv) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and
Halls;
(xvi ) to make provision for research and advisory
services and for that purpose to enter into such arrangements
with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as the
University may deem necessary;
(xvii ) to organise and conduct refresher courses,
workshops, seminars and other programmes for teachers,
evaluators and other academic staff;
(xviii ) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting
Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants, Scholars and
such other persons who may contribute to the advancement
of the objects of the University;
(xix) to confer autonomous status on a College or an
Institution or a Department, as the case may be, in
accordance with the Statutes;
(xx) to recognise, guide, supervise, and control Halls
not maintained by the University and other accommodation for
students, and to withdraw any such recognition;
(xxi ) to determine standards of admission to the
University, which may include examination, evaluation or any
other method of testing;
(xxii) to demand and receive payment of fees and other
charges;
(xxiii) to establish and maintain a health care centre for
the benefit of the students and employees;
(xxiv) to make arrangements for promoting the health
and general welfare of the employees;
(xxv) to supervise the residences of the students of the
University and to make arrangements for promoting their
health and general welfare;
(xxvi ) to lay down conditions of service of all
categories of employees, including their code of conduct;
(xxvii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the
students and the employees, and to take such disciplinary
measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University
to be necessary;

38
(xxviii) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and
to acquire, hold and manage, and to dispose of, with the
previous approval of the Central Government, any property,
movable or immovable, including trust and endowment
properties for the purposes of the University;
(xxix ) to borrow, with the approval of the Central
Government, on the security of the property of the University,
money for the purposes of the University;
(xxx) to do all such other acts and things as may be
necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or
any of its objects.
(2) In exercising its powers referred to in sub-section ( 1), it
shall be the endeavour of the University to maintain an all-India
character and high standards of teaching and research, and the
University shall, among other measures which may be necessary for
the said purpose and take, in particular, the following measures,
namely:—
(i) admission of students and recruitment of Faculty
shall be made on all-India basis;
(ii) admissions of students shall be made on merit,
either through Entrance Tests conducted by the University or
in combination with other Universities, or on the basis of
marks obtained in the qualifying examinations;
(iii) encourage inter-University mobility of Faculty;
(iv) introduce semester system, continuous evaluation
and choice based credit system and enter into agreements
with other Universities and academic institutions for credit
transfer and joint degree programmes;
(v) introduce innovative courses and programmes of
studies with provision for periodic review and restructuring;
(vi) ensure active participation of students in all
academic activities of the University, including evaluation of
teachers.
(vii ) obtain mandatory accreditation from National
Assessment and Accreditation Council or any other statutory
accrediting agency; and
(viii ) introduce e-governance with an effective
management information system.
6. The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole
of India.
7. The University shall be open to women of whatever caste,
creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to
adopt or impose any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession
in order to entitle her to be admitted as a student in the University
or to graduate thereat:
Jurisdiction.
University
open to all
classes,
castes and
creed.

39
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to
prevent the University from appointing any person as a teacher of
the University or to hold any other office therein or to enjoy or
exercise any privilege thereof:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall be deemed
to prevent the University from making special provisions for the
employment or promotion of educational interests of women
physically challenged or of persons belonging to the weaker sections
of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled tribes.
8. Every student of the University other than a student, who
pursues a course of study by distance education system, shall reside
in a Hall or hostel or under such conditions as may be prescribed
by the Ordinances.
9. The University shall, subject to Statutes, have power to
establish at least one school as a model school for the schools of
the region.
10. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the
University.
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more
persons to review the work and progress of the University,
including Colleges and Institutions maintained by it, and to submit a
report thereon; and upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may,
after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon through
the Vice-Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as he
considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in
the report and the University shall be bound to comply with such
directions.
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to
be made by such person or persons as he may direct, of the
University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and equipment, and of
any College or Institution maintained by the University; and also of
the examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by
the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in
respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances
of the University, Colleges or Institutions.
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub-
section ( 3), give notice of his intention to cause an inspection or
inquiry to be made, to the University, if such inspection or inquiry
is to be made in respect of the University or any College or
Institution maintained by it.
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the
University, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or
inquiry as is referred to in sub-section ( 3).
Residence of
students.
Power to
establish and
maintain
schools.
Visitor.

40
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be
made by the Visitor, the University shall be entitled to appoint a
representative, who shall have the right to be present and be heard
at such inspection or inquiry.
(7) Upon receipt of such report of the inspection or inquiry,
the Visitor may address the appointing authority through the Vice-
Chancellor to take appropriate action in accordance with his advice,
if any, regarding the action to be taken.
(8) The appointing authority shall take appropriate action
within a period of two months and in case, it is not able to act as
per the advice of the Visitor, it shall report to the Visitor, the
reasons therefor along with supporting documents within a period of
two months and if the Visitor is not satisfied with the reasons then
the decision of the Visitor shall be final.
(9) The Visitor in respect of the matters not covered under
sub-section ( 7) shall address the Executive Council through the
Vice-Chancellor along with this advice regarding the action to be
taken and the Vice-Chancellor shall take action accordingly.
(10) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this
section, the Visitor may, by order in writing, annul any proceeding
of the University which is not in conformity with the Act, the
Statutes or the Ordinances:
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call
upon the Registrar to show cause why such an order should not be
made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall
consider the same.
(11) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.
11. The following shall be the officers of the University:—
(1) the Chancellor;
(2) the Vice-Chancellor;
(3) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor;
(4) the Deans of Faculties;
(5) the Registrar;
(6) the Finance Officer;
(7) the Controller of Examinations;
(8) the Librarian; and
(9) such other officers as may be declared by the
Statutes to be officers of the University.
12. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in
such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
Officers of
University.
Chancellor.

41
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head
of the University and shall, if present, preside at the Convocations
of the University held for conferring degrees and meetings of the
Court.
13. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor
in such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and
academic officer of the University and shall exercise general
supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give
effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that
immediate action is necessary on any matter, exercise any power
conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act
and shall report to such authority at its next meeting the action
taken by him on such matter:
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that
such action ought not to have been taken, it may refer the matter
to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:
Provided further that any person aggrieved by the action
taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-section shall have the
right to represent against such action to the Executive Council
within three months from the date on which decision on such action
is communicated to him and thereupon the Executive Council may
confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any
decision of any authority of the University is beyond the powers of
the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or
the Ordinances or that any decision taken is not in the interest of
the University, may ask the authority concerned to review its
decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority
refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part or no
decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the
matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall
be final.
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes or
the Ordinances.
14. The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed in such
manner and on such terms and conditions of service, and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.
15. Every Dean of Faculty shall be appointed in such manner
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.
Vice-
Chancellor.
Pro-Vice-
Chancellor.
Deans of
Faculties.

42
16. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and
on such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by
the Statutes.
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into
agreements, sign documents and authenticate records on behalf of
the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such
duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
17. The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.
18. The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such
manner and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as
may be prescribed by the Statutes.
19. The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and on
such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the
Statutes.
20. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of
other officers of the University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
21. The following shall be the authorities of the University:—
(1) the Court;
(2) the Executive Council;
(3) the Academic Council;
(4) the Board of Studies and Academic Boards;
(5) the Finance Committee; and
(6) such other authorities as may be declared by the
Statutes to be the authorities of the University.
22. (1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office
of its members shall be prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Court shall have adequate number of
members from amongst the women:
Provided further that such number of members as may be
prescribed by the Statutes shall be elected from among the teachers,
employees and students of the University.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have
the following powers and functions, namely:—
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and
programmes of the University and to suggest measures for
the improvement and development of the University;
Court.
Registrar.
Finance
Officer.
Controller of
Examinations.
Librarian.
Other
Officers.
Authorities of
University.

43
(b) to consider and approve the annual report and the
annual accounts of the University and the audit report on
such accounts;
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which
may be referred to it for advice; and
(d) to perform such other functions as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.
23. (1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive
body of the University.
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of
office of its members and its powers and functions shall be
prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Executive Council shall have adequate
number of members from among the women:
Provided further that such number of members as may be
prescribed by the Statutes shall be from among the elected members
of the Court.
24. (1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic
body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, coordinate and exercise
general supervision over the academic policies of the University.
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of
office of its members and its powers and functions shall be
prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Academic Council shall have adequate
number of members from amongst the women:
Provided further that such number of members as may be
prescribed by the Statutes shall be from among the elected members
of the Court who are teachers of the University.
25. The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of
Studies and the Academic Boards shall be prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Boards of Studies and the Academic Boards
shall have adequate number of members from amongst the women.
26. The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance
Committee shall be prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Finance Committee shall have adequate
number of members from amongst the women.
27. The constitution, powers and functions of other
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities
of the University, shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
Executive
Council.
Academic
Council.
Board of
Studies and
Academic
Boards.
Finance
Committee.
Other
authorities of
University.

44
28. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities
and other bodies of the University, as may be constituted
from time to time;
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the
members of the said authorities and bodies, the filling up of
vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those
authorities and other bodies for which it may be necessary or
desirable to provide;
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers
of the University and their emoluments;
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and
other employees of the University, their emoluments and
conditions of service;
(e) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working
in any other University or organisation for a specific period
for undertaking a joint project;
(f) the conditions of service of employees including
insurance, provident fund, the manner of termination of
service and disciplinary action;
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of
the employees of the University;
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute
between employees or students and the University;
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by
any employee or student against the action of any officer or
authority of the University;
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College
or an Institution or a Department;
(k) the conferment of honorary degrees;
(l) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and
other academic distinctions;
(m) the management of Colleges and Institutions
established by the University;
(n) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or
officers of the University;
(o) the maintenance of discipline among the employees
and students; and
(p) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may
be provided for by the Statutes.
Power to
make
Statutes.

45
29. (1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new
or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes referred
to in sub-section ( 1):
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or
repeal any Statutes affecting the status, powers or constitution of
any authority of the University until such authority has been given
an opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed
changes, and any opinion so expressed shall be considered by the
Executive Council.
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any
amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the assent of the
Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the
Executive Council for re-consideration.
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an
existing Statute shall have no validity unless it has been assented to
by the Visitor.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-
sections, the Visitor may make new or additional Statutes or amend
or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section( 1), during the period
of five years immediately after the commencement of this Act and
such statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-
sections, the Visitor may direct the University to make provisions in
the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the
Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty
days of its receipt, the Visitor may, after considering the reasons, if
any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to
comply with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.
30. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes,
the Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the admission of students to the University and their
enrolment as such;
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all
degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University;
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and
other academic distinctions, the qualifications for the same
and the means to be taken relating to the granting and
obtaining of the same;
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the
University and for admission to the examinations, degrees and
diplomas of the University;
Statutes how
to be made.
Power to
make
Ordinances.

46
(f) the institution of fellowships, scholarships,
studentships, medals and prizes;
(g) the conditions for award of fellowships,
scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;
(h) the conduct of examinations, including the term of
office and manner of appointment and the duties of examining
bodies, examiners and moderators;
(i) the conditions of residence of the students of the
University;
(j) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of
grievances of employees;
(k) the establishment and management of Faculties,
Departments, Schools, Colleges, other Institutions, Centres of
Studies, Boards of Studies, Special Centres, Specialised
Laboratories and other Committees;
(l) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with
other Universities, institutions and other non-profiteering
agencies including learned bodies or associations;
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any
other body which is considered necessary for improving the
academic life of the University;
(n) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes,
are to be or may be, provided for by the Ordinances.
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor
with the previous approval of the Central Government and the
Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any
time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the
Statutes.
31. The authorities of the University may make Regulations,
consistent with this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the
conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any,
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or
the Ordinances, in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
32. (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared
under the direction of the Executive Council, which shall include,
among other matters, the steps taken by the University towards the
fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or
before such date as may be prescribed by the Central Government
and the Court shall consider the report in its annual meeting.
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor
along with its comments, if any.
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-
section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the Central Government, and
Regulations.
Annual
report.

47
that Government which shall, as soon as may be after it is
submitted, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament.
33. (1) The annual accounts and balance sheet of the
University shall be prepared under the directions of the Executive
Council and shall, once at least every year and at intervals of not
more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or by such persons as he may authorise in
this behalf.
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit
report thereon shall be submitted to the Court and the Visitor along
with the observations of the Executive Council.
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual
accounts shall be brought to the notice of the Court and the
observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by
the Executive Council, be submitted to the Visitor.
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit
report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also be submitted to the
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the
same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before
both Houses of Parliament shall be published in the Official Gazette.
34. (1) There shall be a University Fund which shall include—
(a) any contribution or grant made by the State
Government;
(b) any contribution or grant made by the University
Grants Commission or the Central Government;
(c) any contribution made by Government, semi-
Government or autonomous bodies;
(d) any bequests, donations, endowments or other
grants made by any private individual or institution;
(e) income received by the University from fees and
charges; and
(f) amounts received from any other source.
(2) The amount of the said Fund shall be kept in a Scheduled
Bank as defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, or in a
corresponding new bank constituted under the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 or may be
invested in such securities authorised by the Indian Trusts
Act, 1882, as may be decided by the Executive Council.
(3) The said Fund may be utilised for such purposes of the
University and in such manner as may be determined.
Annual
accounts.
Fund of
University.
2 of 1934.
40 of 1980.
2 of 1882.

48
35. The University shall furnish to the Central Government
such returns or other information with respect to its property or
activities as the Central Government may, from time to time,
require.
36. (1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University
and a copy of which shall be furnished to the employee concerned.
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the
University and any employee shall, at the request of the employee,
be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member
appointed by the Executive Council, one member nominated by the
employee concerned and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit
shall lie in any civil court in respect of the matters decided by the
Tribunal:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall preclude the
employee from availing of the judicial remedies available under
articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub-
section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a submission to arbitration upon
the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996.
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
37. (1) Any student or candidate for an examination whose
name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the
orders or resolution of the Vice-Chancellor, Discipline Committee or
Examination Committee, as the case may be, and who has been
debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for
more than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of
such orders or copy of such resolution by him, appeal to the
Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify
or reverse the decision of the Vice-Chancellor or the Committee, as
the case may be.
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by
the University against a student shall, at the request of such student,
be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub-
sections ( 2), ( 3), ( 4) and ( 5) of section 36 shall, as far as may be,
apply to a reference made under this sub-section.
38. Every employee or student of the University or of a
College or Institution maintained by the University shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to
appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the
Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of
the University or of the Principal or the management of any College
Right to
appeal.
Procedure of
appeal and
arbitration in
disciplinary
cases against
students.
Conditions
of service of
employees.
Returns and
information.
26 of 1996.

49
or an Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the Executive
Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed
against.
39. If any question arises as to whether any person has been
duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any
authority or other body of the University, the matter shall be
referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.
40. Where any authority of the university is given power by
this Act or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees
shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the members of the
authority concerned and of such other person, if any, as the
authority in each case may think fit.
41. All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex
officio members) of any authority or other body of the University
shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person or body who
appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose place has become
vacant and the person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual
vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the
residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would
have been a member.
42. No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of
the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of
a vacancy or vacancies among its members.
43. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any
officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.
44. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872 or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy
of any receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding or resolution of
any authority or other body of the University, or any other
document in possession of the University, or any entry in any
register duly maintained by the University, if certified by the
Registrar, shall be received as prima facie evidence of such receipt,
application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the
existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence
of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof
would, if produced, have been admissible in evidence.
45. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act.
Disputes as to
constitution
of authorities
and bodies.
Constitution
of
Committees.
Filling of
casual
vacancies.
Proceedings
of authorities
or bodies not
invalidated by
vacancies.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Mode of proof
of University
record.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
1 of 1872.

50
(2) Every order made under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the order or both Houses agree that the
order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
order.
46. (1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under
this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette.
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the
Statute, Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute,
Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that Statute,
Ordinance or Regulation.
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations
shall include the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not
earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes,
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective
effect shall be given to any Statute, Ordinance or Regulation so as
to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such
Statute, Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.
47. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the
Statutes,—
(a) the first Chancellor and first Vice-Chancellor shall
be appointed by the Visitor in such manner and on such
conditions as may be deemed fit and each of the said officer
shall hold office for such term, not exceeding five years as
may be specified by the Visitor;
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall
be appointed by the Visitor and each of the said officers shall
hold office for a term of three years;
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall
consist of not more than thirty-one members and eleven
Statutes,
Ordinances
and
Regulations
to be
published in
the Official
Gazette and
to be laid
before
Parliament.
Transitional
provisions.

51
members, respectively, who shall be nominated by the Central
Government and shall hold office for a term of three years;
(d) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more
than twenty-one members, who shall be nominated by the
Central Government and they shall hold office for a term of
three years:
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above
offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by appointment
or nomination, as the case may be in the manner prescribed
by the Statutes.

52
52
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 29)
THE S TATUTES OF THE U NIVERSITY
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from
a panel of not less than three persons recommended by the
Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the
academic or public life of the country:
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the
persons so recommended, he may call for fresh recommendations
from the Executive Council.
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years
and shall not be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office,
the Chancellor shall continue to hold office until his successor
enters upon his office.
2. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor
from a panel of not less than three persons who shall be
recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2):
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the
persons included in the panel, he may call for an extended fresh
panel.
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of
five persons, out of whom three shall be nominated by the
Executive Council and two by the Visitor and one of the nominees
of the Visitor shall be the convener of the Committee:
Provided that none of the members of the Committee shall be
an employee of the University or a college or an institution
maintained by the University or a member of any authority of the
University or connected with an institution associated with the
University or having any business interest in the University.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time salaried officer
of the University.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five
years from the date on which he enters upon his office, or until he
attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, and he shall
be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that the Visitor may direct any Vice-Chancellor after
his term has expired, to continue in office for such period, not
exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him.
Chancellor.
Vice-
Chancellor.

53
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 4), the
Visitor may, at any time after the Vice-Chancellor has entered upon
his office, by order in writing, remove the Vice-Chancellor from
office on grounds of incapacity, misconduct or violation of statutory
provisions:
Provided that no such order shall be made by the Visitor
unless the Vice-Chancellor has been given a reasonable opportunity
of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against
him:
Provided further that the Visitor may, at any time before
making such order, place the Vice-Chancellor under suspension,
pending enquiry.
(6) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the
Vice-Chancellor shall be as follows:—
(i) the Vice-Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary
and allowances, other than house rent allowance, at the rates
fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he
shall be entitled, without payment of rent, to use a furnished
residence throughout the term of office and no charge shall
fall on the Vice-Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of
such residence;
(ii) the Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to such
terminal benefits and allowances as may be fixed by the
Executive Council with the approval of the Visitor from time
to time:
Provided that where an employee of the University, or
a College or an Institution maintained by it, or of any other
University or any Institution maintained by or affiliated to
such other University, is appointed as the Vice-Chancellor, he
may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident
fund of which he is a member and the University shall
contribute to the account of such person in that provident
fund at the same rate at which the person had been
contributing immediately before his appointment as the Vice-
Chancellor:
Provided further that where such employee had been
member of any pension scheme, the University shall make the
necessary contribution to such scheme;
(iii) the Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling
allowance at such rates as may be fixed by the Executive
Council;
(iv) the Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full
pay at the rate of thirty days in a calendar year and the leave
shall be credited to his account in advance in two half-yearly
instalments of fifteen days each on the first day of January
and July every year:

54
Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor assumes or
relinquishes charge of the office of the Vice-Chancellor during
the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited
proportionately at the rate of two and-a-half days for each
completed month of service;
(v) in addition to the leave referred to in sub-
clause ( iv), the Vice-Chancellor shall also be entitled to half-
pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year
of service, and half-pay leave may also be availed of as
commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate:
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of,
twice the amount of half-pay leave shall be debited against
half-pay leave due.
(7) If the office of the Vice-Chancellor becomes vacant due
to death, resignation or otherwise, or if he is unable to perform his
duties due to ill-health or any other cause, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor
shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided that if the Pro-Vice-Chancellor is not available, the
seniormost Professor shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor
until a new Vice-Chancellor assumes office or until the existing
Vice-Chancellor resumes the duties of his office, as the case may
be.
3. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be ex officio Chairman of the
Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee
and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at the
Convocations held for conferring degrees and at meetings of the
Court.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and
address, any meeting of any authority or other body of the
University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a
member of such authority or body.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to see that this
Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations are duly
observed, and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such
observance.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs
of the University and shall give effect to the decisions of all the
authorities of the University.
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary
for the proper maintenance of discipline in the University and he
may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he
deems fit.
(6) The Vice-Chancellor shall have the power to convene or
cause to be convened the meetings of the Executive Council, the
Academic Council and the Finance Committee.
Powers and
duties of Vice-
Chancellor.

55
(7) The Vice Chancellor shall have powers to hear appeal
against any order passed by the Registrar and to confirm or to
modify or to reverse the order.
4. (1) Every Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the
Executive Council on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice-
Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive Council, the matter
shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person
recommended by the Vice-Chancellor or ask the Vice-Chancellor to
recommend another person to the Executive Council:
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the
recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor, appoint a Professor to
discharge the duties of a Pro-Vice-Chancellor in addition to his own
duties as a Professor.
(2) The term of office of a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be such
as may be decided by the Executive Council but it shall not in any
case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of office
of the Vice-Chancellor, whichever is earlier:
Provided that a Pro-Vice-Chancellor whose term of office has
expired shall be eligible for reappointment:
Provided further that, in any case, a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall
retire on attaining the age of seventy years:
Provided also that a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall, while
discharging the duties of the Vice-Chancellor under clause ( 7) of
Statute 2, continue in office notwithstanding the expiration of his
term of office as Pro-Vice-Chancellor, until a new Vice-Chancellor
or the existing Vice-Chancellor, as the case may be, assumes office
or his retirement whichever is earlier.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of
service of a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Ordinances.
(4) A Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall assist the Vice-Chancellor in
respect of such matters as may be specified by the Vice-Chancellor
in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise such
powers and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to
him by the Vice-Chancellor.
5. (1) Every Dean of a Faculty shall be appointed by the Vice-
Chancellor from amongst the Professors in the Faculty by rotation
in the order of seniority for a period of three years:
Provided that in case there is either one or no Professor in a
Faculty, the Dean shall be appointed, for the time being, from
amongst the Professor, if any, and the Associate Professors in the
Faculty by rotation in the order of seniority:
Pro-Vice-
Chancellor.
Deans of
Faculties.

56
Provided further that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty-five
years shall cease to hold office as such:
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean
is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to
perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be
performed by the seniormost Professor or Associate Professor, as
the case may be, in the Faculty.
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the Faculty and shall be
responsible for the conduct and maintenance of the standards of
teaching and research in the Faculty and shall have such other
functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak
at any meeting of the  Boards of Studies or Committees of the
Faculty, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote
thereat unless he is a member thereof.
6. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive
Council on the recommendation of a Selection Committee
constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole-time salaried
officer of the University.
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall
be eligible for reappointment.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of
service of the Registrar shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Ordinances:
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of
sixty-two years.
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the
Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause,
unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office
shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may
appoint for the purpose.
(5) ( a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary
action against such of the employees in respect of whom he is the
appointing authority, and to suspend them pending inquiry and, to
impose upon them such penalty as he deem fit:
Provided that, till the provisions are made to provide for the
procedure to be followed for imposition of penalty, the procedure as
provided in the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and
Appeal) Rules, 1965 is followed.
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any order
of the Registrar.
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio Secretary of, the
Executive Council and the Academic Council, but shall not be
deemed to be a member of any of these authorities and he shall be
ex officio Member-Secretary of the Court.
Registrar.

57
(7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar—
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal
and such other property of the University as the Executive
Council shall commit to his charge;
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the
Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council and of
any Committee appointed by those authorities;
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court,
the Executive Council, the Academic Council and of any
Committee appointed by those authorities;
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court,
the Executive Council and the Academic Council;
(e) to supply to the Visitor and the Chancellor copies of
the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the University
as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;
(f) to represent the University in suits or proceedings
by or against the University, sign powers of attorney and
verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose;
and
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in
the Statutes, the Ordinances or the Regulations or as may be
required from time to time, by the Executive Council or
assigned to by the Vice-Chancellor.
7. (1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the
Executive Council on the recommendations of a Selection Committee
constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole-time salaried
officer of the University.
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five
years and shall be eligible for reappointment.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of
service of the Finance Officer shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Ordinances:
Provided that a Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the
age of sixty-two years.
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when
the Finance Officer is, by reason of illness, absence or any other
cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the
office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor
may appoint for the purpose.
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio Secretary of the
Finance Committee but shall not be deemed to be a member of such
Committee.
Finance
Officer.

58
(6) The Finance Officer shall—
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the
University and shall advise it as regards its financial policy;
and
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be
assigned to him by the Executive Council or as may be
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances or the
Regulations.
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the
Finance Officer shall—
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of
the University including trust and endowed property;
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council
for recurring and nonrecurring expenditure for a year are not
exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose
for which they are granted or allotted;
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual
accounts and the budget of the University and for their
presentation to the Executive Council;
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and
bank balances and on the state of investments;
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and
advise on the methods of collection employed;
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture
and equipment are maintained up-to-date and that stock-
checking are conducted, of equipment and other consumable
materials in all Offices, Centres, Specialised Laboratories,
Colleges and Institutions maintained by the university;
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice-Chancellor
unauthorised expenditure and other financial irregularities and
suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and
(h) call for from any Office, Centre, Laboratory,
College or Institution maintained by the University any
information or returns that he may consider necessary for the
performance of his duties.
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or
person duly authorised in this behalf by the Executive Council for
any money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for
payment of such money.
8. (1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by
the Executive Council on the recommendations of a Selection
Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole-time
salaried officer of the University.
Controller of
Examinations.

59
(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a
term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of
service of the Controller of Examinations shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on
attaining the age of sixty two years:
(4) When the office of the Controller of Examinations is
vacant or when the Controller of Examinations is, by reason of
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of
his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such
person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and
superintend the examinations of the University in the manner
prescribed by the Ordinances.
9. (1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive
Council on the recommendations of the Selection Committee
constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole-time salaried
officer of the University.
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council.
10. (1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date
to be fixed by the Executive Council unless some other date has
been fixed by the Court in respect of any year.
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the
working of the University during the previous year, together with a
statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance-sheet as
audited, and the financial estimates for the next year shall be
presented.
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the
balance-sheet and the financial estimates referred to in clause ( 2)
shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven days
before the date of the annual meeting.
(4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the
Executive Council or the Vice-Chancellor.
(5) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quorum for a
meeting of the Court.
11. Five members of the Executive Council shall form a
quorum for a meeting of the Executive Council.
Librarian.
Meetings of
Court.
Quorum for
meeting of
Executive
Council.

60
12. (1) The Executive Council shall have the power of
management and administration of the revenues and property of the
University and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the
University not otherwise provided for.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the
Ordinances, the Executive Council shall, in addition to all other
powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely:—
(i) to create teaching and other academic posts
including Chairs to determine the number and emoluments of
such posts and to define the duties and conditions of service
of Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and
other academic staff:
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive
Council in respect of the number and qualifications of
teachers and other academic staff otherwise than after
consideration of the recommendations of the Academic
Council;
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Associate Professors,
Assistant Professors and other academic staff including
Chairs, as may be necessary, on the recommendation of the
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill-up
temporary vacancies therein;
(iii) to promote interdisciplinary research by making
joint appointments of teaching staff in different Faculties,
Departments and Centres;
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts
and to define their duties and conditions of their service and
to make appointments to the posts for which it is the
appointing authority in the manner prescribed by the
Ordinances;
(v) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the
University other than the Chancellor and the Vice-Chancellor;
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees
in accordance with the Statutes and the Ordinances;
(vii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts,
investments, property, business and all other administrative
affairs of the University and for that purpose to appoint such
agents as it may think fit;
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total
non-recurring expenditure for a year on the recommendation
of the Finance Committee;
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University,
including any unapplied income, in such stocks, funds, shares
or securities, from time to time, as it may think fit or in the
Powers and
functions of
Executive
Council.

61
purchase of immovable property in India, with the like powers
of varying such investment from time to time;
(x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or
immovable property on behalf of the University;
(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and
apparatus and other means needed for carrying on the work
of the University;
(xii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts
on behalf of the University;
(xiii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to
redress any grievances of the employees and students of the
University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved by the
order of the Vice-Chancellor;
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if
necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, emoluments
and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the
Academic Council;
(xv) to select a common seal for the University and
provide for the custody and use of such seal;
(xvi) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships,
medals and prizes; and to receive donations from the
members of the general public and institutions, with due
acknowledgment for establishing a Chair by contributing at
least rupees one crore, in the name of the donor or in
memory of any person desired; for creating foundations, not
below rupees one crore in the name of the donor or in
memory of any person desired; and for bearing the cost of
any building or complex to the tune of not below rupees one
crore in the name of the donor or in memory of any person
desired;
(xvii ) to provide for the appointment of Visiting
Professors, Emeritus Professors, Joint Faculty, Adjunct
Faculty, Consultants and Scholars and determine the terms
and conditions of such appointments; and
(xviii) to exercise such other powers and perform such
other duties as may be conferred or imposed on it by the Act
or the Statutes.
13. Seven members of the Academic Council shall form a
quorum for a meeting of the Academic Council.
14. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the
Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other
powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely:—
Quorum for
meetings of
Academic
Council.
Powers and
functions of
Academic
Council.

62
(a) to consider matters of general academic interest
either on its own initiative or on a reference by a Faculty or
the Executive Council or the Court and to take appropriate
action thereon;
(b) to make arrangements through Ordinances for the
instruction and examination of persons other than those
enrolled in the University;
(c) to exercise general supervision over the academic
policies of the University and to give directions regarding
methods of admission and instruction, co-ordination of
teaching among the colleges and the institutions, evaluation of
research and improvement of academic standards;
(d) to bring about and promote inter-faculty co-
ordination and to establish or appoint such committees or
boards as may be deemed necessary for the purpose;
(e) to recognise diplomas or degrees and other
Universities and Institutions and to determine their equivalence
in relation to the diplomas and degrees of the University;
(f) to fix, subject to any conditions accepted by the
Executive Council, the time mode and conditions of
competition for fellowship, scholarships and other prizes, and
to award the same;
(g) to make recommendations to the Executive Council
in regard to the appointment of examiners and if necessary,
their removal and fixation of their fees, emoluments and
travelling and other expenses;
(h) to make arrangements for the conduct of
examinations and to fix dates for holding them;
(i) to declare result of the various examinations, or to
appoint committees or officers to do so and to make
recommendations regarding the conferment or grant of
degrees, honours, diplomas, titles and marks of honour;
(j) to award stipends, scholarships, medals and prizes
and to make other awards in accordance with the Regulations
and such other conditions as may be attached to the awards;
(k) to approve and publish syllabus or the prescribed
courses of study and lists of prescribed or recommended text
books;
(l) to prepare such forms and registers as are, from
time to time, prescribed by Regulations; and
(m) to perform, in relation to academic matters, all
such duties and acts as may be necessary, for the fulfilment
of the objects of this Act.

63
15. (1) The University shall have such Faculties as may be
specified in the Statutes.
(2) Every Faculty shall have a Faculty Board and the
members of the first Faculty Board shall be nominated by the
Executive Council for a period of three years.
(3) The composition, powers and functions of a Faculty
Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a Faculty Board and the
quorum required for such meetings shall be prescribed by the
Ordinances.
(5) ( a) Every Faculty shall consist of such Departments as
may be assigned to it by the Statutes:
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the
recommendation of the Academic Council, establish Centres of
Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the University
as the Executive Council may consider necessary.
(b) Each Department shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(i) Teachers of the Department;
(ii) Persons conducting research in the Department;
(iii) Dean of the Faculty;
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the
Department; and
(v) Such other persons as may be members of the
Department in accordance with the provisions of the
Ordinances.
16. (1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies.
(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term of
office of its members shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the
Academic Council, the functions of a Board of Studies shall be to
approve subjects for research for various degrees and other
requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the
concerned Faculty Board in the manner prescribed by the
Ordinances—
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners
for courses, but excluding research degrees;
(b) appointment of supervisors for research; and
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of
teaching and research:
Faculties and
Departments.
Board of
Studies.

64
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies
shall, during the period of three years immediately after the
commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department.
17. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following
members, namely:—
(i) the Vice-Chancellor;
(ii) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor;
(iii) one person to be nominated by the Court;
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Executive
Council, out of whom at least one shall be a member of the
Executive Council; and
(v) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor.
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a
quorum for a meeting of the Finance Committee.
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex
officio members, shall hold office for a term of three years.
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right
to record a minute of dissent if he does not agree with any decision
of the Finance Committee.
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every
year to examine the accounts and to scrutinise proposals for
expenditure.
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items
which have not been included in the Budget, shall be examined by
the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Executive
Council.
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the
University prepared by the Finance Officer shall be laid before the
Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter
submitted to the Executive Council for approval.
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the
total recurring expenditure and the total non-recurring expenditure
for the year, based on the income and resources of the University
(which, in the case of productive works, may include the proceeds
of loans).
18. (1) There shall be Selection Committees for making
recommendations to the Executive Council for appointment to the
posts of Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor,
Registrar, Finance Officer, Librarian and Principals of Colleges and
Institutions maintained by the University.
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts
specified in Column 1 of the Table below shall consist of the Vice-
Finance
Committee.
Selection
Committees
and
Appointments.

65
V oce-Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons specified
in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the said Table:
TABLE
12
Professor ( i) The Dean of the Faculty.
(ii) The Head of the Department, if he
is a Professor.
(iii) Three persons not in the service of
the University, nominated by the
Executive Council, out of a panel of
names recommended by the Academic
Council for their special knowledge of,
or interest in, the subject with which
the Professor will be concerned
Associate Professor or ( i) The Head of the Department.
Assistant Professor ( ii) One Professor nominated by the
Vice-Chancellor.
(iii) Two persons not in the service of
the University, nominated by the
Executive Council, out of a panel of
names recommended by the Academic
Council for their special knowledge of,
or interest in, the subject with which
the Associate Professor or Assistant
Professor will be concerned.
Registrar or Finance ( i) Two members of the Executive
Officer Council nominated by it.
(ii) One person not in the service of the
University nominated by the Executive
Council.
Librarian ( i) Two persons not in the service of
the University who have special
knowledge of the subject of the Library
Science or Library Administration
nominated by the Executive Council.
(ii) One person not in the service of the
University nominated by the Executive
Council.
Principal of College of Three persons not in the service of the
Institution maintained University of whom two shall be
in the University. nominated by the Executive Council and
one by the Academic Council for their
special knowledge of, or interest in, a
subject in which instruction is being
provided by the College or Institution.

66
Note 1.— Where the appointment is being made for an inter-
disciplinary project, the head of the project shall be deemed to be
the Head of the Department concerned.
Note 2.—The Professor to be nominated by the Vice-
Chancellor shall be a Professor concerned with the speciality for
which the selection is being made and the Vice-Chancellor shall
consult the Head of the Department and the Dean of School before
nominating the Professor.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor, or on his authorisation the Pro-Vice-
Chancellor, or the Dean shall convene and preside over the meeting
of the Selection Committee:
Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be
fixed after prior consultation with, and subject to the convenience
of Visitor’s nominee and the experts nominated by the Executive
Council:
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection
Committee shall not be valid unless,—
(a) where the number of Visitor’s nominee and the
persons nominated by the Executive Council is four in all, at
least three of them attend the meeting; and
(b) where the number of Visitor’s nominee and the
persons nominated by the Executive Council is three in all, at
least two of them attend the meeting.
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee
shall be laid down in the Ordinances.
(5) All the proceedings, right from occurrence of vacancy to
selection of the applicants by the Selection Committee shall be
placed before the Executive Council by way of Agenda Note
circulated in advance along with the recommendations of the
Selection Committee in sealed cover for informed decision making
by the Executive Council:
Provided that, if any complaint has been received on the
same, it shall also be included in the Agenda Note.
(6) On being satisfied with the selection process, the
Executive Council may accept the recommendations of the Selection
Committee and shall appoint the person so selected on such terms
and conditions as it deems fit.
(7) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the
recommendations made by the Selection Committee, it shall record
its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.
(8) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the
manner indicated below:—

67
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than
one academic session, it shall be filled on the advice of the
Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure
indicated in the foregoing clauses;
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than
a year, an appointment to such vacancy shall be made on the
recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of
the Dean of the Faculty concerned, the Head of the
Department and a nominee of the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of
the Dean and the Head of the Department, the Selection
Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice-Chancellor;
(iii) No temporarily appointed teacher shall, if he is not
recommended by a regular Selection Committee for
appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on
such temporary employment.
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the
Executive Council may appoint a person of high academic
distinction and professional attainments to accept a post of
Professor or Associate Professor or any other equivalent academic
post in the University on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.
Provided that the Executive Council may also create
supernumerary posts for a specified period for appointment of such
persons:
Provided further that the number of supernumerary posts so
created should not exceed five per cent. of the total posts in the
University.
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other
academic staff working in any other University or organisation for
undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down
in the Ordinances.
20. (1) An authority of the University may appoint as many
standing or special Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint
to such Committees persons who are not members of such
authority.
(2) A Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with
any subject delegated to it subject to subsequent confirmation by the
authority appointing it.
21. (1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the
University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be
governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of
conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the
Regulations.
Special mode
of appointment.
Committees.
Terms and
conditions of
service and
code of
conduct of
the teachers,
etc.

68
(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall
be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(3) On appointment, every teacher and member of the
academic staff of the University shall sign a contract, the form of
which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall be
deposited with the Registrar.
22. (1) All the employees of the University, other than the
teachers and other academic staff shall, in the absence of any
contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions
of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the
Ordinances and the Regulations and until such Statutes, Ordinances
and Regulations are made, the provisions of the Central Civil
Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 shall apply.
(2) The manner of appointment and emoluments of
employees, other than the teachers and other academic staff, shall
be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
23. (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any
person is to hold an office or be a member of an authority of the
University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be
determined according to the length of continuous service of such
person in his grade and a person in higher grade will be considered
senior to a person in the lower grade.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and
maintain in respect of each class of persons to whom the provisions
of these Statutes apply, a complete and up-to-date seniority list in
accordance with the provisions of clause ( 1).
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous
service in a particular grade or the relative seniority of any person
or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own
motion and shall, at the request of any such person, submit the
matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall be
final.
24. (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a
teacher, a member of the academic staff or other employee of the
University and the authority competent to appoint (hereinafter
referred to as the appointing authority) is of the view that
continuance of such teacher, member of the academic staff, or
other employee is not in the public interest or detrimental to the fair
conduct of the regular departmental enquiry, he may, by order in
writing, place such teacher, member of the academic staff or other
employee, under suspension:
Provided that if the appointing authority of such teacher,
member of the academic staff or other employee is the Executive
Council, the Vice-Chancellor may, after recording the facts and
circumstances warranting suspension of such teacher, member of
Terms and
conditions of
service and
code of
conduct of
other
employees.
Seniority list.
Disciplinary
action
against
employees of
the
University.

69
the academic staff or other employee, suspend him and report the
matter to the Executive Council within three months’ failing which
the order shall stand revoked:
Provided further that after considering the report of the Vice-
Chancellor, the Executive Council may confirm or revoke the order.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the
contract of appointment or of any other terms and conditions of
service of the employees, the Executive Council in respect of
teachers and other academic staff, and the appointing authority in
respect of other employees, shall have the power to remove a
teacher or a member of the academic staff or other employee, as
the case may be, on grounds of misconduct.
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case
may be, the appointing authority, shall not be entitled to remove any
teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except for
a good cause and after giving three months’ notice or on payment
of three months’ salary in lieu thereof.
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other
employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or clause ( 3) unless he
has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against
the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff
or other employee shall take effect from the date on which the
order of removal is made:
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic
staff or other employee is under suspension at the time of his
removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he
was placed under suspension.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing
provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member of the academic staff
or other employee may resign,—
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving
three months’ notice in writing to the Executive Council or
the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying
three months’ salary in lieu thereof;
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving
one month’s notice in writing to the Executive Council or, as
the case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one
month’s salary in lieu thereof:
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on
the date on which the resignation is accepted by the
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may
be.

70
25. (1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation
of the Academic Council and by a resolution passed by a majority
of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting,
make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary
degrees:
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council
may, on its own motion, make such proposals.
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a
majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and
voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any
honorary degree conferred by the University.
26. The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed
by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present
and voting, withdraw any degree or academic distinction conferred
on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the
University for good and sufficient cause:
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice
in writing has been given to that person calling upon him to show
cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such
a resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any,
and any evidence he may produce in support of them, have been
considered by the Executive Council.
27. (1) All powers relating to the maintenance of discipline
and disciplinary action in relation to the students of the University
shall vest in the Vice-Chancellor.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers
referred to in clause ( 1), as he deems proper, to a Pro-Vice-
Chancellor and to such other officers as he may specify in this
behalf.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating
to the maintenance of discipline and taking such action, as may
seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice-
Chancellor may, in exercise of such powers, by order, direct that
any student or students be expelled or rusticated, for a specified
period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a
College, Institution or Department or a Faculty of the University for
a stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be
specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or
examinations conducted by the University, College, Institution or
Department or a Faculty for one or more years, or that the results
of the student or students concerned in the examination or
examinations in which he or they have appeared be cancelled.
(4) The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Faculties
and Heads of teaching Departments in the University shall have the
authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the students
in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Faculties and teaching
Maintenance
of discipline
among
students of
University.
Honorary
degrees.
Withdrawal of
degrees, etc.

71
Departments in the University, as may be necessary for the proper
maintenance of discipline in such Colleges, Institutions, Faculties
and teaching Departments.
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice-Chancellor
and the Principal and other persons specified in clause ( 4), detailed
rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the
University. The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of
Faculties and Heads of teaching Departments in the University may
also make such supplementary rules as they deem necessary to the
aforesaid purpose.
(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required
to sign a declaration to the effect that he submits himself to the
disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice-Chancellor and other authorities
of the University.
28. Convocations of the University for the conferring of
degrees shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Ordinances.
29. Where no provision is made for a President or
Chairperson to preside over a meeting of any authority of the
University or any Committee of such authority or when the
President or Chairperson so provided for is absent, the members
present shall elect one from among themselves to preside at such
meeting.
30. Any member, other than an ex officio member of the
Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council or any other
authority of the University or any Committee of such authority may
resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall
take effect as soon as such letter is received by the Registrar.
31. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and
for being, a member of any of the authorities, or being appointed
as, and for being, an officer of the University if—
(i) he is of unsound mind; or
(ii) he is an undercharged insolvent; or
(iii) he has been convicted by a court of law of an
offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in respect
thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had
been subjected to any of the disqualifications mentioned in
clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his
decision shall be final and no other proceedings shall lie in any civil
court against such decision.
Convocations.
Acting
Chairman of
meetings.
Resignation.
Disqualifications.

72
32. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a
person who is not ordinarily resident in India shall not be eligible to
be an officer of the University or a member of any authority of the
University.
33. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a
person who holds any post in the University or is a member of any
authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of
a particular authority or body or as the holder of a particular
appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long
as he continues to be a member of that particular authority or body
or the holder of that particular appointment, as the case may be.
34. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the
University.
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni
Association shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to
vote or stand for elections unless he has been a member of the
Association for at least one year prior to the date of election and is
a degree holder of the University of at least five years standing:
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one
year’s membership shall not apply in the case of the first election.
35. (1) There shall be constituted in the University, a
Student’s Council for every academic year, consisting of—
(i) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic
Council on the basis of merit in studies, sports and extra-
curricular activities; and
(ii) twenty elected representatives of students in the
manner prescribed by the Ordinances.
(2) The Chairperson and other office bearers of the Council
shall be elected by the members of the Council in the manner
prescribed by the Ordinances:
Provided that any student of the University shall have the
right to bring up any matter concerning the interest of the students
before the Students’ Council, if so permitted by the Chairman, and
he shall have the right to participate in the discussions at any
meeting when the matter is taken up for consideration.
(3) The functions of the Students’ Council shall be to make
suggestions to the appropriate authorities of the University in regard
to the programmes of studies, students’ welfare and other matters
of interest to the students and such suggestions shall be made on
the basis of majority of the members present and voting.
(4) Twenty-one members shall form quorum of the meeting
of the Council.
Alumni
Association.
Residence
condition for
membership
and office.
Membership
of authorities
by virtue of
membership
of other
bodies.
Students’
Council.

73
(5) The Students’ Council shall meet at least twice in an
academic year.
36. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub-section ( 2) of
section 30 may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the
Executive Council in the manner specified below.
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in
sub-section ( 1) of section 30 shall be made by the Executive
Council unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the
Academic Council.
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any
draft of any Ordinance proposed by the Academic Council under
clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the
Academic Council for re-consideration, either in whole or in part,
together with any amendment which the Executive Council may
suggest.
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the
draft of an Ordinance proposed by the Academic Council, the
Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the
original draft is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two-thirds
of the members present and voting and more than half the total
number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent
back to the Executive Council which shall either adopt it or refer it
to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall
come into effect immediately.
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be
submitted to the Visitor within two weeks from the date of its
adoption.
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University
to suspend the operation of any such Ordinance and he shall, as
soon as possible, inform the University about his objection to the
proposed Ordinance.
(8) The Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the
University, either withdraw the order suspending the Ordinance or
disallow the Ordinance, and his decision shall be final.
37. (1) The authorities of the University may make
Regulations consistent with the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances
for the following matters, namely:—
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their
meetings and the number of members required to form a
quorum;
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances to be prescribed by
Regulations;
Ordinances
how to be
made.
Regulations

74
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning
such authorities or committees appointed by them and not
provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations
providing for the giving of notice to the members of such authority
of the dates of meetings and of the business to be considered at
meetings and for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of
meetings.
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such
manner as it may specify, of any Regulation made under the
Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.
38. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any
officer or authority of the University may delegate his or its powers
to any other officer or authority or person under his or its
respective control and subject to the condition that overall
responsibility for the exercise of the powers so delegated shall
continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.
Delegation of
powers.

75
75
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Education is considered as prime driving force in elevating the
status of women and it is Government’s commitment to ensure
gender parity in all spheres of life. The making of quality education,
available to everyone is the most fundamental basis for advancing
gender equality and women’s empowerment. Armed with such an
education, and the self-confidence that comes with it, there is no
limit to what women can do-provided they have equal access to job
and career opportunities and the determination to make positive
changes in the country.
2. There are some State Universities and Institutions deemed
to be Universities which cater exclusively to women students, but
there is no Central University exclusively for women in the country.
In the Twelfth Five Year Plan while the focus is on consolidation of
the existing institutions, there is provision for new Central
Universities to address the social gap. The University shall be
established exclusively for women with an objective to provide for
necessary support and supplement the efforts of the Government in
women’s empowerment by giving them increased access to higher
education and research. The proposed women’s University will cut
across social and religious categories and facilitate girls from
disadvantaged sections to enter into higher education.
3. Establishment of a Central University for women would
have a multiplier effect on availability of empowered women in all
walks of life. As a model Central University for women, it will
create standards of excellence to be followed by others. Such a
Central University will help in the fight to overcome discrimination
and change perceptions about what women can and should do.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; M. M. PALLAM RAJU
The 2nd August, 2013

76
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to establish a new Central
University as a body corporate to be known as the Indira Gandhi
National University for Women in the district of Raebareli, Uttar
Pradesh. After enactment of the Bill, the Vice Chancellor will be
appointed, who will prepare the Vision Document and the Draft
Project Report under the guidance of the statutory authorities of the
University. The actual financial requirements of the University will
be worked out on the basis of the Draft Project Report. It is
expected that the proposed University would require about Rs. 500
crore during the Twelfth Plan period. The expenditure would be met
from the Consolidated Fund of India through the University Grants
Commission under the budgetary provisions of the Minsitry of
Human Resource Development.

77
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 29 of the Bill provides that the first Statutes are those
set out in the Schedule to the Bill. It also empowers the Executive
Council of the University to make new or additional Statutes or to
amend or repeal the Statutes of the university subject to the assent
of the Visitor.
2. Sub-Clause (5) of the aforesaid clause empowers the
Visitor also to make new or additional Statutes or amend or repeal
the Statutes of the University during the period of five years
immediately after the commencement of the Act.
3. Sub-Clause (6) further empowers the Visitor to direct the
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any
matter specified by him and if the Executive Council is unable to
implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor
may, after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the
Executive Council for its inability to comply with such direction,
make or amend the Statutes suitably. The matters in respect of
which the Executive Council and the Visitor may make, amend or
repeal Statutes include the constitution, powers and functions of the
authorities and other bodies of the University, the appointment of
officers and teachers of the university, the conditions of service of
employees of the University and other such matters.
4. Sub-Clause (2) of clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Vice-
Chancellor to make the first Ordinances of the University with the
previous approval of the Central Government and provides that the
Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any
time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the
Statutes. The matters in respect of which Ordinances may be made,
or as the case may be, amended, repealed or added to, relate to
admission of students, courses of study, medium of instruction and
examination, the manner of co-operation and collaboration with
other Universities, institutions and other agencies, the setting up of
a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees and other
such matters.
5. Clause 31 of the Bill enables the authorities of the
University to make Regulations, consistent with this Act, the
Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business
and that of the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not
provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the
manner prescribed by the Statutes.
6. Clause 45 empowers the Central Government, by order
published in the Official Gazette, to make provisions to remove
certain difficulties, which may appear to be necessary or expedient

78
and such an order is not to be made after the expiry of a period
of three years from the commencement of the Act and such order
shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
7. Clause 46 provides that every Statute, Ordinance or
Regulation made under the Act shall be published in the Official
Gazette and they shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
8. The matters for which the Statutes, Ordinances or
Regulations may be made pertain to matters of procedure or detail
and it is not possible to provide for them in the Bill. The delegation
of legislative powers is, therefore, of normal character.

79
79
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to establish and incorporate a University in the State of Uttar Pradesh to provide for
avenues of higher education and research facilities to the women in India and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri M.M. Pallam Raju, Minister of Human Resource Development)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.