157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND  REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS, 2004-2005 (DEMAND NO. 105) OF
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD MARCH,  2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 23RD  MARCH,  2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH,  2005/ CHAITRA, 1927 (SAKA)
 
 
C O N T E N T S
1.         Composition Of The Committee
2.         Preface
3.                  Report                                                       
CHAPTER  I   Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
                        Government’s reply
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited
4.         MINUTES
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
2. Shri Eduardo Faleiro
3. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
4. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
5. Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
6.      Shri S. Anbalagan
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
9. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
10. Shri Anil Dhirubhai Ambani
 
LOK SABHA
 
11. Shri Basudeb Barman
12. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
13. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
14. Shri R. L. Jalappa
15. Shri Ramswarup Koli
16. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
17. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
18. Shri Manoj Kumar
19. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
20. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
21.  Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
22. Mohd. Mukim
23. Shri Tukaram Ganpatrao Rengepatil
24. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
25. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
26. Shri Tufani Saroj
27. Smt. P. Satheedevi
28. Shri A.R. Shaheen
29. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
30. Shri K. Virupaxappa
31. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Hundred-Fifty Seventh
Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in its Hundred Fifty Second Report
onDemands for Grants (Demand No.105) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for the year 2004-2005.
2.         The Hundred Fifty Second Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26
th August, 2004. 
Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report received from the Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 22nd March, 2005. 
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on  22nd March,  2005.
New Delhi;
March 22, 2005
Chaitra 1, 1927, (Saka)
Vayalar Ravi
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development
 

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its One
Hundred-Fifty second Report onDemands for Grants (Demand No.105) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for the
year 2004-2005.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the
Report.  They have been categorized as follows:-
(i)                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 2.4, 6.6,16.15,17.5,19.4,
24.1                                                                                                (Chapter I) Total- 6
(ii)                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:  2.2, 2.3, 3.3, 5.6, 5.8, 8.2, 9.2, 9.3, 9.5, 9.6,  11.2, 11.3, 15.5, 15.6, 16.6, 16.12, 16.13,16.19, 20.1, 20.2,
20.4, 21.3, 22.5, 22.6, 22.7, 23.3, 23.4, 25.2, 26.2,                                              
            (Chapter II)  Total- 29
(iii)
               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee: 3.2, 4.5, 6.3, 6.4, 7.2, 8.3, 9.4, 10.2, 12.1, 12.2, 13.2, 14.2, 16.3, 16.4, 16.5, 16.7, 16.8, 16.9, 16.10,
16.11, 16.16, 16.17, 18.3, 19.3, 20.3, 22.8
(Chapter-III)  Total-26
(iv)               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited: 
4.3                          
 (Chapter – IV) Total- 1
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
2.4       The Committee, at the same time, would impress upon the Ministry to ensure that allocations were properly and
fully utilized.
 
Action Taken
 
Ministry has noted the observations and is ensuring optimum and proper utilization of funds.  The utilization of
plan and non-plan funds for the current year has been above 66% till end of December, 2004.  A number of new initiatives
as well as procedural improvements have been undertaken to ensure optimum utilization of available funds.
 
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.6       The Committee notes that despite severe handicaps, performance of this scheme has been better as regards
achieving physical targets during the year 2003-04.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends strengthening this
scheme by providing resources at an appropriate stage.
 
Action Taken
 
Noted for further compliance.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
16.15   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that performance of these schemes should be evaluated and
problem identified with a view to strengthening and expanding them to more and more areas of the country.  These
schemes be implemented with full vigour so as to bring out our talented children and youth to the forefront.
 
Action taken
The Sports Authority of India is presently implementing five Sports Promotional Schemes ranging from age groups of 8-
25 years.  They are:
 
National Sports Talent Contest Scheme            (Male & Female 8-14 years)
Army Boys Sports Company                            (Male 8-14 years)
Special Area Games Scheme                            (Male & Female 14-21 Years)
SAI Training Center Scheme                             (Male & Female 14- 21 years)
Center of Excellence                                         (Male & Female 17-25 years)
 
It is to mention that number of sports persons being trained under the above schemes during last three years have
increased from 6921 trainees during 2001-02 to 7580 trainees during 2002-03 to 10046 trainees during 2003-04.  The
numbers of SAI sports centers under the above schemes have also increased from 116 centres during 2001-02 to 190
centres during 2003-04.
 
The performance of schemes trainees during the last three years have also increased substantially with total 1031
medals won at National level and 175 medals at International level during 2001-02 to 1195 medals at National level and
192 medals at International level during 2003-04 respectively.
 
In the 17
th Commonwealth Games held at Manchester, SAI scheme trainees won 14 Gold, 7 Silver and 9 Bronze
medals, in Busan Asian Games, SAI scheme trainees won 5 Gold, 6 Silver and 3 Bronze medals.  Similarly in the last
Athens Olympics out of total 77 sports persons 39 were from the SAI scheme.
 
The standard of living condition in the residential accommodation/sports infrastructure given by the State Govt.
for implementation of SAI schemes is being improved gradually.
 
   Under the SAI schemes, the schemes trainees are provided with proper medical care/treatment.  Under each
schemes based on the approved norm for medical facility the funds are provided under the budget estimates.  The trainees
are given routine medical assistance in the centers it self and in case of serious injury during the training requiring inhouse
medical treatment special sanction is given.
 
GRANTS FOR CREATION OF SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
17.5     The Committee is happy to see that different schemes of infrastructural support have been proposed to be clubbed
under two umbrella schemes on the pattern as was done for the schemes of promotion of sports Awards incentives.  The
Committee feels that it would enable the Ministry to have a focused and effective implementation of scheme to create
infrastructure of a high standard in various parts of the Country.  The Committee emphasizes the need for special focus on
developing playgrounds in villages and providing sports equipments to rural youth.
 
Action Taken

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
 
            Under the existing scheme of “Grants to Rural schools for purchase of sports equipment and Development of
playfields”, 100% Central assistance upto Rs.1.50 lakhs is provided to schools in rural areas for development of playfield
and purchase of sports equipments. With a view to provide playfields for at least one school in each block, so as to cover
all the blocks of the country, the Ministry has already requested Planning Commission for an additional allocation of
Rs.87.68 crores under the Scheme for the year 2004-2005. However, the proposal has not been accepted.  This apart, the
Ministry in the proposed revision of the Sports Infrastructure Scheme, has included the provision of rendering Central
assistance to Panchayati Raj Institutions & Registered Youth /Sports Clubs on the same pattern as is being done in the case
of rural schools. This proposed revision is intended towards extending the assistance for rural youth/sports clubs &
Panchayati Raj Institutions apart from rural schools and will cover the non-student youth.   However, effective
implementation of the Scheme would require substantial enhancement of budgetary allocation under this head.
 
GRANTS FOR INSTALLATION OF SYNTHETIC SURFACE
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
19.4     The Committee welcomes the move of the Ministry to provide assistance for synthetic/wooden surfaces for tennis,
basketball, volleyball and squash in addition to hockey and athletic track but the Committee feels that these projects should
be completed in a stipulated timeframe.  This proposal should be taken up by keeping in mind the problems encountered
earlier.
 
Action Taken
 
            The proposed inclusion of Synthetic Surfaces for Basketball/Volleyball/Tennis /Squash court, Table Tennis court,
Badminton courts in the proposed revision would help modernize facilities in these sports disciplines.  Since these surfaces
are much less costlier than surfaces for hockey and athletics, there is every likelihood of full utilization of the outlay for
Xth Plan.
 
NORTH-EASTERN STATES 
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
24.1     North-Eastern States have been provided special emphasis by making separate provision for this area both for the
youth programmes as well as sports activities. These States have immense potential for sports development and have
produced many outstanding sportspersons who have brought laurels for the country. Looking at the financial performance
of the Ministry in this region, the Committee feels that these states didn’t receive the attention they deserved. The
Committee therefore, recommends to have a separate unit in the Ministry to monitor the implementation of the schemes in
this area and would like to have a status report after every six months.
 
Action Taken
 
            Based on the recommendations, North Eastern States Cell under Director (Sports) has been set up in the Ministry.
 
CHAPTER-II
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
VIEW OF GOVERNMENTS’ REPLY
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
 
2.2       The Committee notes that initially, Rs. 9.32 crores was earmarked for the Afro-Asian Games in BE 2003-04 on the
plan side and subsequently Rs. 55.00 crore was obtained as supplementary grant for this purpose, but on non-plan side.  The
Committee also notes that Rs. 8.00 crore was re-appropriated from plan side to non-plan side for a newly created head.  In
view of this, the Committee feels that assessment about Afro-Asian Games requirements was highly unrealistic, because
ultimately, a total Rs. 64.32 crores had to be given (Rs. 9.32 crores + Rs. 55.00 crore) for this purpose, instead of Rs. 9.32
crore originally provided for.  Secondly, the re-appropriation of funds from plan to non-plan, according to the Committee, is
not a healthy practice, which leaves less money for the schemes, which are already cash-starved.
 
Action Taken
 
The Games were earlier scheduled to be held at New Delhi from 3
rd to 11 th November, 2001.  The details of
expenditure and financial arrangements for the Games were to be settled between Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Youth
Affairs.  However, on 14th September 2001 Government after reviewing the overall security scenario that emerged as a result
of the terrorist attacks in USA decided to postpone the Games.  Subsequently on the proposal of Indian Olympic Association,
on 1st September, 2003 Government had approved the holding of the Games from 24 th October to 1 st November, 2003 at
Hyderabad instead of New Delhi.
 
As such at BE 2003-04 a nominal provision of Rs.9.32 crores was kept at the time of preparing the estimates. 
However, as per the financial arrangements settled between Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports,
this Ministry was to provide Rs.8.00 crores and Ministry of Finance was to provide Rs.55.00 crores as additionality for
First Afro Asian Games.
 
Since the funds were to be transferred to State Government, a new budget head under Non-Plan was opened.  In
view of this, the plan allocation of Rs.8.00 crores (as a Central Government Share) was re-appropriated from Plan to Non-
Plan.  The additionality of Rs.55.00 crores (Non-Plan) provided by Ministry of Finance was also kept under this head.
 
In view of the above there has been no financial impact on any plan scheme of this Ministry.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
2.3
              The Committee notes that the allocation of the Ministry for the year 2004-05, has been marginally increased and
believes that it would hardly suffice to implement the ongoing projects, leave alone new initiatives proposed by the
Ministry.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should place its requirements for this year, before the
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission justifying its need for higher allocation at the RE Stage.
 
Action Taken
 
Ministry has already projected its requirement of additional funds for expansion of National Service Scheme (NSS)

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
and Rural Sports Scheme to the Planning Commission.  The Ministry of Finance has also been approached for expansion
and strengthening of Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan network.
 
GENDER BUDGET ANALYSIS OF BUDGET ALLOCATIONS
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.3       The Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry to take interest in the development of sports among the
Indian women who have brought laurels to the country in the past and have shown good potential for sports like athletics,
weightlifting, hockey and swimming etc.  Incentives and cash awards would ensure motivation and active participation of
women in various sports activities.
Action Taken
 
Various Schemes of the Ministry are being implemented to provide sports training and exposure to sports persons
(Men & Women).  The Ministry through Sports Authority of India is implementing the following Sports Promotional
Schemes to identify talented sportspersons in the age groups ranging from 8-25 years (Boys & Girls) and admit them in
the respective schemes for regular sports training to achieve excellence at National & International competitions.
      Except the Army Boys Sports Company Scheme implemented in collaboration with Indian Army, all the following
schemes provide training facilities for both Male & Female sportspersons:
 
a. National Sports Talent Contest Scheme
b. Special Area Games
c. SAI Training Center
d. Center of Excellence
 
            The talented sportspersons (Male & Female) are identified through talent scouting as per the scheme selection
criteria and admitted under each identified sports discipline at SAI sports centers to undergo regular systematic &
scientific training.  The efforts are always made to attract greater number of women trainees so that female participation in
the sports could be improved.  During 2003-04 the percentage of female participation, in the above four SAI Schemes was
29.47%.  The percentage of female participation during 2004-05 (as on 31.12.2004) has slightly improved in comparison
to last year.  It is hopefully presumed that the gender participation in respect of female trainees shall improve to some
extent by the end of this academic year.  It is pointed out that under each scheme the selection is done as per the scheme
criteria and also that talented sports persons who have potential to perform at National & International competitions are
admitted for regular training in SAI Schemes.
Apart from above SAI is also implementing on behalf of the Ministry, the following Agency Schemes through out
the country to benefit the Women Sports persons.
 
1. National Sports Festival for Women
2. All India Rural Sports Tournament
3. North East Sports Festival
4. Sports Scholarship Scheme.
 
To promote Sports among Women, the National Sports Festival for Women is conducted from the grass root level
to National Level involving only Women Sports Person in 12 Sports discipline.  During 2003-04 in the National Level
Festival total 2366 Women Sports persons participated from the various states.
The Women Sports persons also participate in the All India Rural Sports Tournament and North East Sports
Festival; the percentage of Women participation in these competitions during 2003-04 was 36.94% and 37.89%

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
respectively.  Under the Sports Scholarship Scheme 3261 Women Sports persons were awarded scholarship to recognize
their outstanding performance at National and State level and also to assist them for pursuing career for Sports and
Physical Education.
Apart from this, Ministry provides cash incentives and awards to sportspersons including women, who win medal
in recognized international competitions.  Pension is also admissible to sports persons including women who win medal in
identified international Games.
Special Awards are given to all the sports persons of both the sexes, who bring laurels for the country in prestigious
International Sports Events. Government has increased the cash award money recently by 100%.  They are equally treated,
as both the sexes have to enter into fierce competitions to win medals at international sports events. Women are also
equally treated while considering sportspersons for the prestigious Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna and Arjuna Awards.
 
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME 
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
5.6       The Committee after having seen the achievements, both physical and financial, describes the performance of the
scheme as satisfactory.  The Committee, however, feels that the Ministry should not be complacent in respect of this
Scheme (NSS).  It, therefore, urges the Ministry to see that the money is released in time and every effort should be made
to utilize the funds allocated in the same year for achieving the targets.
 
Action Taken
 
The Ministry is taking all necessary steps ensuring release of NSS grants in time.  Efforts are also being made to
ensure utilization of the funds allocated in the same year for achieving the targets in toto.  During the current year, funds to
the tune of over 66 per cent of the budgetary allocation have been released till the end of December, 2004.  Again, NSS
Manual laying down guidelines for implementation of the NSS Scheme is also being revised and updated.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
5.8       It appears to the Committee that the Ministry does not have nay mechanism to expedite delayed settlement of
accounts by the States/UTs.  As regards the State Liaison Cells, it is the same story.  The Committee is not aware of the
efforts made by the Ministry to find out the reasons for these phenomena.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry should pursue with the States and find out the problems and try to remove the same.  It is basically the
responsibility of the Ministry to see that NSS was implemented effectively at the national level, of course with the
cooperation of the States.
 
Action Taken
 
With the persistent efforts made by the Ministry, States/UTs defaulting in submission of utilization certificates has
come down to seven (as on 31.12.2004), as compared to twenty-three in the year 2002-03.  A national conference for State
Ministers of Youth Affairs & Sports is being held on 4 th February, 2005.  This issue would be further discussed with the
representatives of the seven States/UTs Governments i.e. Assam, Jarkhand, J & K, Meghalaya, Lakshadweep, Chandigarh
and Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
 
NATIONAL INTEGRATION PROGRAMME

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.2       The Committee is happy that the scheme appears to be picking up after facing some initial teething problems. 
Now, the numbers of viable proposals were increasing.  The Committee, however, wonders as to how the scheme of such a
great national significance could be successfully operated with a marginal enhancement of Rs. 0.45 crores in the year
2004-05.  The Committee is of the view that a scheme for promoting national integration should not suffer due to financial
constraints.  The Ministry should, therefore expand this scheme, by encouraging more and more organizations to operate
it.  Financial allocations also for this scheme need to be suitably enhanced.
 
Action Taken
 
The observation has been noted and larger allocation shall be sought during 2005-2006 and successive years.
 
YOUTH HOSTELS
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
9.2       The Committee is surprised to see that due to overall reduction of Ministry’s allocation, share of this scheme was
drastically reduced from Rs. 260 lakh to just 60 lakh.  This general reduction in Ministry’s allocation, committee feels,
should have been evenly spread to the other schemes as well.
 
Action Taken
 
The reduction in this Scheme’s allocation was necessitated due to limited number of proposals under the Scheme
pipeline during that period.
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
9.3       The Committee notes with concern that out of Rs. 14.93 crore for the Ninth plan outlay, the actual expenditure was
only Rs. 9.65 crores i.e. only 67%.
 
Action Taken
 
The lower level of expenditure was on account of limited number of proposals received from the State
Government.
Recommendations/Observations
 
9.5       The Committee feels that this scheme lacks adequate publicity, as a result youth, particularly from rural areas, were
not able to make use of hostel facilities.  The committee, therefore, is of the opinion that existence of youth hostel facilities
should be given vides publicity particularly by Akashvani which has large audience in rural areas.  It also recommends to
strengthen the scheme as the present coverage of the scheme was too less to show any impact.
 
Action Taken
 
In order to give wide publicity to Youth Hostels, the Ministry is preparing a brochure/pamphlet on Youth Hostel,
which will be widely circulated to govt. departments/state governments/ NGOs/etc. Information about youth hostels has
already been placed on the government website.  The matter relating to providing free publicity to youth hostels has been

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
taken up with the Akashwani authorities.
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
9.6       The Committee does not know how much of the existing facility of youth hostels was being utilized by the women
youth.  Generally women, particularly from rural areas, do not come out due to reasons of security and safety.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that separate girls hostels should also be constructed on the lines of youth hostel.
 
Action Taken
 
People from all walks of life even visitors from other countries are free to utilize the facilities of these Youth
Hostels. Youth Hostels provide hostelling facilities to Men & Women in separate dormitories of 8-10 or 4-6 beds.  The
Government of India, generally, appoints a team of husband & wife as Warden/Assistant Warden at each Youth Hostel so
that Assistant Warden could easily cater to the problems or needs of a girl student/rural women.  In view of this necessity
of constructing separate youth hostels for girls/women has not been felt so far.
 
ASSISTANCE TO RURAL YOUTH AND SPORTS CLUB
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
11.2     The Committee is at a loss to understand as to how the Ministry would be able to meet this target with the present
allocation.  In view of the scheme being rural youth-oriented, its importance can hardly be overemphasized.  The
Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry to make efforts for obtaining adequate resources so that the momentum of the
scheme is not lost.
Action Taken
 
             Efforts for obtaining adequate resources will be made at the time of formulization of BE 2005-06 so that the
momentum of the scheme is not lost.   The Ministry is also emphasizing the role and involvement of Youth Clubs in
several other Youth & Sports related programmes of the Ministry in a meaningful way.  The registered Youth Clubs have
been recognized as Non-Governmental organizations and are being assisted in a big way by the Ministry under its
Schemes like vocational education, NIC, adolescents, etc.  They have been motivated and assisted to take projects
available for NGOs from various Ministries and agencies.
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
11.3     The Committee further notes that this is a merged scheme, among others, the scheme for research, evaluation and
publication.  In the absence of any mention about these aspects in the new scheme, it appears that the evaluation and
publicity aspects have been given a go by.  It is very unfortunate.  The Ministry should have a permanent mechanism for
evaluation and publicity of its scheme.
 
Action Taken
 
As a result of follow-up action on zero based budgeting the Ministry has merged some schemes with similar
objectives.  One of the components of this merged scheme is Assistance for Youth Development Studies, Evaluation and
Publication.  It has been decided to utilize this scheme for setting up of a permanent mechanism for evaluation, publication
and publicity of various schemes.  Publication of a monthly magazine by NYKS has also been started with a view to

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
spread awareness and information about youth adolescent related issues and initiatives among the youth. 
 
SPORTS AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION (BUDGETARY ALLOCATION)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
15.5     While appreciating the need for the additional funds to the Ministry, the committee would like to point out that the
Tenth Plan outlay of Rs. 1145.36 crores is more than double the amount of Rs. 472.61 crores outlay of Ninth Plan.  The
Committee feels that with this increased allocation, the Ministry should be able to make up for the gap; to some extent
between the allocation and its requirement.  But it would certainly not be enough to fulfill the objectives of extending NSS
and creating proper sports facilities in every school.  The Committee recommends that the proposal of the Ministry
regarding getting the additional funds from the education cess be seriously considered as these projects would benefit
ultimately schools only, which are primarily the responsibility of the Ministry of HRD.
 
Action Taken
 
            The Ministry has already submitted a proposal to Planning Commission for enhanced allocation to enable the
Ministry to implement NSS in all Schools, Colleges and Universities in the country.  The matter was also taken up with
Ministry of HRD for providing funds under Sarv Shiksha Abhiyan since this Ministry caters to the sports needs of the
schools, colleges and universities.  However, the response of the Planning Commission or Ministry of HRD has not been
positive so far.  The matter is being pursued with them.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
15.6     The Department, however, should concentrate on making an assessment of all those sports related schemes, which
are not performing well and take corrective measures wherever required.
 
Action Taken
 
            A review of all the schemes has been undertaken and remedial measures have been taken.  A large number of
schemes have been merged and converted with umbrella scheme for effective implementation.  The Scheme relating to
Talent Search & Training has been amended.  The Scheme for State Sports Academy is being revised to make it more
effective.  Consultations in this regard are being held with the State Governments and Corporate Sector.  ‘Run for Sports’
and Flag distribution was organized on ‘Sports day’ for encouraging donations for National Sports Development Fund
(NSDF).  Corporate Sector, PSU and Nationalised Bank have been addressed to involve themselves in the schemes of
NSDF and State Sports Academy. 
 
The Scheme of Exchange of Sports and Physical Education Teams has not picked up since it is based on the
principle of reciprocity with other countries.  However a large number of agreements such as Cultural Exchange
Progrmames, Sports Protocols and Memoranda of Understanding have been signed.  
 
SAI SUB-CENTRES
 
SCHEME FOR DOPE TEST
 
Recommendations/Observations
 

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
16.6     Last few years have seen a number of sportspersons specially the weightlifters and athletes testing positive for
banned drugs.  These instances have brought shame instead of fame to the Nation.  Our Scheme for Dope test was
launched only three years ago.  The SAI has anti-doping lab set up a decade ago in New Delhi, it has still not acquired the
requisite international certification to gain legal sanctity. So, even if anybody fails a test, he or she can successfully
challenge it in a Court.  Such a situation allows the over-ambitious ones to take the easy route.
 
Action Taken
 
As submitted above, after acquiring the essential requisites viz ISO/IEC 17025:1999 in September 2003, DCC SAI
got temporary accreditation by IOC for testing of 1 st Afro Asian Games. The application for permanent accreditation
submitted to WADA on Feb. 6, 2004.  Even though a special scheme was launched recently, the funding for Dope test
laboratory was being covered under the Ministry’s overall budgetary allocations.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
16.12   The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make efforts to streamline the procedure for Dope testing,
upgrading the test facilities, employing experts in the area for making the test results foolproof.  Involving many agencies
in this, Committee feels, would only complicate the matter.  Only SAI and IOA, therefore, should be made responsible for
this work.  And they should put necessary guidelines in tune with World Anti-Doping Code.
 
Action Taken
 
The quality of test results given by DCC, SAI is satisfactory. The technology being used in terms of analytical
methods and equipment facilities are the latest. This has been reviewed by the following: -
 
§           Team of Japanese scientists
§           Assessment team for ISO/IEC 17025:1999 accreditation which included Technical Assessor Dr. John H. Vine from
Australia. (Who is an International Technical Assessor for Doping Labs.)
§           Participation in International proficiency testing programmes.
 
All the methods have been developed as per WADA International Standard for Laboratories. The same methods are
being used by all WADA accreditated Labs.  In case of all new drugs introduced, methods are developed and then testing
is conducted as per approved method.  For example THG was detected in the month of October, 2003 and the methods for
testing the same was given by WADA to all accreditated labs.  DCC SAI was able to detect THG and is one of the few
labs in the world, which could detect the THG.  Moreover DCC SAI is also participating in the proficiency testing which is
one of the mandatory requirements for getting the permanent accreditation from WADA.  The samples were received in
DCC from WADA. It is pointed out here that DCC was able to detect all the drugs, which were in their scope and was able
to obtain Z score within the prescribed limits.  There were 24 accreditated labs, who had participated in the above said
proficiency testing.  However, New Delhi, DCC was the only non-accreditated lab. Who have achieved the Z score within
the prescribed limits?  The overall performance of DCC Lab. was within first five labs.  This also shows that this Lab. is
following all the methods, which are being followed by the accredited lab. of WADA.  All the guidelines issued by
WADA are followed from time to time.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
16.13   The Committee also emphasizes an urgent need for educating our athletes, coaches and other supporting personnel

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
about the harmful effects of dope; conducting in-competition and out-of-competition dope tests on sportsperson; and
promoting research and training in the area.
Action Taken
 
             Under the guidance and support from the Ministry, SAI is taking necessary steps to educate and train its coaches
and other supporting personnel as well as sportspersons attending camps about the harmful effects of dope.  The National
Sports Federations have also been requested to be active in this regard.
 
DCC SAI, besides dope testing, is also engaged in preparing/updating the following books for circulation amongst
sportspersons, coaches etc.
 
§
           Drug Hand Book Directory Drug Abuse in Sports
§           Preparing pamphlets
§           Distributing latest information of WADA document
.
The education materials which are being received from WADA is being circulated among the sports fraternity and
coaches.  Sports persons are being advised and made aware about dangers of use of drugs for enhancing their performance.
 
DCC has also started encouraging research in the area of doping and two of the Research Fellows have been
appointed, who are doing the research on the following:
 
·        Endogenous steroid profile in Indian Sportspersons.
·        Sample purification procedures to improve detection of anabolic steroids by GC-MSD & HRMS.
 
Recently, the Ministry has placed information about list of prohibited drugs and substances in its ‘sportal’ web
site.  A list of substances with Indian trade names has been placed in the web site.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
16.19   The overall performance as well as functioning of the SAI, the Committee feels, has been far from satisfactory. 
Our performance in international sports as it is, is highly disappointing.  The SAI obviously has not been able to make any
significant impact as was initially visualized when it was set up.  It is said to have developed into an unwieldy bureaucratic
organization, which is not being managed by sportspersons themselves.  The Committee feels that there is a need to have a
re-look on both its mandate as well as organization with a view to bringing in this organization professionalism, dynamism
and efficiency so that it becomes a think tank in the sports arena.
 
Action Taken
 
In the para there are two parallel concerns expressed – about SAI’s working and the overall performance of the
country in the international sports.  The responsibility for development of sports and performance mainly rests with
National Level Sports Federations and as ‘Sports’ is a State subject, with State Governments, Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports supplements the efforts of the National Sports Federations and State Governments by support to coaching,
exposure, facilitation of participation of the former category and creating/upgrading infrastructure with State
Governments, their local bodies and in schools and other educational institutions located in these states.  Sports Authority
of India, as a Government owned registered society assists the Ministry in coordinating with the efforts of the State

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
Government in those areas of central funding.  The objectives of SAI namely broad-basing of sports, developing
excellence and maintaining and utilisation of stadia created/upgraded by the Government for IX Asian Games, needs to be
viewed in the above focal areas of attention of Government of India.
 
            The performance of Indian Teams at the International level has not been as per our expectations.  There has been
resurgence to Indian sports during the last few years both in terms of India’s performance at the International level as well
as its capability of successfully holding mega international sports events.
 
            During the 2002 Commonwealth Games, the performance of the Indian team was commendable and it surpassed
all the previous records in terms of number of medals ever won by Indian contingent in International multi-disciplinary
tournaments.  Similarly in the 2002 Asian Games too the performance of Indian team was good.  With the disintegration of
erstwhile USSR, the competition in the Asian Games in different disciplines has become much more competitive.   For the
2004 Athens Olympic Games, 76 sportspersons had qualified and 75 took part in the Games.  Many of our athletes were in
the zone of competition and appear to have missed the medals by narrow margins.
 
            The modern sport is sports science oriented.  The resurgence in Indian sports is attributed to the proper planning
and monitoring by SAI in coordination with the concerned sports federations; eminent sports persons and other
professional experts.
 
            The national teams for various mega international sports tournaments/ Championships are being prepared by SAI
on behalf of Government.  The Long Term Development Plan for different disciplines are prepared by SAI in
collaboration with the concerned National Sports Federations.  The discipline wise monitoring committees, each headed by
DG, SAI with President of the concerned federations as its members besides others review the preparation and
performance of the Indian teams.  Monitoring is also done by the MYA&S as well as by the National Monitoring
Committee headed by the Hon’ble Minister for YA & Sports.  The Government has also set up these apart high power
committees in the recent past for monitoring the performance of the Indian teams.  The meticulous planning and proper
monitoring has paid rich dividends in terms of better performance by our athletes.  The national camps are organised by
SAI in collaboration with the concerned sports federations at its Regional Centres located at Bangalore, Kolkata besides its
academic wing at NS NIS, Patiala and other places having requisite sports infrastructure and sports sciences back-up.
 
            SAI is not an unwieldy bureaucratic organisation.  Out of total strength of 2036 employees there are 1487 coaches,
38 sports scientists, besides 48 numbers of officers with sports background.  The job requirement of Coaches and
Groundsmen is also technical in nature.
 
SCHEME RELATING TO INCENTIVES FOR PROMOTION OF SPORTS ACTIVITIES
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
20.1     The Committee notes that during 2003-2004, BE allocation of Rs. 15.06 crores was reduced to Rs. 9.76 crores in
RE. The Committee expresses its anguish over the reduction under such an important scheme having varied components
for promoting sports activity.
 
20.2     The Committee finds that out of the five schemes, the financial performance in case of ‘Sports scholarship scheme’
and ‘pension for meritorious sports persons’ has been good. In the case of other three, things were not that good. In the

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
case of Rural sports programme, for example, there were variation in allocation in BE 2001-2002 and 2002-2003. BE,
2003-2004 was reduced at RE Stage due to general cut in Ministry’s allocation. The Committee notes that the impact of
this cut was borne by this scheme meant for rural sports. Rural sports, the Committee feels, are not getting the required
attention.
 
Action Taken
 
The scheme of Rural Sports Programme, one of the sub-components of the Scheme of Incentives for Promotion
Sports Activities, has been reviewed and revised during the year 2003-2004, simplifying its various provisions as well as
enhancing the pattern of financial assistance making the scheme more attractive. Provision for extending financial
assistance for holding district level sports competitions has been incorporated. The involvement of the functionaries of
NYKs and their youth/sports clubs in the conduct of the tournaments at various levels has been stressed to provide a fillip
to theses tournaments.  Special financial assistance for holding district and State level competitions to North Eastern States
will be given henceforth. The increased patterns of financial assistance for holding rural sports competitions at various
levels now will be as under:
                                                            (Old Rate)
                                            (Revised rates)
i)          District  level:                            Nil                                            Rs.30,000/- per distt
                                                             Nil                                           Rs.50,000/-per dist
                                                                                                            for NE States
 
ii)         State/ UT level                          Rs.30,000/-                              Rs.50,000/- /Rs.25,000/
Rs.15,000/- per                        per discipline
discipline
      
Nil                                            Rs.75,000/- per discipline for NE States
 
iii)          National level                          Rs.2,00,000/-                           Rs.2,50,000/-
 per discipline                           per discipline
 
            In view of the above changes in the Scheme, the rural sports are expected pick-up momentum.
 
            As far as the National Sports Development Fund is concerned, assistance has been provided to India’s elite
sportspersons such as Maj. R.V.S. Rathore, Anju Bobby George, Abhinav Bhindra, Bobby Aloysius, etc. for training
abroad which has resulted in their excellent performance.  There is a problem of raising resources for the Fund.  Efforts are
being made in this regard.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
20.4     Similarly, National Sports Development Fund could not pick up due to poor response from private/corporate units
and individuals.  As a result, provision in RE 2001-2002, 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 had to be reduced, as no matching
grants were available.  The Committee feels that with the present state of affairs, there appears to be little hope from this
scheme.  The Ministry must therefore, revisit this scheme at the earliest.
Action Taken 

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
 
            In order to spread awareness about sports among the youth and invite contributions to National Sports
Development Fund (NSDF), on the occasion of National Sports Day, Flag distribution for fund collection was undertaken
all over the country with the help of regional/branch offices of Sports Authority of India, Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathana
and National Service Scheme.
 
Apart from this, references at the level of Secretary (YA&S) have been made to various National Corporate houses,
Nationalized Banks, PSUs as well as associations like FICCI, ASSOCHAM, and CII asking them to contribute generously
to this Fund.  Only PSU, i.e BHEL, has committed to contribute an amount of Rs.1.00 crore.
 
SPECIAL AWARDS TO WINNERS IN INTERNATIONAL SPORTS EVENTS AND THEIR COACHES
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
21.3     The committee is of the opinion that the pension scheme for sportspersons is a good scheme but it needs to be
further streamlined and strengthened. Besides, the Committee suggests that other facilities like CGHS benefits should also
be extended to them. It has come to the notice of the Committee that many cases of sportspersons for pension are pending.
The Committee would like the Ministry to expedite the disposal of pension cases pending with it as early as possible.
Action Taken
 
            The Ministry is exploring the possibility of a medical assistance for the ex-Olympians and other outstanding
sportspersons.  However, the CGHS benefits, meant for Central Government employees cannot be extended to the sports
persons, as they are not employees.
 
ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
22.5     The Committee is aware about questions being raised from different quarters particularly in media about the
functioning of National Sports Federations.  While the Committee feels concerned about those questions, it, however,
thinks that National Sports Federations are the lynchpin in the entire sports structure of the country.  Organizations like
Indian Olympic Association are under certain international obligations as well.  While recognizing the key contribution of
the NSFs in the promotion and development of sports in the country, the Committee is of the opinion that they should also
see that their functioning does not leave any cause of complain.  If some of the NSFs were not functioning in transparent
manner and the matter is reported in the newspaper, it does not mean that functioning of all the NSFs are questionable.
 
22.6     The Committee feels that if the Ministry had initiated some steps to start a dialogue on the issues of concern, the
NSFs including IOA should have cooperated in this endeavour of the Ministry.  In present scenario, some revolutionary
decision needs to be taken to achieve results in a fixed timeframe as has been done in other countries like China, South
Korea and, Taiwan. Such a strategy could be chalked out only after the Ministry, the Federations, IOA and the corporate
houses and all the stakeholders in sports sit together to share each other concerns and identify the problems.
 
Action Taken
 
Recently, meetings have been held at the level of Minister, Youth Affairs and Sports with most of the major
Federations.  The Federations are being assisted for training and exposure of sports persons, engagement of foreign

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
coaches, purchase of modern equipments as well as secretarial support based on Long-term Development Plans. 
Information about modern practices being followed by countries like China for training their sports persons is being
studied.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
22.7     The Committee is happy to know that soon after the conclusion of the Commonwealth and the Asian Games in
2002, the Ministry undertook the exercise of finalizing Long Term Development Plans with various NSFs.  The exercise
has been completed and a review undertaken in respect of some of the Federations also.  The Committee would like to
know the result of that review for its knowledge.
 
Action Taken 
 
The yearly review of Long Term Development Plan is done with each of the major national level federation.  This
is done under the Chairmanship of DG, SAI and a representative of the Ministry is also invited.  Ministry also proposes to
take a final evaluation of each Long Term Development Plan before the next plan is processed partly as a result of this
interaction.  India’s performance in International events in Athletics, Weight Lifting, Volley Bal, Badminton, Shooting,
Table Tennis and Chess have shown marked improvement.  It can be said that where Federations seek the assistance of
SAI and the Ministry for exposures, conduct of training camp and engagement of coaches, improvement can be attempted.
 
STATES SPORTS ACADEMY
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
23.3     The Committee feels that this scheme has not taken off at all mainly due to from poor response from the corporate
sector.  The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry to discuss the problems with the private sector and
based on discussions held so far the scheme has been proposed to be revised.  The Committee therefore, recommends that
the process of revision be expedited as early as possible.
 
Action Taken
 
            Based on the consultations with various stakeholders, three aspects of the scheme have been identified for revision
i.e. a) inclusion of a larger number of disciplines in eligibility criteria. b) Upgradation of infrastructure owned by State
Governments, Federations, SAI, as well as infrastructure set up with the assistance of Central Government for conversion
into Academy. c) Revision in the funding pattern and share of various partners in the implementation of the scheme.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
23.4     The Committee calls upon the corporate houses to co-operate in this national endeavor as part of their social
responsibility.  Any apprehensions/problems that they may be having in contribution for this noble cause, the Committee
feels, could be taken care of after mutual consultations with the Ministry as well as Federations.
 
Action Taken
 
            The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee on the above subject as incorporated in its latest report laid on the
Table of the Both Houses was brought to the notice of Corporate Houses.  The Scheme of State Sports Academy and

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
National Sports Development Fund were shared with them.  At the level of Secretary (YA&S) a large number of PSUs and
nationalized banks have been addressed at the level of Secretary (YA&S).   They were requested to participate in the
national endeavour for achieving excellence in sports as part of their social responsibility.
 
PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG DISABLED
 
25.2     Under the scheme of Promotion of Sports among disabled a token provision of Rs.4 lakhs has been made for BE
2004-05.  The Committee is dismayed to observe that the scheme is being merged into the scheme relating to events and
the same is under formulation.  This appears to be a strange move on the part of the Ministry.  The Committee
recommends that the scheme of disabled should be finalized at the earliest and every possible steps be taken to run it as a
separate scheme.
Action Taken
 
             Based on the exercise of Zero Based Budgeting, umbrella schemes by merging various existing Schemes having
overlapping objectives have been formulated.  There was a proposal for merging the scheme for disabled in the scheme
relating to Events.  Now, keeping in view the observations of the Hon’ble Committee, the Ministry shall pursue the
formulation of a separate scheme for Promotion of Sports among Disabled.  It may be mentioned in the existing scheme
for Assistance to National Sports Federations, physical and mentally handicapped sportspersons can be provided
assistance.  This existing provision would be retained for recognized National Sports Federations dealing with sports for
disabled.
 
MONITORING OF SCHEMES
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
26.2     The Committee is surprised to see that there is no permanent mechanism in the Ministry of its own to receive
regular feedback as well as to monitor various programmes, both under Youth Welfare and the Sports.  This is an aspect
without which, it is not possible to know about the performance and success of the schemes run by the Ministry.  The
Committee was informed that monitoring was being done basically by two Committees one formed under the DG, SAI and
the other under the Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports.  The Committee disapproves a monitoring activity, which is so
centralized that it is being done from the Centre.  Sports being the State subject, the Committee feels, any mechanism,
which is not from down-to-the-top, is bound to be ineffective.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry;
should devise a decentralized mechanism of monitoring of its schemes at the earliest.
 
Action Taken
 
             The Sports is a State subject and concerned State Governments are supposed to monitor promotion of sports in the
concerned State.  However, a large number of Ministry’s schemes are being implemented through State Governments,
NGOs, educational institutions and Sports Authority of India.  Each scheme has its own monitoring system.  The
Infrastructure Scheme is being monitored on regular basis at three stages, i.e. A) at the time of sanctioning – the existing
sports infrastructure in proposed area as well as state-wise performance in implementing earlier sanctioned project is taken
into account. B) The first installment is released only after the grantee institution spends its proportionate share of the
proposed expenditure.  C) The 2
nd and final installment is issued only after utilization and progress report of the project is
received from the grantee institutions.
 

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
 The inspections by Asstt. Engineer and Senior officers of the Ministry, on random basis, are being conducted from
time to time to monitor the progress in respect of the sports infrastructure projects approved by the Government to ensure
proper utilization of funds. Since Progress Reports duly signed by the Government engineers of the rank of Executive
Engineer/Asstt Engineer and Utilisation Certificate’s duly countersigned by the Officers of the State Governments of the
rank of Dy. Secretary and above are called for before the release of grant.
 
Schemes implemented by through Sports Authority of India are implemented in a decentralized manner through its
regional centers, sub-centres and its training centers.  However, regular feedback and monitoring is undertaken by sub-
centres and regional centers and periodically by the SAI Head Quarters.
 
Performance of National level Federations are monitored in term of Long Term Development Plans and in order to
check the efficacy of utilization of Government grants.  However, the Ministry does not monitor day-to-day activities of
State Sports Federations and Sports Department of State Governments.
 
On Youth side, the Schemes are implemented through Central agencies, state educational institutions, Universities
and non-governmental organizations.  Each Scheme is being monitored at the district level.  A few selected academic
institutions have also been assigned the task of concurrent monitoring.  The scheme-wise monitoring mechanism is as
follows:
 
a)
                  Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan :
 
1.                               The programmes and activities by youth clubs are monitored.
 
2.                               Through 500 district level offices, i.e. District Youth Coordinators.  The special schemes of
programmes of MYAS; and
 
3.                               Other Ministries UN agencies/State Governments/District Administration and various
developmental agencies and NGOs assigned to NYKS are monitored by 18 Regional Coordinators
of NYKS.  The monthly reports are being obtained from regional and zonal level officers by the
NYKS for monitoring purposes.
b)         National Service Scheme (NSS)
 
                        The scheme is implemented by the Programme Officers in various educational institutions.  The programme
is monitored on regular basis by State Liaison Officers who are State Level Officers on the strength of NSS
Programme in each state.  At the regional level, the programme is monitored by the Regional Officers.  At the
Scheme is monitored by Project Officer, NSS as well as officers of the Ministry.
 
c)                  Assistance to NGOs under various Schemes
 
A monitoring system has been set up to ensure proper utilization of the funds sanctioned under various
scheme of the Ministry.  The field functionaries of the NYKS and NSS have been assigned the task of sending
reports on conduct of activities by the grantee institutions in their respective areas.
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
GENDER BUDGET ANALYAIS OF BUDGET ALLOCTIONS

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.2       The Committee notes that percentage of funds spent on women component is not upto the mark under various
schemes of the Ministry except the NSS, NSVS and sports scholarship.  In some schemes, especially those run by SAI, it
is very low.  It is matter of great concern to the Committee that only 33.60% of the total allocation of the Ministry was
spent on women component during the year 2003-04.  The very fact, that data have been assumed for some schemes,
shows thatgender analysis of its scheme is being done neither systematically nor regularly.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the gender-based analysis of the allocations of the Ministry should be done regularly, as it would provide
an idea about the percentage of funds being spent on the women who constitute about half of our population.
 
Action Taken
 
All the schemes of the Ministry are designed to benefit sports persons belonging to both the sexes. However, under
a specific scheme of National Championship for Women, Govt. gives grants to States/ UTs for holding women sports
competitions at block, district and State levels.
 
Under the scheme of Sports Scholarships, there is a provision for giving special scholarships for women. Fifty (50)
scholarships @ Rs.1500/- per month are given to senior women champions per annum, 20 scholarships @ Rs.7, 500/- per
course are given to women doing diploma in sports coaching at SAI center; and 10 scholarships @ Rs.10,000/- per annum 
are given to women doing M.Phil / Ph. D. in physical education.   Instructions have been issued to various implementing
agencies to maintain gender-disaggregated data for effective monitoring of the gender analysis of various schemes.
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s move of issuing instructions to various implementing agencies to
maintain gender disaggregated data for effective monitoring of the gender based analysis of various youth as well as sports
schemes of the Ministry.  However, the Committee feels that Ministry's gesture in this direction should move further. An
exclusive Cell in the Ministry may act as a watchdog to oversee the progress made by the implementing agencies with
regard to funds being spent on the women component under various schemes. The Committee hopes that the budgetary
documents of the Ministry would reflect the gender component of allocations under different schemes. 
 
YOUTH PROGRAMMES
Recommendations/Observations
 
4.5       The Committee is of the opinion that for achieving these avowed objectives youth will have to be provided proper
education and training opportunities, access to information on employment opportunities including entrepreneurial
guidance and financial credit, proper platforms for developing qualities of leadership. Tolerance and open mindedness,
patriotism, etc. But with this financial performance, the Committee feels, the Ministry will hardly be able to achieve these
targets. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ministry to Play a more pro-active and catalytic role in optimally
utilizing the allocations in various youth-related schemes in the coming years.
 
Action Taken
 
A number of initiatives have been taken to empower youth through various schemes being implemented by the

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
Ministry.  A national inter-ministerial Committee has been set up under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (YA&S) for
preparation of draft National Plan of Action.  In this regard, a large number of proposals have been identified for
convergence of services and utilizing youth clubs for improving the outreach of these proposals for community
development in the country especially rural tribal areas.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Ministry has not shared the details of initiatives taken by them to empower the youth through its various
schemes. Even the details of the proposals identified by the Ministry for convergence of service and utilising youth clubs
for community development have not been mentioned.   Only specific action taken by the Ministry is the setting up of a
national inter-ministerial Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Youth Affairs & Sports) for preparation of
draft National Plan of Action.   The Committee is not aware about assessment if any, of youth scheme(s) initiated by this
Committee so far.   The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard.  The Committee emphasises upon the Ministry
to ensure that the task assigned to the Inter Ministerial Committee is executed within a stipulated time frame in order to
have the desired impact on various youth scheme.
 
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.3       The Committee notes that out of 500 posts of district youth coordinators, 134 posts are lying vacant.  The Ministry
has to expand activities to all the districts in the country.  The Committee finds the Ministry in the catch-22 situation. 
Funds have been reduced and there is ban on filling up the posts, let alone creating new posts.  Then, there is the target to
cover the remaining districts also.  The Committee is dismayed at the casual manner the scheme is being run with such a
less number of District Coordinators and how the targets were going to be achieved.  The NYKS having all India network,
the Committee feels, its volunteers can play vital role in areas like literacy, family welfare, health awareness, national
integration, gender equality etc. in rural areas.  The Committee feels very much concerned at the way this scheme is sought
to be implemented.  The Committee, therefore, recommends to initiate effective measures for improving the situation and
taking this scheme out of the morass it is presently in.
Action Taken
 
It is a fact that District Youth Coordinator (DYC) offices exist in 500 districts.   Out of these, a large number of
posts of Youth Coordinators are lying vacant.  Against these 134 vacancies, 47 Regional Coordinators have been posted as
a result of recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries in connection with the report of Expenditure Finance
Commission.  As on date, there are 97 vacancies of DYCs in these 500 districts.  There are vacancies but no sanctioned
posts available at present.
The additional charges of vacant offices have been given to the Regional Coordinators or Youth Coordinators of
the adjacent District Kendras.  With a view to expeditiously fill these posts with regularly recruited officers, the Ministry
has approved a proposal to create 97 posts and the proposal stands referred to Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure.  There is also a proposal to universatize the scheme in all districts of the country.  The proposal also seeks
approval of the Department of Expenditure in this regard.
 
Recommendation/Observations

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
 
6.4       Committee has been given to understand that a recruitment process to fill up the vacancies of District Youth
coordinators was initiated sometime back.  The Committee is not aware of the final outcome of the process.  The
Committee would like to have a status note on the same.
 
Action Taken
 
The posts of Youth Coordinators at District level were advertised in December, 1996.  Interviews etc. were also
been conducted in November, 1997.  However, the results were not declared and entire exercise was cancelled.  One of the
reasons for cancellation was the fact that the posts created by the Governing Body of the NYKS did not have the
mandatory approval of the Ministry of Finance.  At present there is also ban on recruitment in NYKS by the Ministry of
Finance.  The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance after implementing the recommendation of the
Expenditure Finance Committee.  There is a likelihood of sanction of posts and lifting of ban on the recruitment.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
6.3-6.4             The Committee expresses its unhappiness that a large number of posts of District Youth Coordinators are
lying vacant continuously for more than 8 years. Some posts were advertised in December 1996, interviews were also held
in November 1997 but the results were not declared and the entire recruitment exercise was cancelled on the ground that
the posts created by the Governing Body of Nehru Yuva Kendras (NYKs) did not have the mandatory approval of the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee is not ready to accept such reasoning given by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports. How can the Ministry afford to remain  all along ignorant of the functioning of Governing Body of NYKs which is
headed by the Minister of State of the Ministry? Somewhere some accountability needs to be accepted. The Committee
feels that the Ministry has failed to handle the issue. Here the Committee would like to reiterate that the Ministry would be
failing in achieving the targets with such a less number of District Coordinators. The Committee would like the Ministry to
seriously pursue its case for sanction of posts of District Coordinators and also lifting ban on their recruitment with the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee feels that the makeshift arrangements as done in some of districts by giving
additional charge to the Regional Coordinators would not work for a long period. The Committee opines that Ministry
should seriously endeavour for effective implementation and universalisation of NYKs schemes by appointing its
functionaries in all districts across the country.
 
NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION CORPS SCHEME (NRC)
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
7.2         The committee notices an element of ad-hocism as well as uncertainty about the scheme and urges the
Department to expedite its evaluation as well as decision to continue/discontinue this scheme at the earliest so that it could
be implemented timely and effectively.
 
Action Taken
 
7.2
              The National Reconstruction Corps Scheme (NRC) was launched as a pilot scheme for two years only, i.e. till
31.3.2003.   Based on detailed evaluation of the scheme and the experience gained, a new scheme has been formulated and

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
circulated to Ministry of Finance & Planning Commission.  The Scheme is likely to be considered for approval in January,
2005.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
7.2       The Committee’s attention has been drawn towards the prolonged process in taking a decision about the
continuance of the scheme of National Reconstruction Corps.  The Committee has been commenting on the under-
utilisation of funds allocated for the scheme for want of a decision.  The Committee is, however, distressed to note that
almost two years have elapsed since the completion of the Pilot Project on 31
st March, 2003 and the revised scheme is
awaiting approval from the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission.  The Committee observes that Rs.10.80 crores
earmarked for the scheme for 2004-05 would again remain under- utilised.  The Committee urges upon the Department to
expedite all the required formalities so that from 2005-06, the scheme is implemented in the true sense.
 
NATIONAL INTEGRATION PROGRAMME
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.3       The Committee observes that voluntary agencies play a vital role in organizing both National Integration Camp and
Inter-State Youth Exchange Programmes.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the assessment of work done by
them under these Programmes, specially of those agencies being allocated the maximum grants.
 
Action Taken
 
A system has been set up to monitor this Scheme at the field level.  While issuing the sanctions, a copy of the
sanction of funds to an NGO/Institution is invariably endorsed to the field functionaries of Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan
and National Service Scheme, advising them to monitor actual implementation of the programme and submit the report to
the Ministry.  The second installment of grant is released only after receipt of report from the above agencies confirming
that the grant has been properly utilized and for the purpose for which it was released.   It may be mentioned that a copy of
the sanction letter is also sent to the District Collectors.  In fact, all applications for assistance from NGOs are entertained
only after receiving the recommendations of the District Collector or State Government.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
8.3       The Committee in its last Report had specifically asked for details about assessment of the work done by NGOs
under the National Integration Camp and Inter-state Youth Exchange Programmes specially those getting the maximum
grants.    The Committee is surprised to note that instead of furnishing the information asked for, the Ministry has specified
the process of selecting NGOs for grants.   The Committee presumes that perhaps no assessment has been done so far.   If
that be so, the Committee takes a serious view thereof.
 
YOUTH HOSTELS
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
9.4       The Committee notes that performance of this scheme is not satisfactory, in view of the expenditure pattern in the
entire Ninth Plan period as well as 2003-04.  The fact that the allocation of the Ministry was reduced from Rs. 260 lakhs to
60 lakhs last year, gives an impression that this scheme was not given the priority that it deserved.  Just 85 youth Hostel
upto December 2003, in a country of continental dimensions, the Committee feels, is highly inadequate which needs to be

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
increased in the coming years.  The Committee notes that the spread of these 85 hostels state-wise is also highly uneven. 
In view of this, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must try to see that this scheme picks up and gets adequate
resources so that the pending projects are completed in time.  It is also necessary to fix physical target for this scheme
every year.
 
Action Taken
 
Since construction of youth hostel is a joint venture of the Central and State Government, the performance of the
scheme, to a large extent depends upon the initiatives taken by the concerned State Governments.  Besides 20 youth
hostels, which were under construction (upto December, 2003); this Ministry has already conveyed its approval in
principle for construction of 27 youth hostels.  However, the construction work has not yet been started as procedural
requirements like the preliminary estimates/drawings or handing over of the developed piece of land to the construction
agency are yet to be completed.  The annual physical targets for sanction of the resources would depend upon the initiative
of the State Governments.  However, based on estimates, targets would be fixed.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
9.4       The Committee has time and again been expressing its concern over the performance of the scheme of Youth
Hostels.   The Committee is aware that construction of youth hostels is a joint venture of Central and State Governments
but the plea of the Ministry that the performance of scheme to a large extent depends on the initiative of the State
Governments is not acceptable. The Committee is constrained to note that there seems to exist no system of monitoring the
progress made in the construction of youth hostels.  The information being given by the Ministry in December/January,
2005 that 20 youth hostels were under construction upto December, 2003 confirms Committee’s apprehensions.  The
Committee has not much hope about the fate of 20 youth hostels for which the Ministry has already conveyed its approval,
as a number of procedural requirements as listed by the Ministry are yet to be completed.  The Committee is of the view
that the Ministry has to take a more pro-active role by pursuing this matter with the concerned State Governments.
 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR YOUTH
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
10.2     The Committee gets an impression from what has been stated above that the Commission was not taken with due
seriousness although, it had laudable mandate.  Its initial tenure of six months, the Committee feels, was not realistic and
the Commission was not provided with the necessary wherewithal and assistance for starting its work in time.  The
Committee disapproves this ad-hocism
 as also the manner in which funds were arranged first by re-appropriation and then
from the Contingency Fund.  The Commission has since submitted its report after two years and four months, which it was
to submit within 6 months initially. The Committee expresses its unhappiness at the manner everything was done.
However, it would like to have a note on the report of the Commission at the earliest.
 
Action Taken
 
National Youth Commission has since been wound up w.e.f. 30.9.2004.  It has submitted its report in Sept., 2004. 
The Report has been placed on the Table of both he Houses of Parliament.  Recommendations of the Commission on
various issues are currently under examination.
 
Comments of the Committee

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
 
10.2     The Committee notes that the National Commission for Youth set up in March, 2002 for a period of six months to
study the problem of youth and suggest remedies has finally given its Report in September, 2004.   The Committee has
been informed that recommendations of the Commission are under the consideration of the Ministry.   The Committee
hopes that undue delay in submission of the Report of the Commission   would not occur in the process of implementation
of its recommendations.
 
XII.     NEW SCHEMES
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
12.1     The Committee came to know that two scheme: (i) Scheme for Welfare and Development of Adolescents and (ii)
Establishment of National/State Youth Centres were proposed to be implemented during the Tenth Five Year Plan. It is
surprising that till today both these schemes could not be implemented. An amount of Rs.90 lakh was made for the scheme
for welfare and Development of adolescent in BE 2002-2003; which remained unutilised. Despite this fact Rs.15.30 crore
was provided in 2003-2004,  which gains remained unutilised. Rs.6.30 crore has been provided for this scheme for 2004-
2005.
 
12.2     The Committee finds it appalling that the funds are being allocated for the scheme for welfare and development of
Adolescents for the last three financial years but these went unspent every year mainly because the scheme could not be
finalized.  Similar was the story of the proposed scheme of Establishment of National/State Youth Centres.  In this case
also the amount allocated since 2002-03, remained unutilized again because this scheme also could not be finalized till
today.  This reflects lack of foresight and planning in the Ministry.  The Committee deprecates this tendency of allocating
amounts even when the schemes were not finalized.  This is against the norms of fiscal discipline.  The Committee,
therefore, feels that Ministry should ask for allocations only after the finalization of the schemes. It, therefore,
recommends that these two schemes should be finalized and implemented without further delay and ensures that funds
provided are fully utilized.
 
Action Taken
 
The matter is being pursued but the approval is still awaited.    The scheme of Development and Empowerment of
Adolescents has already been approved and is under implementation.  The Scheme has been widely disseminated through
the State Governments and District Collectors.  A large number of NGOs & District Youth Coordinators from different
parts of the country have already been sanctioned projects/programmes worth Rs.2.5 crores during the current year.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 
The Committee notes that the Scheme for Welfare and Development of Adolescents targeted to be implemented in
Tenth Plan could be initiated in 2004-2005, i.e. third year of the Tenth Plan.   However, the fate of the other new scheme
‘Scheme for Establishment of National/State Youth Centres’ proposed to be initiated during Tenth Plan is still
undecided.    The Committee reiterates its recommendation that allocations of a particular new scheme should be made
only on completion of all procedural formalities. 
 
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR YOUTH DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD) 
 

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
Recommendations/Observations
 
13.2     The Committee notes with concern the pace of development of the Institute including the construction work which
is going on at a very slow speed. The Committee also notes that even the required complement of academic and other staff
were also not in place so far. The construction was held up due to dispute with the contractor. In view of the importance of
the mandate of the Institute in the area of youth development, the Committee recommends that all efforts be made to
ensure that RGNIYD was provided with faulty and other staff to enable it to fulfill its mandated function and objectives.
Initiatives also be taken to provide the physical infrastructure required for this premier Institute as early as possible.
Action Taken
 
The Ministry has a proposal for creation of four Academic divisions with 12 posts has been approved by the
Ministry of Finance on 3
rd November, 2004.  The posts have been advertised and are likely to be filled in during the
current financial year.  The problems relating to its construction work, involving contractual disputes, incomplete work
etc., have also been addressed adequately.  It has been decided to cancel the contract for construction with the present
contractor.  The arbitrator is being appointed.  The CPWD has been requested to prepare estimates for completion of the
incomplete work.  An auditorium at the cost of Rs.2 crores has also been sanctioned.  The work is expected to start soon.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee observes that some progress was made during 2004-05 to make the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute
for Youth Development functional.  Proposal for creation of four divisions with 12 posts has been approved by the
Ministry of Finance and these posts are likely to be filled up during the current financial year itself.  The Committee hopes
that all construction related problems would also be sorted out with the appointment of Arbitrator. The Committee would,
however, like to emphasise that efforts should be made to get all the construction work completed within a fixed time-
schedule, to avoid any increase in the project estimates.
 
NON-GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS (NGOs)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
14.2     Committee  appreciates the good work done by several NGOs it however feels concerned to note that such large
number of NGOs have failed to submit utilization certificates for years together.  The Committee further notes that even
then some NGOs were given funds for the subsequent years also.  The Committee is not aware of the circumstances under
which grants were released even without UCs given by them.  The Committee would like to know the action taken, if any,
against all the defaulting NGOs and the steps proposed/taken for ensuring timely submission of UCs by them.  The
Committee feels that extra care should be taken while selecting NGOs for giving grants the Ministry should not shy away
from taking deterrent action against the erring ones.  The Ministry should have a mechanism to have a regular monitoring
of the performance of the NGOs, including physical inspection.
 
Action Taken
 
At present, funds are not being released to NGOs who have not cleared their accounts and have not submitted U.Cs
for the grants sanctioned to them in the past.  The proposals of NGOs are considered by a Committee constituted for the
purpose.  Recently, a mechanism has also been evolved to obtain feed back from the field functionaries.   In some cases,
action has been initiated to blacklist the erring NGOs. The second instalment is released to NGOs after an inspection

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
report is received by the field authorities.
 
On sports side, funds are released to the National Sports Federations (NSFs) only after receipt of utilization
certificate and audited accounts pertaining to a similar event held in the past.  Funds are also released in instalments and
the second instalment is not released without obtaining UC and audited account in respect of the first instalment.
 
 Similarly, no further grant is being released to the NGO till UC of earlier grant is received.   The defaulting NGOs
have been asked to submit UCs, failing which deterrent action will be taken against them.  The NGOs seeking assistance
are required to forward their application along with the recommendation of the concerned District Magistrate/State Govt.
before their proposal is sanctioned and funds are released.  The Ministry’s autonomous organization i.e. NYKS and NSS
depute their field representatives to monitor the programmes sanctioned by the Ministry and on receipt of report from them
second installment of grant is considered for release.
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is at a loss to understand that despite a huge network of mechanism of feedback from the field
functionaries, the instances of non-submission of UCs by a large number of NGOs have not declined.  It seems that
monitoring reports to be submitted by field representatives of NYKS and NSS were not reaching the inspecting
authorities.   The Committee feels that this directive is being impressed upon only after Committee’s observations in this
matter.    The Committee is of the view that in the event of non-performance/non-compliance of prescribed norms by any
NGO; the matter should be taken up with the recommending authorities also.   The Committee also feels that there is a
need for taking deterrent action against non-performing NGOs to ensure better performance from other NGOs in the field.
Mere blacklisting them would not serve any propose.
 
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
16.3     The Committee, however, observes that in 2003-04 BE allocation of Rs. 110.50 crores had to be reduced to Rs.
98.50 crores in RE, whereas actual expenditure was only Rs. 97.00 crores.  The Committee feels that the pace of
expenditure of the SAI allocations does not present an encouraging picture.  The Committee would like the Ministry to
ensure optimum utilization of funds by the SAI for its programme in 2004-05.
 
Action Taken
 
The Budget Allocation of Rs.110.50 crore for the year 2003-04 was reduced to Rs.97.00 crore due to reason that
funds to the tune of Rs.35.00 crore were already available with SAI as unspent balance for the previous years.  Thus,
during the year 2003-04 though funds to the tune of Rs.97.00 crore were released from the Ministry, yet the actual
expenditure of SAI under different Plan Schemes was 115.82 crore.
 
As regard the utilization of funds during the year 2004-05, the instructions have been given to SAI to ensure that
there should be optimum utilization of funds on implementation of various plan schemes of SAI.
 
 

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
            Committee’s attention has been drawn towards under-utilisation of allocated funds to Sports Authority of India
during 2003-04.  The Committee is not convinced by the justification given by the Ministry in the matter.  It has been
informed that due to unspent balances of Rs.35.00 crore available with SAI from the previous year, budget allocation of
Rs. 110.50 crore  for 2003-04 was reduced to Rs. 97.00 crore and the actual expenditure was Rs.115.82 crore.  This clearly
indicates that unspent balances are still available with SAI.  The Committee expresses its serious concern over this state of
affairs.  The Committee apprehends that level of expenditure would continue to be the same in 2004-05 also.  The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that the Ministry should initiate stringent measures for streamlining the entire system.
 
SAI SUB-CENTRES
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
16.4     The Committee finds that the SAI Regional Centres at Sonepat, Gandhinagar, Bhopal, Kolkata, Imphal and
Bangalore are not evenly distributed as regards different regions in the country.  So is the case with the sub-centres also. 
The Committee feels that the creation of the regional as well as sub-centres should be based on performance of the region
as well as the States.  It appears that this has not been the case so far.
 
Action Taken
 
The selection of States for locating Regional Centres/Sub-Centres has been decided based on the geographical size
and population in each zone.  In the Governing Body meeting held in November 1987 it was decided to open six Regional
Centres at Bangalore, Gandhinagar, Calcutta, Chandigarh, Imphal and Delhi.  Since Delhi was having the head office of
SAI, the Central Regional Centre was relocated from Delhi to Bhopal for proper implementation of SAI Schemes.  For
opening of Central Regional Centre at Bhopal, the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh allotted 100 crores of land and a grant of
Rs.1.00 crore, as State Government share for creation of Sports infrastructure.
 
Similarly, Northern Regional Centre at Chandigarh is being shifted to Sonepat, keeping in view the insufficient
sports infrastructure available at Chandigarh.  For establishing the center at Sonepat, the Govt. of Haryana allotted 100
crores of land and its share of Rs.1.00 crores for creation of required sports infrastructure.  Hence, a decision was taken to
shift NSNC from Chandigarh to Sonipat.
Sports Authority of India is having a Sub-Centre at Guwahati.   In July, 2000 the Finance Committee has decided
to open four more Sub-Centres to strengthen the sports infrastructure in the country.  The four new sub-centres are being
opened at Nagercoil (Tamilnadu), Lucknow (UP), Hazaribagh (Jharkhand) and Jabalpur (Madhya Pradesh).
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
16.5     The Committee recommends that the construction work at sub-centre at Hazaribagh may be completed at the
earliest.  State government should be persuaded to hand over the land at a suitable place so that the construction of sub
Centre at Nagercoil could be initiated without further loss of time.
 
Action Taken
 
The work at Sub-Centre, Hazaribagh is being reviewed for early completion and drawings of the incomplete

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
portions are being approved.  However, Sub-Centre at Nagarcoil cannot be started as no land is available for construction
and earlier allotted land falls in Maritime Zone where no construction can take place.  The matter is being pursued with the
State Government.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee has been given to understand that selection of States for locating Regional Centres/Sub-centres has
been decided based on the geographical size and population in each zone.  If that be so, the Committee fails to understand
the reason for shifting Northern Regional Centre from Chandigarh to Sonepat.  Lack of insufficient sports infrastructure at
Chandigarh has been cited the reason behind such a decision.    The Committee expresses its reservation in this regard. 
The Committee feels that required land and funds being made available by a State is the real criteria.  The Committee is
perturbed to note that the four new sub-centres at Nagercoil (TN), Lucknow (UP), Hazaribagh (Jharkhand) and Jabalpur
(MP) are yet to be opened.  The Committee recommends that these centres should be opened and made functional at the
earliest.
 
SCHEME FOR DOPE TEST
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
16.7     In view of cases in Athens Olympics and earlier experience, the Committee notes that our weightlifters are most hit
by the scourge of doping.  Every time an Indian contingent prepares to leave the country for a mega event, doping tests are
hastily conducted and surprisingly they do not test positive here but fail the test in International events.
 
Action Taken
 
As per the WADA code of ethics, pre-departure testing is not permitted. Hence, it is mandatory for the Federations
to have a testing plan for the year. It is also required to send the samples at least fifteen days prior to the participation. The
details of the procedure have been sent to all the federations for compliance.
 
            As regards two recent cases of weightlifters are concerned, the role and responsibility of DCC starts from receiving
of sample.  DCC SAI is responsible for testing the sample.  There is a possibility that an athlete takes the drug after giving
the sample for dope testing.  For example Ms. Sanamachu, was tested positive for Furosemide, a short acting drug.  This
drug could have been taken either a day before or on the day of competition.  Again, Ms Pratima Kumari was tested
positive for testosterone.  This could be applied as gel, nasal spray, and cream just before the event.  It may also be
mentioned here that the testing of Ms. Pratima Kumari was also done by WADA in the month of July and was found
negative.  Due care is being taken that the sample which are received are tested as per the methods adopted by all
accredited Labs.  Process of sample collection is also being streamlined.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
16.8     The Committee was surprised to know that nobody seems to take the responsibility for the same.  Even the Sports
Ministry and SAI claim that it is not their duty to conduct dope tests on athletes who are under control of IOA and various
federations.  Federations have a ready-excuse about the high cost of conducting dope test.  Thus, at the end of the day
nobody is ready to own the responsibility for the bad name that a few athletes bring to the nation.
Action Taken (16.7-16.8)
 

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
All Federations are required to undertake testing of sports person as they are affiliated to international Federation,
who have signed the WADA Code.  It is the responsibility of the Federation to conduct test of sports person for ‘in’ and
‘out of competition’.  They are expected to have a plan for testing for the whole year.
 
It may be mentioned that Federations do not incur any cost of conducting dope test. Dope test for the disciplines
covered under the priority and general category under the Govt. guidelines are conducted free of cost under the Scheme
relating to Dope Test.  Most of Olympic disciplines are covered under the priority and general category.  Thus, NSF
cannot escape from their responsibility on the plea of ‘heavy costs’.  SAI has taken up various measures to spread
awareness and stop dope the menace among the Indian sports persons.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
16.7-16.8         The Committee takes a serious note of the explanation given by the Ministry regarding instances of our
sportspersons being tested positive for banned drugs. The Committee is distressed that while cases of doping are
increasing, the Ministry and its concerned agencies instead of owning the responsibilities, still continue to disown their
responsibility.  The Committee terms the situation very deplorable as ultimately the individual sports-person is held
responsible for having been tested positive in doping at international events. The Committee feels that if the Ministry is
really serious to combat the malaise of doping it should not even hesitate to de-recognise those Sports Federations who are
not getting the dope-testing of the athletes conducted as and when required.
 
Recommendation/Observations
 
16.9     The Committee feels extremely unhappy about the continuing indifference shown by all sports bodies – the
Ministry, IOA, Federations and the SAI about the serious malaise. They appear to be passing the buck to each other and no
serious attempt has been made so far by them to clean the mess that has plagued our sports persons.
 
16.10     The very fact that sportsperson after having been cleared by our test, get caught during the events shows how
rudimentary or outdated procedure we adopt about this testing.  It means lab at SAI does not have the necessary facility for
this test.  The Committee was informed that the procedure allows for tempering of the samples also.
 
16.11   The Committee, therefore, recommends that more sports scientists should be deputed by SAI to efficiently put all
sportspersons to dope testing.  It should evolve some mechanism so that the samples could not be tempered.  The entire
procedure should be transparent and the punishment has to be as per international norms.  Though there is a provision for
withdrawal of grants and facilities to the offender, but that of course, is rarely resorted to.  The Coaches and doctors of
Sportspersons testing positive should be made liable because during the training they are in-charge of their trainees. 
Blaming the sportsperson alone will not be fair.
 
Action Taken (16.9 – 16.11)
 
Dope Control Centre has got the necessary equipments for testing the samples. This can be collaborated with the
fact that in the last two years DCC has obtained ISO/IS 9001:2000 (December, 2002) and was able to achieve a mandatory
requirement of ISO/IEC 17025:1999 for permanent accreditation.  It is further pointed out that there all the methods to test
the various banned drugs as mentioned in the prohibited list issued by WADA have been developed and adopted.  These
methods have been developed with the help of Accredited Lab of WADA.  The testing is being conducted with due care
and is well documented.  The Surveillance Audit is being conducted by National Accredited Board for Laboratory

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
(NABL) for testing.  The Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India and their Lead Assessor had assessed the
functioning of the Laboratory.   The last surveillance audit was conducted by NABL in the month of June, 2004 and it was
a great pride for DCC that not even a single non-conformity was observed by the Technical Assessor of NABL. Thus, the
DCC has been following all the methods approved by WADA and is in tune with the WADA International Standard of
Laboratory Version 4 (Aug 2004).     As regards the procedure for tempering with the sample is concerned, the same is
well documented.  Due care is taken that the sample is not tampered and is not known to anyone except the person who is
authorized to handle the custody of the sample.  The samples are received in a sealed condition and are stored in deep
freezer in a controlled temperature.   These codes are further decoded and are given to the analyst for sample preparation.
There are only three persons in the Lab. who have the knowledge of the assigned Lab. Codes.  Further, all the staff of
DCC, has given an undertaking that they would maintain the secrecy and confidentiality regarding drug testing of samples
and other issues. The procedure being adopted by this Lab. is same as being followed by all other accredited Lab.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
16.16   The Committee agrees with the Ministry that sporting standards in country have not declined.  It, however, believes
that it cannot be said to have improved either.  Our performance in international sports is not at all satisfactory and
commensurate with the size of our country as well as the population.
 
Action Taken
 
Over the years, the performance of Indian sportspersons in Olympics has been improving.  In 1996 and 2000 India
won only a bronze medal.  No medal could be won in 1984 and 1988 Olympics.  Moreover, during the Athens Olympic
Games, 2004 in the disciplines of Archery, Shooting and Weightlifting Indian sportspersons were very close to medals and
in the disciplines of Athletics they created new national records.  During Athens Olympic Games, Indian sportsperson
Major R.V.S. Rathore won a silver medal in shooting.  This is the first silver medal won by an individual sports person
since India’s independence.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee feels that despite all claims of the Ministry about the documentation of samples in DCC, SAI labs, it
remains a matter of examination for all sports administrations including the Ministry as to whether the procedure as well as
the facilities for testing the samples actually meet the international standards as approved by WADA. The increasing cases
of doping by our sports persons put a question-mark on such procedures and documentations. It is understood that the
issue of permanent accreditation of DCC, SAI is under consideration of WADA. The Committee feels that this is the right
time to get our facilities accredited for international level of testing. The issue of permanent accreditation assumes great
significance. The doping issue is to be seriously debated in the context of coaches particularly the foreign coaches who
have been pin pointed for their connivance with the doping testing authorities at international level. The Committee would,
therefore, reiterate that the coaches as well as doctors of sports persons who are incharge of their training, need to be made
equally accountable. The Committee would also impress upon the Government to depute more sport scientists at DCC,
SAI.
            The Committee finds it quite disturbing that no concrete efforts have been made to streamline selection criteria of
sports persons at the international level. The fact that we could win only one Bronze medal in 1996, one Bronze medal in
2000 and a silver medal in recent Olympic games indicates the level of sports and the selection of sports persons in our
country. In a country of more than 1000 million people, the performance of our sportsmen continues to be very

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
discouraging at the international level. The Committee, therefore, emphasises upon streamlining the entire selection
criteria of our sports persons to get better results in future. For that matter, the participant sportspersons for the next Asian
Games, Olympics and even Commonwealth games in 2010 should be selected without further delay.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
16.17   The Committee is of the opinion that training is the core aspect of good performance.  Rigorous training for years
together for producing champions is required.  The Committee opines that sports training should be properly planned and
managed for getting the best results.  The Committee recommends to draw-out scientific training modules for our
sportsperson in different disciplines after consulting coaches, federations and experts in fields like sports medicine and
sports psychology.
 
Action Taken
 
In order to expand and streamline the sports promotional scheme, the following new initiatives have been taken
through Sports Authority of India:
 
1.       Adoption of schools for promotion of indigenous games/material art - SAI has adopted 27 schools in the country
during 2002-03.
 
2.       Promotion of sports in remote and rural areas and to provide an opportunity to village children to under go sports
training. – SAI has adopted 24 Navodhya Vidhyalayas during 2002-03.  Approval of Finance Committee of SAI has
also been obtained to adopt 25 more Navodhya Vidhyalayas during 2004-05.  By the end of 10 th plan under this
scheme 100 Navodhya Vidhyalayas will be adopted.
 
 
3.
       Promotion of Wrestling in the country- In order to create a broader base for modern wrestling and supplement the
efforts made by various Akharas in the country, SAI has adopted 16 Akharas during 2002 to 2004 and also provided
financial assistance to up coming 29 Akharas for equipment support.
 
4.
       This year another eight Army Boys Sports Companies (ABSCs) with an intake capacity of 1000 boys has been
sanctioned.  Para-military forces have also been requested to raise boy’s companies on the ABSC pattern.
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee appreciates the initiative for adoption of 27 schools for promotion of indigenous games/martial art
and Navodaya Vidayalas for providing opportunity to the aspiring rural children to undergo sports training. The
Committee, however, fails to understand the linkages of the new initiatives taken through Sports Authority of India with
the scientific training modules. Even crucial issues like sports medicine and sports psychology have also been not
addressed in the reply. The Committee would like to be apprised about the training modules framed to achieve best results
at international level. There should not be any difficulty in exploring the training modules being implemented in other
neighbouring countries like China, Japan, Korea etc.
 
GRANTS FOR PROMOTION SPORTS IN UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
18.3     The Committee observes that allocation as well as expenditure under this scheme has increased over the years due

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
to receipt of more and more proposals.  It was able to utilize Rs. 32.78 crores as against Rs. 23.11 crores allocated during
the Ninth Plan.  The Committee urges the Ministry to see that proposals received were processed and grant released within
minimum possible time so that pace of its implementation is not broken.  The Committee is, however, not satisfied with
the coverage of colleges and universities under the scheme.  It appears that proposals are coming from a few States, its
benefit, therefore, are not reaching to other States.  The Ministry should take upon the responsibility of encouraging
universities/colleges from the areas where from the proposals are less or are not coming at all.
 
Action Taken
Proposals found in order under this scheme are immediately placed before the GIA Committee for consideration.
Proposals approved by the GIAC are processed for release of grant in the case of purchase of non consumable sports
equipment and 75% of the approved grant is directly released to the Universities/Colleges concerned after getting the
approval from the Finance Unit of the Ministry within a minimum possible time. In the case of infrastructure viz, Indoor
Stadium, Playfields etc. the case for release of grant is processed immediately on receipt of the Progress Report, audited
accounts & photographs etc. from the Universities/Colleges.
 
            Under these Schemes of the Ministry, the initiative has to come from the State Government/Universities /Colleges
as they submit the proposals under the scheme to avail admissible Central assistance. Government of India on its own
cannot provide assistance to colleges Universities without receiving the proposals from the Universities/Colleges of the
State.  The schemes have been brought to the notice of various state functionaries during touring by the Ministry’s officers
to the state and state officers’ visits to the Ministry.  The details about the scheme have also been placed on the web site of
the Ministry with a view to provide wider dissemination of information.  It has also been decided to write to the Vice-
Chancellors of various recognized Central Universities to bring to their notice the existence of this Scheme.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee welcomes the initiative taken by the Ministry to bring to the notice of the VCs of various
recognized Central Universities the existence of the scheme of grant to colleges/Universities.  However, the Committee
would like the Ministry to pursue the matter constantly with the State Governments to take benefit from the scheme.
 
GRANTS FOR INSTALLATION OF SYNTHETIC SURFACE
 
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
19.3     The Committee notes with serious concern that the decrease during these years was due to non-receipt of accounts
and required documents from the grantees.  The Committee is apprehensive whether the allocation for 2004-05 will also be
utilized.  As per the trend during the previous years, it appears difficult, if not impossible.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry must try and get all the pending UCs and documents cleared before the close of the financial
year.  In view of large number of pending UCs and non-completion of required documents, the Committee feels, there is
apparently some problem in the formalities to be completed by the grantees.  The Committee feels that this is a strong case
for review, with a view to resolving the problems.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the number of projects
completed under the scheme during the last three years (State-wise).
 
Action Taken

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
 
It is a fact that out of the 44 projects approved since 1998-1999, only 13 projects have so far been completed. The
Synthetic track/surface materials are not available in India and, are required to be imported from abroad. The total cost of
these surfaces is around Rs.2.50 crores. The concerned State Government/grantee find it difficult to arrange for their
committed share as per the stipulated ratio. The Central assistance is restricted to Rs. one crore for laying synthetic athletic
track or artificial Hockey Surfaces.  This results in delays in completing the work and consequentially in availing
sanctioned Central assistance. All the State Government/grantees are reminded from time to time to submit the Progress
Report, Utilisation Certificates etc so that the project could be got completed expeditiously. The Scheme was reviewed in
the Ministry and it has been decided that the Central assistance be increased from the existing ceiling limit of Rs.1.00 crore
to Rs.1.50 crore in the revised Sports Infrastructure scheme under process with a view to ease the financial problem being
faced by the applicant States.
 
            As desired by the Committee, the State-wise details of projects completed under the scheme during the last 3 years
is enclosed. (Annexure)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
19.3     It is surprising to note that 31 out of 44 projects approved since 1998-1999 have not been completed as some of the
State Governments/Grantees could not submit the UCs, progress reports etc.  The Committee hopes that the revised rates
of central assistance would lessen the financial burden of State Govts and ease the problem to some extent.  The
Committee while reiterating its earlier recommendation would like the Ministry to expedite finalisation of projects which
otherwise may keep on piling ultimately affecting the performance of our sportspersons. The Committee appreciates the
proposed upward revision of funds under the revised Sports Infrastructure Scheme.
 
PROMOTION OF SPORTS AND GRANTS IN SCHOOLS
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
20.3     The Committee takes a serious view of the casual manner in which this scheme meant for the school games is
being implemented. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should vigorously pursue procurement of
pending UCs and also try to simplify the procedure for it with a view to encouraging States to come forward and send
proposals.
 
Action Taken
 
Over the years, the State/UTs have been urged to submit their proposals for receiving grants under the scheme. 
The Ministry has also issued several letters to the States / UTs for submission of Utilization Certificates of previously
released grants.  However, the response of States/ UTs had not been very encouraging.   There were also instances of some
States/ UTs having refunded the money after 2-3 years of non-utilization. However, the scheme has been revised during
2003-04 and is being implemented through the Sports Authority of India. The scale of assistance has also been revised. 
These initiatives are expected to help to improve the performance under the scheme considerably during the current year. 
The issue of pending utilizations will be taken up in the conference of State sports Ministers and a strategy to procure UCs
will be worked out as suggested by the Committee.
 

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
Comments of the Committee
 
20.3     The Committee feels that non-utilization of funds by States is not a recent development. Instead the Committee has
been pointing out problems time and again but no concrete efforts seems to be done by the Ministry as the situation has not
improved.  The Committee would like to be  apprised about the outcome of the Conference of State Sports Ministers and
the follow up action taken by the Ministry with regard thereto.
 
ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
22.8     The Committee would like to mention about the alleged non-submission of UCs by some sports federations that
has become a recurrent feature and the Ministry has not been able to tackle the problem.  Besides, statement of accounts is
also not being published by some sports federations.  The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure the financial
accountability of these federations.  The Committee is surprised at the silence  maintained by the Ministry on this aspect. 
This approach ultimately would hamper the development of sports.  The Committee would like the Ministry to adopt more
pro-active approach in these matters.
Action Taken
 
As per prevalent practice funds are released to the NSFs only after receipt of utilization certificate and audited
accounts pertaining to similar event held in the past.  Funds are released in installments and the second installment is not
released without obtaining UC and audited account in respect of the first installment.  This has streamlined the system of
assistance to the National Sports Federations.
 
In order to ensure that the Federations publish their accounts regularly, the issue was discussed in the meetings held
with the various Federations at the level of Hon’ble Minister.
 
However, all the National Sports Federations have also been addressed in this regard and implementations of these
guidelines are being reviewed from time to time.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is not satisfied with the state of affairs prevailing in the sports federations.  The Committee feels
that the efforts made by the Ministry with regard to ensure the financial accountability has not yielded any results.  The
Committee emphasises that these sports federations, registered under the Societies Act, are duty bound to file their
accounts.  The money they spend is the public money, and therefore, it is obligatory on their part to publish these
accounts.  They should therefore, not only file their annual accounts but also reflect the funds released to them by Central
Government as well as money received from other sources.  Errant federations should be de-recognised.
 
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
4.3       The Committee notes with concern that the allocation for youth welfare schemes could not be utilized during the

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
entire Ninth Plan period, despite the fact that the main thrust of the Ninth Plan was on harnessing the Yuva Shakti.  Tenth
Plan outlay for Youth Welfare Schemes has substantially increased to Rs. 677.64 crores, as compared to only Rs. 352.24
crores in Ninth Plan.  The Committee, however, observes that position remains unchanged during the first two years of
Tenth Plan.  During 2002-2003, against an allocation of Rs. 106.98 crores, expenditure incurred was Rs. 98.70 crores. 
Enhanced allocation of Rs. 121.98 crores in BE 2003-04 had to be reduced to Rs. 82.20 crores at the RE state and even
that remained underutilized.  Low utilization of funds, the Committee feels, should be viewed seriously because it reflects
nothing but the lack of sincerity and determination in implementing the Youth Welfare Schemes.
 
OBSERVATONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
.
GENDER BUDGET ANALYAIS OF BUDGET ALLOCTIONS
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s move of issuing instructions to various implementing agencies to
maintain gender disaggregated data for effective monitoring of the gender based analysis of various youth as well as sports
schemes of the Ministry.  However, the Committee feels that Ministry's gesture in this direction should move further. An
exclusive Cell in the Ministry may act as a watchdog to oversee the progress made by the implementing agencies with
regard to funds being spent on the women component under various schemes. The Committee hopes that the budgetary
documents of the Ministry would reflect the gender component of allocations under different schemes.  (Para 3.2)
 
YOUTH PROGRAMMES
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Ministry has not shared the details of initiatives taken by them to empower the youth through its various
schemes. Even the details of the proposals identified by the Ministry for convergence of service and utilising youth clubs
for community development have not been mentioned.   Only specific action taken by the Ministry is the setting up of a
national inter-ministerial Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Youth Affairs & Sports) for preparation of
draft National Plan of Action.   The Committee is not aware about assessment if any, of youth scheme(s) initiated by this
Committee so far.   The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard.  The Committee emphasises upon the Ministry
to ensure that the task assigned to the Inter Ministerial Committee is executed within a stipulated time frame in order to
have the desired impact on various youth scheme. (Para 3.3)
 
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee expresses its unhappiness that a large number of posts of District Youth Coordinators are lying
vacant continuously for more than 8 years. Some posts were advertised in December 1996, interviews were also held in
November 1997 but the results were not declared and the entire recruitment exercise was cancelled on the ground that the
posts created by the Governing Body of Nehru Yuva Kendras (NYKs) did not have the mandatory approval of the

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
Ministry of Finance. The Committee is not ready to accept such reasoning given by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports. How can the Ministry afford to remain  all along ignorant of the functioning of Governing Body of NYKs which is
headed by the Minister of State of the Ministry? Somewhere some accountability needs to be accepted. The Committee
feels that the Ministry has failed to handle the issue. Here the Committee would like to reiterate that the Ministry would be
failing in achieving the targets with such a less number of District Coordinators. The Committee would like the Ministry to
seriously pursue its case for sanction of posts of District Coordinators and also lifting ban on their recruitment with the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee feels that the makeshift arrangements as done in some of districts by giving
additional charge to the Regional Coordinators would not work for a long period. The Committee opines that Ministry
should seriously endeavour for effective implementation and universalisation of NYKs schemes by appointing its
functionaries in all districts across the country. (Para 6.3-6.4)
 
NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION CORPS SCHEME (NRC)
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
7.2       The Committee’s attention has been drawn towards the prolonged process in taking a decision about the
continuance of the scheme of National Reconstruction Corps.  The Committee has been commenting on the under-
utilisation of funds allocated for the scheme for want of a decision.  The Committee is, however, distressed to note that
almost two years have elapsed since the completion of the Pilot Project on 31
st March, 2003 and the revised scheme is
awaiting approval from the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission.  The Committee observes that Rs.10.80 crores
earmarked for the scheme for 2004-05 would again remain under- utilised.  The Committee urges upon the Department to
expedite all the required formalities so that from 2005-06, the scheme is implemented in the true sense. (Para 7.2)
 
NATIONAL INTEGRATION PROGRAMME
 
Comments of the Committee
 
8.3       The Committee in its last Report had specifically asked for details about assessment of the work done by NGOs
under the National Integration Camp and Inter-state Youth Exchange Programmes specially those getting the maximum
grants.    The Committee is surprised to note that instead of furnishing the information asked for, the Ministry has specified
the process of selecting NGOs for grants.   The Committee presumes that perhaps no assessment has been done so far.   If
that be so, the Committee takes a serious view thereof. (Para 8.3)
 
YOUTH HOSTELS
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
9.4       The Committee has time and again been expressing its concern over the performance of the scheme of Youth
Hostels.   The Committee is aware that construction of youth hostels is a joint venture of Central and State Governments
but the plea of the Ministry that the performance of scheme to a large extent depends on the initiative of the State
Governments is not acceptable. The Committee is constrained to note that there seems to exist no system of monitoring the
progress made in the construction of youth hostels.  The information being given by the Ministry in December/January,
2005 that 20 youth hostels were under construction upto December, 2003 confirms Committee’s apprehensions.  The

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
Committee has not much hope about the fate of 20 youth hostels for which the Ministry has already conveyed its approval,
as a number of procedural requirements as listed by the Ministry are yet to be completed.  The Committee is of the view
that the Ministry has to take a more pro-active role by pursuing this matter with the concerned State Governments. (Para
9.4)
 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR YOUTH
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
10.2     The Committee notes that the National Commission for Youth set up in March, 2002 for a period of six months to
study the problem of youth and suggest remedies has finally given its Report in September, 2004.   The Committee has
been informed that recommendations of the Commission are under the consideration of the Ministry.   The Committee
hopes that undue delay in submission of the Report of the Commission   would not occur in the process of implementation
of its recommendations. (Para 10.2)
 
XII.     NEW SCHEMES
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 
The Committee notes that the Scheme for Welfare and Development of Adolescents targeted to be implemented in
Tenth Plan could be initiated in 2004-2005, i.e. third year of the Tenth Plan.   However, the fate of the other new scheme
‘Scheme for Establishment of National/State Youth Centres’ proposed to be initiated during Tenth Plan is still
undecided.    The Committee reiterates its recommendation that allocations of a particular new scheme should be made
only on completion of all procedural formalities.  (Para 12.2)
 
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR YOUTH DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee observes that some progress was made during 2004-05 to make the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute
for Youth Development functional.  Proposal for creation of four divisions with 12 posts has been approved by the
Ministry of Finance and these posts are likely to be filled up during the current financial year itself.  The Committee hopes
that all construction related problems would also be sorted out with the appointment of Arbitrator. The Committee would,
however, like to emphasise that efforts should be made to get all the construction work completed within a fixed time-
schedule, to avoid any increase in the project estimates. (Para 13.2)
 
NON-GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS (NGOs)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is at a loss to understand that despite a huge network of mechanism of feedback from the field
functionaries, the instances of non-submission of UCs by a large number of NGOs have not declined.  It seems that
monitoring reports to be submitted by field representatives of NYKS and NSS were not reaching the inspecting
authorities.   The Committee feels that this directive is being impressed upon only after Committee’s observations in this
matter.    The Committee is of the view that in the event of non-performance/non-compliance of prescribed norms by any

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
NGO; the matter should be taken up with the recommending authorities also.   The Committee also feels that there is a
need for taking deterrent action against non-performing NGOs to ensure better performance from other NGOs in the field.
Mere blacklisting them would not serve any propose.  (Para 14.2)
 
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
            Committee’s attention has been drawn towards under-utilisation of allocated funds to Sports Authority of India
during 2003-04.  The Committee is not convinced by the justification given by the Ministry in the matter.  It has been
informed that due to unspent balances of Rs.35.00 crore available with SAI from the previous year, budget allocation of
Rs. 110.50 crore  for 2003-04 was reduced to Rs. 97.00 crore and the actual expenditure was Rs.115.82 crore.  This clearly
indicates that unspent balances are still available with SAI.  The Committee expresses its serious concern over this state of
affairs.  The Committee apprehends that level of expenditure would continue to be the same in 2004-05 also.  The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that the Ministry should initiate stringent measures for streamlining the entire system.
(Para 16.3)
 
SAI SUB-CENTRES
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee has been given to understand that selection of States for locating Regional Centres/Sub-centres has
been decided based on the geographical size and population in each zone.  If that be so, the Committee fails to understand
the reason for shifting Northern Regional Centre from Chandigarh to Sonepat.  Lack of insufficient sports infrastructure at
Chandigarh has been cited the reason behind such a decision.    The Committee expresses its reservation in this regard. 
The Committee feels that required land and funds being made available by a State is the real criteria.  The Committee is
perturbed to note that the four new sub-centres at Nagercoil (TN), Lucknow (UP), Hazaribagh (Jharkhand) and Jabalpur
(MP) are yet to be opened.  The Committee recommends that these centres should be opened and made functional at the
earliest. (Para 16.4& 16.5)
 
SCHEME FOR DOPE TEST
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
            The Committee takes a serious note of the explanation given by the Ministry regarding instances of our
sportspersons being tested positive for banned drugs. The Committee is distressed that while cases of doping are
increasing, the Ministry and its concerned agencies instead of owning the responsibilities, still continue to disown their
responsibility.  The Committee terms the situation very deplorable as ultimately the individual sports-person is held
responsible for having been tested positive in doping at international events. The Committee feels that if the Ministry is
really serious to combat the malaise of doping it should not even hesitate to de-recognise those Sports Federations who are
not getting the dope-testing of the athletes conducted as and when required. (Para 16.7 & 16.8)
 

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee feels that despite all claims of the Ministry about the documentation of samples in DCC, SAI labs,
it remains a matter of examination for all sports administrations including the Ministry as to whether the procedure as well
as the facilities for testing the samples actually meet the international standards as approved by WADA. The increasing
cases of doping by our sports persons put a question-mark on such procedures and documentations. It is understood that
the issue of permanent accreditation of DCC, SAI is under consideration of WADA. The Committee feels that this is the
right time to get our facilities accredited for international level of testing. The issue of permanent accreditation assumes
great significance. The doping issue is to be seriously debated in the context of coaches particularly the foreign coaches
who have been pin pointed for their connivance with the doping testing authorities at international level. The Committee
would, therefore, reiterate that the coaches as well as doctors of sports persons who are incharge of their training, need to
be made equally accountable. The Committee would also impress upon the Government to depute more sport scientists at
DCC, SAI.
            The Committee finds it quite disturbing that no concrete efforts have been made to streamline selection criteria of
sports persons at the international level. The fact that we could win only one Bronze medal in 1996, one Bronze medal in
2000 and a silver medal in recent Olympic games indicates the level of sports and the selection of sports persons in our
country. In a country of more than 1000 million people, the performance of our sportsmen continues to be very
discouraging at the international level. The Committee, therefore, emphasises upon streamlining the entire selection
criteria of our sports persons to get better results in future. For that matter, the participant sportspersons for the next Asian
Games, Olympics and even Commonwealth games in 2010 should be selected without further delay. (Para 16.16)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee appreciates the initiative for adoption of 27 schools for promotion of indigenous games/martial art
and Navodaya Vidayalas for providing opportunity to the aspiring rural children to undergo sports training. The
Committee, however, fails to understand the linkages of the new initiatives taken through Sports Authority of India with
the scientific training modules. Even crucial issues like sports medicine and sports psychology have also been not
addressed in the reply. The Committee would like to be apprised about the training modules framed to achieve best results
at international level. There should not be any difficulty in exploring the training modules being implemented in other
neighbouring countries like China, Japan, Korea etc.  (Para 16.17)
 
GRANTS FOR PROMOTION SPORTS IN UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee welcomes the initiative taken by the Ministry to bring to the notice of the VCs of various
recognized Central Universities the existence of the scheme of grant to colleges/Universities.  However, the Committee
would like the Ministry to pursue the matter constantly with the State Governments to take benefit from the scheme.  (Para
18.3)
GRANTS FOR INSTALLATION OF SYNTHETIC SURFACE
 
Comments of the Committee
            It is surprising to note that 31 out of 44 projects approved since 1998-1999 have not been completed as some of the
State Governments/Grantees could not submit the UCs, progress reports etc.  The Committee hopes that the revised rates

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
of central assistance would lessen the financial burden of State Govts and ease the problem to some extent.  The
Committee while reiterating its earlier recommendation would like the Ministry to expedite finalisation of projects which
otherwise may keep on piling ultimately affecting the performance of our sportspersons. The Committee appreciates the
proposed upward revision of funds under the revised Sports Infrastructure Scheme.  (Para 19.3)
 
PROMOTION OF SPORTS AND GRANTS IN SCHOOLS
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee feels that non-utilization of funds by States is not a recent development. Instead the Committee has
been pointing out problems time and again but no concrete efforts seems to be done by the Ministry as the situation has not
improved.  The Committee would like to be  apprised about the outcome of the Conference of State Sports Ministers and
the follow up action taken by the Ministry with regard thereto.  (Para 20.3)
 
ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
 
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is not satisfied with the state of affairs prevailing in the sports federations.  The Committee feels
that the efforts made by the Ministry with regard to ensure the financial accountability has not yielded any results.  The
Committee emphasises that these sports federations, registered under the Societies Act, are duty bound to file their
accounts.  The money they spend is the public money, and therefore, it is obligatory on their part to publish these
accounts.  They should therefore, not only file their annual accounts but also reflect the funds released to them by Central
Government as well as money received from other sources.  Errant federations should be de-recognised. (Para 22.8)
MINUTES
 
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
 
            The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 22
nd  March 2005, in Room
No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
4. Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
5.      Shri S. Anbalagan
6. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri Basudeb Barman

157th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/157threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:22:30]
8. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
9. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
10. Shri R. L. Jalappa
11. Shri Ramswarup Koli
12. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
13. Shri Manoj Kumar
14. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
15. Shri Tukaram Ganpatrao Rengepatil
16. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
17. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
18. Shri Tufani Saroj
19. Smt. P. Satheedevi
20. Shri A.R. Shaheen
21. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
22. Shri K. Virupaxappa
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
 
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the 157
th Action taken Report on the recommendations/observations
contained in 152nd Report on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) in respect of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and
adopted the same.
 
3.         The Committee decided that the Report may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha on Wednesday, the 23 rd March 2005.  The Committee authorized Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad, M.P and in his
absence, Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah, M.P. to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Basudeb Barman, M.P.
and in his absence Shri Manjunath Kunnur, M.P.  to lay the Report in the Lok Sabha. 
           
4.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.50 a.m. to meet again at 10.30 a.m. on Wednesday, the 30th March 2005.