PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTIETH REPORT
ON

THE NETAJI BHAWAN
CALCUTTA

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 03.12.96)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 03.12.96)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 1996/Agrahayana, 1918 (Saka)



PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTIETH REPORT
ON

THE NETAJI BHAWAN
CALCUTTA

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 03.12.96)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 03.12.96)

pe

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 1996/Agrahayana, 1918 (Saka)

950RS — 1A


CONTENTS

2७685
(COMPOSITION COMMITTEE. ...0.0<00sviscnsvesesceresseseesssesanesneueaccsusdugeauawesseswenens (i)
IPREFAGE bs oc ccwawannwonenewsrane cece usnnadunasetsstusasersswsnssesecantanesavsseseeeassseeseesesees’ (iii)
REPORT is ccsecowsaswuszsrecesanseg vaseest sh yareaveasewscssewsssseevewseenvveneenavavesseneeeaveseees 1-2
DENNIS Eb AU) 1 2a Ue eon मा नम मा मा या CERISE TPCT 3
PEO nc ire egdagncy | ew ces eee ze जुगाड़: मई 3 wee we 2p ee


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1996-97)

1. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Dr. B.B. Dutta
4. Dr. M. Aram
5. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik
6. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
7. Shri Raj Nath Singh
8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
9. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
10. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
11. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharti Ray
12. Shri R. Margabandu
13. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
14, Dr. Mohan Babu
15. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA
16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
17. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
18. Shri Sartaj Singh
19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Shri Jai Prakash
21. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
22. Shrimati Divya Singh
23. Shri Mahant Abedyanath
24. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
25. Chaudhary .Paragi Lal
26. Dr. C. Silvera
27. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
28. Shri Dutta Meghe
29. Shri I. G. Sanadi
30. Shrimati Krishna Bose
31. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao
32. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
33. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi
34, Shri Pawan Diwan
35. Shri Krishna
36. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
37. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
38. Shri Samik Lahiri
39. Shri S.K. Karvendhan
40. Shri Mukhtar Anees
41. Dr. M. Jagannath
42. Dr. Bali Ram

0)

95075 — 2 a


(ii)

43. Shri Ranen Barman
44, Shri Surender Singh
45. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer.

950RS -- 2 B


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fiftieth Report of the Committee on the Netaji
Bhawan, Calcutta.

2. A Study Group of the Departmental-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development visited Netaji Bhawan, Calcutta on 10th October, 1996 to
have a first-hand information on the activities of Netaji Research Bureau engaged in the task
of study, research and enquiry about Netaji’s life of profound experience and super-human
struggle and all round development of Netaji Bhawan. A list of Members who visited Netaji
Bhawan is enclosed as Annexure.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the 27th

November, 1996. न
New छएिहाजा; S. 8. CHAVAN
November 27, 1996. . Chairman,

Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development.

Agrahayana 6, 1918 (Saka)

(iii)


REPORT

1. NETAJI BHAWAN, Calcutta, the ancestral house of Subhas Chandra Bose was
dedicated to the nation on 23rd January, 1947 by Sarat Chandra Bose. The Netaji Museum,
established in 1961 by Netaji Research Bureau, is a full-fledged biographical museum of vast
material on the life of Netaji collected from all parts of the world. Thi: museum is a store
house of inspiration and enlightenment for the people of this country.

2. Netaji Bhawan, with its traditional pillars and porticos, gives the appearance of a
typical early 20th century Bengali residential house. A marble plague, bearing the name of
IN Bose, Netaji’s father, decorates the front entrance. A fine profile of Netaji’s face draws
the attention of the visitors at the entrance gate. In the main portico stands a replica in red
stone of the stately ILN.A. Martyrs Memorial Column with the I.N.A. motto inscribed on it.

3. On the top floor of the Netaji Bhawan, Netaji’s cot, clock, clothes, shoes and Gita
have been preserved in the room where Netaji used to stay. Netaji's office-room during the
period of his Congress Presidentship is still painted in the hues of the Indian tricolour. His
working-desk, revolving chair, book-almirahs, etc. are preserved in-tact. The Netaji Bhawan
contains a treasure of numerous photographs, documents and articles relating to Netaji’s life.
The uniform donned by Netaji as G.O.C. of the Volunteer Corps at Calcutta in 1928, his
original passport and some rare antiques brought by him from Burma are among the
valuable exhibits. Warm clothings used by Netaji in Europe are kept in a show-case. Postage
stamps printed by Free India Centre, Azad Hind journals and Hindusthani translations of
German military texts are some of the interesting things to be seen.

4. The Freedom Library with marvellous collections of books on India’s Freedom
Struggle forms an integral part of the Museum. Books, periodicals and documents are being
collected to cover the entire freedom movement of India since 1857. The archives of the
Bureau consist of almost all published works of and on Netaji in various languages, a large
collection of letters covering his entire life, an extensive compilation of his speeches and
writing and journals, newspapers and other source material relating to Netaji. A scheme of
publishing Netaji’s work has been taken up by the Netaji Research Bureau with the
assistance of the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Education,
Government of India and nine such volumes have already been released. The remaining
volumes should also be completed before the commencement of Netaji Centenary Celebra-
tion year, i.e. 1997 which also happens to be the 500 year of India’s Independence or at
least efforts should be made to publish rest of the volumes during the centenary year.

5. Modern microfilm reader has since been installed in the Library and relevant
documents have been obtained in microfilm from other organisations and countries,
particularly from German and Japanese foreign offices. Films and voice and music tapes also
constitute part of the archives. The Bureau has also made one documentary film on Netaji
which was shown to the Committee at the time of its visit. The Committee was informed
that film shows, specially historical documentary on Netaji and the Indian struggle for
freedom are regular feature of the programmes of Netaji Museum.

6. The Committee was also informed that Netaji Research Bureau has, through the
years, planned and executed on scientific lines the all round development of Netaji Bhawan.
The rich museum, library and archives are recognised as the first and one of the best of their
kinds. In short, Netaji Research Bureau has grown up to be an impressive National Institute
of History and Politics.

9SORS — 3


2

7. The Committee was informed that Netaji Research Bureau plans to celebrate Netaji
Subhas Chandra Bose Centenary in a befitting manner. As part of the centenary
celebrations, Netaji Research Bureau plans to create Netaji Museum a unique institution of
international importance as a living and permanent memorial to Netaji Subhas Chandra
Bose. The Institution will consist of a Historical Research Organisation, a research oriented
centre for academics and traditionals in economics, politics, sociology, education, health,
environment, etc. and a broad-based cultural centre. Netaji Bhawan will, thus become a
beaconlight for India’s triumphal entry into the twenty first century.

8. While planning for development and modernisation of Netaji Bhawan Complex, a
total view has been taken of reinforcing and developing the old historical building without
interfering with its traditional character and constructing a contemporary building
complementing the existing structure and in harmony with it. The Complex will become a
unique, structurally attractive and eminently functional place. In brief, the development
programme of Netaji Bhawan Complex will include modernisation of Netaji Museum,
upgradation of Netaji archives, expansion of freedom library and automisation of library
services and other ancilliary works. Netaji Research Bureau expects the Government of
India to wholeheartdly contribute and extend financial support in the fulfilment of the
programme of development for Netaji Centenary.

9. The Parliamentry Committee was given to understand that the former Prime Minister
of India had visited Netaji Bhawan Complex at Calcutta and assured to give financial grant
of Rs. 12 crores (Approx.) for the upgradation and development of Netaji Bhawan. Even
the present Prime Minister, while visiting Netaji Bhawan on 14th July, 1996 reiterated that
the commitments made by the previous Government will be honoured. The Parliamentary
Committee -was, however, distressed to note that despite the commitments made by the two
Prime Ministers, Netaji Museum has not received any financial support from the
Government of India so far. The Committee in its 43rd Report on Demand for Grants
1996-97 had also asked the Department of Culture to act fast in consultation with Ministry of
Finance and Prime Minister Office. It is unfortunate that the Department of Culture has not
moved thus far. The Committee fully supports the developmental plans of Netaji Bhawan
and strongly recommends the Government of India to extend the necessary financial support
as per the commitments already made so that Netaji’s Museum could be developed and
strengthened as a monument of national importance in the year of Centenary celebrations of
Netaji. The Committee strongly recommends that the commitments made by the two P.Ms.
should get reflected in the RE for the year 1996-97 because of the centenary year starting in
January, 1997.


ANNEXURE-I

NAME OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE WHO VISITED NETAJI BHAVAN,
CALCUTTA ON 10TH OCTOBER, 1996

1. Shri 5.8. Chavan — Chairman
2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
4. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
6. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

7. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

8. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

9. Shri 1.G. Sanadi

10. Shrimati Krishna Bose

11. Shri Samik Lahiri

12. Dr. Bali Ram


MINUTES



VII
*SEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 11th September, 1996 in
Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS.

1. Shri S.B. Chavan —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo

Dr. B.B. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
LOK SABHA

11. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

12. Shri Sartaj Singh

13. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

14. Dr. C. Silvera

15. Shri 1.0, Sanadi

16. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose

17. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy

18. Shri Krishna

19. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi

20. Shri Samik Lahiri

21. Dr. M. Jagannath

22. Dr. Bali Ram

23. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary

2. The Committee at the first instance discussed about its future programme. After
some discussion, the Committee identified the following items, which, the Committee feels,
require detailed examination:—

MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

8,०9० :० ०५७० # ० ०

e

A. * * - *
B. Department cf Culture हैं
(yi * के *

(2) Maintenance of Museums.
(i) Salarjung Museum, Hyderabad;
(ii) Indian Museum, Calcutta;
(iii) Netaji Memorial Museum, Calcutta.
G) * > *

*Minutcs of Ist-VIth mecting relate to matters not included in this report.
***Relate to other matters.


8

The Committee has, however, decided to take up the following initially:
1. Value based education.
2. Vocational education.
3. The problem of drop-outs.
4. Functioning of National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta.
5. Functioning of National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.

3. The Committee then decided to visit Calcutta and Jaipur to make an on-the-spot visit
to the National Institute of Homoeopathy at Calcutta and the National Institute of Ayurveda
at Jaipur and also to make a detailed examination of the issue of value based education.
During the visits, the Committee decided to visit some of the reputed Voluntary
Organisations and to hold discussions with them and State Governments on the issue of
value based education.

4. The Committee further decided to visit Indian Museum, National Library and Netaji
Memorial Museum at Calcutta and to visit the project sites of Lok Jumbish and Sikhsakarmi
Projects at Jaipur and also to hold discussions with them. The Committee formed two Study
Groups, one for visiting Calcutta and the other for Jaipur and Mount Abu. The Chairman of
the Committee directed that the consent of the Members may be taken for finalising the
Study Groups.

5. The Committee decided that the Study Group visiting Calcutta should undertake the
visit from the 8th to 11th October, 1996 and the Study Group visiting Jaipur and Mount Abu
should visit there from 4th to 8th November, 1996, 16 Committee authorised its Chairman
to finalise’ the details of the tour programmes and to approach Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha, for his permission for the visits of the Study Groups to Calcutta, Jaipur and Mount
Abu.

6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.


शा
EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Wednesday, the 27th November, 1996 in
Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Dr. B.B. Dutta
Dr. M. Aram
Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA
9. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
10, Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
11. Shri Dutta Meghe
12. Shrimati Krishna Bose
13. Shri Krishna
14, Shri Samik Lahiri
15. Dr. Bali Ram

SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Forty-ninth Report on the Functioning of
Indian Museum, Calcutta, Draft Fiftieth Report on the Netaji Bhawan, Calcutta and Draft
Fifty-first Report on the Functioning of the National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta.
The Committee, after some discussions, adopted the reports with some minor modifications.

2SIAAARYN

3. The Committee then, authorised its Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram and
Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Krishna Bose
and in her absence Shri Samik Lahiri to lay the reports in Lok Sabha. The Committee, also
decided that the reports may be laidpresented on 3rd December, 1996 or on a subsequent
day subject to availability of Hindi Version.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 p.m.


VI
SIXTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 29th August, 1996 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri S. B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. B. B. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

LOK SABHA

8. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

9. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
10. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

11. Shri Mahant Abedyanath
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

13. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
14, Shri Dutta Meghe

15. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
16. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
17. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
18. Dr. M. Jagannath

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Demands for Grants for 1996-97
of the Departments of Education (Demand No. 47), Women and Child Development
(Demand No. 50) and Youth Affairs and Sports (Demand No. 48). The Committee, after
some discussions, adopted the same with some modifications.

NANEWN

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram and Dr.
(Smt.) Bharati Ray to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan and
in her absence Shri Ram Chandra Dome to lay the reports in Lok Sabha. The Committee
decided that the reports may be laid/presented on 3rd September, 1996 or on a subsequent
day subject to availability of Hindi Version.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

19