PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMIT-
TEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY WELFARE
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12.3.96)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12.3.96)

aaa

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 1996/Phalguna, 1917 (Saka)


CONTENTS

. ComposiTION OF THE CoMMITTEE

. INTRODUCTION
. CHAPTER-|

» CHarrer-Il

» CHaprer-lil

. CHAPTER-IV

. Chapter-V

. Minutes

Report.

Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Government has not given any reply

PaGEs
(i)-Gi)
(iii)

1-12

13-19

20-25

27

28


(8-6) ec as ee) a
mee : rs eal मी waintguaoninal £
है : i पथ com : of bene 5 ss

peta i ही ।



COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. M. Aram

Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
2.
26.
zt.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
33.
38.
38:
40.
41.
42.

Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

Dr. Vasant Pawar

Vacant

Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

Shri Z.M. Kahandole

Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
Shri K.T. Vandayar

Vacant

Shri Inder Jit

Shri Anna Joshi

Dra Ramesh Chand Tomar
Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
Dr. K.D. Jeswani

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

Shri Rambadan

Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

Shri Ramchandra Dome

Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh


43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal
45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

3. Shri Om Datta Sharma, Under Secretary

4. Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu. Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on
its behalf, present this Thirty-ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/Observations contained in its 20th Report on “Demands for Grants”
(1995-96) of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Family Welfare).

2. The Twentieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 25th April, 1995 and
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th April, 1995. Action Taken Note on the
recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Family
Welfare, was considered by the Committee and this Report was adopted at its sitting held on
11th March, 1996.

New DELHI; P. UPENDRA

March, 1996 Chairman,
— Se Committee on Human
Phalguna, 1917 (Saka) Resource Development.


ite) 176 मत हल आकर
aa 7०545) $n,
ods: iamnow.
Ip) wo |
(छगक्षाउभा dined
animmol
big 2९९ ॥ ae
11 Ag 19
(छिप “16:

81:
HRS,
weve

04 biod guitiie ei 1 belgoht ecw

३४ hh
8७॥५.)

Sa 4

80055: शा

Moi ५० 3 9फे कक ५
ANSE SNS

noroUGORTM

Talawensiiist ne

tego ndiiricd. adi
israqaisved! 59७० ०5
11 शक 32928 अड्ाज्य का
69 ARON 3० इप्लौल ५६ vf
: 4 bps ties quand We 1624021),

me 22 oH 119 10058 ग19% 9४ ofl ;९
है... aor geil fo
tat B01 Wo आदत Sit 75० Dial
अभ्यास हा
Roche figs 4510006 git ४० barebieics aw. ot OW
DOL ome: ait

oy

ewe}
ORE ४5
92००) TEED &७पर४४५



CHAPTER-I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, (Department of Family Welfare) for the year 1995-96, which
was presented to Rajya Sabha on 25.4.95 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same
day.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:

(i) Recommendations / Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
32, 7.2; 8.359525 999 10:25°42.29123}1311 13.2014 1414S, 1531998, 48.25'1812)
24.

(ii) Recommendations / Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 1, 1.1, 1.2, 2, 3, 3.1, 5, 5.1, 6, 7, 7.1, 8, 8.1, 8.2,
$, 30 3055, 35, 10; 2h, वीद% अर: eee

(iii) Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 2.] to 2.7, 3.3, 3.4, 4, 4.1, 4.2, 5.2, 5.3,
6.1, 7.3, 7.4, 8.4; 11.1, 12. 12.1, 12.2, 13.3, 16; 164, 17, 19721, 19) एड के के;
25s 85,979 26 nla 26:2.

(iv) Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been received: Nil

3. The Committee will now deal with some of its recommendations on which the Action
Taken notes of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:

Budgetary Provisions
(Recommendations Paras 2.1—2.7)

2.1 Asked to comment on the allocation, the Department stated that certain
programmes like Rural Family Welfare Centres and Rural sub-centres would continue to be
under-funded, aggravating the problem of arrears. It would also not be possible to undertake
(i) expansion of the services required to increase accessibility and (ii) provide for
complementary requirements to improve quality.

2.2 The Committee was informed that the expansion of Rural sub-centres, which are
the grass-root level units would be adversely affected because only Rs. 190 crores have been
provided against a requirement of Rs. 300 crores for the maintenance of these sub-centres.

2.3 The Department also stated that there would-be virtually no expansion of urban
health infrastructure, although the growth of urban population is faster than rural population
due to migration. The expansion of Urban Health Posts would be possible only if additional
resources are made available. The present outlay is not sufficient even for maintaining the
existing level.

2.4 The Committee was also informed by the Secretary, that the remaining amount, out
of the total provided for 8th Plan, would not be enough for the terminal year of the plan. In
view of the submission made by the Secretary, the Committee infers that the Planning
Commission has not taken a very realistic view of the needs of the Family Welfare
Programmes which aim at arresting the alarming growth of population.

2.5 The Committee, therefore, feels that the plan outlay should be raised sufficiently, at
an appropriate stage, in order not only to sustain the existing Family Welfare Programmes

1


2

but also to take new initiatives to achieve the objectives spelt out in the Eighth Plan
Document. The Committee feels any increase in allocation in the context of growing
population would not be a bad investment.

2.6 The Committee also notes with concern that the share of Family Welfare sector,
which was 1.8% of the total public sector outlay during the 7th Plan, has been reduced to
1.5% during the 8th Plan. In view of the nature and size of the population, and a large
portion of the family welfare plans accounts for health infrastructure and services at the
grass root level, which are of vital importance for improving the lot of the poorer and
weaker sections of the society, the Committee strongly recommends that at least 3% of the
total public sector outlay should be set aside for family welfare plans.

2.7 The Committee points out that there is a keen interest among international donor
agencies to provide assistance for our population control programmes. However, this
assistance can be availed of only if a matching provision exists in the family welfare budget.
Normally, it can not be accommodated within the budget, which otherwise also is inadequate
for normal programmes without a matching step up. The Committee, therefore, feels that
there is a strong case for providing additional assistance for key areas of family welfare
programmes.

Ministry’s Reply

2.1 to 2.7. The observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee have been
noted by the Planning Commission. The outlay for Family Welfare during the Seventh Plan
period was Rs. 3256.30 crores. The actual expenditure was Rs. 3120.80 crores; though an
outlay of 1.8% of the total Plan investment was provided for Department of Family Welfare,
the actual expenditure was only 1.43% of the total Plan expenditure.

In the Eighth Plan the outlay provided is Rs. 6500.00 crores—nearly double the amount
of the outlay under the Seventh Plan. Even in terms of proportion the outlay form 1.5% of
the total Plan outlay showing thereby a step up as compared to the 1.43% which was the
actual expenditure on Family Welfare during the Seventh Plan period.

Considering the existing severe resource constraint it is not possible to further increase
the outlay for Family Welfare during the Eighth Plan period. However, from the data on
outlays and expenditure during the Eighth Plan period given below it would appear that the
entire outlay provided in the Eighth Plan is likely to be fully utilised for meeting the
expenditure incurred by the Department of Family Welfare during the Eighth Plan period.

Plan Period Total Plan Investment Family Welfare
शा Plan 180,00.00 Outlay. 3,256.30 Outlay (1.8%)
218,729.60 Actual 3,120.80 Actual (1.43%)
Exp; Exp.

शा Plan 434,100.00 Outlay 6,500.00 Outlay (1.5%)



Annual Plans

Plan Period Total Plan Investment Family Welfare
1992-1993 80,771,96 B.E. 1,000.00 B.E. (1.24%)
72,852.44 Actual 1,072.60 Actual (1.47%)
Exp. Exp.
1993-94 100,120.16 B.E. 1,270.00 B.E. (1.27%)
92,628.64 R.E. 1,423.57 R.E. (1.54%)

1,312.62 Actual
Exp. (1.42%)

1994-95 112,197.12 8.8. 1,430.00 B.E. (1.27%)
106,166.43 1२.६. 1,538.00 R.E. (1.45%)
1995-96 128,589.98 B.E. 1,581.00 B.E. (1.23%)

Note: The figures of outlay for VII Plan and VIII Plan are at respective base year's prices i.e. 1984-85 prices and
1991-92 prices respectively.
Comments of the Committee

The country’s population is at the threshold of crossing 100 crores and soon it may
overtake China, the most populated country. Resources being limited, the country needs to
give top-most priority to population control programme. This much felt concern does not
reflect in the budgetary allocations. Unless population growth is controlled, the country
cannot prosper and people cannot have a comfortable living, Keeping this in mind, the
Committee recommended allocation of 3% of total Public Sector outlay for family welfare
programmes. Planning Commission should give a serious thought to this, The Committee
reiterates its earlier recommendation for higher allocation for family welfare programmes
keeping in view their importance for the overall development of the society. The
Department should again stress upon the Planning for higher allocations. Simultaneously,
the Department should make full use of the offers from international donar agencies who
are keen to assist us in the population control programmes.

Rural Family Welfare Centres
Recommendation (paras 3.3 & 3.4)

3.3 In response to the Committee's recommendation, in its Eighth Report, to expedite the
proposed study to evaluate the role of Rural Family Welfare Centres, the Department stated
that the study, which covered 2831 centres working in seven States, has been completed and
the report is under finalisation. In the light of this study, State-specific reports have also
been prepared to be sent to the respective States for taking necessary action {n the matter.

3.4 The Committee suggests that the reports should be finalised at the, earliest and
recommends that the Department should impress upon the States the need to initiate action
on the basis of the study report sent to them.

Ministry’s Reply ‘

3.3 & 3.4 A study of Rural Family Welfare Centres has been carried out by Institute for
Research in Medical Statistics. New Delhi, in the States of U.P., M.P., Rajasthan, Haryana,
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu & Orissa. The report has. been received and circulated to
respective State Governments. Action is being initiated on the comments.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee has learnt that the comments have not so far been received from the
States on the report submitted by the Institute for Research in Medical Statistics. The
Department should pursue the matter with the States for their comments and on the receipt
of the comments, an early action be initiated.



Rural Sub-centres
Recommendation (Paras 4, 4.1 & 4.2)

4. To provide a-comprehensive Primary Health Care Service at the grass root level, a
sub-centre is established on the basis of the centre for every 5,000 population in plain areas
and one for 3,000 population in hilly and tribal areas.

4.1 The Committee notes that, as on 30th July, 1994 there were 1,31,471 sub-centres
functioning in the country, out of which, only 97,551 sub-centres are being funded by the
Government of India. It also notes that a provision of Rs. 190 crores has been made for
Rural Sub-centres this year. To a question as to how the rest of the Centres are being
fundedS the Secretary stated that these centres have been set up under the Minimum Needs
Programme and are being funded by it. He also informed that no new sub-centre was
proposed to be added this year. के

4.2 The Committee is of the view that since a majority of our people live in rural and
tribal areas and these centres are peripheral health institutions providing basic health and
family welfare services to them, the decision of the Department not to add new Centres is
quite disappointing. The Committee, therefore, recommends that serious efforts be made by
the Department to provide adequate funds not only to open more sub-centres this year but
also to provide the necessary infrastructure at the existing centres.

Ministry’s Reply

4, 4.1 & 4.2 There are 131900 sub-centres existing in the country out of which 97557
are being funded by the Central Government and the remaining 33919 are under the State
Sector. Due to financial constraints, the Government of India has not sanctioned additional
sub-centres since 1990-91 onwards.

In case, State Governments wish to open additional sub-centres, they are free to open
these out of their own budget.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee is pained to note that no rural sub-centre was opened since -1990-91
onwards. India lives in villages and unless we provide basic health care to our rural people,
the country cannot progress inspite of the scientific and industrial growth. The Department
should reconsider the matter and try to convince the Planning Commission of the necessity
of additional resources and allocation for expansion of the scheme.
Urban Family Welfare Centres
Recommendation (Paras 5.2 & 5.3)

5.2 The Committee is of the opinion that the health delivery system in urban slum areas
is very weak and the health services are at the bare minimum and the quality of services is
very poor. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Urban Revamping Scheme,
which is meant for improving outreach delivery system in urban slums, should be expanded
even to cover the peripheries of the urban areas, so that the poor are not deprived of the
basic health services.

5.3 In view of the above, the Committee feels that there is a great need for a larger
allocation to these centres.

Ministry’s Reply

5.2 & 5.3 In the draft Annual Plan for 1995-96 the department projected the

requitement of Rs. 30.00 crores for the Urban Revamping Scheme. It was also planned to

establish 102 new Health Post (D type) but the actual budget allocated was only Rs. 18.00
crores. Therefore, the expansion planned will not be. possible.


Comments of the Committee

This is a good scheme for providing health care services in urban slum areas and it
needs to be expanded. Planning Commission should consider the importance of the scheme
and provide higher allocations.

Post Partum Programme
Recommendation (Para 6.1)

6.1 The Committee feels that for such a vital programme that too when the programme
is quite a success—a lower allocation this year is quite disturbing. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that allocation to this programme be increased, and steps be taken to further
expand it. The Committee also feels that the registration of all the births is not being done
as provided in the law, and this job may be entrusted to the local panchayats which will be
required to submit monthly reports to concerned authorities.

Ministry’s Reply

6.1 It is admitted that the allocation is less. Against Rs. 49 crores allocated for the
Scheme the likely expenditure would be Rs. 56.50 crores. If allocation is increased, the
programme can be expanded. For district level Post Partum Programme the allocation
during 1995-96 has been only Rs. 1900 lakhs and for sub-district level Post Partum
Programme Rs. 3000 lakhs. Thus the total allocation is Rs. 4900 lakhs and not Rs.4000 lakhs
as per the report. This allocation for district / sub-district level Post Partum Programme has
been static during the last three years.

The registration of births and death falls within the purview of the office of the
Registrar General of India. The Registration of Births & Deaths (RBD) Act, 1969 provides
for the appointment of registration functionaries at various levels like: (i) Registrar General,
India at national level; (ii) Chief Registrar at the State level; (iii) District Registrar at
District level; and (iv) Registrar for local areas such as Panchayat, Municipality, Municipal
Corporation or other local bodies.

The actual work of registration is carried out by a three tier hierarchy of State
Government/U.T. Administration officials drawn from one or more departments viz. the
Chief Registrar at State level, District Registrar at District level and local Registrar at
periphery level. Under the RBD Act, 1969, authority for the appointment of Chief
Registrar, District Registrar and Registrar at local area levels has been given to the State
Governments.

In rural areas the registration functionaries can be classified into Panchayats, Police,
Health, Education and Revenue. In urban areas, Health Officers or Executive Officers of
municipalities function as Registrars of Births and Deaths. The distribution of rural
Registrars ‘by type of agency is as under:-

Panchayat 11 States+1 UTT

Police Station Officer 4 States+1 UT

Village level Revenue Official 2 States+2 UTs
Community Development 2 States

Sub-Divisional /Tehsil Office 2 States+1 UT us
Primary Health Centre 3 States+1 UT v
Teachers 2 States

On the basis of Model Rules prepared by the Registrar-General, of India, various State
Governments have framed their rules which have been duly notified by them. Registration
of births in various parts of the country is being done according to the provisions of the
Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 and rules framed by the State Governments.


6

While under the 1969 Act, registration of births has been made compulsory throughout
the country, registration is still far from complete. Reasons are apathy of genera] public
towards registration, ignorance, and lack of utility of birth certificate in the persgnal life of
common citizens. For. improving the completeness of registration and increasing the
awareness if general public, the Registrar-General Office has undertaken several
promotional measures. Publicity campaigns have been launched through T.V., radio,
posters, cinema slides, printing of slogans of postal stationery etc. for promoting the
completeness of registration. In several States production of birth certificate has been made
compulsory for first school admission and entries of the name of new born in the ration
card. Inter-departmental co-ordination committees have been set up in various States.

Panchayat Officials are doing registration in a majority of the States. However,
entrusting the registration work to Panchayat does not necessarily result in improving the
registration as seen from the low registration levels in U.P. (26 per cent), Bihar (21 per
cent) and Rajasthan (22 per cent). On the other hand, there are States which have
registration officials other than those from Panchayat and yet have high levels of registration
for births e.g. Karnataka (Revenue Official—63 per cent), Punjab (Police Officials — 88 per
cent), Orissa (Health Officials—65 per cent) and Tamil Nadu (Revenue Officials—87 per
cent).

Comments of the Committee

Accepting that allocation being less and static is not sufficient. The Department should
make efforts to get higher allocations

It is disturbing to note that inspite of registration of births being compulsory under the
Act, it is far from complete in any of the States. There is no_uniform system of registration
in the States. The Centre shduld fix responsibility on one single agency, be it Panchayats or
Revenue Officials, and they should be held accountable. The Committee has noted that the
performance of those States where Panchayats have been entrusted’ with this task, is not en-
couraging. New Gram Panchayats have come up in almost all the States and they are the
most appropriate bodies to be entrusted with this responsibility. Panchayats can be made
over all In-charge under whose supervision other egencies, such as Revenue Officials, may
work.

Sterilisation Beds
Recommendations (Para 7.3 & 7.4)

7.3 The Committee also notes, with concern, the falling percentage of males among
acceptors of sterilisation. The Department stated that in order to motivate more men, a new
and simpler method of male sterilisation, known as No-Scalpel Vasectomy, has been
introduced. The Committee was also told that in order to popularise the new method, the
Department had initiated a series of- training programmes for the surgeons positioned in
medical colleges, district hospitals and community health centres and 1500 doctors had been
proposed to be trained in a period of three years. The Department also stated that the
project would be implemented with United Nation Fund for Population (UNFPA) support
and was awaiting its approval.

7.4 The Committee feels that the Department should pursue the matter with UNFPA
and get the project approved by them at the earliest. The Committee feels that in order to
induce more men to go in for vasectomy operation the Department should propagate
extensively the advantages of the new technique particularly in the rural and remote areas,
the Committee also feels that the cash incentives paid to vasectomy operation should be on
par with tubectomy.


Ministry’s Reply

7.3. & 7.4 Although the new UNFPA assisted No-Scalpel Vasectomy Project has been
approved by UNFPA but it is to be approved by the Project Implementation Committee.
The proposal has been prepared and shall be submitted to the Committee for their approval.
Provision has been made in the project for taking up extensive IEC activities to propagate
this new method of No-Scalpel Vasectomy. Guidelines are also being issued to all States/
UTs for popularising Vasectomy and increasing involvement of males in Family Welfare
Programme. The Compensation for loss of wages (Rs. 100+) paid to the acceptors of
Vasectomy is already at par with that of the acceptors of Tubectomy under the existing
scheme. hi be
Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that the Department should get the No-Scalpel Vasectomy
approved by the Project Implementation Committee at the earliest. Being a better method,
it needs to be given wide publicity. The Department should undertake the publicity of an
extensive scale and provide adequate trainees for the project. *

Free Distribution of Conventional Contraceptives
(Recommendation (Para 8.4)

8.4 Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs have been requested to examine the suggestion
of distribution of condoms through the fair price shops under the Social Marketing Scheme.
This Scheme provides an opportunity to the fair price shopkeepers and the civil supplies
corporations to earn additional income which would act as an incentive for them to
distribute condoms. In the absence of such an incentive, efforts to distribute free condoms
through fair price shops were not successful.

Ministry’s Reply

8.4 The Committee feels that free distribution of contraceptives should be further
expanded in rural areas by making available contraceptives in all fair price shops and
cooperative in each State.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee has been given to understand that there is no good response from the
States regarding this scheme. The Centre should encourage all the States and convince them
of the viability of this. Social marketing through Civil Supplies Corporations be encourage.
Involvement of Non-Governmental Organisations Recommendation (Para 11.1)
Recommendation (Para 1.1)

11.1 Keeping in view the nature and magnitude of population control programme, the
Committee feels that the involvement of NGOs to supplement the Governmental efforts is
crucial that any let up in this regard would prove to be detrimental.. The Committee,

therefore, recommends that an in-depth study should be undertaken by the Department so
as to find out the reasons for the reluctance of NGO to take up family welfare programmes.
Ministry’s Reply

11.1 The Government is conscious of the importance of involvement of NGOs in the
family welfare programme. Several steps have been taken during the last 2-3 years to step up
NGOs’ involvement in the programme by devising new and attractive model . schemes,
organising regional/State level and national level meetings with prominent NGOs, State
Government functionaries*to educate and motivate them to work for the family welfare
programme. As a result of these efforts as large number of organisations in the country have
come up for taking up projects under the various schemes. Seven large and well established


8

organisations have been recognised as Mother Units and given power to support 50 NGOs in
their area. An imprest of Rs. 10 lakhs has been placed at their disposal from which grant on
approved projects can be released to the smaller NGOs and replenished from the
Department of Family Welfare so that the imprest amount always remains at Rs. 10 lakhs.
In the State also State SCOVA Committees have been set up and they have been given
powers to sanction projects upto Rs. 10 lakhs per project.

As a result of these efforts the Department of Family Welfare has been able to upgrade
the level of funding support to NGOs from Rs. 3.29 crores in 1990-91 to Rs. 16.30 crores in
1994-95. The number of NGOs supported has also gone up from 91 in 1990-91 to 831 in
1994-95. There are a large number of projects which are awaiting clearance by the
Department of Family Welfare. Similarly there are indications that a large number of
projects are being received by the State SCOVA Committees and Mother Unit
Organisations. There would, therefore, be no dearth of NGOs working for the family
welfare programme in the country in the near future.

The Department of Family Welfare has ordered mid-term evaluation of projects
sanctioned under the model schemes during 1993-94 to know the result of the schemes and
also the difficulties and bottlenecks encumbered by the NGOs in implementing the projects.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee has been given to understand that a mid-term evaluation of projects
sanctioned under the model scheme during 1993-94 has been completed. The Committee
desires that the follow-up action on the basis of the evaluation report be taken up at the
earliest.

Village Health Guide Scheme
Recommendations (Paras 12, 12.1 & 12.2)

12. The Village Health Guide Scheme aims at imparting training to local persons,
preferably women, who could do voluntary work in Primary Health Care so as to provide
relief to the people from common ailments. A Village Health Guide is paid Rs. 50८ per
month as an honorarium.

12.1 A provision of Rs. 10 crores has been made for this scheme this year also. The
Committee had recommended, in its Eighth Report, extension of this scheme to all villages.
The Secretary, during the course of his oral evidence, stated that except Maharashtra, West
Bengal, Mizoram and Punjab, other States were not in favour of continuing the scheme. The
States not willing to continue feel that this Scheme is not serving any useful purpose because
the same community health worker continues to work as the village health guide also.
Explaining the reason for its success in the four States mentioned above, the Secretary said
that in Punjab they had all women health guides; in Mizoram the community workers had
been found very useful in inaccessible areas; in Maharashtra there was a growing spirit of
community work; and in West Bengal it was closely supervised by the Panchayats.

12.2 The Committee is of the opinion that the difficulties of each State should be
analysed and the scheme should be presented with a more realistic and flexible approach so
that more States can take advantage of it.

Ministry’s Reply
The Scheme is under review.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee desire that the review of the scheme may be completed at the earliest.


9

It needs to be made more viable and attractive. Discussions may be initiated with all the
States. The Department should, however, not delay the process since the scheme is not
working, well.

Area Development Project
Recommendation (Para 13.3)

13.3 the Committee also feels that there should be transparency regarding the
‘Innovative Services’ which are being provided under this project. Injections and invasive
techniques must not be promoted without considering the local conditions, and there should
be a check on the utilisaition rate and the actual performance with regard to promotion of
reproductive health.

Ministry’s Reply

13.3 The recommendation has been noted and the State Governments are being advised
to provide transparency in implementation of the innovative schemes udner on-going
projects and the likely new projects by invloving NGO’s Private Medical Practitioners,
Women’s groups, etc.

Comments of the Committee

This Project is implemented with the help of USAID. The Project is mostly centralised.
In the reply of the Ministry there is no reflection of the Committee’s doubts on the
transparency regarding innovative services. The Department should ensure transparency.

Dais Training
Recommendation (Paras 16 & 16.1)

16. The allocation made to this programme remains the same i.e, (Rs. 7.5 crores) as
that of last year. The Committee has recommended in its 8th Report, an increase in

allocation for this programme but the Committee is sorry to note that no increase has been
made for such a vital training programme and the scheme is not expanding.

16.1 The Committee is aware that the proportion of deliveries attended to by untrained
hands is still very high in rural areas of Assam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh. Therefore, the Committee reiterates that adequate allocation should be
made for this scheme so that more number of Dais can be trained and the scheme can be
expanded to such an extent that at least one Dai is available for 1000 population.
Ministry’s Reply

16 & 16.1 In addition to the routine plan allocation for the CSSM programme funds to
the tune of Rs. 7.5 crores have been approved under the Head Dais Training Programme.
The funds are meant for procurement of dais kits and for training of dais. Dais kit are being
supplied to the States/UTs as per allocation and cash assistance or Rs. 2.5 cores have been
allocated to the States for meeting the expenses on training of dais. Initially, the training of
dais was confined to 119 districts of six high IMR States but now in order to universalise this
intervention also at the pace of the UIP, a proposal, as stated above to enusre 100%
deliveries by trained personnel, by training atleast one TBA/Dai in each village is udner
active consideration. Out of the cash assistance provided to the State/UTs' for
implementation of the CSSM programme funds to the tune of Rs. 7.19 crores have also been
allocated to the States for meeting expenses on reporting fee to TBAs and for procurement
of disposable deliveries (DDKs). Additional funds are also being sought for under Dais
Training Programme to the tune of 219.50 lakhs during the current year and 1775.00 lakhs
during 1996-97.


10

Comments of the Committee

The Committee has noted that only about 47.3% deliveries are conducted by trained
personnel. This is not a happy situation. The goal of National Health Policy to have
100% deliveries conducted by trained ‘Dais’ should not remain on paper only. The
Department should take an early decision on the proposal to cover 100% deliveries by
trained personnel by training one TBA/Dai in each village

Technology Mission on Family Welfare for States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh

Recommendation (Para 17 & 17.1)

17. The Committee in its 8th Report has suggested creation of a Technology Mission
for Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan which account for 40% of the
country’s population and where the programme of family welfare programme is very
slow.

17.1 The Secretary, during the course of his oral evidence, stated that formalities had
been completed for the establishment of a Technology Mission, in the four States and
hoped that it would be operationalised by July, 1995. The Committee urges that the
Department with the cooperation of the concerned State Governments should
operationalise the Mission by the target date.

Ministry’s Reply

17 & 17.1 The Proposed Technology Mission on Family Welfare for the 4 States of
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh could not be approved on account
of constraint of budgetary resources. However, the measures envisaged under the
Technology Mission are proposed to be implemented through externally assisted projects.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee is unhappy to note that thé Technology Mission on Family Welfare
for the States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh could not be
approved on account of budgetary constraints. Even though these four States account for
40% of country’s population, and the family welfare programme is extremely slow there,
the Department has taken a casual. approach. The Committee takes a strong exception to
this. The Department should have made sincere efforts for necessary funds for the
technolgoy mission. The Department should be serious at least now to implement the
Technology Mission through externally assisted projects.

Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuses) Act, 1994
Recommendations (Para 19 & 19.1)

19. On the question of progress made in framing the Rules and the Constitution of
the proposed Central Supervisory Board with regard to implementation of the Pre-Natal
Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation & Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1994, the Secretary
informed the Committee that rules had been drafted and sent to the Ministry of Law, for
vetting. States have also been requested to nominate their representatives on the Central
Supervisory Board. The Board will be constituted as soon as the rules come into force.

19.1 The Committee feels that the Central Supervisory Board should be constituted
as quickly as possible and the matter should be taken up with the States on a priority
basis.

Ministry’s Reply

19 & 19.1 The constitution of the Central Supervisory Board under the Pre-Natal
Diagnostic Technique (Prevention and Regulation of Misuse) Act, 1994 is at an advanced


ll

stage. The Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha have elected their representatives on the
Central Supervisory Board. The rules under the Act have been framed and approved.
The Act is likely to be brought into force shortly. The rules will also be notified.

Comments of the Committee

Even though the act was passed in 1994 it is very strange that the rules have not
been notified as yet. The Committee is not satisfied with the delay in the matter. The
rules should be notified at the earliest and the Act be implemented immediately.

General Observations/Recommendations
Recommendation (Paras 20 & 20.1)

20. Family Welfare is a hundred per cent centrally sponsored programme. While the
Centre lays down the norms and policy guidelines for this programme, the
implementation lies with the State Governments and Panchayati Raj Institutions.

20.1 The Committee had observed, in its 8th Report, that States showing good
results in population control do not get any benefit in the allocation of central plan
assistance because allocation is not based on performance but on population. The
Committee had recommended for the revision of the same. The opinion of the
Committee was placed before the Planning Commission by the Department, and the
Planning Commission, while agreeing to the suggestions of the Committee, has stated that
before linking higher allocations with better performance as suggested by the Gadgil
Formula, the Planning Commission feels that it should have cumulative experience over
the next few years of the actual working of the formulae before any modification is
made.

The Committee feels that the Department in the meantime, should insist on the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance to provide some incentives to the
States. who are doing well in population control.

Ministry’s, Reply

20 & 20.1 The better performing States are already being given incentives by the
Planning Commission under the formula for release of Central Plan Assistance to the
States. The Central Plan Assistance is based on the modified Gadgil-Mukherjee Formula,
under which 1% of the total Central assistance is provided to States on the basis of their
performance in the reduction of Crude Birth Rate and Infant Mortality Rate.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels that 1% of total central assistance provided to States on the
basis of their performance in the reduction of crude birth rate and Infant’ Mortality Rate
is not sufficient. The Department may initiate dialogue with States and the Planning
Commission in this matter and take a decision to increase it suitably. The matter may be
referred to the next Finance Commission also.

Recommendation (Paras 25 & 25.1)

25. The Committee, in its Fifteenth Report, had suggested convening a meeting of
the party leaders in Parliament for consultation on the matter and arriving at a
consensus. On being asked about the present thinking of the Department in. this regard
and whether they were serious about getting the bill passed the Committee was informed
that it had been put up for orders of the ‘higher ups’.

25.1 The Committee feels that, this being an important legislation, it brooks no delay
and recommends that a meeting of the leaders of various political parties in Parliament


12

be convend early so that the Bill could be passed on the basis of the agreement likely to be
arrived at.

Ministry’s Reply

25 & 25.1 It appears that the reference is to the 79th Constitution Amendment Bill,
1992. The Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs had fixed the meeting of the political parties on
19th August, 1995. Since the date of the meeting was not convenient to the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs was requested to postpone the
meeting.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee presented its report on 22.3.95. The Committee does not understand as
to why a meeting could not be held so far. It shows a very sorry state of affairs and the
Commitee feels that such delays should be avoided. The Committee strongly urges that an
early action be taken in this regard.

Recommendation (Paras 26, 26.1 & 26.2)

26. To a question as to what steps the Department propose to take on the Draft
National Population Policy prepared by the Swaminathan Committee, the Secretary
informed that it had been circulated for inter-departmental consultation and as soon as
comments were received from the Ministries, the Cabinet would be approached for further
action.

26.1 The Committee feels that the Department should complete its consultations with
the Ministries expeditiously and get the approval of the Cabinet at the earliest.

26.2 Since there are some apprehensions about certain aspects of the Draft National
Population Policy, the Committee feels that a meeting of the Chief Ministers of the States
should be convened to consider the draft policy after which the Parliament could debate and
approve it.

Ministry’s Reply

26, 26.1 & 26.2 Consultation with State Governments, Union Territories and various
Ministries on the preliminary draft of the National Population Policy is complete. A draft of
the National Population Policy has been prepared, and is being discussed at senior levels in
the Department of Family Welfare.

Comments of the Committee

At the time when the country’s population is growing at a rapid pace, the Committee is
constrained to note that the Department is taking unduly long time to finalise the national
Population Policy. it brooks no delay and the Department should act expeditiously to
finalise the NPP.


CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Rural Family Welfare Centres
Recommendation (Para 3.2)
3.2 The Committee feels that the provision made to these Centres is unrealistic and

recommends that sufficient provision be made to maintain the existing centres, so that their
functioning is not affected adversely.
Ministry’s Reply

3.2 The Scheme of Rural Family Welfare Centres was started in the year 1955 and
became operational throughout the country in 1960. Till 1.4.80 there were 5435 Rural
Family Welfare Centres attached to block level PHC. Presently the Rural Family Welfare
Centres have been integrated with services provided by Primary Health Centres and
Community Health Centres. The Rural Family Welfare Centres have lost their independent
identity and are part and parcel of PHC/CHC Health complex. The budget for Rural Family
Welfare Centres during 1994-95 was Rs. 13150 lakhs and during 1995-96 is Rs. 16000 lakhs
and is meant for payment of salaries of staff sanctioned under the scheme.The actual
requirement for these centres will be projected in the Annual Plan 1996-97. The other
material required in the RFWCs is provided through PHC & CHC etc. In addition
Government of India is providing free inputs like LEC material, intrauterine devices, oral
pills, condoms, Iron folic acid tablets & immunisation material including syringes etc.
Sterilisation Beds
Recommendation (Para 7.2) ५

7.2 On the question of increasing the number of beds and revision of norms, the
Secretary informed the Committee that only limited funds were available with the
Department and that priority was given only towards supporting the existing programmes
rather than revising the norms. The Committee feels that sterilisation programme is very
important for arresting the growth of population. Therefore, the Committee recommends
that the norms which were fixed eight years ago should be revised for making the scheme
more acceptable and attractive.

Ministry’s Reply

7.2 Under Sterilisation beds scheme there are 2915 sterilisation beds functioning in
Government/Voluntary Organisations. The present norm of Rs. 3000 per bed per annum for
achievement of 75/60 Tubectomy per bed per annum in Government/Voluntary
Organisations was admissible. The norm has since been revised to Rs. 4500 per bed per
annum subject to achievement of 75/60 Tubectomy per bed per annum.

Free distribution of Conventional Contraceptives
Recommendation (Para 8.3)

8.3 The Committee is of the opinion that budgetary allocation made in this regard does
not reflect the importance of barrier methods for young couples and suggests that adequate
attention must be paid to this area. Presently the emphasis is on sterilisation which is
suitable for couples with one or more children. The Committee feels that other methods like
Condoms, Diapragms, IUD and Non-sterioidal pills must also be given adequate
importance.

Ministry’s Reply
8.3 The non-terminal (spacing) methods are being given due importance under the
13


14

Family Welfare Programme and as a result of this, the number of acceptors of various
methods over the years indicate an increase in acceptance of non-terminal methods.
Information, Education and Communication IEC

Recommendation (Para 9.1)

9.1 The Committee feels that since LEC activities are very vital for propagating family
welfare schemes and for promoting the small family norm and mother and child care, the
Department should finalise the above proposals at the earliest. The Committee is further of
the opinion that the Department should involve Panchayats also in this programme by
providing them necessary materials on IEC.

Ministry’s Reply -

9.1 Scheme of establishment of IEC Bureau at State level is in operation in 8 States i.e.
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal having 4.5 crores population or more each. Funds have been
earmarked at the rate of Rs. 7.50 lakhs to each State. Further continuation will depend on
evaluation of Bureau after completion of 5 years. Similar action would be taken for
establishment of IEC Bureau in 7 States having one crore to 4.5 crore population during
1996-97. Thereafter remaining States having less than one crore population would be
covered in 1997-98 and continued subject to evaluation.

Through restructuring of IEC set up at State level the optimal returns would be
achieved.

A provision has been made to establish 50 Health Awareness Units in villages of 135
identified weak districts through NYKS. Thrust areas have already been identified such as
creating awareness among adolescent girls regarding consequences of early marriage, age of
mother at first child birth, childcare, immunisation and adoption of small family norm after
providing adequate training and IEC training material.

Involvement of Panchayats is envisaged through handing over a few Mahila Swasthya
Sanghs to Panchayats’on pilot basis in selected districts. Expansion of this model would be
attempted on evaluation of this pilot programme. 33% female Panchayat members would be
involved to attain coordination and support for the programme. Adequate training is
imparted on population growth and CSSM

11932 New Mahila Swasthya Sanghs are proposed to be constituted in selected districts
during 1995-96. Population education activities are being organised in 65603 existing Mahila
Swasthya Sanghs. Emphasis has been given on inter-personal communication activities.

Recommendation (Para 9.2)

9.2 The Committee suggests that the Department should consider Integration of IEC
with the activities of field agencies like ICDS, adult education set up, school teachers, ISM
Practitioners and local NGOs with a view to propagating virtues of small family.

Ministry’s Reply

9.2 Integration of IEC with activities of field agencies like ICDS, Adult Education &
School teachers syllabus has taken place. ISM practitioners and NGOs would be sent IEC
materials.

Research & Evaluation .
Recommendation (Para 10.2)

10.2 The Committee observes that there are a number of research organisations under
different Ministries / Department. In, addition to ICMR, which are engaged incarrying out.


15

the basic clinical research relating to human reproduction / fertility. These activities, the
Committee feels, need to be coordinated and their funding support strengthened with a view
to achieving major breakthrough in this field. The Committee also realizes that the
contraceptive research in indigenous system of medicines, especially, in herbal medicines,
also needs to be encouraged and supported.

Ministry’s Reply

10.2 A national Committee on Research in Haman Reproduction (NCRHR) was
constituted by the Department of Family Welfare on 27.3.92 under the Chairmanship of
Secretary (FW) with an objective to coordinate various research activities going on at
different institutions /organisations in the field of contraceptive technology, direct them
towards priority areas of national interest, ensure adequate financial support, expedite
outcome of such research activities and its use in the field and establish linkages between
research laboratories and manufacturing units.

With a view to encourage contraceptive research in Indian System of Medicine, the
Ministry had set up a Committee which identified products such as Pipladi Yoga and Neem
(under Ayurveda System of Medicine) and MH-18 (under Unani System of Medicine) for
further research. Clinical trials with these are proposed to be taken up*by Central Council of
Research in Ayurveda & Central Council of Research in Unani Medicine respectively.

On the specific request of Professor Ranjit Roy Choudhury, this Ministry has permitted
him to conduct clinical trials on the Rosa Sinensis.

Involvement of Non-Governmental Organisations

Recommendation (Para 11.2)

11.2 The performance of NGOs who show good results should be widely publicised and
such organisations should be given special awards and incentives.

11.3 Apart from involving NGOs, the Committee also feels that even private medical
practitioners, including ISM practitioners, ex-servicemen, retired Government servents, etc.
and the elected representatives of the local bodies should also be motivated and trained in
family welfare services so that they can also be used in propagating the smalt family norm.

Ministry’s Reply i

11.2 The recommendation has been noted. The Department is already encouraging
NGOs from weak areas to pay field visits to better performing States including NGOs
elsewhere to learn lessons to improve their performance.

The Tripartite National Committee of family welfare planning in the organised sector
have already recommended wards inter-alia to the NGO’s Sector and organised Sector
organisations. The first award was announced and distributed in March, 1993. Three
organisations each in the voluntary and organised sector received these awards.

11.3 Department of Family Welfare have already prepared a number of model schemes
which can be taken by NGOs which come from various backgrounds and include Medical
practitioners, ISM practitioners, Ex-servicemen, retired Government servents, etc.

Area Development Project «

Recommendation (Paras 13.1 & 13.2)

13.1 The Committee emphasis the need for extending the programme to more areas/
States depending upon their socio-economic and cultural background.

13.2 The Committee also notes that at present, area projects in urban slums are being
implemented mostly in big cities like Calcutta, Delhi, Bombay, Hyderabad and Bangalore.


16

The Committee recommends that the Department should initiate steps to expand the scheme to
more cities and urban agglomerations in various States.
Ministry’s Reply

13.1 Keeping in view the recommendation, the Department of Family Welfare proposes to
take up an area project in four districts of backward Konkan region of Maharashtra State
namely, Pune, Raigad, Sindhudurg and Ratnagiri for a period of 5 years at an estimated cost of
Rs. 47.40 crores with German assistance. A Memorandum for the Expenditure Finance
Cominittee of the Ministry of Finance has been circulated to the appraising Ministries for their
comments. The approval of EFC is expected to be obtained shortly.

Proposals are also under consideration for taking up area projects in six North-Eastern
States with the assistance of European Community, in three backward districts of Dharmapuri,
Tanjavur and Nagapattina—Quaid-E-Milleth in Tamil Nadu with DANIDA assistance and in
three districts of West Bengal with assistance of Overseas Development Administration (U.K.).
Assistance is also being sought from World Bank for taking up area-based sub-projects with
emphasis on reproductive and child health in selected districts and cities of the States. A World
Bank Preparation Mission has visited the country in September, 1995 in this connection.

13.2 Efforts are underway to take up projects in selected cities with the emphasis on
Reproductive and Child Health parameters. Donor agencies like the World Bank and UNFPA
are expected to provide future assistance for such projects. The State Governments are being
requested to formulate proposals in this regard.

Recommendation (Para 13.3)

13.3. The Committee also feels that there should be transparency regarding the ‘Innovative
Services’ which are being provided under this project. Injections and invasive techniques must
not be promoted without considering the local conditions, and there should be a check on the
utilisation rate and the actual performance with regard to promotion of reproductive health.

Ministry’s Reply
13.3 The recommendation has been noted and the State Governments are being advised to

provide transparency in implementation of the innovative schemes under on-going projects and
the likely new projects by involving NGO's Private Medical Practitioners, Women’s groups, etc.

Recommendations (Para 14, 14.1)
Child Survival & Safe Motherhood Project (CSSM)

14. This Programme consists of two components, namely, child survival component and safe
motherhood component. Under Child Survival component all districts of the country are
proposed to be covered in a phased manner. The districts covered under CSSM during a
particular year are supplied with Drug Kit-A and which are not covered are supplied with IFA
Tab. & Vitamin-A in bulk. During 1993-94, 154 districts were supplied Drug Kit-A. The
remaining districts were supplied with lron Tabs. & Vitamin ‘A’. During 1994-95, 101 more
districts were added to the programme and, therefore, kits were to be supplied to 255 discticts
and bulk drug to the remaining districts. But only 41 districts could be supplied these Drug Kits.

14.1 The Committee finds the progress of the scheme rather slow as only 255 districs have
been covered so far and in some of the districts Drug Kits could not be provided uptil now. The
explanation given by the Department that DGS & D did not.place orders is also not acceptable.
Therefore, the Committee recommends, that in future the Department shold ensure a speedy
expansion of the programme so that the target of covering all the districts is not delayed. It
should see that the order for Drug Kit-A are placed well in advance.

Ministry’s Reply
14 & 14.1 The Universal Immunisation Programme for the control of vaccine preventable


17

diseases; ORT Programme for prevention of death due to acute dehydration caused by
diarrhoea and Prophylaxis Schemes against nutritional anaemia among pregnant women and
children and control against blindness due to vitamin ‘A’ deficiency among children of under
3 years of age are already in implementation of all the districts of the country. The access
established under the UIP is now being utilised to extend and intensify other services related
to Maternal and Child Health under Child Survival and Safe Motherhood Programme
launched in August, 1992 with the objective of improving the health status of women and
children and reducing maternal, infant and child mortality rates. The Programme is being
implemented in the phased manner and all districts of the country will be covered under the
Child Survival as well as Safe Motherhood component of the programme. Initially, only 219
districts of high IMR/MMR were proposed to be taken up under the Safe Motherhood
component but now in view of the assurance given by the Prime Minister to the Parliament,
all the districts of the remaining states are being taken up under the safe motherhood
component also. Thus the CSSM programme will cover all the districts of the country under
its both components by the year 1996-97.

(ii) In order to sustain and strengthen the accessibility of services to mothers and
children provided under UIP and CSSM programme during the VII & VIII Plan period, all
the ongoing MCH interventions are being proposed to be brought under the umbrella of
Reproductive and Child Health Programme. With this unified approach of CSSM plus
activities, it is envisaged to achieve the goals of national health policy.

(iii) To have 100%" deliveries conducted by trained dais is one of goal of the national
health policy. As per SRS estimates (1992), 47.3% deliveries were conducted by trained
personnel including 24.4% institutional deliveries. In order to ensure 100% deliveries by
trained personnel, a proposal for formulating a specific dais training programme is also
under’ active consideration. The training of dais is a part of overall efforts to increase
accessibility to basic maternal and women care particulary anti-natal care, dedivery practices
and post natal care. The goal is to train/retrain atleast one traditional birth attendant (TBA)
i.e Dai in each village of the country. —

(iv) To eradicate Polio from the country, a programme called Pulse Polio Immunisation
has been launhed in the country. The OPV dose will be administered to all children in India,
0-3 years of age on one single day,. irrespective of previous immunisation status. This will be
repeated 4—6 weeks later. The purpose of PPIs is to reduce the circulation of the wild polio
viruses. 9th Decemebr, 1995 and 20th Jan., 1996 have been fixed as immunisaition days in
the country. To make the programme a success all out efforts have been made. The Steering
Committee chaired by at the level of Cabinet Secretary in the Centre and Governor in the
States have been formed. Logistic support have been provided to all the states. A fund for
Rs. 50.00 crore has been approved for the PPI Programme during the year 1995-96, out of
which 34.00 crores have been kept for purchase of polio vaccine an balance 26.00 crore for
social mobilisation. Funds have also been released to the States in this regard. External
assistance is also being sought for from ODA, UNICEF and also Rotary in this regard.

(v) The current status of supplies of drug kits is as under :

(a) So far as supply of drug kit ‘A’ is concerned, orders for all the districts upto phase
four i.e. 1995-96 have been placed in two instalments: first instalment through DGS &
D to the States of Orissa, Bihar and West Bengal and second instalment to remaining
districts through RITES. more than 50% of these kits have already been supplied and
remaining are expected by December, 1995.

(b) The tenders for drug kits for the districts covered in 1995-96 have also been
invited and it is expected that order will be placed by the RITES in December, 1995.

Recommendation (Para 15 & 15.1)
Immunisation
15. To bring down the infant and maternal mortality rate the universal immunisation


18

programme was launched in 1985 and was declared as one of the Technology Mission in

1986.

15.1 The Department rightly claims that the universal immunisation programme is an
outstanding success and points out that the infant mortality rate has come down over the
years considerably. The Committe while agreeing to this, cautions that no complacency
should be shown in this regard.

Ministry’s Reply

15 & 15.1 The performance graph of the programme shows that during the last many
years the coverage level for immunisation both for the infants and pregnant women have
been sustained and all out efforts are being made to cover the uncovered pockets. To
eliminate the poliomylitis, a special compaign of PPI has been launched.

Involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions in Family Welfare

Recommendation (Paras 18, 18.1 & 18.2)

18. One of the important recommendations made by the Committee in its Eighth
Report, was to involve the Panchayati Raj Institutions in National Family Welfare
Programmes. To a query as to what concrete steps the Department had taken in this regard,
the Secretary informed the Committee that the authority to involve Panchayati Raj
Institutions lay with the States and that very few States had taken initiatives in this regard.
The Committee is not satisfied with this routine explanation and tendency to throw the
blame on the States always. The Department does not say what efforts it had made to
induce the States to involve Panchayati Raj Institutions in family welfare programmes. A
routine, cyclostyled circular would not be enough.

18.1 The Committee feels that the Department should pursue the matter vigorously with
the State Governments to involve Panchayats/Nagarpalikas for propagation, promotion,
implementation, as well as monitoring the family welfare programmes.

18.2 The Committee also reiterates its earlier recommendation, made in the Eighth
Report, that Panchayats should be given specific targets relating to family welfare
programmes and those fulfilling the targets might be given special awards and incentives in
the form of grants for developmental works undertaken by them.

Ministry’s Reply

18, 18.1 & 18.2 It is primarily for the State Governments to delegate powers,
responsibilities and funds to Panchayats/Nagarpalikas. The Department of Family Welfare
included an Agenda Item—“Involvement of Panchayats in the management and
administration of Primary Health Care Institutions” in the meeting of the Central Council of
Health & Family Welfare, so that the State Governments may be motivated to involve the
Panchayats in the management of health institutions.

The Department of Family Welfare has recently got a new scheme approved, under
which one revenue village with a population of 500 or more, in every district, which records
the lowest crude birth rate, infant mortality rate and child mortality rate among all the
competing revenue villages in that district will be given a cash award of Rs. 2 lakhs. The
award money will be spent by the Panchayat for developmental works in the village
concerned. Full and universal civil registration will be a pre requisite for the award.

General Observations/Recommendations

Recommendation (Para 24)
24. The Committee also finds that the monitoring and supervising aspect of the family


19

welfare programmes is very weak and that it needs to be improved at the field level. A large
number of reports, returns and registers, the Committee feels, need to be replaced by one or
two simple, integrated cards.

Ministry’s Reply

24. To reduce the burden of paper work at the grass root level, the monthly proforma
under HMIS has been simplified, designed & developed by CBHI & National Information
Centre and it has been made computer compilable.

There is a need for the rapid implementation of Health Management Information
System all over the country as at present only 40% of the State/UTs (13 in number) stands
covered under the project. When the entire country is covered under HMIS meaningful data
for the various health conditions and related aspects will be available for effective policy
planning implementation & serve as a tool for the surveillance, prevention & timely
remedial action without further delay.

Health Management Information System integrates the Health & F.W. Programmes
such as, Family Welfare, Maternal & Child Health, Immunisation, National Malaria,
Tuberculosis, Leprosy, Blindness control as well as programmes on iron and vitamin ‘A’
deficiency. It also includes communicable diseases on national importance and local diseases
which are to be given priority by the individual States.


CHAPTER-III
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue

Recommendation (Paras 1, 1.1 & 1.2)

1. The population of our country is growing at an alarming rate. It has increased from
342 million in 1947 to 846.3 million as per the census of 1991 and an estimated 900 millions
by the end of 1994. The average annual exponential growth rate has been in the order of
2.14%. Realising the fact that rapid increase in population would have a serious implication
on the overall socio-economic development, India became the first country in the world to
adopt family planning programme on a national basis in 1951. The objective is to reduce the
birth rate in order to stablise the population at a level consistent with the requirements of
the socio-economic development of the nation.

1.1 Keeping in view the above objective, the National Health Policy (1983) laid down
long-term demographic goals to achieve a Net Reproduction Rate of Unity (NRR:1) by the
end of this century. The implications of this are to achieve the following goals also by 2000
AD.

(a) Reduction of average size of the family from 4.3 children to 2.3 children.

(b) Reduction of Crude Birth Rate (CBR) to 21 per thousand from the level of.33 in
1978, death rate from 14 to 9 per thousand population and Infant Mortality Rate (IMR)
from 129 to 60.

(c) Increasing the Couple Protection Rate (CPR) from 22 per cent to 60 per cent.

1.2 The Seventh Plan, however, visualised that the goal of reaching NRR:1 may be
achievable in the period of 2006—2011 AD. But, as per the Eighth Plan document, it would
be achievable only in 2011—2016 AD. The goals to be achieved by the end of Eighth Plan
are as follows:— ~

Indicator 8th Plan goal Achievements 1993
(a) CBR (per 1000 Population) 26.0 28.5

(b) IMR (per 1000 Population) 70.0 74.0*

(c) CPR 56.0 45.4**

“Sample Registration Survey (SRS) Data
**Ag on 31.3.1994.
Ministry's Reply
No action.
Budgetary Provisions
(Recommendation Para 2)

2. The Committee, in its Eighth Report, had observed that Rs. 1430 crores, provided
last year to the Department, was insufficient for achieving the target of “NRR—one” by
2000AD., and had recommended substantial increase in allocation. The Committee notes
that a sum of Rs. 1593.51 crores has been provided this year for the Department, of which
Rs. 1581 crores forms plan component and Rs. 12.51 crores as non-plan component. It
works out to 0,92% of the total budget of the Government of India.

20


Rural Family Welfare Centres a1

Recommendation (Paras 3 & 3.1)

3. In order to provide family planning and MCH services in the rurai areas, Rural
Family Welfare Centres were established. The Commitee found that presently 5435 centres
have been set up in the country and their number is stagnating at the same level since April,
1980. When asked, the Department informed that new centres would not be provided
hereafter because the Family Planning and MCH services are now being provided through
integrated facilities at PHCs.

3.1 The budgetary provision for these centres has been increased from Rs. 131.50 crores
B.E. 1994-95 to Rs. 160 crores in 1995-96. To a question whether the department proposes
to increase the number of centres with the increase in allocations, the Secretary informed
that Committee that the Department has no plan to expand it because, the allocation this
year, though increased by Rs. 28.50 crores, would not be sufficient even for supporting the
existing Centres.

Ministry’s Reply

No action.

Urban Family Welfare Centres
Recommendation (Paras 5 & 5.1)

5. Urban Family Welfare Centres were established to provide family welfare and MCH
services in urban areas. At present. there are 1499 such centres in the country, out of which
208 are run by the Central Sector i.e. Ministries of Railways, Defence, Labour, etc.

5.1 The Committee was informed that no new Urban Family Welfare Centre would be
set up and only the existing ones have been proposed to be reorganised. Besides, various
categories of Health Posts would also be established. The Committee is happy to note that
the budgetary allocation for this purpose has been increased in 1995-96. The Committee,
however, is surprised to note that no targets were fixed last year. On being asked as to why
targets were not fixed, the Secretary informed the Committee, that it was due to the fact
that money made available was for the continuance of the existing Urban Family Welfare
Centres, and it was not possible to fix a target for expansion. The Committee does not agree
with the contention of the Department. It feels that it is possible to fix targets both physical
and financial, even in maintaining/continuing the existing centres.

Ministry’s Reply

5 & 5.1 The monitoring of the scheme from 1.4.95 shall take place at the Central level
wherein performance in respect of ante-natal coverage and Family Planning services and
primary health care activities shall be monitored. They shall also be required to give the
position of the staff working under the scheme. The State Government will be monitoring
the Scheme on a greater detail for which a comprehensive proforma has been devised.

Post Partum Programme
Recommendation (Para 6)

6. Besides providing ante-natal, natal and post-natal services to expectant mothers, this
programme also provides family planning services. In other words, it is a maternity centred
hospital-based approach to Family Welfare Programme. It covers 550 Post Partum Centres
at the District Levei hospitals and 1012 centres at the Sub-district level hospitals. This year a
provision of Rs. 40 crores has been made, which shows a slight reduction over the last year.
The Department stated that it is due to the fact that the component of de-canalisation has
been excluded from the programme.


Ministry’s Reply

No action
Sterilisation Beds
Recommendation (Paras 7 & 7.1)

7.. A scheme for reservation of sterilisation beds in hospitals and nursing homes for
providing facility for tubectomy operations was felt necessary as the beds for such cases were
not readily available. At present, a total of 2797 beds are available. A maintenance grant of
Rs. 3,000 per bed per annum is paid to each institution provided they have achieved 75/60
tubectomies per annum.

7.1 An allocation of Rs. 1 crore has been made this year. The Department claims that
the programme is quite a success, and 1,05,269 tubectomies were performed during 1993-94
over 58 tubectomies per bed per annum.

Ministry’s Reply
No action
Free Distribution of Conventional Contraceptives

Recommendation (Paras 8 and 8.1, 8.2)

8. The budget allocation for free distribution of contraceptives has been reduced from
Rs. 76 crores in 1994-95 to Rs. 69 crores in 1995-96. To a specific question regarding the
reduced allocation, the Department stated that earlier targets of contraceptive users were
being fixed by the Department in consultation with the States and supplies used to be
dispatched accordingly. In order to reduce wastage from this year onwards, the States have
been requested to work out their requirements in this regard and supplies will be made
accordingly.

8.1 The Department stated in the performance budget, that greater thrust was being laid
on spacing method for younger couples and there was a likelihood of increase in the total
demand for conventional contraceptives.

8.2 The Committee hopes that the increase in requirement of contraceptives will be met
by the Department despite a reduced allocation.

Ministry’s Reply

8, 8.1 & 8.2: During 1995-96 no targets for Free Distribution of condoms have been set
by Deptt. of Family Welfare. Supply of condom stocks to the States will be on the basis of
demand projected by the States. This will lead to significant reduction in wastages, but there
will be no problem in meeting all genuine requirements projected by the States.

Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
Recommendation (Para-9)

9. IEC activities are carried out to achieve wider publicity for family welfare methods.
A sum of Rs. 34.46 crores has been allocated this year. The Department proposes to
establish IEC Bureaus at State level, so that local-specific communication material can be
prepared. It also proposes to establish Population Awareness Units through Nehru Yuvak
Kendra Sangathan and Mahila Mandals by involving the youth and women respectively.

Ministry’s Reply
No action


Research & Evaluation
Recommendation (Paras 10 & 10.1)

10. The allocation for Research & Evaluation has been reduced from Rs. 16.59 crores in
B.E. 1994-95, to Rs. 15.79 crores in 1995-96. For Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR),
the provision has been reduced from Rs. 9 crores to Rs. 7.5 crores. Explaining the reason for
reduction in the provision to ICMR, the Secretary stated that ICMR was given grants-in-aid on
a year to year basis for undertaking research in contraceptive technology by involving 33 Human
Reproduction Reseach Centres (HRRC), and this year the Department is proposing to establish
14 more HRRCs. Another reason is that out of the 33 HRRCs established so far, only 23 have
agreed to implement the district project evolved by the ICMR and the rest opted out of it since it
was voluntary.

10.1 The Committee is of the opinion that the research and evaluation activities are very
crucial for developing new techniques of population control. It also feels that the allocation
made is not adequate even for sustaining the ongoing programmes. The Committee therefore.
recommends that allocations for research activities should be raised suitably. The Committee
also feels, that the Department should take adequate measures to persuade the remaining
HRRCs also to accept the district projects which are basically meant for improving the quality of
family planning services at the district level.

Ministry's Reply

10 & 10.1 The allocation of grant to Indian Council of Medical Research for various
research activities during the current year is 750 lakhs as against 723 lakhs during 1994-95.

The working and progress made in the District Project by HRRCs was reviewed by
Secretary (FW) and the project was dropped from six HRRCs because of poor performance by
HRRCvs/specific request from HRRCs to terminate the district project.

Involvement of Non-Governmental Organisations
Recommendations (Paras 11 & 13)

11. A sum of Rs. 8.5 crores has been provided for the year 1995-96 under this Head. The
Secretary stated that family welfare was such an area where not many NGOs showed interest.
He however, accepted that more of that were coming forward now and their number had
increased considerably. The Secretary admitted that the present level of allocation would not be
adequate to meet the requirement in this regard.

Area Development Project
Recommendation (Para 13)
13. Area Development Projects have been taken up with financial assistance from external

agencies in 15 States and in the National Capital Territory of Delhi to improve health and family
welfare delivery system. It is noted that its outlay has been kept at the level of the year 1994-95.

Ministry’s Reply
No action

Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuses) Act, 1994
Recommendation (Paras 19 & 19.1)

19. On the question of progress made in framing the Rules and the Constitution of the
proposed Central Supervisory Board with regard to implementation of the Pre-natal Diagnostic
Techniques (Regulation & Prevention of Misuses) Act, 1994, the Secretary informed the
Committee that rules had been drafted and sent to the Ministry of Law, for vetting. States have
also been: requested to nominate their representatives on the Central Supervisory Board. The
Boara will be constituted as soon as the rules come into force.


24

19.1 The Committee feels that the Central Supervisory Board should be constituted as
quickly as possible and the matter should be taken up with the States on a priority basis.

Ministry’s Reply

19 & 19.1 The constitution of the Central Supervisory Board under the Pre-Natai
Diagnostic Technique (Prevention and Regulation of Misuses) Act, 1994 is at an advanced
stage. The Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha have elected their representatives on the Central
Supervisory Board. The rules under the Act have been framed and approved. The Act is
likely to be brought into force shortly. The rules will also be notified.

General Observations / Recommendations

Recommendation (Para 21)

21. In the process of implementation of various programmes / schemes relating to family
welfare, a vast network of institutions for the delivery of health and family welfare services
have come up in our country. The quality of service, which varies markedly from State to
State, the Committee feels is far from satisfactory. The outreach is insufficient, particularly
in remote rural areas and urban slums. The Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for
improving the quality and outreach of services at the earliest.

Ministry’s Reply
21. Differential noims have been adopted for establishment of Sub-centres, Primary
Health Centres and Community Health Centres in hilly and tribal areas, as under :

Name of the centre : Population norms Population norms for Hilly
for Plain areas and Tribal areas
Sub-centres é 5,000 3,000
PHCs 30,000 20,000
CHCs 1,20,000 80,000

The norms are however indicative only and the State Govt. may relax the norms according
to the topographical and socio-economic conditions. Since Health is a State subject, the
quality of service varies from the State to State depending upon the infrastructural
devicopment, posting of medical and para-medical staff, budgetary provisions for medicines,
equipment and other facilities.

Recommendation (Para 22)

22. It appears to the Committee that keeping in view the general constraint of
resources, the thrust of the major family welfare programmes during the 8th Plan period has
necessarily to be on consolidation of the existing infrastructure rather than its expansion.
However, strengthening of health facility, the Committee feels is essential in remote rural
areas and urban slums. Construction of sub-centres and PHC buildings, supply of essential
equipments etc. deserve priority and need sustained attention. Establishment of Post Partum
Centres in all sub-district level hospitals, provision of lapractomy facility in all CHCs and
MTP facilities in all PHCs also need priority consideration.

Ministry’s Reply
22. Construction of sub-centres and Primary Health Centres and maintenance of

Primary Health Centres are under the State Governments’ Minimum Needs Programme.
The Central Government on their part is providing funds at the rate of Rs. 50.00 lakhs per


25

district per year for selected demographically weak districts under the Social Safety Net
Scheme for strengthening the existing PHCs. During 1995-96 it was propsed in the Annual
Plan Projections to open 45 district level and 63 sub-district level Post Partum Centres.
However, due to budget being static during the last three years the scheme could not be
expanded. Assistance for strenthening of the primary health infrastructure is also provided
under various Area Projects.

All out efforts are being made to provide facilities for conduction of MTP at all PHCs
in the country. However, as per the MTP Act it would be limited to the availability of
necessary infrastructure and trained manpower. Funds under this Scheme are being provided
to the State Governments for the training of medical officers of the PHCs in the conduction
of MTP at the identified training Cenres for the purpose. For laparoscopic sterilisation,
Centres for training have been set up in all major States. In order to conduct sterilisation by
laproscopic methods at all CHCs, it is necessary that a trained Gynae. / Obst. / Surgeon be
posted at the CHC. Provision of these services would depend on the infrastructure and
availability of trained manpower. However, as far as the development of infrastructure at
PHCs and CHCs is concerned this comes under the Minimum Needs Programme of the
States.

Recommendation (Para 23 & 23.1)

23.. The Finance Minister while presenting the Budget for 1995-96, announced a
National Social Assistance Scheme. One of the components of the scheme is provision of
sustenance for pre-natal and post-natal maternity care to women belonging to poor
households for the first two births. The scheme will eventually cover about 14 million
neediest beneficiaries from household below the poverty line. Three quarters of the
beneficiaries are likely to be women needing assistance on account of old age, widowhood
and maternity. The scheme, to be funded jointly by the Centre and the States, will be
implemented by the States through Panchayati Raj Institutions.

23.1 The Committee is surprised to note that this does not find reflection in the
allocation for family welfare or in the sector-wise allocaton made for current year.

Ministry’s Reply

23 & 23.1 The scheme on National Social Assistance Programme is being implemented
by Ministry of Rural Areas and Employment as 100% Centrally sponsored scheme. The
scheme has three main components:—

1. National Old Age Pension Scheme (NOAPS).
2. National Family Benefits Scheme (NFBS).
3. National Maternity Benefit Scheme (NMBS).

A Scréening Committee has also been formed of which Secretary (FW) is a member.
First meeting of the Committee was held in November, 1995.


CHAPTER-IV

Recommendations/Observations Replies to which have not been accepted by the Committee

Please see Chapter-I.

6


CHAPTER-V

Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been received

-NIL-

27