Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
REPORT NO.
294
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th January, )5 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th January, )5 2018
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and
Eighty Third  Report  on  the  Subject ‘The
Implementation of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
and Mid-Day-Meal Scheme’
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FOURTH REPORT
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

30
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred
Eighty  Third  Report  on  the  Subject  ‘The
Implementation of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
and Mid-Day-Meal Scheme’
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-20
Chapter-I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government ......................................................................................... 2
Chapter -II Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply ................................ 3-9
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ..................... 10-19
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the
Government is still awaited ............................................................................. 20
5. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS –– A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 21-23
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 25-28

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2017)
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya    —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
5. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
6. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
9. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
10. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
12. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
13. Shri Nihal Chand
14. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali (Patil)
15. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste.
16. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
17. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
18. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
19. Shri Ramachandran Mullappally
20. Shrimati Neelam Sonker
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri N.K Premachandran
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
25. Shri M.I. Shanavas
26. Dr. Nepal Singh
27. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
28. Shri Satyapal Singh
29. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
30. Shri P.R. Sundaram
31. Shrimati P.K Sreemathi Teacher
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri K P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred Ninety Fourth Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by Government on
the observation/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty Third Report on Subject the
Implementation of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and Mid-Day-Meal Scheme.
2. Two Hundred Eighty Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 15
th December, 2017 and simultaneously
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 15th December, 2017. Replies of the Government to the Recommendations/
Observation contained in the Report were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 4th
January, 2018.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 4th January,
2018.
DR. SA TYANARAY AN JATIYA
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
5 January, 2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Pausa 15, 1939 (Saka) Committee on Human Resource Development
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
CAL : Computer aided Learning
MDMS : Mid-Day-Meal Scheme
NCF : National Curriculum Framework
ODL : Open Distance Learning
PBBB : Padhe Bharat Badhe Bharat
QPR : Quarterly Progress Report
RAA : Rashtriya Avishkar Abhiyan
SSA : Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
SMC : Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee
SLSMC : State Level Steering-cum-Monitor ing Committee
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in its Two Hundred eighty-third Report on the subject “The Implementation of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and
Mid-Day-Meal Scheme” pertaining to the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of School
Education and Literacy. The 283rd Report was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 20th June,
2017. The Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of School Education and Literacy) vide
its communication dated 29th June, 2017 furnished its Action Taken replies to the Committee.
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in
the 283rd Report have been categorized as follows:
(i) Chapter-I:
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government
Paras - 34.1 and 41 Total – 2
(ii) Chapter-II:
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply –
Paras - 28, 28.1, 29, 29.1, 34, 36, 36.1, 37, 37.1 and 46 Total – 10
(iii) Chapter-III:
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee
Paras - 30, 30.1, 31, 31 (a & b), 32 (a & b), 32.1, (a&b),  33, 33.1,  35, 35.1, 38, 38.1,39, 39.1,
40, 40.1, 42,43, 44 and 45 Total – 19
(iv) Chapter-IV:
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of the Government is still awaited.
Paras –  Nil Total - Nil

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
Recommendations/Observations
34.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends to initiate the pilot project of establishing the Smart Classes in
Government schools, in fact, through which teaching–learning process would be effective using computer
enabled techniques, wherein teaching by the use of multi-media projector is executed and Smart Boards are
used, which have more visualization of lessons for students. A comprehensive viable target should be set for
successful functioning of Smart-Classes in Govt. schools and a status note be provided to the Committee.
Action Taken
Under the Innovation Head, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) provides support for Computer aided Learning
(CAL) facilities upto ` 50 lakhs per district per year. The focus of CAL is to maximize coverage in Upper
Primary Schools with special emphasis on Science and Mathematics. During 2016-17, an amount of
` 31195.06 lakh has been allocated for CAL in 8226 government upper primary schools including ` 16493.63
lakh for Rashtriya Avishkar Abhiyan (RAA).
Recommendations/Observations
41. The Committee further recommends that for intensification of MDMS, it should be incumbent on the
nodal Ministry to review the infrastructure development meant for MDMS in the meetings of Steering-cum-
Monitoring Committee (SMC) and representatives of other nodal Ministries which run the infrastructure
development schemes of MDMS should be invited to these meetings.
Action Taken
The mid day meal scheme covered 10.03 Crore children studying in 11.50 lakh Government and
Government aided schools, Special Training Centres and Madrasas & Maqtabs supported under SSA on
daily basis during 2015-16.  In order to monitor the scheme of such magnitude and vastness,  the MDM
guidelines provide for setting up of Steering-cum-Monitoring Committees at National, State and District
Levels. The State Level Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee (SLSMC) headed by Chief Secretary of the
State advises the State on the implementation of the Scheme and discusses issues requiring convergence
with other Departments in the State.  It has been made mandatory that the Annual Work Plan & Budget of
the State should be approved by SLSMC. During 2015-16 37 meetings of the SLSMC were held in various
States/UTs. During 2016-17, 8 meetings of SLSMC have been held.  The representative of the MHRD is
also invited in the SLSMC meetings.
2

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
Recommendations/Observations
28. On the basis of deliberations with various stakeholders in the field of elementary education at places
of visit described in proceeding paragraphs, the Committee notes that Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) was
launched in 2000-01. However , the precursor of this programme was District Primary Education Programme
(DPEP), launched way back in 1993-94 with an aim of achieving the objective of universal primary
education. There is no denying the fact that for both DPEP and SSA, the major thrust is to ensure universal
enrolment in elementary schools and remove social and gender gaps in schooling. Back in reckoning, the 2%
education cess was set rolling in 2004 and, in fact, there was no opposition whatsoever for imposition of this
levy. The Committee appreciates the endeavor made by the Government towards the universal enrolment
goal for schools in India, which has led to the fact that almost all children are enrolled in school today. The
Committee, on the other hand, is intrigued to note that while the enrolment picture continues to improve; on
the learning front, the story is far from satisfactory. In Arithmetic, only a little over half of all children
involved in Standard V could do a 2 digit subtraction problem with borrowing.
Action Taken
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) has made significant progress in achieving near universal access and
equity. However, imparting quality education to children at elementary level is the major challenge and
therefore, reorienting the SSA programme towards quality is the main emphasis of the Department. Central
Government, along with State and UT Governments has taken various initiatives for improving the quality of
education, the details of which are attached at Annexure-I.
Recommendations/Observations
28.1 The Committee, therefore, emphatically recommends that Central Government should undertake all
initiatives for the States and focus on ensuring that children are learning well and the States should also
resort to their own measures in a time bound sustainable manner to understand what is the level of students
in terms of learning, and the means to determine improvement in basic learning. The Committee also
recommends that the need of the hour is to shift the policy and practice from input-based expenditure to
outcome-focused achievement for implementation of SSA.
29. The Committee further notes that one of the prime challenges is to get much more effective utilization
of the resources that are spent on elementary education which is the backbone of SSA. Effective spending
implies that the expenditure is incurred on progress towards goals, especially in terms of improving learning
outcomes of children in elementary schools.
Action Taken (28.1 & 29)
For the financial year 2016-17, the Project Approval Board (PAB) of the SSA decided that 10% of the
total outlay shall be utilized for quality related initiatives alone under the SSA as against approximately 6% in
previous years. Accordingly, activities related to quality interventions through SSA were approved in the
Annual Plans for all States and UTs.
3

4
To enable this, the Department categorized all interventions under the SSA in three categories where
Category II is related to interventions for improvement in quality and learning outcomes. These include
Teacher Training, Academic Support through BRC/CRC, Learning Enhancement Programme (LEP),
Innovation fund for CAL, Library, Teacher Grant, TLE for New Schools, Transport/Escort facility, Special
Training for Age appropriate admission of OoSC, Innovation, Community Mobilization and SMC Training.
While releasing the funds under SSA, all States and UTs have been advised through the sanction order
to ensure that at least 10% of the total expenditure of the State/UT for the current year is on quality
interventions as listed in Category II.
Further, all States and UTs have been given specific commitments focused on improvement in learning
outcomes during the finalization of their Annual Plans under SSA for 2016-17.
MHRD has developed a web portal called SSA SHAGUN (from the words Shaala and Gunvatta)
which has two parts i.e., one is a Repository of good practices, photographs, videos, studies, newspaper
articles etc on elementary education, State /UT wise. These are in the public domain. Its purpose is to
showcase success stories and also to provide a platform for all stakeholders to learn from each other. This
would also instill a positive competitive spirit among all the States and UTs.
The second part is regarding the online monitoring of the SSA implemented by States and UTs and can
be accessed by Government Officers at all levels using their specific passwords. It comprises questionnaires,
related to various interventions under SSA and the performance of the State, which will be filled in by the
States and UTs. There are 122 Reports which will be automatically generated from the data filled in the
questionnaires. These Reports, along with the success stories in the Repository, has created an online
platform to see the status of implementation of the SSA and the elementary education in all States and UTs.
MHRD, through NCERT, has developed Learning Outcomes for each class in Languages (Hindi,
English and Urdu), Mathematics, Environmental Studies, Science and Social Science up to the Elementary
stage. Care has been taken to develop the outcomes following consultations with States, UTs, SCERTs and
education experts from organizations including civil society organizations. The Learning Outcomes developed
by NCERT are based on the minimum levels of learning to facilitate the monitoring of students against
expected benchmarks.
These are being included in the Central Rules of the Right of Children to Free & Compulsory Education
(RTE) Act, 2009. A simplified version of these learning goals for display on the school notice board is being
finalized.
Recommendations/Observations
29.1 The Committee recommends that the Government of India should set the achievable goals and all
elements of education system viz., teachers’ training, on-sight support, materials and measurement, etc.,
have to be aligned to help schools and resultantly teachers help children learn better. Plans can be reviewed
and adjusted on year-to-year basis but the sustainable efforts have to be made for expanding the outreach
in the field of elementary education.
Action Taken
The RTE Act 2009 and National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 both point to building on the
child’s knowledge, potential and talent through a child centric approach. It suggests that everything done in

5
or for the school should be geared towards a measurable development in student’s learning level and
prepares them for independence of thought and action, life-long learning, democratic values, creativity
and life skills.
The Central Government, through SSA, supports the State Governments and UT Administrations
on several interventions to improve teaching standards, including inter-alia;   regular in-service teachers’
training, induction training for newly recruited teachers, training of all untrained teachers to acquire
professional qualifications through Open Distance Learning (ODL) mode academic support for teachers
through block and cluster resource centres, training on ICT Component, Inclusive Education, Gender
Sensitization and Adolescent Education is provided. Under SSA, the focus is to give subject specific, need
based and relevant in service teacher training to both elementary and secondary teachers for their
professional develop ment.
The focus of the Department is to align all its efforts towards improvement in learning outcomes of
children at elementary stage.
Recommendations/Observations
34. The Department of School Education and Literacy in its background note has apprised the Committee
of the new initiatives taken up by Department in the field of elementary education under the Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan (SSA) for improving the quality of education. The Committee admires these initiatives, like Swachha
Vidyalaya, Padhe Bharat Badhe Bharat (PBBB), Rashtriya Avishkar Abhiyan (RAA), Shaala - Siddhi,
School Leadership Development Programme, Vidyanjali, Twinning programme (Partnership Between Schools)
and E- Pathshala. The Committee wishes the Department to excel in the field of all these eight initiatives
and expect to get the details of concrete measurable achievements made therein so far, from the department
so that a review can be made for the success rate, including constraints, if any, and overall responses.
Besides, by interactions with various stakeholders in the field of elementary education, the Committee
during its visit to select places, was impressed for setting up of Smart Classes in Govt. schools, which would
augment the quality of teaching–learning process of education for students.
Action Taken
The Department is supporting States and UTs to implement national level initiatives to improve the
quality of education.
i. The ‘Padhe Bharat Badhe Bharat’ (PBBB), a sub-programme of the SSA, in classes I and II
focusing on foundational learning in early grades with an emphasis on reading, writing and
comprehension and Mathematics. States and UTs have been implementing specific interventions
like ABL in Tamil Nadu, Nalli Kali in Karnataka, Pragya in Gujarat; steps have been taken to
develop specific teacher training modules for teachers teaching students in classes 1 and 2.
Punjab, Meghalaya, Delhi have introduced programmes for strengthening teaching of maths in
classes 1 and 2; in Sikkim schools have set up reading corners for children in the foundational
classes through support from community members.
ii. The Rashtriya Aavishkar Abhiyan (RAA), also under the SSA, was launched by Late Dr. A.P.J.
Abdul Kalam. This aims to motivate and engage children of the age group 6-18 years, in Science,
Mathematics and Technology by observation, experimentation, inference drawing and model
building, through both inside and outside classroom activities. Schools have been adopted for

6
mentoring by Institutions of Higher Education like IIT’s, IISER’s and NIT’s. In some States
students have been taken for exposure visits to factories, research hubs; science and maths
clubs are being formed at the school levels, students are participating in competitions and
exhibitions to showcase their innovations in Maths, Science and Technology.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Government.  However, the Department
should inform the Committee about the data on functional smart classes in Government Schools.
Recommendations/Observations
36. An overview of MDMS presented the genesis of this scheme and the Committee finds that Mid-Day
Meal in schools has had a long history in India. In 1925, a Mid-Day Meal Programme was introduced for
disadvantaged children in Madras Municipal Corporation. By the mid 1980s, three States viz. Gujarat,
Kerala and Tamil-Nadu and the UT of Pondicherry had universalized a cooked Mid-Day Meal Programme
with their own resources for children studying at the primary stage. By 1990-91, the number of States
implementing the Mid-Day Meal Programme with their own resources on a universal or a large scale basis
had gone up to twelve States. Considering the aspect of enhancing enrollment, retention and attendance and
simultaneously with a view to improve the nutritional level among the children, the National Programme of
Nutritional Support to Primary Education (NP-NSPE) was launched as a Centrally sponsored scheme on
15th August, 1995, initially in 2408 blocks in the Country. By the year 1997-98, the NP-NPSE was introduced
in all blocks of the country. On the directives of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, cooked Mid-Day Meal
Programme was undertaken by the State Governments after November, 2001. Cooked Mid-Day Meal is
reported to have created a platform for children of all social and economic backgrounds to take meals
together , thereby facilitating achieving the objective of social equality. Nonetheless, the Committee has
gathered that, typically the MDMS has been resulting in the diversion of the attention of teachers and
students on activities related to it, rather than towards teaching and learning activities, resulting in loss of
studies also.
36.1 The Committee recommends that this aspect should be looked into and necessary initiatives by expedient
means be taken in the prevalent situation to overcome such drawback in MDMS.
Action Taken (36 & 36.1)
The MDM Guidelines envisage that teachers should, under no circumstances be assigned responsibilities
that will impede or interfere with teaching/learning. Teachers should, however, be involved in ensuring that
(a) good quality, wholesome food is served to children, and (b) the actual serving and eating is undertaken
in a spirit of togetherness, under hygienic conditions, and in an orderly manner so that the entire process is
completed in 30-40 minutes. It should however, be ensured that the food prepared is tasted by 2-3 adults
including at least one teacher before it is served to children.
In order to ensure that the teaching and learning activities in the schools are not affected,  25.53 lakh
cook-cum-helpers have been engaged by various States/UTs for preparing and serving of Mid-Day-Meal.
This has relieved the teachers from most of the activities under Mid Day Meal Scheme except that the
teacher is to taste the meal before it is served to the children and entire process of serving and eating of mid
day meal is completed within 30-40 minutes in an orderly manner.

7
Recommendations/Observations
37. The Committee notes that the Government’ s multi-faceted approach for MDMS, has undoubtedly
shown tremendous results. Be that as it may, the Committee understands that, in general, visible shortage of
basic infrastructural facilities and also the manpower, are crucial for the accomplishment of the cooked
Mid-Day Meal Programme.
Action Taken
As regards provision of infrastructure facilities under Mid-Day Meal scheme,   it is mentioned that
central assistance for construction of 10.05 lakh Kitchen-cum-stores has  been sanctioned to the States/
UTs. The States/UTs have reported in their first Quarterly Progress Report (QPR) for the quarter from April
to June, 2016 that 7.94 lakh Kitchen-cum-stores have been constructed and construction work is in progress
for 98437 Kitchen-cum-stores.
Regarding manpower, it is mentioned that Central Assistance for Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
(MME) is released to the States @ 1.8%  of the recurring central assistance ( cost of food grain, transport
assistance,  cooking cost and honorarium to cook-cum-helpers). 0.2% MME is for National Component for
Advertisement & Publicity and Professional Services etc.  The MDM guidelines envisage that 50% of  MME
funds are to be spent  at school level on forms, stationery soaps, plates, glasses, mats, training of cook-
cum-helpers, and replacement/repair/maintenance of cooking devices, utensils, storage bins etc. The remaining
50%  MME funds can be utilised for hiring charges for manpower at various levels, Transport and
contingencies, Office Expenses, Furniture, Computer hardware and consumable, capacity building of officials,
preparation of manuals, External Monitoring & Evaluation, Publicity etc.  However, the States with small
outlay for recurring central assistance are not able to engage the manpower at all levels. Therefore, a
proposal for enhancing the MME 3% is under consideration.
It is also relevant to mention that 100% central assistance is provided for MME Charges. The sharing
pattern between Centre and State under MDMS was 75:25 for all States except NER States, till 2015. But
the funding pattern of MDMS has been revised w.e.f. 01.04.2015  in the ratio of 60:40 for  non-NER and 3
Hill States  Due to the revision of funding pattern, the recurring central assistance to States other than NER
& 3 Hill States, has decreased. Since the MME is @ 2% of recurring central assistance their MME charges
have also got reduced.
Recommendations/Observations
37.1 The Committee , therefore, recommends to initiate measures to strengthen these factors in right earnest
and unfailing commitment; for example, lack of pucca buildings, separate toilet facilities for boys & girls,
unavailability and poor functional condition of kitchen sheds, unavailability and poor functional condition
of Store Rooms, Poor availability of tumblers and plates, shortage of access to proper drinking water ,
shortage of cooks, etc. Further, there should be timely payment to Cooks-cum-Helpers.
Action Taken
Under the SSA, the Central Government supports State Governments & UT Administrations for creation
and augmentation of infrastructure facilities in schools including construction of toilets, provision of drinking
water facilities, construction of new Primary schools and Upper primary schools and additional classrooms
etc. Since inception of SSA scheme in 2001, Government of India has sanctioned construction of 311028

8
Primary schools/ upper primary schools, 1873415 additional classrooms, 242198 drinking water facilities,
1036470 toilets across the country up to financial year 2016-17.
Government achieved the ambitious target of building 4,17,796 toilets in 2,61,400 government schools
in one year. With this, about 13.58 crore children in 11.08 lakh government schools were given access to
gender segregated toilets.
Further, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Ministry of Drinking
Water and Sanitation have jointly advised the Panchayati Raj Departments of all States to include provisions
for the following activities, while utilizing funds from the Fourteenth Finance Commission devolved directly
to Gram Panchayats:
(a) construction and regular repair/maintenance of toilets in schools;
(b) water supply systems for drinking water, toilets and hand wash.
MDM:
The Construction of pucca buildings and other infrastructure for schools comes under the purview of
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan. Regarding, construction of pucca kitchen-cum-stores, it is mentioned that 7.94
lakh Kitchen-cum-stores have already been constructed till June, 2016 against the sanctioned 10.05 lakh
kitchen-cum-stores. Construction work is in progress for 98437 Kitchen-cum-stores. Store room is a part
of the approved design for Kitchen-cum-stores. The progress for the construction of kitchen-cum-stores is
monitored at various levels such as Review Meetings, National Conference of Education Secretaries, meetings
of Programme Approval Board-Mid Day Meal headed by Secretary, Department of School Education &
Literacy.  The Secretary (SE&L) has written D.O. letters to the Chief Secretaries of all the States for
completing sanctioned Kitchen-cum-stores by 31.3.2017.  Maintenance of already constructed kitchen-
cum-stores is to be done through the funds under school maintenance grant given by SSA.
As regards availability of drinking water,  it is mentioned that 96% of the schools have facility of
drinking water as per the information furnished by States/UTs in the Quarterly Progress Report for the
period from April to June, 2017.
Regarding shortage of cooks, it is stated that PAB has approved engagement of 26.63 lakh cook-cum-
helpers during 2016-17 against which States/UTs have engaged 25.30 lakh (95%) cook-cum-helpers. The
Cook-cum-helpers are paid honorium by the School Authorities. The delay in the payment of honorarium to
cook-cum-helpers is due to the delay in the flow of funds from State Treasury to schools. As soon as the
funds are received in the schools, the payment for the pending honorarium of cook-cum-helpers is made by
the Schools. Now, e-transfer of honorarium is being done in majority of the States.
Recommendations/Observations
39. The Committee also notes that the cost of construction of kitchen-cum-store is determined on the
basis of plinth area norms and state schedule of rates prevalent in the State/UT on sharing basis. The
Department of School Education and Literacy has prescribed 20 sq. mt. plinth area for construction of
Kitchen-cum-store in schools having upto 100 children. For every addition of upto 100 children, additional
4 sq. mt. plinth area will be added. States/UTs have the flexibility to modify the slab of 100 children depending
upon the local conditions. As on March, 2016, 10.5 lakh kitchen-cum-stores have been sanctioned till date.

9
So far a total number of 7.82 lakh kitchen-cum-stores have been constructed and construction work is in
progress for 1.08 lakh.
39.1  The Committee recommends that requisite initiatives would be taken to get the construction work
started for remaining 1.15 lakh kitchen-cum-stores expeditiously.
Action Taken (39 & 39.1)
MHRD has sanctioned 10.05 lakh Kitchen-cum-stores  out of which 7.94 lakh Kitchen-cum-stores
have been constructed till June, 2016. Construction work is in progress for 98437 Kitchen-cum-stores. The
Secretary, SE&L has written D.O. Letters to the Chief Secretaries of all the States for completing sanctioned
Kitchen-cum-stores by 31.3.2017.
The construction work in the remaining schools has not started mainly due to the reasons that central
assistance to most of these schools was sanctioned on unit cost norms @ 60,000/- each prior to November,
2009 when the norms for construction of kitchen-cum-stores were revised to plinth area norms at State
approved Schedule of Rates. Now with the revised norms based on schedule of rates, States are accelerating
the construction work.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Government and would like be apprised of
the tangible outcome of the communications sent to State Government on 31.3.2017.
Recommendations/Observations
46. The Committee appreciates the endeavor made by PPP mode in MDMS, which has been successful in
Andhra Pradesh and recommends to enhance its outreach to get it implemented in other States as well so as
to ensure a better delivery of service and, therefore, a better performance of MDMS.
Action Taken
Mid Day Meal guidelines envisage that MDM is cooked locally in the school premises either through
Self Help Groups or through the personnel engaged by the School Management Committee. However, for
urban areas, where there is a space constraint for setting up school kitchens in individual schools, a Centralised
Kitchen could be set up for a cluster of schools where cooking can take place and the cooked hot meal may
be transported under hygienic conditions through reliable transport systems to various schools. Operations
of these Centralized Kitchens may be entrusted to reputed NGOs under the PPP model.  Mid Day Meal Rules
notified on 30th September, 2015 under National Food Security Act 2013 also stipulate that Schools in urban
area may use the facility of centralised kitchens for cooking meals wherever required in accordance with the
guidelines issued by the Central Government.
During 2015-16, State Governments/UTs had engaged 314 NGOs in 127 districts under Mid Day
Meal Scheme for providing mid day meal to 72,19,889 children studying in 42383 schools.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendations/Observations
30. The Committee, after having an in-depth analysis in the subject matter takes note of the educational
development in India, which is neither homogenous in regional spread nor neutral to social formations. It
has a strong bias in favour of economically developed areas with strong infrastructural support as compared
to the backward regions of the country. It is disheartening indeed that in spite of planned efforts, of course,
of Planning Commission/NITI AYOG, regional disparities in the field of quality based educational
development continue to be glaring. Germane to this, for the ongoing SSA mission, the Committee considers
decentralization as a major strategy for planning and management of elementary education. The
decentralization, within the national framework of SSA sounds paradoxical as every region of the country
counts on the diversity of culture, language, etc.
Action Taken
SSA envisages decentralized, need based and participatory planning in a bottom – up approach. All
States and UTs submit their proposal under the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) Programme through their
Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWP&B).  Based on their proposal, the Project Approval Board (PAB) in the
Ministry of Human Resource Development approves an outlay as per the programmatic and financial norms
of the scheme, which includes the share of both the centre and the states.
The RTE Act gives immense importance to School Management Committee as a part of decentralized
structure and one in which the parents will have a very significant role. Essential provisions regarding
constitution and functions of SMCs have been given in Sections 21 and 22. Section 21 of the Right of
Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE), 2009 stipulates that each Government school, Government
Aided school and school belonging to a specified category should have a School Management Committee
(SMC) mandated with the work to monitor the working of the school; prepare and recommend School
Development Plan; and monitor the utilisation of the grants received, besides their other activities. The SMC
is mandatory for all elementary schools.  Some Government schools also have Parent Teacher Associations
(PTAs) which perform similar functions as assigned to SMC. Under SSA, procurement of uniforms and
textbooks is also decentralized to the school level.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee feels that the empowerment of SMCs/PTAs and the increased role of parents
in the SMCs are steps taken in the right direction. Ministry’s reply does not categorically
states the steps being taken by them with regard to removing the regional imbalances that
Committee emphasized in its recommendation. Accordingly, the observations of the Committee
regarding the regional disparity in the educational development, which shows a huge negative
bias against the economically backward areas has not been addressed in the Department’s
response.
The regional imbalance in so far as the infrastructural development and quality based
educational development continues to be unaddressed. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should make more concerted efforts to bring about the infrastructural changes
10

11
and quality of education provided in the backward areas of the Country, where the options of school
children are limited unlike in the more developed regions of the Country.
Recommendations/Observations
30.1 The Committee recommends that government of India should bring out time bound programmes to
minimize the gap wherever States are standing differently in their educational status. This is the proven
pathway through which the SSA’ s time frame of universalisation of elementary Education in true sense, and
not for name sake, be realized. The Committee also recommends that this is the prime duty of the Government
of India not to obviate from the endeavor that if the SSA is an opportunity for States to develop their own
vision of elementary education, as the basic framework of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan’s claims, the States have
to fit themselves with the broader notional goal of providing useful and relevant elementary education for
all in the category of 6-14 years age group.
Action Taken
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009 provides for free and
compulsory education for the children of the age of 6-14 years in neighbourhood schools till completion of
elementary education. The Department has issued various advisories and guidelines to the States and UTs
for effective implementation of various provisions of the RTE Act, 2009.
All States and UTs are implementing the RTE Act, 2009 as per their own State RTE Rules. The central
Government provides financial support to the States and UTs under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of SSA
for implementing the provisions of RTE Act, 2009.
Several new initiatives by the Department viz. Swachh Vidyalaya Abhiyan, Padhe Bharat Badhe Bharat,
Rashtriya Aavishkar Abhiyan have been launched under the SSA scheme to guide the States and UTs in
providing useful and relevant elementary education for all children in the age group of 6-14 years.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee feels that in order to realize the objectives of the RTE Act, 2009, the States
need to effectively implement the various schemes/initiatives like Swachh Vidyalaya Abhiyan, Padhe
Bharat Badhe Bharat, Rashtriya Aavishkar Abhiyan etc.  The role of the Central Government is not
limited to the framing of the laws/guidelines but also to ensure that its objectives are achieved.
Hence, a robust monitoring mechanism need to be set up for checking the implementation in a
timely and qualitative manner, which is at present, not visible and more focus is required, especially
in the worst performing States/UTs.
Recommendations/Observations
31. The Committee recommends to bolster the national role at local level concerning the success of
implementation of SSA by ensuring proper coordination and synchronization of efforts made by the Ministry
of HRD, National Council of Educational Research & Training (NCERT), National University of Educational
Planning and Administration (NUEPA), National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS), and National Council
of Teacher Education (NCTE).
Action Taken
Efforts are made by MHRD for ensuring proper coordination and synchronization of efforts made by

12
the Ministry, National Council of Education Research & Training (NCERT), National University of Education
Planning and Administration (NUEPA), National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS), and National Council
of Teacher Education (NCTE). This will be further emphasized.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee takes note of the reply. However, no tangible steps are visible.  The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should take concrete steps in this direction and enlighten
the Committee about the involvement of organization like NCERT, NUEPA, NIOS, NCTE etc. so as
to ensure the successful implementation of SSA at the local level.
Recommendations/Observations
32. (a) As regards the key challenges faced in the implementation of SSA at States level, the Committee
expresses its concern for the absence of State Institutes of Educational Management and Trainings (SIEMATs),
which hampers the scholastic understanding of the State – specific issues and innovations. Hence, the goal
of achieving the Universal Elementary Education would become a distant dream if every State is standing
differently.
Action Taken
As per the programmatic norms of SSA, the SIEMAT plays a key role in providing capacity building
and support for revamping and strengthening education planning and management structures and systems
necessitated by RTE Act.
Financial norms of SSA provide for one time assistance to States and UTs for SIEMAT up to ` 3.00
crore. So far 13 States have established SIEMAT. However, State Council of Educational Research &
Training (SCERT)s and other State level institute look after the functions of SIEMAT where SIEMAT is not
established.
Further, recognizing the significance of effective school leadership in improving the quality of education,
Secretary (SE&L) has written to all States and UTs to identify an existing institution in the State to function
as a School Leadership Academy. This would act as the nodal state based leadership development institution
for providing sustained and contextual school leadership training.
Recommendations/Observations
(b) In this perspective, the Committee recommends that discrepancies between the National and State
systems have to be removed, like the entry norm of 6 years of age is prevalent in some States and 5 years in
others and, in all likelihood, would be giving a jolt to noble aims of the SSA.
Action Taken
Section 3(1) of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009 states:
“3(1) Every child of the age of six to fourteen years, including ‘child belonging to disadvantaged
group’ and ‘child belonging to weaker section’ shall have a right to free and compulsory education in
a neighborhood school till completion of elementary education.”
All States and UTs are broadly implementing the RTE Act, 2009 as per their own RTE Rules.

13
Comments of the Committee
The Committee would like to emphasise again that the role of the Central Government does
not end with the formulation of the RTE, Act and various rules there under. The MHRD is the most
important stakeholder in this endeavor and it is imperative that a constant monitoring of the
implementation of its schemes needs to be done so that timely intervention can be made by it,
whenever the situation demands.  Accordingly, the Committee  recommends that appropriate steps
need to be taken immediately by the Department of School Education & Literacy to bring about a
standardized and uniform education system across the Country without exceptions.
Recommendations/Observations
32.1 (a) Referring to other key challenges at the district and sub-district level, the Committee would
focus on the status of DIETs (District Institute of Education and Training). The Committee also
expresses its concern that there exists wide variations in the nature and effectiveness of these
institutes among the States in which they have been set up. In each of these States, the DIETs
have developed in different ways and, therefore, vary in terms of infrastructure, expertise and
activities. Further, the Committee is of the opinion that Block Resource Centres (BRCs) and
Cluster Resource Centres (CRCs) are not found competent enough to impart sufficient training,
while the DIETs are not involved in the District Elementary Education Planning in many States.
Besides, there is a lack of coordination between different agencies and officers. The role and the
functioning of the SIEMAT, for instance, are unclear.
(b) So the Committee recommends the Department to address these types of confusion prevailing at
the District Level concerning the implementation of SSA by revamping the institutions like the
SIEMATS and DIETs.
Action Taken
BRCs/URCs and CRCs are the most critical units for providing training and on-site support to schools
and teachers. Given the significance of these structures, under SSA, financial support is provided to strengthen
faculty and infrastructure support to BRC/URC and CRCs.
The Block and Cluster level human resources in the form of BRP and CRP have the primary role of
academic support and supervision in order to improve quality of education. The Department has emphasized
to the States and UTs, during the AWP&B meetings, to ensure that Block level officers are held accountable
for academic support and improvement of quality of education in schools in their block.
SIEMATs/SCERT/other State level institutes are functioning at the State level for providing academic
support to teachers and education administrators. DIETs are providing the similar supports at district level.
The Central Government emphasizes effective coordination between BRCs, CRCs, DIETs, SCERTs and
SIEMATs.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee in its previous observation has recommended that there should be
decentralization in the functioning of DIETs and SIEMATS.  The Committee also recommends that
a uniformity of BRCs/URCs and CRCs across the country would not be the right approach for
imparting training to teachers. The Committee also clearly observes that the accountability of

14
Block level officers to bring about academic support and quality of education in their blocks has not
be tested, which can be gauged from the fact that huge disparities exist across the Country on these
issues.  The Committee recommends that immediate steps may be taken to create a mechanism to
monitor the functioning of all BRC/URC periodically through the Block/Cluster level officers so
that all issues/deficiencies could be addressed in a timely manner and also to making them more
accountable.
Recommendations/Observations
33. The Committee would like to share its concern for the number of colossal vacancy of teachers remaining
unfilled up under SSA. The Committee is of the firm opinion that such a huge existing vacancies of teachers
under SSA is bound to affect adversely the implementation of SSA. For example, as per the data made
available to the Committee by the Ministry vide the status note on the SSA dated 8th June, 2016, in Jharkhand
the number of sanctioned post of teachers under SSA is 69522 by State, and 122678 under SSA; the working
position is of 34052 by State and 78554 under SSA, and consequently the existing number of vacancies of
teachers is of 35470 by State and 44124 under SSA. There is need to overcome the typical disarray that in
some States, teachers recruited against SSA sanctioned posts, are recruited on contract and after a period of
5-6 years these teachers are shifted to the State against the vacancy in the States sanctioned post, however,
the vacancy created under SSA remains as a sanctioned post and the State can go and recruit fresh teachers
against these vacancies.
33.1 The Committee, therefore recommends that such daunting task of filling up the arising vacancies of
teachers in States has to be carried out in a sustainable time bound planning.
Action Taken (33 & 33.1)
The recruitment, service conditions and deployment of teachers are primarily in the domain of the
State Governments and UT Administrations. However, the Central Government through the flagship
programme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) at elementary level provides assistance to the State Governments
and UTs for additional teachers to maintain appropriate Pupil Teacher Ratio as per the prescribed norms for
various levels of schooling.
The Central Government has been consistently pursuing the matter of expeditious recruitment and
redeployment of teachers with the States and UTs at various fora.  Advisories on this issue have also been
issued to States and UTs from time to time.
As per Unified District Information System For Education (UDISE) 2015-16 (Provisional), the Pupil
Teacher Ratio (PTR) at national level for elementary schools is 24:1 as compared to the norm of 30:1 for
primary schools and 35:1 for upper primary schools laid down under the Right of Children to Free and
Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009.
Out of 19.45 lakh teacher posts sanctioned under SSA, 15.74 lakh teacher posts have been filled up as
on 31st December, 2016.
Currently there are 5.33 lakh teacher posts vacant against the State sanctioned posts and 3.71 lakh
teacher posts vacant against the SSA sanctioned posts. The large numbers of teacher vacancies exist in
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal.

15
Comments of the Committee
The Committee feels that most the responses of the MHRD to the Committee’s recommendation
ends at the altar of the State Governments. There is no accountability beyond this point and the
Committee feels helpless with this attitude of the Department.  The Committee recommends that
the MHRD should devise a strategy to ensure that this long pending action for filling up the teachers
vacancies is taken up immediately instead of simply putting the ball in the Court of the States/UTs.
However, the Committee appreciates the achievement of PTR of 24:1 for elementary Schools and
35:1 for Upper Primary Schools, and such successes needs to be encouraged and replicated in other
aspects of the SSA.
Recommendations/Observations
35. The Committee notes the increased devolution of funds from 32% to 42% through 14th Finance
Commission Award, effective from 2015-16. The Committee shows its concern that States have not reported
earmarking funds exclusively for education out of the increased devolution of funds.
35.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends for inspiring States for the proportionate adjustment of increased
devolution of funds on education.
Action Taken (35 & 35.1)
Education is in the Concurrent List and the responsibility of running majority of the schools vests with
the States. SSA is the designated vehicle for implementation of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education (RTE) Act, 2009. Section 7(1) of the RTE Act, 2009, states that both the Centre and the State
shall have concurrent responsibility for providing funds for carrying out the provisions of the Act.  Section
7(2) states that estimates for implementing the Act shall be prepared and the PAB outlay may be taken as the
estimates prepared in compliance with this sub-section.  Further, Section 7(3) states that the Central
Government shall provide to the State Government, as grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage of
expenditure as it may determine, while, Section 7(5) states that the State Government shall, taking into
consideration the sums provided by the Central Government to a State Government, be responsible to
provide funds for the implementation of the provisions of the Act.  It is, therefore, clear that the responsibility
for meeting the fund requirement vests with both the Centre and the States.
With the acceptance of the recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission by the Government of
India, the devolution of funds to the States has been increased from 32% to 42 % of the net Union Tax
Receipts.  In this regard, it is stated that States have received an additional fund of ` 186149.79 crore more
during 2015-16 as compared to 2014-15 through 14th FC Award.  Similarly, there is additional devolution of
funds of ` 232528.13 crore more during 2016-17 as compared to 2014-15.  With the enhanced devolution
of funds, States have been advised to allocate more funds to SSA so as to carry out the functions and
responsibilities conferred upon the States by Section 7(5) of the RTE Act, 2009.   Accordingly, this Department
has written to the Chief Secretaries of all the States for ensuring the allocation of adequate amount of funds
for the School Education Sector in their state budget.
However, it is felt that these funds are untied and States may not be allocating enough funds towards
the education sector. It is, therefore, suggested that these funds need to be ring fenced so that at least 30%
of it can be used for social sector alone including education.

16
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that the Ministry of HRD is aware of the possibility of the increase in
fund allocations to State due to devolution of fund not being proportionately utilized for the education
Sector.  The Committee agrees with the suggestion of the Ministry for ring fencing of these funds
so as to ensure that atleast 30% can be used only for Social Sector including education.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must seek ways and means to achieve this
objective and also inform the Committee of the action taken in this regard in its replies.
Recommendations/Observations
38. The Committee expresses its concern that most of the States did not follow the guidelines of Government
of India to deliver food grains at the school point by PDS dealer, thereby resulting in the leakage of food
grains. There have been instances where due to long supply chain, food grains supplied got adulterated and
pilfered.
38.1 The Committee recommends that this facet of MDMS should be reviewed and points of failure be
identified to intensify Mid-Day Meal Scheme in right direction.
Action Taken (38 & 38.1)
The MDM guidelines envisage that transport assistance is to be given for transportation of food grains
from nearest FCI godown to the School. But in hilly areas it is not possible to deliver the food grain up to
school level due to the arduous contours and difficult terrain. Food grains are carried as head load up to
school level and the cost of transporting the food grain as head load is reimbursed from the transport
assistance.  FCI weighs the Truck load of food grain to the District Authorities and receives acknowledgement
for the quantity of food grain lifted by District Authorities. The FCI weighs the food grain before delivery.
Since the gunny bags are filled FCI without weighing each bag,  these  gunny bag contains varying  quantity
of food grains  which ranges from 49 to 51 kg.  The schools receiving 51 Kg. gunny bag do not complain
but the schools receiving 49 kg. bag complain of short supply. The schools should  weigh the gunny bags
before accepting food grains so that the shortfall if any is compensated by FCI.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Ministry of HRD on the issue of
adulteration and pilferage of food-grains owing to the long supply chain in the delivery of food-
grains to the schools.  The Committee re-iterates its recommendation that a foolproof mechanism
should be established to solve the problem of adulteration and pilferage and the first step in this
direction would be to eliminate middlemen/shorten the supply chain to the school.  Further, steps
should be taken to identify points of failure/improvements required, so that these can be corrected
at the earliest.
Recommendations/Observations
40. The Committee observes that while Mid-Day Meal scheme seems to have contributed to an increase in
the attendance in Schools across the country, it does not seem to have any significant impact on fresh
enrolments in sample schools.
40.1 This particular scenario, the Committee recommends, requires to be considered by the Government and
requisite measures be taken.

17
Action Taken (40 & 40.1)
Mid Day Meal Scheme supplements the efforts of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan for universalisation of
elementary education by providing nutritional support to the children studying in elementary classes in the
Government and Government aided Schools, Special Training Centres and Madarsas & Maqtabs supported
under SSA. The aim of the scheme is to  address the class room hunger of the children by providing them
mid day meal with prescribed calories and nutrition thereby enabling them to  focus on their study.  The
provision of mid day meal attracts children towards attending school regularly and also get education.
Thus, the scheme also  contributes in increasing the enrolment, attendance and retention of the children
in schools.
There is gradual decrease in the enrolment in the Government schools during the last five year at
primary stage but there is slight improvement in the upper primary classes as is evident from the following
two tables:
Primary Schools
Y ear Total Enrolment Enrolment in Schools Enrolment in
covered under MDMS Private Schools
2010-11 135207057 102324701 32882356
2011-12 137099984 99342648 37757336
2012-13 134784272 93944638 40839634
2013-14 132428440 90448625 41979815
2014-15 130501135 86848505 43652630
Mushrooming growth of private schools in close vicinity of human habitations has resulted in increase
in enrolment along with an overall decline in the number of children enrolment in MDMS.
But there is improvement in upper primary as would be noticed from the following table:
Upper Primary Schools
Y ear Total Enrolment Enrolment in Schools Enrolment in
covered under MDMS Private Schools
2010-11 57844942 44459622 13385320
2011-12 61955154 46584080 15371074
2012-13 64926077 47649248 17276829
2013-14 66471219 47460450 19010769
2014-15 67165774 47963079 19202695
It would be observed that enrolment in Government schools in upper primary has increased during
2014-15 over the enrolment of 2013-14 by 5 lakh approximately whereas it increased in the upper primary
during the corresponding period by 2 lakh in private schools. Some States are proposing to start English

18
medium primary schools so as to attract more children which may result in increase in the enrolment under
primary stage.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is concerned about the decliningenrolment in schools covered under MDMs,
which is in direct contradiction to the enrolment trends in the other categories for private schools
as well as in Upper Primary Schools (both MDM and Private School).  The Committee recommends
that the Department must find out the underlying reasons for this anomaly and address it at the
earliest and inform the Committee of the same in its next response to the Committee along with
the latest updated figures after 2014-15.
Recommendations/Observations
42. The Committee strongly recommends that it is to be ensured that meetings of School Development and
Management Committee has participation of one member each of Block Level Committee, Parent Teacher
Association and Panchyati Raj Institutions (PRIS).
43. The Committee would like to recommend the Government that District nodal authority becomes strict
in getting utilization certificates from the implementing authority and school, in time, so that delivery of
funds/foodgrains are not delayed.
Action Taken (42 & 43)
Noted. The States/UTs are being advised accordingly.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes  the reply  and impress upon the Department to ensure that there is no
delay and apprise  the Committee of action on it.
Recommendations/Observations
44. The Committee takes note of the suggestions of stakeholders with whom it got an opportunity to
interact at selected places of visit and recommends that local women self help groups or mothers of children
studying in the schools get preference in preparation of meal in MDMS. This would not only ensure a means
of employment and income for the SHGs, but also they would cook as per the locally prevalent tastes.
Action Taken
Self Help Groups  are implementing the scheme in  various States such as Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh etc.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes the reply given by the Department and finds that owing to lack of
participation date concerning the engagement of SHGs in MDMS, no explicit inference could be
drawn.  The Committee, hence, recommends the Government to provide the statistical data with
regard to participation of SHGs in MDMS.
Recommendations/Observations
45. The Committee also came to know that wages for MDM differ from state to state; the Committee

19
therefore, recommends that the Government should strive to ensure that there has to be uniformity in this
regard and minimum wages as per norms of the Government should be paid to the workers/cooks involved
in MDMS.
Action Taken
The cook-cum-helpers are engaged on part time basis by the School Management Committees for
cooking and serving the mid day meal to the students in Government and Government aided schools,
Special Training Centres and Madarsas & Maqtabs supported under SSA. The MDM guidelines prescribe
the payment of  honorarium @ `1000/- per month to cook-cum-helper. The honorarium is to be shared
between the Centre and State in the ratio of approved funding pattern. Except  NER and 3 Hill States
(HP,J&K and Uttarakhand) where funding pattern is  90:10, the funding pattern for all other States is in the
ratio of 60:40.  UTs are given 100 central assistance for honorarium to CCH.
Some States /UTs  viz Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Mizoram, Punjab,
Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep
and Puducherry are making  additional contribution over and above  their minimum mandatory State/UT
share. That is the reason for payment of different amount of honorarium to CCH.
As regards, payment of minimum wages to CCH, it may be mentioned that CCH are engaged on part
time basis by SMCs for preparation and serving of mid day meal in schools. Therefore, the minimum wages
are not paid to them.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee has pointed out to the Ministry on a number of earlier occasions that the
honorarium needs to be increased, if the objective to provide good, wholesome and tasty cooked
food to the children in to be realized.  There is no doubt that the cooks/helpers needs to be compensated
properly for their services and that too at a uniform rate rather than the hug disparity that presently
exists across various States.  The Committee feels that the minimum mandatory State/UT share in
the Honorarium should be raised further so that the disparity among the States is minimal.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED.
-NIL-

OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee feels that the empowerment of SMCs/PTAs and the increased role of parents
in the SMCs are steps taken in the right direction. Ministry’s reply does not categorically
states the steps being taken by them with regard to removing the regional imbalances that
Committee emphasized in its recommendation. Accordingly, the observations of the Committee
regarding the regional disparity in the educational development, which shows a huge negative
bias against the economically backward areas has not been addressed in the Department’s
response. The regional imbalance in so far as the infrastructural development and quality based
educational development continues to be unaddressed. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should make more concerted efforts to bring about the infrastructural changes
and quality of education provided in the backward areas of the Country, where the options of school
children are limited unlike in the more developed regions of the Country. (Para 30)
The Committee feels that in order to realize the objectives of the RTE Act, 2009, the States
need to effectively implement the various schemes/initiatives like Swachh Vidyalaya Abhiyan, Padhe
Bharat Badhe Bharat, Rashtriya Aavishkar Abhiyan etc.  The role of the Central Government is not
limited to the framing of the laws/guidelines but also to ensure that its objectives are achieved.
Hence, a robust monitoring mechanism need to be set up for checking the implementation in a
timely and qualitative manner, which is at present, not visible and more focus is required, especially
in the worst performing States/UTs. (Para 30.1)
The Committee takes note of the reply. However, no tangible steps are visible.  The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should take concrete steps in this direction and enlighten
the Committee about the involvement of organization like NCERT, NUEPA, NIOS, NCTE etc. so as
to ensure the successful implementation of SSA at the local level. (Para 31)
The Committee would like to emphasise again that the role of the Central Government does
not end with the formulation of the RTE, Act and various rules there under. The MHRD is the most
important stakeholder in this endeavor and it is imperative that a constant monitoring of the
implementation of its schemes needs to be done so that timely intervention can be made by it,
whenever the situation demands.  Accordingly, the Committee  recommends that appropriate steps
need to be taken immediately by the Department of School Education & Literacy to bring about a
standardized and uniform education system across the Country without exceptions. (Para 32)
The Committee in its previous observation has recommended that there should be
decentralization in the functioning of DIETs and SIEMATS.  The Committee also recommends that
a uniformity of BRCs/URCs and CRCs across the country would not be the right approach for
imparting training to teachers. The Committee also clearly observes that the accountability of
Block level officers to bring about academic support and quality of education in their blocks has not
be tested, which can be gauged from the fact that huge disparities exist across the Country on these
issues.  The Committee recommends that immediate steps may be taken to create a mechanism to
monitor the functioning of all BRC/URC periodically through the Block/Cluster level officers so
that all issues/deficiencies could be addressed in a timely manner and also to making them more
accountable. (Para 32.1)
21

22
The Committee feels that most the responses of the MHRD to the Committee’s recommendation
ends at the altar of the State Governments. There is no accountability beyond this point and the
Committee feels helpless with this attitude of the Department.  The Committee recommends that
the MHRD should devise a strategy to ensure that this long pending action for filling up the teachers
vacancies is taken up immediately instead of simply putting the ball in the Court of the States/UTs.
However, the Committee appreciates the achievement of PTR of 24:1 for elementary Schools and
35:1 for Upper Primary Schools, and such successes needs to be encouraged and replicated in other
aspects of the SSA. (Para 33 & 33.1)
The Committee notes that the Ministry of HRD is aware of the possibility of the increase
in fund allocations to State due to devolution of fund not being proportionately utilized for the
education Sector.  The Committee agrees with the suggestion of the Ministry for ring fencing
of these funds so as to ensure that atleast 30% can be used only for Social Sector including
education.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must seek ways and
means to achieve this objective and also inform the Committee of the action taken in this
regard in its re plies. (Para 35 & 35.1)
The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Ministry of HRD on the issue of
adulteration and pilferage of food-grains owing to the long supply chain in the delivery of food-
grains to the schools.  The Committee re-iterates its recommendation that a foolproof mechanism
should be established to solve the problem of adulteration and pilferage and the first step in this
direction would be to eliminate middlemen/shorten the supply chain to the school.  Further, steps
should be taken to identify points of failure/improvements required, so that these can be corrected
at the earliest. (Para 38 & 38.1)
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Government and would like be apprised
of the tangible outcome of the communications sent to State Government on 31.3.2017.
(Para 39 & 39.1)
The Committee is concerned about the decliningenrolment in schools covered under MDMs,
which is in direct contradiction to the enrolment trends in the other categories for private schools
as well as in Upper Primary Schools (both MDM and Private School).  The Committee recommends
that the Department must find out the underlying reasons for this anomaly and address it at the
earliest and inform the Committee of the same in its next response to the Committee along with
the latest updated figures after 2014-15. (Para 40 & 40.1)
The Committee notes  the reply  and impress upon the Department to ensure that there is no
delay and apprise  the Committee of action on it. (Para 42 & 43)
The Committee notes the reply given by the Department and finds that owing to lack of
participation date concerning the engagement of SHGs in MDMS, no explicit inference could be
drawn.  The Committee, hence, recommends the Government to provide the statistical data with
regard to participation of SHGs in MDMS. (Para 44)
The Committee has pointed out to the Ministry on a number of earlier occasions that the
honorarium needs to be increased, if the objective to provide good, wholesome and tasty cooked

23
food to the children in to be realized.  There is no doubt that the cooks/helpers needs to be
compensated properly for their services and that too at a uniform rate rather than the hug disparity
that presently exists across various States.  The Committee feels that the minimum mandatory
State/UT share in the Honorarium should be raised further so that the disparity among the States
is minimal. (Para 45)

MINUTES

27
V
FIFTH  MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 4th January,
2018 in Committee Room No. ‘62’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya    —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK  SABHA
5. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
6. Shri Nihal Chand
7. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
8. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
9. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
10. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
11. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
12. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt the draft (i) 294
th Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations /
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty third Report on “Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and
Mid-Day-Meal Scheme”, (ii) 295 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty fourth Report on “Issues and Challenges
before Higher Education Sector in India”, (iii) 296 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, (iv) 297th Report on Action Taken by Government
on the observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty eighth Report on Demands
for Grants (2017-18) of the Department of Higher Education, (v) 298th Report on Action Taken by Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty ninth Report on Demands
for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development and (vi) 299th Report on the National
Sports University Bill, 2017.

28
3. The Committee considered the draft 294 th, 295th, 296th, 297th, 298th and 299th Reports and adopted them
after some discussion.
4. The Committee, then, decide to present/lay the 294 th, 295th, 296tth, 297th, 298th and 299 th Reports to
both the Houses of the Parliament on 5th January, 2018. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his
absence, Shri Partap Singh Bajwa, M.P ., Rajya Sabha to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and
Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P., Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati, M.P., Lok
Sabha to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 11.00 A.M.