PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

HUNDRED - FIFTEENTH REPORT
ON

ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE THRITY FIRST REPORT ON THE FUNCTIONING OF
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HOSPITALS
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 147 MARCH, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 14 MARCH, 2002)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH , 2002/ PHALGUNA 1923 (SAKA)


ry mmr el Mme | |
1}


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

PREFACE

REPORT

CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:

CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies

CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
By the Committee.

CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Replies of the Government have not been received--------

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONSAT A GLANCE

MINUTES

PAGES

(ii)
(iii)
1-71

72-77
78-85


||

| ॥॥॥॥॥| iil



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2002-2003)

Shri $.B. Chavan — Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Eduardo Faleiro

Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee
Shri Akhilesh Das

Shri Bachani Lekhraj

Shri B.P. Apte

Prof. R.B.S. Varma

Shri Bratin Sengupta

Smt. Vanga Geetha

. Shri R. Sarath Kumar

. Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik

. Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”
. Shri Mrinal Sen

. Dr. Akhtar Hasan Rizvi

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

. Shri $.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao
. Shri Kirti Jha Azad

. Shri Baliram Kashyap

. Shri Ramakant Angle

. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan

. Shrimati Jaskaur Meena

. Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal

. Shri 0. $. Baswaraj

- Shri Sunil Dutt

. Shri R.L. Jalappa

. Shri Ambareesha

. Shri Kantilal Bhuriya

. Shri 8.0. Golam Osmani

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Dr. M. Jagannath

. Shri Davendra Singh Yadav

. Kumari Bhavana Pundlikrao Gawali
. Shri Ashok Kumar Singh Chandel
. Smt. Renu Kumari

. Smt. Kumudini Patnaik

@


. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

. Shri Shriniwas Patil

. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
. Shri Ramesheth Thakur

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Director

Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary

Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer
Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer

(ii)



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human

Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Hundred and Fifteenth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-first Report of the Committee relating to Functioning
of Central Government Hospitals of Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare.
2; The Thirty-First Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
16" August, 1995. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report,
received from the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare were considered by
the Committee. Clarifications were also sought by the Committee from the representatives of the
Department.

3 The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 18"
February, .2002.

NEW DELHI; S.B. CHAVAN
February 18, 2002 Chairman,
Magha29, 1923 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development

6)


H |

॥॥॥॥|
|

VRP



REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the

recommendations contained in its Thirty-First Report on the Functioning of Central Government
Hospitals which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16" August,

1995

2:

Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the

recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:-

@

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
4.8,4.10,4.11,4.12,4.13,11,13,13.1,15,18,21,22,23,26.2, AIM-
8.1,9,9.1,9.2,11.1,11.3,12,15,15.1,15.2,18,18.1,18.2,18.3; PGI-5,6,7,9.1,13,18.2; JIP-
3,4,6,12.1; SF-3.3,4,8.1,11; RML-7,8,9.1; LH-5,5.1,12.1,13,13.1; AIP-5.1,6,8,9,10.1
(Chapter 1) Total-55

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies: 4.7, 4.14,20.2,24.2; AIM-10.3,10.4; PGI-10,15,17; JIP-
rae SF-3.1,3.2; RML-4, 5:23 LH-5S.3,5.4
(Chapter II) Total-17

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee:4.3,4.4,4.5,4.6,4.9,4.11,5.2,5.3,6,8,10,12,14.1,16,16.1,
17.2,19,19.1,19.2, 19.3,23,24,24.1,25.1; AIM-16,16.1; PGI-16,16.1; JIP-5,8,9,11,11.2;
SF-2.1,2.2,2.3,2.4,2.5,5.1,6,7,7A, RML-S.3,6; LH-
2.3,3,4,5.2,6,7,7.1,7.2,9, 10, 11,11.1,12.2; AIP-3.1,3.2,3.3,4
(Chapter-II) Total- 61
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are
still awaited- 5.1,5.4, 7,7.1,9,9.1,20.4,20.5; AIM-11.2,13; PGI-1.1,9A,11,12,12.1,12.2;
JIP-10; SF-5,7; RML-3; LH-8,14.1; AIP-7,7.1
(Chapter - IV) Total- 24

The final replies in respect of the recommendations/observations made in Chapter IV of
the Report are still awaited from the Department. The Committee may be apprised of
the fact as and when action is taken.


CHAPTER-I

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
GOVERNEMNT

RECOMMENDATION

4.8 To start with, the Committee suggests that there is a need to optimize all existing and available
physical facilities to control overcrowding. The Committee would emphasise the necessity for
opening more counters and creating space for OPD patients. Since overcrowding also results वीणा
lack of guidance and direction to patients and a patient friendly handling system, there is a need for
constant review of arrangements as to how for appropriate information and guidance are available to
patients and their relatives visiting the hospitals. In particular, constant vigilance is needed for a better
interface between clerical staff and patients visiting the hospitals.

ACTION TAKEN

4.8 The Ministry agrees with the observations. Hospitals are taking steps to ensure that proper
guidance and directions are given to patients, further that efforts are made for rationalizing the use of
space.

RECOMMENDATION

4.10 Another solution in this connection, according to the Committee, could be setting up of the OPDs
away from the main wing of the hospital, preferably in the same complex, with self-contained
essential test/diagnostic facilities to divert the patients seeking OPD attention from those needing
detailed investigation and treatment. The Committee is happy to learn that the AIIMS is already in the
process of setting up such OPD, away from the main hospital area, which would be provided essential
facilities for basic pathological tests required for primary care. Such OPDs, the Committee feels,
would not only reduce the congestion in the main hospital, but it would also release some working
space for physicians, etc.

ACTION TAKEN

4.10 The suggestion to set up OPDs away from the main wing of the hospitals will be kept in view
while considering the establishment of new OPDs as also the need for providing essential facilities
within easy reach to provide basic care quickly.

RECOMMENDATION

4.11 The Committee feels that conscious and urgent steps for reducing the waiting time and promoting
easily accessible and cheaper testing facilities would go a long way to mitigate, if not eliminate,
overcrowding in the hospitals. Increased waiting time, in the Committee’s opinion, is a direct
manifestation of overcrowding and in almost all the hospitals, the Committee found, that the waiting
period was very long, ranging from one hour to three hours.

ACTION TAKEN

4.11 The Ministry agrees with the observations. Efforts are being made to reduce waiting time and
to facilitate movement of patients.
RECOMMENDATION

4.12 The Committee agrees that it may be difficult to lay down a specific waiting time applicable to all
facilities and disciplines but it is not impossible for each hospital to evolve its own internal norms and
standards for each Department to reduce the waiting time to the maximum extent possible, after

2


studying the pattern of patients. An overall goal in each hospital could be to strive to reach a situation
where the patient should not have to be away from home for more than half a day in order to get OPD
treatment. From that objective in view, each hospital should work out how best and how soon this can
be achieved progressively over a fixed period of time. In fact, one half of a day at OPD is considered
adequate keeping in view the fact that patients will also have to spend extra travel and transactional
time in reaching the hospital and returning home. Alternatively, provision of two shift OPD may also
be considered.

ACTION TAKEN

4.12 Safdarjung Hospital has brought the registration time forward by half an hour i.e. instead of 9.00
a.m., it has been made 8.30 a.m; the OPD ends at 11.30 a.m. instead of 11.00 am. Thus, the
registration time has been increased by an hour. The position is reviewed by the hospital authorities
periodically.

RECOMMENDATION

4.13 With the growth of technology, more and more sophisticated tests would be needed to support
diagnosis and therapy and large investments are inevitable, particularly in prestigious hospitals. This is
partly the result of patient expectations from any premier institute where they expect and are
encouraged to expect better and more state of the art diagnostic and curative procedures. Such
procedures are not only high-tech but generally tend to be cost-escalating. In this context, it is the
duty of the leaders in the profession, especially those heading the Departments, to examine and assess,
through proper audit, whether technological procedures adopted are, in every case, necessary and
relevant to patients’ needs in our country. This judgement can be made only by the leaders within the
medical community itself, who can be relied upon to look into all aspects of prevalence and incidence
of diseases, its proximate determinants and the socio-economic background of patients. In many cases
of ordinary ailments, Indian Systems of Medicine could be equally effective, if not more, and may be
considered for expansion.

ACTION TAKEN
4.13. Noted for necessary action.
RECOMMENDATION

11. The Committee found that blood banks in most of the Central Government hospitals had no
moder facilities and equipments commensurate with the nature of services required today. In view of
the menace of killer disease like AIDS spreading through blood transfusion, the Committee
emphasises the need for providing adequate facilities for carrying out HIV tests in the Blood Banks of
each hospital immediately. It recommends that the Department should provide facilities for modern
Blood Banks in each hospital where fractionation of blood into its different components can be done
and transfusion of blood is made foolproof.

ACTION TAKEN

11. The Ministry has laid down standards for staff and standards for space for Blood Banks. The
essential basic equipment which are needed for the smooth functioning of the Bank has also been laid
down. The rules have been framed for grant of licence to process blood components from whole
human blood. Human blood components are prepared by the Bank as a part of the blood services.
Testing facilities for blood grouping, hepatitis, HIV, Malaria, etc. are available in the Blood Banks of
Central Government hospitals. The Blood Banks are inspected by Experts before renewal of licence.


The deficiencies pointed out are brought to the notice of hospital authorities for rectification. The
deficiencies ‘pointed out by the experts are removed by the hospitals.

From the 1* of June, 2001, screening for Hepatitis C has been mandatory for all Blood Banks
in the country and HCV Test Kits are being provided to all government and charitable blood banks.
Component Separation Units, where one unit of whole blood is separated into various components and
then can be used by a number of patients has been provided to AIIMS, Red Cross Blood Bank, GTB
Hospital and Armed Forces Transfusion Centre in Delhi.

RECOMMENDATION

13. An increasing number of cases of suspected ‘AIDS’ are being reported from various parts of the
country, particularly in metropolitan and major cities. There is, however, not enough awareness
among the people about this deadly disease. The Central Government hospitals, which are supposed
to be role models in such campaigns, do not appear to be serious about the problem.

13.1 The Committee, therefore, feels that the Central Government hospitals should at least now rise to
the occasion, keeping in view the gravity of the situation and launch massive campaigns against the
spread of this disease. These hospitals could bring out posters, leaf-lets, etc. and display them
conspicuously in the hospital premises for the benefit of the people.

ACTION TAKEN

(13 & 13.1). The Government has initiated a massive awareness campaign on Prevention and Control
of HIV/AIDS in the country using electronic, print and folk media. Each year Family Health
Awareness Campaign is being conducted which aims to generate awareness amongst rural and urban
slum populations on sexually transmitted infections including HIV/AIDS. The last round of Family
Health Awareness Campaign was held during the period April-June 2001 and the next round is
envisaged in the month of February, 2002. With the objective to equip the medical and para-medical
personnel in the management of HIV/AIDS cases in the hospital, a comprehensive training programme
is being implemented. The training programme also includes Central Government hospitals. State
AIDS Control Societies are providing IEC material to hospitals for display at prominent places in the
hospital.

RECOMMENDATION

15. Enough opportunities, the Committee feels, are not being made available to doctors to keep track
of the latest advancements in the medical sciences/technology, which is a fast developing discipline.
The Committee is of the opinion that doctors/ professors should be given adequate opportunities for
refreshing and advancing their knowledge and skill by interacting with their counterparts in advanced
countries. The Committee, therefore, feels that Government should take immediate steps for
providing adequate opportunities for this to doctors and faculty members. The
technicians/paramedical staff handling various sophisticated and modern medical equipments should
also be provided the required training with a view to imparting efficiency and precision in their work.

ACTION TAKEN

15. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has been organizing training courses at various places in
India where doctors are exposed to the latest developments on the subject. The training is imparted in
identified training institutions spread over various parts of the country. Doctors are also sent on
WHO/Colombo Plan, Common-Wealth Fellowships etc. for training abroad. Medical Council of India
also conducts continuing medical education as also other agencies like Medical Colleges, National
Board of Examination, etc.


The technicians/para-medical staff are acquainted with the working of the equipment under the
supervision of the agency installing/servicing the same. In service training programme is being
conducted at Safdarjung Hospital in the area of CSSD, OT, Medical Records, Rehabilitation and STD.
RECOMMENDATION

18. The practice of Doctors/professors going on deputation, after having had costly and advance
training at government cost and coming back for taking promotion, came to the notice of the
Committee. The Committee deprecates the idea of doctors/ professors for having best of both the
worlds, as it is against the very ethics of medical profession. It, therefore, recommends that the
Department should take a serious view in these cases and discourage such practices.

ACTION TAKEN

18. This has been noted for necessary action. The suggestion will be kept in view while considering
extension of deputation of officers of CHS.

RECOMMENDATION

21. CGHS beneficiaries being located mostly in metropolitan cities, particularly in Delhi, where a
number of Central Government Hospitals are functioning, deserve a separate wing for them and their
dependants. The Committee found that CGHS wing, provided in the hospitals particularly in the
Safdarjung and Dr. RML Hospitals, are not functioning satisfactorily. It was complained to the
Committee that CGHS beneficiaries do not get adequate attention and the facilities for which they are
entitled to, even after they come duly referred by their dispensaries. A patient, on an average, has to
wait nearly two to four hours for getting examined by the specialists. This waiting period, the
Committee notes, is more than that in case of the OPD patients. The Committee is of the view that
procedure for consultation/tests for the CGHS beneficiaries, duly referred by their dispensaries, needs
to be reviewed and streamlined by the respective hospitals so as to provide them quick and efficient
services.

ACTION TAKEN

21. There are 87 Allopathic dispensaries functioning under the CGHS, Delhi/New Delhi which
provides OPD treatment to the CGHS beneficiaries and some of them also provide laboratory facilities
to the CGHS beneficiaries. Two or three dispensaries are attached to such dispensaries where
Laboratory facilities are available. Some of the laboratories have been upgraded by providing modern
testing equipments. Further few nodal centers have also been set up in the dispensaries to provide
specialist consultations services to the CGHS beneficiaries by attaching two or three nearby
dispensaries. Apart from the above, one CGHS wing at Safdarjung Hospital and one Specialists
Chamber at Dr. RML Hospital are functioning which provides Specialists Consultation Services only
to such beneficiaries which are referred by their treating doctors of their respective dispensaries.

Instructions have already been issued to complete all the basic investigation of the patients in the
dispensary itself for which facilities are available in the dispensaries/polyclinics before referring the
cases to the Specialists for consultation in CGHS wing at Safdarjung hospital and Specialists Chamber
at Dr. RML Hospital as that would help them in clearing the rush from such hospitals.

RECOMMENDATION

22. The Committee observ a pensioners/Senior citizens, who deserve a priority treatment, are not
getting it in the hospitals. are also treated like other patients and are made to wait in the general
queue for longer hours despite their advanced age. The Committee emphasizes the need for making
special arrangement for senior citizens and infirms in all the hospitals immediately and it should be
ensured that they are not put to any inconvenience and are provided prompt service.


ACTION TAKEN

22. Priority treatment is given to pensioners/senior citizens in Central Government hospitals. The
need for doing so has been reiterated during a review meeting with the Medical Superintendents of the
hospitals.

RECOMMENDATION

23. The concept of geriatric clinics in India has not gained momentum although problems relating to
the aged/elderly people in the country are becoming more complex with the disintegration of joint
family system and the fast increase in the number of upper age people. There is a growing feeling of
insecurity, coupled with related health problems, amongst elderly people. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Government should take necessary steps to develop ‘geriatrics’ as a specialized
subject, and provide sufficient number of specialists and infrastructure for opening Geriatric Clinics in
all the Central Government hospitals.

ACTION TAKEN

23. The Dte.GHS has been requested to examine the proposal for setting up of Geriatric Clinics.

The recommendations of the Technical Committee set up by the Ministry, to consider inter-alia this
issue, was examined. The recommendations were circulated in October, 1996 for comments to the
Government of Delhi, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Railways, MCD/NDMC and Central
Government hospitals before taking a final view.

No separate Geriatric Clinics have been set up in the Central Government hospitals though separate
counters, queues, seating arrangement etc. is provided to Senior Citizens.

As far as the problems of the aged are concemed, ESI Corporation has taken up setting up of Geriatric
Clinics in its Action Plan 2001-02. This will be followed up in coming years as well.

Railways have extended medical facilities to its retired employees in a scheme known as
Retired Employees Liberalized Health Scheme. This scheme provides medical care to the retired
railway employees at par with serving employees. As per feasibility, separate doctors, clinics,
dispensing counters, etc. have been provided in addition to comfortable waiting rooms in selected
hospitals for senior citizens. Medical officers and staff are being imparted training in geriatric care
wherever feasible.

The Delhi Government has not set up any Geriatric Clinics separately. However, Special
Clinics on Sunday for Senior Citizens of the age of 60 and above were started in 9 hospitals under
Govt. of NCT of Delhi for two hours from 10 A.M. to 12 Noon in September, 1999 to provide services
under Medicine, Surgery, Orthopaedic, Gynaecology, ENT and Eye specialities supported with
Pathological tests and Radiological facilities. Senior Citizens are being given prefercial treatment in
registration in OPDs and at Medicine Counters in different hospitals.

RECOMMENDATION

26.2 The Committee is fully aware of the general resource crunch in the country. It, however, feels
that in view of the need for improving quality and adequacy of medical care, the Government should
explore the possibility of generating/sparing more resources for allocation to this sector.

ACTION TAKEN

26.2 Increase in allocations will be considered as and when the plans for revamping the hospital and
undertaking constructions work are at an advanced stage of approval to avoid blockage of funds.
However, the need to upgrade the hospital is receiving due emphasis.

6


ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES, NEW DELHI

RECOMMENDATION

AIM 8.1 The Committee feels that no progress is likely to be made, unless some crucial, initial steps
are taken right now to mitigate, if not eliminate, overcrowding in OPD. The Committee emphasizes
the need for consciously trying to bring down the waiting time and making testing facilities easily
accessible and cheaper. The Committee would also emphasise that for making the AIIMS a purely
referral hospital, efforts must be made to coordinate various planning decisions at the Centre and in
the States and to ensure adequate and timely allocation of funds for the development of selected
peripheral hospitals around Delhi and in the neighbouring States, which will contain the bulk of the
admission rush to AIIMS. A system of deputing senior specialists from AIIMS to the peripheral
hospitals as visiting professor/ faculties to help raise the standard of patient care may be considered.

ACTION TAKEN

8.1 To cope with the patients rush, besides expansion of hospital services in specialities like Dr.R.P.
Centre, C.T. Centre, Neuro-Sciences Centre etc., it is proposed to have a screening OPD.

The Government of NCT of Delhi has informed that such arrangements have not been made.
However, peripheral hospitals are providing specialist services in the specialities of Medicine,
Surgery, Gyane & Obstetrics, Paediatrics, Orthopaedic, Ophthalmology, ENT and Dermatology.

As regards the recommendations of the Committee for deputing senior specialists from the
Institute to the peripheral hospitals, the Institute agrees to the proposal. However, this needs
examination in depth keeping in view the constraints related to limited faculty strength and the
Institute’s own rising demands in the field of patient care, teaching commitments and research needs.
At present the patient load at AIIMS is so high that it may not be possible to send faculty to peripheral
hospitals on a regular basis. However, senior faculty members are deputed to peripheral hospitals as
and when required on a case-to-case basis.

RECOMMENDATION

AIM 9. As regards, the AIIMS, the Committee was made aware of the original idea of having a
linkage between the AIIMS and the Safdarjung Hospital, with the latter acting as the focus for primary
treatment and a reference for complicated cases to be sent to AIIMS.

AIM 9.1. It seems to be, at first sight, an attractive idea but much skepticism was expressed during the
evidence before the Committee, whether it can be a practical proposition now, especially in view of
the growth of parallel specialities and super-specialities in both the hospitals. The Committee feels,
however, that the possibility should continue to be kept in mind and explored because it would enable
an integrated view of cost effective use of resources and demonstrate as to how an effective referral
system can be developed.

ACTION TAKEN

(9 &9.1). The recommendations made by the Committee can only be implemented if the AIIMS
is declared as a fully referral hospital. The points raised in favour of providing a referral character to
the Institute have been noted.

ह
RECOMMENDATION

AIM 9.2 The Committee is fully aware of the availability of considerable competence and expertise in
Safdarjung Hospital in selected specialized areas which had been built up over nearly four decades.
But, in a period of constrained public resources, it would be proper for the Department of Health not to
ignore any opportunity at integrated development of expensive facilities, when patient convenience

7


can also be enhanced. It should not be beyond human ingenuity to work out a reasonable
understanding of details with all concerned. While the intention of the Committee is not to allow the
specialisation built up in Safdarjung to wither away, it emphasizes the fact that the facilities in AIIMS
and Safdarjung should be complementary and supplementary to each other and duplication of facilities
be avoided to the extent possible.

ACTION TAKEN

9.2 The observations of the Committee have been noted. Whereas each hospital has to provide basic
facilities for patient care, while creating super-specialty and special facilities care would be taken to
avoid duplication and ensure integrated development.

RECOMMENDATION

AIM 11.1. In a prestigious institution like AIIMS, there are competing demands among disciplines
and Departments, for space, beds, budgets, use of equipment and other facilities. The limits imposed
on non-plan expenditure are always too severe, especially in the current phase of compression of
public expenditure and inflationary pressures. As a consequence, maintenance and hospital routines
have suffered considerably. The planning process also does not always seem to lead to optimal
distribution of resources within and among institutions, which leads to mal-utilisation, and wastage of
resources and facilities. Cases were brought to the notice of the Committee regarding lack of balance
in investment between equipment, personnel and maintenance needs. Such problems require to be
sorted out, case by case, in time, through systematic coordination, which, in turn, depends on a
dynamic and coherent chain of command.

ACTION TAKEN

11.1 This is receiving the attention of the Institute. While the Institute has taken the lead in providing
facilities for specialized clinical care, research and teaching, the appointment of resources works to the
advantage of new developments and improvements leave a relatively reduced amount for day-to-day
maintenance. One of the major decisions taken has been the upward revision of charges of various
tests, procedure and surgery with the funds being deposited in a hospital development fund. This is
expected to rationalize the allocation of resource intended for essential maintenance, which is as
important as undertaking new developmental activities.

RECOMMENDATION

AIM 11.3 The Committee would endorse the danger pointed out by an eminent witness who feared
that if the current stresses bearing on the Institute continue, if may affect quality of care and leadership
in the field of medicine and health. The Committee takes a serious note of a widely shared view that
morale of individuals on AIIMS faculty, is low because of instances of individuals with proximity to

high places, disturbing the evolution of a coherent command structure and creating handicaps to the
evolution of a harmonious collegiate policy and decision making, so urgently needed at AIIMS.

ACTION TAKEN
11.3 The Government is well aware of the concern expressed by the Committee made in this para and

all possible efforts are being made to keep the morale of the faculty members of the Institute high.

RECOMMENDATION


AIM 12. Furthermore, the Committee would recommend the development in the Ministry of an
independent data base of technology developments (and associated unit cost) in medical care, so that
comparative unit cost for hospital procedure and’ routines at different locations, can be examined to
ensure costs-effective use of resources. There could always be a case for concentrating expertise in
one or a few institutions on sound grounds of need and economies of scale and scope, but in a large
country, there is a need for wider dispersal. In fact, wherever repeated requests are made by Members
of Parliament, for example, either for a new All India Institute or for branches of AIIMS to be set up in
different parts of India, what is conveyed is the feeling that in a vast country like India, technological
frontiers and opportunities for state-of-the-art cure in medicine should be dispersed among a variety of
institutions, both public and private, in different parts of India, and regulated through a framework of
coordinated promotion.

ACTION TAKEN tk

12. The recommendations are well taken. The priorities of the Central Health Sector are evolved after
a series of consultations involving administrators, subject experts from a variety of institutions and
NGOs before changes are fixed or funds earmarked for new strategies and programmes the cost
effectiveness of various options are widely discussed and as far as possible pilot studies and projects
undertaken on a regional basis to provide experience on which the planning process is founded.
Government has strengthened the planning unit and the Central Bureau of Health Intelligence but
would welcome an opportunity to upgrade these divisions in the larger interest of providing sufficient
data to help the planning process further.

RECOMMENDATION

AIM 15, The Gynaecology and Obstetrics ward was highly crowded. About 400 patients, the
Committee was informed, visit Gynae OPD everyday, who have to wait for hours to get examined.
There is an acute shortage of space as well as beds in the ward. More than two patients have to share
the same bed alongwith the just-born babies. -As a result, infection risk, both for the mothers and the
neonates, is very high, post-portem cases are accommodated in the fire escape area due to lack of
space.

AIM 15.1 Equipments such as Ultrasonography were over-used and needed replacement. The
Committee was informed that a research and training center, run with the WHO assistance, had been
closed down. Despite the basic infrastructure for in-vitro fertilization being available, it could not be
used for lack of funds.

AIM 15.2 The Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for (a) providing more beds in the Gynae
and Obstetrics ward; (b) expanding and modernizing the Nursery; (c) replacing the overused and old
equipments; and (d) encouraging research and training in the Department.

ACTION TAKEN

15 to 15.2. It is clarified for the information of the Committee that two patients do not share one bed.
However, a mother and a child share one bed in the interest of maternal and child health.

It is true that the number of patients that visits the Obstetrics & Gynae OPD and other OPDs
of the institutes are very high. Because of the heavy load upon the space and staff at the Institute by
ever increasing number of patients, attempts have been made to optimize available space by
reallocating certain areas such as corridors and varandas. However, the fire escape areas remain free.

While the know-how exists for in-vitro fertilization, it is not being done due to lack of
adequate staff, time and related requirements such as space. However, no equipments or machinery
for the present are lying unused. Due to space constraint, it is difficult to provide additional beds.

4


However, when Institute Rotary Cancer Hospital building is fully functional, the cancer related cases
would shift from main building thereby providing space in main building. At present, a state of art
treatment is being given in the nursery which is well equipped and is manned by very competent
clinicians. Research is constantly encouraged. While a number of research projects have been
completed, research is being conducted in gynaecology, oncology, endoscopy, foetas medicine, family
planning, Vaginal Ultrasound/Colour Doppler used in patients with carcinoma cervix and carcinoma
of the ovary, assisted reproduction techniques, high risk pregnancies ett. A start has been made in
improving equipments and facilities within the department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology by and
large assistance of German Aid Programme.

RECOMMENDATION

AIM 18. The Committee noted that during 1994-95, against an allocation of Rs.81 crores at BE stage,
the Institute was provided Rs.83 crores in the RE. During 1995-96, the Institute has been allocated
Rs.89.29 crores, as against the demand of Rs.110 crores. It was contended by the Ministry that
keeping in mind the availability of funds and the trend of expenditure, the allocation made to the
Institute for the year 1995-96 seems to be adequate.

AIM 18.1 The Director, AIIMS, informed the Committee that, over the years, while the expenditure
of the Institute had increased tremendously, there had not been a corresponding increase in the funds
made available to it. While in 1977 the Institute was spending 20 per cent of its total expenditure on
treatment of patients, this has been reduced now to about 5 per cent only. It was argued by the
Director, AIIMS that the annual increase in the budget, in fact gets neutralized by the existing rate of
inflation.” He suggested full neutralization of non-plan allocation as against the existing partial
neutralization,

AIM 18.2 The Committee was also apprised of the constraints under which the Institute was
functioning, such as inadequate water supply, lack of infrastructure facilities and inadequate funds
required for immediate replacement of equipments, etc.

AIM 18.3. The Committee agrees with the suggestion given by the Director, AIIMS, and strongly
recommends that the inflation on non-plan expenditure should be taken into consideration while
allocating funds not only to the AIIMS but also to all the Central Government Hospitals.

ACTION TAKEN 2 i
(18, 18.1, 18.2 and 18.3). The funds provided to the Institute have been stepped up over the years as
indicated in the following chart:

(Rs. in lacs)

1991-92 1992-93 1993-94 1994-95 1995-96 1996-97
Plan 1400.00 2729.00 3200.00 3000.00 4600.00 4347.00
Non-Plan 3900.00 4543.00 5040.00 5300.00 6629.00 2840.00
Total 5300.00 7272.00° 8240.00 8300.00 11229.00 7187.00

1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-2001 2001-2002
Plan 5689.00 6996.00 7000.00 8500.00 10000.00
Non-Plan 8921.00 14950.00 16000.00 16112.00 16680.00
Total 14610.00 21946.00 23000.00 24612.00  26680.00

The Institute has also been making efforts to step up its internal revenue generation processes in
order to bridge the shortfall of non-plan funds. This process shall be further expedited during the 10°"
Plan period.

There is still inadequate water supply at Ayurvigyan Nagar Campus of AIIMS. The tube well
have been bored in that area, but the water available from these tube-wells is not fit for human

10


consumption. Requests have been made to MCD for additional connection of water to be provided.
The case is under process.

200 Type III quarters at Ayurvigyan Nagar have already been constructed and allotted to the Nursing
staff. 32.09 acres of land was allotted to the AIIMS at Masjid Moth Camp. Approximately 24 acres of
the said land was encroached upon by the Juggies. The said jhuggie cluster has been demolished by
the MCD Slum Wing in the month of March, 2001. The possession of land so vacated has been taken
up on priority. The total: amount deposited by AIIMS with MCD for vacation of above jhuggy cluster
is Rs.2.97 crores. के

The Hospital charges in AIIMS have been revised to generate additional resources and utilize the same
for better patient care. However, there is a blanket provision for exemption of all hospital charges for
the poor and indigent patients. The approved rates structures are different for OPD/General Ward and
Private Wards so as to keep impact of the increase on the general public to the minimum.

POSTGRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND
RESEARCH (PGIMER), CHANDIGARH

RECOMMENDATION

PGI 5. Need to restore the referral status, which has been lost mainly due to overcrowding in the
Institute, was also emphasised by all sections of the Institute. It was argued that due to non-
development of services in the Medical Colleges and hospitals in the neighboring States, patients with
ordinary illness also come directly to this Institute. The Committee feels that one remedy could be to
strengthen services in those Medical Colleges so that rush to the Institute can be contained. The
concemed State Governments, the Committee feels, should display due interest in developing health
facilities on priority basis.

ACTION TAKEN

5. Government agree that there is need to augment out-patient facilities in Chandigarh. A 500-bedded
hospital attached to the Chandigarh Medical College has become operational.

RECOMMENDATION

PGI 6. The Committee was informed that the Chandigarh Medical College is proposed to have a 500-
bedded hospital but its progress has been disappointingly slow. The Director/Principal of this medical
college, who is also the Secretary, Medical Education, Chandigarh Administration, ‘informed the
Committee that the progress in this regard was very slow mainly due to paucity of funds. The
committee was given to understand that responsibility for the slow progress in this regard lay on the
part of Union Ministries of Finance and Health and Family Welfare. It was argued that once this
hospital comes up, the burden on the PGI hospital would be reduced to a great extent. The committee,
therefore, feels that the necessary formalities and requirements towards establishing this hospital,
which has already been unduly delayed, should be completed by the Department in consultation with
the concerned Ministries/Departments. Ministry of Finance should make necessary allocations for the
proposed hospital so that it is set up within the next two years.

ACTION TAKEN

11


6. A 500-bedded hospital attached to Chandigarh Medical College has been commissioned.
RECOMMENDATION

PGI 7. The Committee found that the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology has got only 92
beds with an occupancy rate of 107.5% which, by any standard, is very high. The Committee saw
two, and sometimes more than two patients, sharing the same bed in this Department. It, therefore, is
of the view that the number of beds in this Department needs to be increased suitably so that the
resulting complications and inconvenience to patients is avoided.

ACTION TAKEN

7, A new Gynae Ward had been commissioned. A waiting hall for attendants and relatives outside the
labour room has been commissioned w.e.f. 27/3/97.

RECOMMENDATION

PGI 9.1 A demand to give to the Director, PGIMER, all the powers which are enjoyed by the Vics
Chancellor of a University, was also voiced before the Committee. The Committee expresses its deep
concern about vacancies in teaching positions, as well as in Group *C’ and ‘D’ posts, remaining
unfilled for long period. The Committee recommends that immediate steps should be taken to fill up
the vacancies. The Committee fells that the suggestions of the Director, PGIMER, regarding
appointments to all class I posts by the Institute’s Body and providing more autonomy to the Director
need serious consideration by the Department.

ACTION TAKEN

9.1. Posts other than faculty posts are filled by the Institute in routine way from time to time.

The Institute Body has powers to create posts. However, all Group A posts can be created with the
approval of the Central Government. This is as per standing instructions of Deptt. of Expenditure
dated 3-5-1993 which applies to all Govt. departments and autonomous bodies under the Central
Government.

As regards powers of appointment, these are already vested with the Institute Body.
RECOMMENDATION

PGI 13. The Committee was surprised to learn that there were no facilitates for Lithotripsy and MRI

in this premier “7 18 Committee feels that the facilities mentioned above be provided to the
Institute early. ‘sion >

ACTION TAKEN

13. Lithotripsy and MRI units have been commissioned on 15/8/98 and 2/2/98 respectively.
RECOMMENDATION

PGI 18.2 The Committee feels that the demand of the Institute for more funds for taking up new

projects appears to be justified and recommends that the Department should provide the required
amount at an appropriate stage.

12


ACTION TAKEN

(18.2) The Institute was sanctioned Grant-in-aid (Plan) as under:-

S.NO. Year Amount in lakhs

1. 1994-95 1700.00+1000 German Grant (for purchase of equipment)
2. 1995-96 1840.00

३3. 1996-97 2100.00

The entire amount of grant-in-aid was utilised for the purpose for which it was sanctioned.

Against the proposal submitted by Institute for the Ninth Plan (1997-2002) for Rs.336.38 crores,
Government of India had approved an outlay of Rs.200.00 crores as per details given below:-

1. Augmentation of various Departments Rs.60.00 crores

2. Completion of continuing Schemes Rs.55.00 crores

3. New schemes Rs.55.00 crores

4. Completed Engineering Rs.30.00 crores
Works

The details of budget provision for PGI under Plan and the grants-in-aid released to PGIMER,
Chandigarh and Plan during 1997-98 to 20001-02 is as under:

(Rupees in lakhs)
1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02
9" Plan Outlay 3000.00 4000.00 4700.00 4400.00 4500.00
Amount given as 3000.00 4000.00 2500.00 2200.00 2250.00
Grants-in-aid
(Till 31.12.01)

JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL
EDUCATION & RESEARCH, PONDICHERRY

RECOMMENDATION

गए 3 The Committee. while visiting the Institute on January 17, 1995, noticed that the waiting room of
the OPD was crammed and the space was not adequate. Chairs/benches provided there were very old
and insufficient. There was no facility for attendance and relatives of patients who were found
squatting in the open lawns. The Committee feels that adequate facilities should be provided in the
waiting hall and steps taken to clean and beautify its campus at the earliest.

ACTION TAKEN

3. An extension of OPD in the second floor of the present block has been constructed and started
functioning with enough waiting space. Old wooden furniture has been replaced by new benches and
also with fibre glass moulded chairs for the patients and attendants in the OPD blocks. Railings are
provided at the registration counter for an orderly “Q”.

Efforts to beautify the campus have been made in order to keep the campus clean and tidy and to have
a good look. Sign Boards are provided to guide the public.

RECOMMENDATION

Jip 4. Medical record keeping system, though organised, appeared to be archaic and the Committee
* found that computers were not being used for this purpose. The Committee was informed that the

13


entire hospital services were being centrally computerised. The Committee feels that the progress in
this respect is very slow and needs to be expedited

ACTION TAKEN

4. The computerisation work has been speeded up for the better patient care.

The programmes have been developed for Medical Record Department under Unix System through
JIPMER Computer Centre (Centralised) and under NOVELL NETWARE OPERATING SYSTEM.
The programmes have also been developed for Institute and Hospital and Hospital Services for wards,
blood bank and Lab. Investigations, registration of new patients in OPD & Indoor, Alpha index search
system and discharge analysis etc.

New Server is purchased by HIS for Medical Lab./Pharmacology modules revised and put to use in
within 2 or 3 months. Internet facilities in the Library with 6 nodes for the benefits of students and
faculties have been provided. It is envisaged to provide a radio link with VSNL, so that all academic
departments are covered with the internet facilities.

RECOMMENDATION

JIP 6. The Committee noticed that patients were facing a lot of difficulty due to shortage of beds in
Obstetrics & Gynaecology and Medicine wards. The Committee suggests that extra beds should be
provided in these Departments on priority basis.

ACTION TAKEN

6. Extra beds numbering 52 were added in the hospital, raising the total bed strength from 860 to 912.
Also by reallotting the existing rooms, additional beds for the Department of Obstt. and Gynae. were
provided and the congestion is eased.

The proposal for construction of Super-Speciality Block is being taken up in the 10" Five Year Plan.
RECOMMENDATION

JIP 12.1 In view of the above, the Committee feels that the amount allocated for the Institute for the
year 1995-96 will not be sufficient to take care of its requirements, such as, expanding some of its
existing departments adding new superspecialities and providing some basic facilities for students,
doctors and other staff. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the allocation for the Institute be
enhanced suitably keeping in view the requirements of the Institute.

ACTION TAKEN

12.1. The suggestion for more funds have been noted. This year also allocation has been increased as
per details given below:-

(Rupees in lakhs)
Medical College, Regional Post-Graduate
JIPMER College, JIPMER
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan
1996-97 - 1130.27 554.57 1118.06
1997-98 - 1470.00 795.00 1230.00
1998-99 - 1621.00 1176.00 1349.00
1999-2000 - 1754.00 1350.00 1534.00
2000-01 -- 2025.00 1400.00 1685.00

14


SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL
RECOMMENDATION

SF 3.3. The Committee also came to leam that recognition to the Blood Bank functioning in the
hospital had been withdrawn. Explaining the position, the Medical Superintendent informed that the
recognition of the Blood Bank was not a one-time affair, as it is renewed from time to time. Due to a
few deficiencies noticed last year, recognition to the Blood Bank was suspended. The Committee feels
anguished that such an essential facility has been suspended and no adequate efforts appear to have
been made to revive it. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that steps be taken to correct
the deficiencies pointed out, in order to restore the recognition of the Blood Bank without any further
delay.

ACTION TAKEN

SF 3.3 The issue of recognition of blood bank in Safdarjung Hospital has been examined. During the
inspection by the Drug Control officials of Delhi Govt. on 9" Sept., 1996, the following deficiencies
were notices:~

(0) Action is being done to fill the post

(ii) Out of the four refrigerators, three are in working order, one is under repair.

(0). All centrifuge machines are in working order.

(iv) | A new walk-in cooler is in process beside two old walk-in cooler machines, which are in
working order.

Blood Bank has been strengthened by posting more technical staff, nurses and attendants. There are
two walk-in-cooler for blood storage and issue. Steps are being taken to repair the Blood Banx
refrigerator. No blood is issued without performing mandatory Laboratory test.

RECOMMENDATION

SF 4 The Department of Cardiology is in a very bad shape. The Committee was informed that it was
being reorganized. Some of the basic equipment needed for monitoring/treating/testing of the heart-
patients, the Committee feels that there is an urgent need for strengthening the Cardiology Department
by providing adequate facilities and essential equipments. The Committee recommends that a Cath
Lab. should also be provided.

ACTION TAKEN

SF 4 Cath. Lab. And Infusion Pumps - 12 in number have been procured, installed and started
functioning. The following equipments are under process and expected to be received by December,
2001:

Holter - One
Monitor - Six
Central Station - One
Defibrillator - Three.

RECOMMENDATION

SF 8.1 The Committee does not agree with the view of the Department of Health that the amount
provided would be sufficient to cover the expenditure of the hospital in 1995-96. The Medical
Superintendent also demanded more funds for the hospital. In view of the various requirements of the
hospital, mentioned above and also taking into account the escalation of costs, the Committee feels
: that the allocation of funds for the current year needs to be enhanced suitably at an appropriate stage.

15


While doing so. necd of the hospital or constructing residential accommodation, replacing old
equipments and improving other facilitics should be kept in mind.

ACTION TAKEN

SF 8.1. The Government constantly endeavors to improve the functioning of the Central Government
Hospital by providing maximum possible outlays, sanctioning medical, para-medical and
administrative posts, procuring the requisite diagnostic and laboratory equipment etc. so as to ensure
that the’ standard of paticnt care provided is not compromised. The budgetary provision for the hospital
since 1992-93 is as under:-

\

Year Rs. In Lakhs
1992-93 3563.41
1993-94 3818.00
1994-95 4158.00
1995-96 4170.00
1996-97 4711.00
1997-98 5835.00
1998-99 7354.00
1999-2000 8435.00
2000-2001 8267.00

Apart from the increase in the Budget provision indicated above, increase in allocations will be
considered as and when the plans for revamping the hospital and undertaking construction work are at
an advanced stage of approval to avoid blockage of funds. However, that need to upgrade the hospital
is receiving due emphasis.

RECOMMENDATION कि

11. The Committee found that blood banks in most of the Central Government hospitals had no
modern facilities and equipments commensurate with the nature of services required today. In view of
the menace of killer disease like AIDS spreading through blood transfusion, the Committee
emphasises the need for providing adequate facilities for carrying out HIV tests in the Blood Banks of
each hospital immediately. It recommends that the Department should provide facilities for modern
Blood Banks in each hospital where fractionation of blood into its different components can be done
and transfusion of blood is made foolproof.

ACTION TAKEN

11. The Ministry has laid down standards for staff and standards for space for Blood Banks. The
essential basic equipment which are needed for the smooth functioning of the Bank-has also been laid
down. The rules have been framed for grant of licence to process blood components from whole
human blood. Human blood components are prepared by the Bank as a part of the blood services.
Testing facilities for blood grouping, hepatitis, HIV, Malaria, etc. are available in the Blood Banks of
Central Government hospitals. The Blood Banks are inspected by Experts before renewal of licence.
The deficiencies pointed out are brought to the notice of hospital authorities for rectification. The’
deficiencies pointed out by the experts are removed by the hospitals.

From the 11 of June, 2001, screening for Hepatitis C has been mandatory for all Blood Banks in the
country and HCV Test Kits are being provided to all government and charitable blood banks.
Component Separation Units, where one unit of whole blood is separated into various components and
then can be used by a number of patients has been provided to AIIMS, Red Cross Blood Bank, GTB
Hospital and Armed Forces Transfusion Centre in Delhi.

16


DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPSITAL
RECOMMENDATION

RML 7. Other area, which needs attention, is the Neurology Department, which has been added to the
hospital not too long ago. There is only one room where the EEG is done and patients are also
examined by doctors. The upkzep and maintenance of this Ward, the Committee feels, require
attention.

ACTION TAKEN

(7). EEG room has been renovated and construction of additional room is under process.
The new EMG & EEG machines have already been procured for Neurology Department to upgrade its
services.

RECOMMENDATION

RML 8. Some of the services of the hospital, by virtue of highly trained manpower and special
equipments, have become centres of excellence. These services, the Committee feels, if augmented by
providing desired inputs would go a long way in further improving the patient care. These services
are:

(i) Neurological Services

(ii) Nursing Home Services

(iii) | Organized Emergency Services
(iv) Cardiology Services

(v) Hyperbaric Oxygen Chamber.

ACTION TAKEN
(8). Recently there has been a significant improvement in the infrastructural facilities in all the
important and critical areas. Some of these are as follows:

- Setting up of an Emergency Control Room, manned round the clock by a senior doctor.

- Provision of a large pool of trolleys in the OPD and the Emergency for the free use of the patients.

- Installation of a Whole Body CT Screen, at a cost of Rs.4 crores (Approx.).

- Renovation and moderisation of almost all the rooms in the Nursing Home.

- Renovation of Recovery Room (ICU) and various Operation theatres of the hospital. The latest
equipments like Anaesthesia machines, Ventilators, Cardiac monitors, Operation tables, OT lights,
Pulse Oxymeters, Hyper-Hypo thermia system etc. have been added to upgrade the facilities in
these area.

- A Cardiac Cath lab. costing about Rs.1.35crores have been made functional recently.

- In addition, equipments like ultrasound, image intensifier, Baby Incubators, Infant Respirators,
Infant Warmers, Laparoscopes, Operating Microscope, Cysto Resectoscope, Arthroscope etc. have
also been added during this year to upgrade the facilities in different areas of patient care.

- Recently, a Surgeon and a Physician (Specialist Grade Officer) have been made available round
the clock in the Emergency. These Senior Doctors remain Physically present there on duty to
attend to all serious patients.

- In addition, significant modifications have been done in the laboratories of the hospital.
Equipments like Automatic Blood Cell Counters, Auto analyzers, Fibrin timer etc. have been
added.

- A oxygen concentrator has been installed and operationalised.

17


- Five additional ambulances have been procured in the hospital for patient use.

- An additional incinerator of a capacity of 175 kg per hour as per CPCB Standards have been
procured and installed.

- Some additional equipments like Bioscaler Mixer, Cryo Centrifuge Machine, Phototherapy Wrap
Panel, Binocular Microscopes, Twinbeam Bilirubinometer, Automatic ESR Analyzer, Clinical
Flame Photometer etc. have been procured.

- The accident & emergency departments of the hospital have been centrally air-conditioned.

- Aplastic Shredder have been installed for the hospital waste management system.

- The Nursery of the hospital has been renovated and latest equipments have been added to it.

- New specialities like Paediatric Surgery, CTVS, Urology, and Gastroenterology have been started
recently in the hospital.

The efforts are still on to improve the facilities further depending on the availability of funds.
RECOMMENDATION

RML 9.1 The Committee does not agree with the Department of Health in this regard. Even during
discussions with the hospital authorities, the Committee was told by the Medical Superintendent that
the funds provided to the hospital were not adequate. Dr. RML hospital, besides providing medical
care to the general public, has the responsibility of providing some special services like running a
VVIP dispensary in the South Block, providing medical care to PM House and also to foreign,
dignitaries visiting India as State Guests. It also provides medical cover to various public functions
like Republic Day, Independence Day, and to international and national conferences held in Delhi
from time to time. It also supplies, both materials and staff, whenever demanded, to the Medical
Centre being run in the Parliament House Annexe. In view of the urgent requirements of the hospital
for providing new services and strengthening the existing ones and also for running special services
mentioned above, the Committee is of the opinion that the amount provided would hardly be
sufficient. It, therefore, recommends that more amount should be provided to this hospital at the
appropriate stage.

ACTION TAKEN

(9.1). Medicines and equipments are supplied by Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital for VVIP
Dispensary at South Block for providing medical care to PM House. The expenditure on these items is
debited to sub-head “Material & Supplies”.

There has been overall increase in both Plan and Non-Plan budget as pointed out in Para No. RML 9.
However, the requirement under this sub-head will be augmented as and when required.

LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE AND ASSOCIATE HOSPITAL
RECOMMENDATION

LH 5. The Committee was apprised of the fact that there was no regular staff for manning certain very
crucial services of the hospital. The Committee was astonished to learn that the Casualty of the
hospital was being run by Junior Residents since 1992 and had no regular staff. Likewise, the staff in
the Forensic Medicine Deptt., the oldest Department in the hospital, was found to be inadequate
keeping in the view the high crime rate prevailing in seven police stations which are attached to it. The
Committee was also told that due to the shortage of Sr. Residents, there was a restriction on admission
of patients to the Departments of Medicine, Surgery and Orthopaedics.

LH 5.1 The Committee feels that since the SKH is a general hospital providing treatment to poor
people for all kinds of ailments and serving as a training centre for undergraduate students, there

18


should not be any restriction on admission to any of the wards of the hospital due to shortage of
staff/doctors. The committee, therefore, recommends that all vacancies in the hospital should be filled
up at the earliest and wherever there is a need to provide more posts of Senior/Junior Residents, these
should be created immediately.

ACTION TAKEN

5 & 5.1. The Department of Forensic Medicine is now adequately staffed, both at Senior and Junior
levels.

The Accident & Emergency Department of Smt. S.K. Hospital is functioning round the clock and
attending to all emergency cases as well Medico-legal cases and Road side accidents. It has 8 beds
reserved for disaster management with all essential medicines and equipments.

It is being managed by Junior Residents of each speciality available round the clock in Casualty. All
senior faculty is available on call for any emergency.

It functions on overall supervision of Addl. Medical Superintendent. It has round the clock ECG
Laboratory as well Minor OT for immediate attention to needy patients.

The posts of Senior Residents were created in November, 1997 in the Deptt. of Medicine (3), Surgery
(3) and Orthopaedics (3) for strengthening the Hospital services.

RECOMMENDATION

LH 12. As far as residential accommodatotion for the doctors and employees of the hospital is
concerned, the Committee was informed that they were being denied accommodation under the
General Pool. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for denial of accommodation to them
from the General Pool, which, the Committee was informed, was being given to employees of other
hospitals. The Committee fails to understand the- reasons for such discrimination. It, therefore, feels
that a policy decision in this regard must be taken at the earliest and some quarters be provided from
the General Pool in the nearby areas.

ACTION TAKEN

12. Ministry of Urban Development has since allowed the staff and officers of the Institute to get
accommodation from general pool at par with others.

RECOMMENDATION

LH 12.1 The Committee also feels that the old bungalows, which are presently in the campus, should
be replaced by multi-storeyed residential flats so that more accommodation could be provided.

ACTION TAKEN

12.1. The suggestion is acceptable in principle. A beginning has been made in this direction. Proposal
for demolition of old bungalows with the campus have already been included in the Comprehensive
Redevelopment Plan. Already 45 Type I flats have been constructed and allotted to the employees.
Action has been initiated to take up construction of 30 type II and 30 Type III flats. There is a proposal
under process for construction of 148 quarters of different types.

RECOMMENDATION

LH 13. In the case of Lady Harding Medical College and Sucheta Kriplani Hospital, the budgetary
provision on the plan side has been reduced from Rs.3.70 crores in 1994-95 to Rs.3.15 crores in 1995-

19


96. When asked to explain, the Department stated that the reduction in the Budget Estimate of 1995-96
in respect of the hospital is due to lesser allocation made by the Planning Commission to Central
Sector Health Programmes in 1995-96. The Committee was further informed that a sum of Rs.6 crores
has been given out of German Aid and Rs.3.50 crores was made available to the Hospital during the
year to purchase CAT SCAN. The Committee was informed by the Medical Superintendent that the
hospital lacked in modern equipments for treating patients and since the hospital was attached to the
college, it required more funds. The Committee agrees with this plea

LH 13.1 The Committee is surprised to note that the total allocation for the Kalawati Saran Children’s
Hospital has come down from Rs.7.68 crores (RE) in 1994-96 to Rs.6.68 crores (BE) in 1995-96.
There is also reduction in the plan budget from Rs.3.18 crores (RE 1994-95) to Rs.2 crores in BE
1995-96, The Department, however, stated that there was no real decrease. as an amount of Rs. 6.68
crores has been provided in BE 1995-96 as against the allocation of Rs. 6.25 crores in BE 1994-95.
The Committee does not agree with the Department's idea of making a comparison between BEs of
the 1994-95 and 1995-96, and feels that it should instead, be made between RE of the last year and BE
of the subsequent year. The Committee feels that the hospital should be given more funds for creating
more facilities and improving the existing ones in the hospital.

ACTION TAKEN

(13 & 13.1) The Budget provision in respect of Lady Hardinge Medical College and Smt. S. K.
Hospital and Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital have been augmented in the Revised Estimates 1996-
97. A provision of Rs.23.73 crores in BE 1996-97 (Plan and Non-Plan) was increased to Rs.25.59
crores in respect of LHMC & Smt. S.K. Hospital.

A provision of Rs.8.67 crores in BE 1996-97 (Plan and Non-Plan) was increased to Rs.10.09 crores in
respect of Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital. The provision in the Budget Estimates 2001-02 are as
under:-

(Rs. in crores)

2001-02(BE)
Kalawati Saran 14.25
Children Hospital ७

Lady Hardinge Medical 43.64
College & Smt. Sucheta
Kriplani Hospital

ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL MEDICINE & REHABILITATION
(AIIPMER), BOMBAY

RECOMMENDATION

AIP 5.1 The Committee is of the view that the production base of the workshops manufacturing
various appliances/devices for handicapped people, particularly its smithy section, should be expanded
and modernised so as to enable the Institute to take up the production of appliances etc. on a large
scale and also to market them. It will help the Institute, the Committee feels, to augment its sources of
income. The Committee recommends that the requirements of the Institute should be assessed and
suitable funds be made available to the Institute for the purpose.

ACTION TAKEN

AIP 5.1. Hydraulic Power Hammer machine for Smithy Department has already been procured. The
staff is being trained on this machine and the production on. this machine is under progress which will

20


increase exploratory work of production of various joints. The Institute has also procured vacuum
formatting machine with accessories for fabricating Prosthetic Sockets out of Plastic Laminates used
for aids and appliances supplied to Physically Handicapped Patients.

There are other institutes under the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment established with the
objectives of production and marketing of appliances/devices for the disabled. The All India Institute
of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Mumbai has been established for treatment of patients and
training of professionals.

RECOMMENDATION
AIP 6 When the Committee enquired about the possibility of introducing newer trades and separate
sections in the Vocational Training Workshop, the Committce was informed that it could not be done

due to lack of space and manpower. The Director, however. added that the Institute was already seized
of the matter. The Committee emphasises the need for expediting the proposal under consideration.

ACTION TAKEN

6. The details of the new trades and the trades recognised by the State Board of Vocational
Examination , Mumbai are:

The titles of new trades:
1. Computer Operating
2. Maintenance and repairs of electric domestic appliances at

The trades recognised by SBVE, Mumbai
1. Commercial Printing

2. Cabinet and Furniture making

3. Computer Operating

4. Electric Wireman

25 candidates have been trained in the above mentioned recognised trades. The candidates
who successfully completed the training programme were given tools’ kits and are self employed (18
candidates)

The training in Computer Operating and Electric Wireman could not be conducted due to lack of space
and trained staff having requite qualifications required by 58५5, Mumbai for which the requirement
of two instructors has been projected before the Work Study Group.

It has been observed that it becomes very difficult for students (disabled) in a city like
Mumbai to continue their training programme without adequate financial assistance (Stipend), with
the result that a large number of trainees drop out before completing the training programme. To
overcome this problem, a detailed proposal is being submitted for grant of stipend to candidates
receiving vocational training in various trades

RECOMMENDATION

AIP 8 The Committee feels that the stipend being paid to the vocational guidance trainees is very
meager and, therefore, recommends that is should be increased suitably. More organisations, such as
Indian Oil Corporation, ONGC, Steel Authority of India and other nationalised banks should be
persuaded to contribute for this cause.

ACTION TAKEN

8. At present the trainees are given the Scholarship of Rs.300/- per month from the Annual Budget of
the stitute and provision for Scholarship has been proposed in the Budget Estimates for the next year
1999-2000. Efforts are being made by the Institute to encourage public sectors contributing towards

21


the course and have managed to provide Tool Kits to the trained (disabled) trainees. for self-
employment programme as donation from H.P.L.Co. The other trainces are referred to the Special
Employment Exchange for placement.

RECOMMENDATION

AIP 9 Another aspects noticed by the Committee was the total lack of facilities for visitors/attendants
of patients, particularly those coming from far- flung areas of the country. In a city like Bombay,
people coming along with their spastic and handicapped children need to be accommodated
somewhere near the Institute, if not in the campus itself. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that
providing adequate facilities to visitors/ attendants of the patients needs a scrious consideration by the
Department

ACTION TAKEN

9. The King George Infirmary has been extending services to the out station patients reporting for
Rehabilitation Programme and the nearby sanatirea viz. Dhakleshwar Temple Trust and Ghagde
Maharaj Dharmashals, Haji Ali Durgah Trust have been giving their support by providing rooms to the
patients and their families. The institutions, which are referring patients for rehabilitation, also make
arrangements for their stay during treatment in their own premises and for transport. In extreme cases,
where the above facilities could not be availed, the patients are admitted in the Institute wards for
limited period with priority to urgent post-operative cases.

RECOMMENDATION

AIP 10.1 To a question, whether it would be sufficient for the Institute in view of the fact that they
have proposed new buildings and extension of building, the Department replied that Rs.50 lakhs had
been provided separately for the same. But the Committee noticed that there is lack of space in almost
all the Departments and there is also a need to modernise and expand its various workshops for which
the Committee feels the allocation would be insufficient. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the budgetary provision for the Institute be raised suitably.

ACTION TAKEN
10.1 . A total of Rs.5.28 crores (Rs.2.28 crores under Plan and Rs.3.00 crores under Non-Plan) has

been provided in the Budget Estimates 2001-02 which is sufficient to meet the projected needs of the
Institute.

22


CHAPTER-II

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENTS REPLY

RECOMMENDATION

4.7 In view of the above, the Committee emphasizes the need for taking immediate steps for
reducing/regulating the flow of patients coming directly to these hospitals. The problem of
overcrowding, the Committee feels, can be tackled only if all its dimensions are simultaneously and
equitably addressed. The Committee recognizes, therefore, that overcrowding may be reduced only by
a simultaneous improvement in (a) the levels of management efficiency in hospitals, (b) improvement
in peripheral facilities in District and State hospitals for primary and secondary treatment, and (c)
organizing a functional referral system.

ACTION TAKEN

4.7 The Ministry agrees with the observations. Construction of peripheral hospitals by the
Government of NCT of Delhi is expected to reduce pressure on the Central Government hospitals.
Government of NCT of Delhi has informed that additional Central assistance amounting to Rs.1 crore
was approved for Pilot Project for effective Health Delivery system in Trans Yamuna area.

This was done in view of the various health and environmental hazards being faced by the
residents of East Delhi, comprising one third of the total population of Delhi. The people of East
Delhi face challenges of inadequate supply of safe drinking water, improper disposal of liquid and
solid waste, vehicular pollution of air and poor health care facilities. Poverty, low literacy rate,
unplanned colonization, lack of health consciousness among masses and lack of education has further
contributed to the poor health status of the community.

A baseline survey has been got conducted by Delhi Government in Trans Yamuna area
through ICMR for assessing health need and baseline data of various health indicators and socio-
economic status of the people of Trans Yamuna Area, so that proper infrastructure can be developed
for providing primary health care including strengthening of lab. Services and to develop a proper
referral system by identifying secondary level health care institutions and tertiary health care
institutions under 3 Tier health care delivery system in future, as per the objectives of the pilot project
for which funds had been initially allocated.

The ICMR has already submitted the interim report of the baseline survey and the final report is yet
to be received. The total amount of Rs.20.5 lakhs had been spent for this purpose. Keeping in view
the establishment of three-tier referral system, the following have been initiated in subsequent years
till now.

At primary health care level, 7 health centers have already been opened in Trans Yamuna Area with
lab. Facilities in each Health Centre.

At the secondary level, Lal Bahadur Shahstri Hospital in East District has been upgraded to
100 bedded hospital and has been declared as District Hospital of East District for providing
secondary level health care for patients who will be referred from Health Centres falling in East
District. For North East District, 2 hectares of land had been purchased at Shastri Park and 200
bedded hospital is under construction on this land. This will act as secondary level health care
Institution for the patients being referred from the Health Centres falling in North District.

For tertiary health care services, 5.39 hectors of land had been purchased at Tahirpur for 650 bedded

super speciality hospital. This hospital is under construction process and when fully commissioned
will function as a Tertiary health care institution in Trans Yamuna Area. Apart from that, the existing

23


GTB Hospital is also being strengthened with more number of maternity beds for providing maternal
and child health care at tertiary level. Similarly 200 bedded Pacdiatrics Super-speciality hospital at
Geeta Colony is under construction process which will provide tertiary level health care for Paediatrics
patients.

The objectives of referral system/3 Tier health care delivery system in Trans Yamuna Area will be
achieved in future, as per the objectives of the pilot project under reference.

RECOMMENDATION

4.14 In order to reduce the waiting time, special efforts should be made to minimize the time taken
to know results of various diagnosis/tests. While the Committee notes the impressive increase of
testing facilities-both routine and specialized-in Central Government hospitals, as well as in private
sector hospitals, it also would like to draw attention to the great disparity that exists in the charges for
similar tests conducted in private hospitals and diagnostic centres. No doubt, it is claimed that a part
of the disparity arises from the need to recover a reasonable return on capital invested in setting up
such private corporate hospitals and research centres. Therefore, the Committee is convinced that for
a long time to come, our public hospital systems (including AIIMS) will continue to bear the brunt of
tests, diagnosis and treatment of the people. The Committee accordingly, expects continued pressures
on the facilities of AIIMS and major Central Government hospitals and. therefore, there is no escape
from periodic review of services as to how to reduce waiting time, nature and need of test facilities
being set up and the fees to be charged therefore. It also envisages that this problem would remain
steadily acute in AIIMS where most complicated cases are brought needing appropriate sophisticated
tests which have to be ordered in such a manner as to prevent bunching or overcrowding. The
Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for a periodic review and upgrading of facilities,
procedures, logistics, fees, etc. with the primary aim of increasing patients’ convenience and reducing
delay in getting test result.

ACTION TAKEN ‘

4.14 The investigation samples are collected by the hospital generally from 9.00 a.m. to 11.30 a.m, on
working days on Monday to Friday and upto 10.30 a.m. on Saturday. All the investigations except the
ones which require more time by virtue of their procedure (incubation etc.) are processed the same day
and reports delivered by next day to the respective OPD/Wards. The OPD patients collect the reports
on the next visit to the hospital. Gradually, the investigations are becoming less time consuming due to
the advancement in technology thereby reducing the time and simultaneously increasing the accuracy.
The situation is likely to improve further with the passage of time. Upgradation of facilities is an
ongoing process. The fees to be charged by Government hospitals are reviewed and have been revised
for AIIMS and PGIMER. Further revision in charges in AIIMS is under consideration.

RECOMMENDATION

20.2 The Committee feels that the Ministry of Finance should have made some provision for this
purpose last year so that at least the process of taking over of the land and the quarters from the Delhi
Administration could have been started. The Committee strongly recommends that a suitable
allocation should be made this year for this purpose at an appropriate stage.

ACTION TAKEN

20.2 The proposal to acquire 100 partially built expandable DDA flats in Rohini was shelved as the
representatives of the nurses refused to accept the accommodation in Rohini.

24


RECOMMENDATION

24.2 In fact. the Committee is. of the view that private and corporate hospitals enjoying duty
exemptions or zero duty imports of cquipments. लए, have an obligation to provide a percentage of
their services free to the poor so that the latter too may have access to their specialities. The
Committce is aware that such linkages. established carlicr on a loose basis. were not monitored and led
to problems in verification. The altcrnative. a contribution to the fund as suggested above. may be
more transparent and unambiguous. The Committee would request the Government to consider this
suggestion carly.

ACTION TAKEN

24.2. The Dte.GHS was issuing certificates as required under notification No.64/88-
Cus..dated1.3.1988. The certificates were issued to the private hospitals/institutions under the said
notification strictly on the recommendations from the concerned State Governments who inter-alia
certified in cach case:~

(a) that the Institution provides treatment without distinction of caste. creed. race. religion or language:

(b) that the Institute provides free treatment, on an average to at least 40% of all their out-door
paticnts:

(०) that the institution provide 10० treatment to all indoor paticnts belonging to familics with an
income of less than Rs.500/- p.m. and keeping for this purposc at Icast 10% of all hospital beds
reserved for such paticnts: and

(9) that the Institute provides treatment at reasonable charges. cithcr on the basis of the income of the
paticnts concerned or otherwise. to paticnts other than those specified in clauses (a) & (0) above.

The notification No.64/88-Cus., dated 1.3.88 was rescinded vide notification No.99/94-Cus.. dated
1.3.94. Ona clarification from the Ministry of Finance that the cquipments imported prior to 1.3.94
were to be considered under the rescinded notification, Dtc. General of Health Services continued to
issue CDEC to the eligible institutions recommended by the concerned State Government.

Peoples Union of Civil Liberties (PUCL) filed a CWP 409/96 in the High Court of Delhi alleging
large scale irregularities in the issuance of duty exemption certificates under the notification No.64/88-
Cus., dated 1.3.88. The Hon‘ble High Court of Delhi vide order dated 31.1.96 restrained DGHS from
issuing exemption certificates under notification No.64/88-Cus.. dated 1.3.88. Vide order dated
18.10.96, the Hon’ble High rt constituted two committees (Rosha Committee & Mohile
Committee) to examine the = larities and to monitor the recovery of custom duty from ineligible
institutions. The Hon'ble Court vide order dated 19.12.96 reviewed their direction and inter-alia
directed the DGHS to decide pending applications for grant of cxcmption certificate in accordance
with law.

As per the directive of Hon"ble High Court, the Dte. General of Health Services has disposed off 112
pending applications and that of 76 diagnostic centre cases. Pursuant to the directions of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Mediwell Hospital case, the Directorate Gencral of Health Scrvices/Department of
Health has taken up review of all the 396 beneficent institutions that availed benefits under 64/88-Cus.
Notification. As per the progress report submitted to the Hon’ble Delhi High Court on 4.5.2001. all
the 396 institutions have beem examined. CDEC stands withdrawn from 385 institutions. Three
institutions (viz. (i) Maharaj Jagat Singh Charitable Hospital. Bias (ii) Sri Satya Sai Institute of Higher
Medical Sciences, Puttapurthy. Andhra Pradesh and (iii) Medical Research Foundation, Madras) were
found fulfilling the post importation conditions. They are being monitored on their continuing
eligibility of retain CDEC as per the observations of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Mediwell Hospital
case. Three cases were closed as no import was found effected under 64/88-Cus. Notification. Two

25


cases are sub-judiced and action has been initiated in these cases for dismissal of writs. Remaining
three cases have been referred to the Department of Revenue.

The withdrawal/rejection orders of all these institutions in each case have been endorsed to (i) Rosha
Committee (ii) Mohile Committee (iii) Department of Revenue (iv) Assistant Commissioner of
Customs concerned and (v) respective State Health Secretaries. The proceedings before the one man
Committee (Mohile Committee) have not yet been completed. However, the Hon'ble High Court vide
order dated 30.3.2001 have discharged the Rosha Committee of its obligation.

The review of CDEC cases is being monitored by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. In this
connection, it is added that a number of institutions whose CDECs have been withdrawn/rejected have
filed writ petitions in their respective High Courts against these withdrawal letters.

ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES, NEW DELHI
RECOMMENDATION

AIM 10.3 The Committge has given much though to this matter, and links that seem to exist among,
unbearable overcrowding levels, undergraduates” educational needs and constraints on referral status.
The Committee is of the view that the Department must, on balance, and taking a long-term view of
the sustainability of high level of competence at AIIMS, relocate the undergraduate seats at an
alternative institutions taking them away from AIIMS. Indeed, Safdarjung hospital itself could
accommodate the fifty seats taken away from AIIMS. Safdarjung was a teaching institution itself till
recently, affiliated to University College of Medical Sciences (UCMS). Many witnesses felt that
taking away undergraduate education from AIIMS many have to be considered as a necessary policy
change at the present state of development and problems faced by AIIMS; as Health Secretary himse:f
admitted that there could always be possibilities to relocate the fifty seats in other Medical Colleges in
Delhi if transfer to Safdarjung presented problems.

AIM 10.4 The Committee would, therefore, recommend that serious thought should be given to early
possibility of doing away with the undergraduate education at AIIMS, more so because of the need to
restore the referral character of the Institute. If overcrowding at AIIMS is to be tackled effectively, we
should not accentuate the problem by provision of general medical care merely to provide for
undergraduate education.

ACTION TAKEN

(10.3 to 10.4).

Since its inception, the Institute has been continuously developing and evolving curricular strategies
for undergraduate teaching programme, some of which have served a role model for the rest of the
country. Some of the important changes introduced in the curriculum at the Institute which are either
followed by other universities or under active consideration of the Medical Council of India are as
follows

Earlier the duration of the first professional phase of MBBS _ course in all medical colleges used to
be two years. In AIIMS, the course was successfully reduced to one and a half years without
compromising with the quality of teaching. The Medical Council of India followed this example and
introduced the same duration in all medical colleges. Subsequently, the Institute further reduced the
first professional phase to one year. This has been incorporated in the recommendations made by the
Medical Council of India.

Right from the first batch of AITMS undergraduate in 1961, the rural posting of interns has been one
fourth of the total internship period. Most other Medical colleges introduced this pattern subsequently

26


\

AIIMS has been a leader in designing objective assessment procedures especially in the practical and
clinical assessment. Several medical colleges are in the process of following these modalities of
assessment.

The contribution made by the AIIMS in the undergraduate education has reached beyond the country.
AIIMS has played a singular role in developing the curriculum for a new college at B.P. Koirala
Institute of Health Sciences at Nepal.

One of the important objects of the Institute is also to produce teachers for medical colleges. It is well
known that a good doctor/researcher does not necessarily makes.a good teacher. Teaching requires
skills in communication and an understanding of learning needs and behaviour of the students. In
medical colleges in our country, the teachers are expected primarily to teach the undergraduate
students. It is imperative that the future teachers (viz. junior residents, senior residents, pool officers)
are given pedagogic experience through teaching of MBBS students. This was historically also an
important reason for initiating undergraduate programme at AIIMS.

Over the years AIIMS has developed excellent facilities and infrastructure for providing high quality
of undergraduate training. In the interest of evolving new patterns of medical education for the
country through experimentation in undergraduate curriculum (which is only possible at AIIMS
because of its unique statutory status), and for ensuring a high order of teaching skills for future
teachers, there is a case for undergraduate courses to continue at the Institute. However, the
recommendations of the Committee have been noted.

POSTGRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND
RESEARCH (PGIMER), CHANDIGARH

RECOMMENDATION

PGI 10. The need to allow professors and Doctors to practise privately, on sharing basis with the
Institute, was suggested as one of the measures to retain and also to attract qualified doctors and
specialists, to the Institute. The Committee does not agree with the proposition and feels that this
suggestion, if implemented, would give rise to more problems than it intends to solve.

ACTION TAKEN
10. It is Government policy not to allow private practice by Central Government doctors.
RECOMMENDATION

PGI 15. While going around the Library, the Committee noticed that books, particularly the new
arrivals, were not properly displayed. Older books were found in very bad shape. The Committee
feels that most of them need binding. It was found from the visitors’ book that not many readers were
visiting the Library. The Committee found very few students in the reading room. The Committee is
not satisfied with the explanation given in this regard and feels that there is a need for looking into the
reasons for the Library not attracting good number of readers and improving its working.

ACTION TAKEN

15. The newly built library has just been commissioned and books and journals were in the process of
being rearranged at the time of the visit of the Committee. Similarly, the observations that there were
few readers is based on the fact that during working hours of the hospital and the Institute, very few
people can come and read in the Library. The students also work full time in the Hospital and basic
Sciences Departments. The majority of students also work full time in the Hospital and basic Sciences

27


Departments. The majority of students do their reading and thesis work in the evening and in fact
during the end of the session. The library is kept open upto 2.00 A.M. and the demand is to keep it
open 24 hours.

RECOMMENDATION

PGI 17. The Doctor's Association complained of lack of modern equipment and facilities for having
seminars and symposia. decent pay-scalcs and adequate residential accommodation. The association of
Resident Doctors highlighted demands such as long duty hours. experience as Junior Residents not
counted for promotions. low amount of book contingency, reserve vacancies not being filled up, etc
The points raised by them, the Committee fecls. deserve immediate svmpathctic consideration by the
Government.

ACTION TAKEN

17. Most of these demands are not local but based on broad national policy in relation to the residency
programme. The Scheme is uniformally applicd but can be modified from time to time depending on
the circumstances. Orders have been issued 0n30/11/98 revising the emoluments of Resident Doctors
as under:-

Junior Residents: Junior Residents will be paid Rs.9400/- p.m. in the first year. Rs.9723/-p.m. in the
second year and Rs.10050/-p.m. in the third vear of their Residency. which is inclusive of NPA

Senior Residents: The Senior Resident will be paid Rs.10940/-p.m. in the first year, Rs.11295/-p.m. in
the second year and Rs.11650/-p.m. in the third year of their Residency, which is inclusive of NPA.
The emoluments of Senior Residents having only Post-Graduate Diploma will be reduced by Rs.325/-
and the same will be reduced by Rs. 650/- in the case of those Senior Residents who do not have any
Post -Graduate degree and diploma.

The emoluments as now revised have been effective from 1/1/96.

JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION &
RESEARCH, PONDICHERRY

RECOMMENDATION

JIP 7. The Committee is of the view that the OPD and Emergency services in the hospital are adequate
and need to be expanded and improved. The Committee was informed that government had
sanctioned the construction of a new Casualty Block at an estimated cost of Rs.601.93 lakhs but the
work was yet to be started. The committee recommends that construction work should be taken up
immediately.

ACTION TAKEN

7. The newly constructed second floor of the OPD Block has started functioning. The building has
been taken over and the new Casualty Block has started functioning w.e.f. 27.1.2000. The proposal
for providing staff for Emergency Medical Services Department of JIPMER, Pondicherry is being
proposed and the Dte.GHS have sought some information/comments from JIPMER, Pondicherry.
RECOMMENDATION

JIP 11.1 One of the reasons given for vacancies not being filled up promptly was that nobody wants to
serve in this remote comer of the country. The Director of the Institute argued that some definite

28

७० कक मन्‍ककनक+- 052०5 पक, जा


transfer policy would have to be laid down for improving the situation. It could be done, he argued, by
resorting to transfer of faculty members from three institutions ic. Lady Hardinge Medical College
(LHMC), Maulana Azad Medical College and University College of Medical Sciences. Delhi. When
asked about its possibility, the Director, Medical Education. accompanying the Committee, stated that
such transfers were possible. The Committee. therefore. suggests that this proposal should be
considered in all its aspects and implemented at the earliest.

ACTION TAKEN

11.1. The teaching faculty of CHS posted at JIPMER. Pondicherry and Lady Hardinge Medical
Collelge, New Delhi, Maulana Azad Medical College. Delhi arc transferred from one institution to
other or vice-versa. However, they cannot be transferred to University College of Medical Services
(UCMS) as UCMS is not a part of CHS

SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL
RECOMMENDATION

SF 3.1 The Committee was further informed that out of 1,190 posts of nurses, 155 posts in various
categories were vacant, mainly due to non-availability of reserved category candidates, in spite of
advertising several times in newspapers and through Employment Exchanges. On being asked, one
reason given for the poor response in this regard was lack of accommodation for them. The Medical
Superintendent suggested that the reserved category candidates must be given an offer of provisional
appointment without holding any formal interview. They could be regularised after they had served
satisfactorily for some time. In view of shortage of nurses in the hospital. the Committee feels that this
suggestion may be considered by the Ministry for implementation.

ACTION TAKEN

SF 3.1 The suggestion for Medical Superintendent, Safdarjung Hospital that reserved category nurses
candidates should be given overall provisional appointment without holding any interview is not
acceptable as the recruitment to various services/posts in Government Department is made in
accordance with notified Recruitment Rules. The Total sanctioned strength of Nursing staff in various
categories including Chief Nursing Officer. Nursing Superintendent and Deputy Nursing
Superintendent is 1292. As on date 1114 posts are filled and 178 posts including 147 posts of Staff
Nurses are lying vacant. Of these a total number of 135 posts have already been advertised (68
General, 27 OBC and 25 SC, 15 ST) during the month of August, 2000, but further recruitment action
has been withheld due to various instructions of the Ministry of Finance, on filling up of vacant posts
in the Government. In response to the advertisement, which was published in all Employment
News/Rozgar Samachar, a total number of more than 10.000 applications have been received. The
Tesponse is more than adequate to fill up all vacant posts including the reserved categories. These
posts will be filled up as and when clearance from the Ministry of Finance is received.

RECOMMENDATION

SF 3.2 As regards Group “C° and ‘D” staff, the Committee notes that not enough posts have been
provided over the years, unlike in the case of doctors. The Committee was informed that the
promotional avenues for them are virtually non-existent, most of them retiring without any promotion
in their entire service life. The Committee emphasises the need to improve this situation at the earliest
by (a) providing more posts in Group C and D; and (b) opening avenues of promotion for those
stagnating for more than ten year$ in one scale. The Committee desires that all-out efforts be made to
fill up the vacant posts, in all categories, by taking suitable measures.

29


ACTION TAKEN

3.2 Efforts are being made for better promotional avenues to boost the moral of the staff. At present
In-Situ promotions are given to all eligible employees. The Government has already implemented
Assured Career Progression (ACP) Scheme recommended by the 5" Pay Commission for Central
Government Employees in which eligible employees are now getting at least two financial
upgradations in the next higher scale of pay after 12 and 24 years of service respectively. This scheme
has already been implemented in the hospital and all the eligible employees, who have not got
promotion, have since been given financial upgradation under ACP Scheme.

DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL

RECOMMENDATION

RML 4. The Committee was informed that a proposal was initiated and it was decided by the
Government to hand over the Lower Hastings Square, which is situated next to the boundary of the
Hospital, to Dr. R.M.L. Hospital in 1977. This land is required by the hospital for its expansion,
including construction of an additional hostel for Resident Doctors. Presently, this land is under the
occupation ‘of the President's Secretariat. The Committee feels that the Department should take up the
matter with the President’s Secretariat and the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment to get
possession of this plot of land for improving hospital services.

ACTION TAKEN

(4). The New Delhi Municipal Committee had been requested to hand over the triangular NDMC par
measuring about 2,000 sq. meters adjoining the Casualty. The hospital proposes to set up 30 bed
Emergency Wing for dealing with surgical, orthopaedic, neuro-surgery, burn, as well as ICU on this
plot of land.

For residential purpose, transfer of land at Lower Hastings Square measuring about 4.5 acres, which is
in possession of the President Estate, has been taken up. The land in question has been legally
transferred to the Hospital but the Hospital has not been given possession of the land. The hospital
proposes to construct residential accommodation i.e. type E, 48 quarters and type III, 32 quarters as
well resident doctors hostel of about 100 rooms on this plot of land.

Secretary (Public Grievances), Cabinet Secretariat had also reviewed the matter with officers
concerned and suggested that a proposal be submitted for consideration of Committee of Secretaries.
Accordingly, the proposal was submitted in October, 1996 for consideration and decision of the
Committee of Secretaries on:

(i) Handing over possession of triangular plot measuring about 2,000 sq. meters adjoining the
casualty of DR. R.M.L. Hospital presently under the possession of NDMC, to the hospital;
and

(ii) Handing over of Lower Hastings Square (area: 3.827 acres) presently under the possession of
Presidents’ Secretariat, to DR. R.M.L. Hospital.

The Committee of Secretaries in its meeting held on 23.10.1996 observed that 3.827 acres of land
in the Lower Hastings Square had been allotted in 1977 to construct residential accommodation for
the staff members of the hospital. The land was to be handed over to the Ministry as and when the
existing quarters were vacated by the Presidents’ Estate. However, the President Secretariat in 1989
had informed that it was no longer possible for them to part with the land. Consequently, the matter
had remained pending since then. Representative of the Ministry of Urban Affairs & Employment
informed that they have been in touch with the Presidents’ Secretariat in this regard and have

30


identified 1.257 acres of land of Baba Kharak Singh Marg which could be handed over to President
Secretariat. As soon as the final clearance from the President Sectt. is obtained, the land will be
formally transferred and possession handed over the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Urban
Affairs & Employment was addressed on 12.11.1996 requesting him to have the needful done. The
Ministry of Urban Affairs & Employment have accordingly issued orders on 7.1.1997 for allotment of
land measuring 2.257 acres for construction of doctors residences of Dr. R.M.L. Hospital and on
8.1.1997 sanctioned allotment of land measuring 1982.785 sq. yards to Dr. R.M.L. Hospital.

The triangular plot measuring around 2000 sq. yards adjoining the Emergency department of the
hospital has been handed over to the hospital. A proposal to construct a new Emergency Block with
the additional Trauma beds is planned. A detailed proposal has been got prepared by the hospital from
HSCC. The EFC proposal for the same has already been approved. Further necessary approvals are
being sought.

For residential purpose, the land measuring 3.987 acre, which was in possession of President Estate,
has been allotted to the hospital. It is planned to construct residential quarters. Resident Doctors
Hostel and other facilities on this land and further action is in progress.

RECOMMENDATION

RML 5.2 The Committee feels that the position of residential accommodation in the hospital is very
poor which needs to be improved urgently by providing sufficient number of houses from the General
Pool of different categories in the nearby Government colonies.

ACTION TAKEN

(5.2). The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Urban Affairs & Employment who have
informed that doctors and nurses are being allotted accommodation by the Hospital from its pool. The
quarters already placed at the disposal of Hospital were as a measure of relief. The Ministry of Urban
Affairs & Employment have expressed their helplessness in earmarking any specific accommodation
to the Hospital, given the present acute shortage of general poor residential accommodation and
percentage of satisfaction in respect of different categories of Govt. employees.

LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE AND ASSOCIATE HOSPITAL

RECOMMENDATION

LH 5.3 It was pointed out by the representatives of the faculty that the scale of pay of the Professors in
the CHS teaching sub-cadre was less than the scale of pay of Professors in the University of Delhi.
The Committee was further informed that while doctors, who joined in 1983, had become Professor in
1991 after the completion of just 8 years, those who joined in 1971 could become Professors only in
1991, as their service rendered before 1.1.1983 in CHS sub-cadre was not counted for the purposes of
promotion and the services was written off by the Ministry.

LH 5.4 The Committee feels that grievances of the faculty appear to be genuine and is of the opinion
that the Department should take steps to remove this anomaly in the pay scale and the service rendered
by the CHS teaching sub-cadre before 1.1.83 should be considered for promotion purposes.

ACTION TAKEN

(LH 5.3 & 5.4) Regarding the grievance about the anomaly in the scale of pay, it is a matter for the
consideration of the Fifth Central Pay Commission. As regards, the counting of service, this aspect has

31


been examined by the Supreme Court in Writ Petition No .683 of 1990 and the Hon’ble Supreme
Court has upheld the Government's view that this service cannot be taken into account for promotion.

32



CHAPTER-III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

RECOMMENDATION

4.3 One problem, which is the direct outcome of overcrowding, is the shortage of beds in various
hospitals. With the number of patients requiring admission in hospitals increasing day by day,
shortage of beds is acquiring alarming proportion. For example, the number of patients admitted in
Dr. २.५... Hospital every day has gone up from 74 patients in 1970 to as high as 120 patients in
1994.

4.4 The Committee is of the view that due to influx of patients from various parts of the country to
Delhi and the population of Delhi increasing at a rapid pace, Central Government hospitals are under
constant pressure and admit patients more than their bed capacity. As a result, two to three patients
have to share a bed in many Wards.

ACTION TAKEN

(4.3 & 4.4). | The Government of NCT of Delhi has informed that one of the priorities proposed to
be achieved by Delhi Government in the field of Medical & Public Health Sector during 9" Five Year
Plan had been to remove geographical imbalance in provision of health care services in deficient areas
by opening of new peripheral hospitals, upgradation of existing hospitals including colony hospitals by
raising bed strength and augmentation of services by appropriate institutional strengthening to reduce
the work load of major hospitals. To reduce the pressure on the existing hospitals, Govt. of NCT of
Delhi has proposed the following:

1. 200 bedded hospital at Narela.

2. Construction of 150 bedded maternity and child block at Sanjay Gandhi Memorial Hospital,
Mangolpuri.

3. 200 bedded Hospital at Pitampura.

4. 140 bedded New Emergency and Trauma Block at Hari Nagar

5. Constructiori of 300 bedded Super-speciality wing of Deen Dayal Upadhyay Hospital.

6. Upgradation of Colony Hospital at Patel Nagar to 70 beds.

7. 500 bedded Hospital at Dwarka.

8. 200 bedded Paediatric Super-speciality Hospital at Geeta Colony.

9. 200 bedded Hospital at Shastri Park.

10. Construction of 500 bedded Ward Block at GTB Hospital.

11. Construction of 150 bedded Matemity and Child Block at GTB Hospital.

12, 200 bedded Dr.Hedgewar Arogya Sansthan, Karkardooma.

13. 650 bedded Super-speciality Hospital at Tahirpur.

14. 1153 bedded Ward Block and 57 bedded Nursing Home Block in Lok Nayak Hospital.

15. 450 bedded Surgical Orthopaedic Block at Lok Nayak Hospital Complex.

16. 400 bedded Casualty Block at Lok Nayak Hospital.

17. Construction work of Phase-3 building of Guru Nanak Eye Centre

18. Construction of a separate Dental College Building in Delhi at Maulana Azad Medical College.
19. 100 bedded Dr.B.C. Roy Hospital and Molecular Science Research Centre in JNU Complex.
20. 200 bedded hospital at Vasant Kunj.

33


COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee notes the various steps taken /proposed for augmentation of health
services in the NCT of Delhi. The Committee is, however, apprehensive that the envisaged plan
may not be completed in the Tenth Five Year Plan. While agreeing that the Central
Government can only supplement the medical facilities provided by the State Governments, the
Committee wishes to point out that due to financial constraints, the required health system is
missing in the States. The Committee has been informed that Schemes like setting up of Local
Self-Government Dispensaries , developing of Regional Diagnostic Centres , World Bank aided
State Health System Development Projects etc. have been initiated by the Central Government.
The Committee hopes that these steps would result in a better medicare system in the States
which would gradually lessen the burden of Central Govt. Hospitals. The Committee would,
however, emphasise that the Central Govt. should constantly monitor the medical facilities being
provided in the States, specially the adjoining States of the Capital. 2

RECOMMENDATION

4.5 Another related aspect is the lack of adequate space, both built-up and open, in the hospitals

Some hospitals are so short of space that there is hardly any scope of their physical expansion and also
for providing more beds. Similarly, the doctors/faculty members are also facing acute shortage of*
office/examination room and usually three to four of them have to share a single room

ACTION TAKEN

4.5 The newly constructed block of Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital which is a four storeyed
building, constructed under Japanese International Corporation Agency (JICA) Project is functional
w.e.f. 6.3.2000.

A Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan for LHMC & Associated Hospitals has already been submitted
by Central Design Bureau which has to be implemented in 3 phases.

As far as Dr. RML Hospital is concerned, there are plans to construct additional floors in the existing
buildings of the hospital. Also there is a plan to construct an additional building to house additional
Emergency Trauma Beds and other related facilities. The relaxation in ground coverage for this
hospital has been obtained and is now 33.33% instead of 25%.

Safdarjung Hospital has already taken up the hospital expansion project under which the new OPD
complex is goming up. B and C Wings of this complex have been completed and 0705 are already
functioning there. A and D Wings are under construction. They are likely to be completed very soon
to accommodate the different departments of the hospital

* COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee desires that all necessary steps may be taken to finalise and implement
the Comprehensive Re-development Plan in time for LHMC and Associated hospitals and
complete the construction of additional buildings in Dr. RML hospital and A and D wings of
OPD complex in Safdarjung hospital at the earliest.
RECOMMENDATION
4.6 The Committee is of the opinion that the hospitals are-bursting at the seams, both on the OPD and

inpatient sides. There is a phenomenal increase in the number of patients with no corresponding
increase in the number of beds and other infrastructural facilities. Asa result, these hospitals are

34


overburdened and work much beyond their capacity. Overcrowding, the Committee feels, impinges
upon not only the quality and efficiency of medical services but also adversely affects research
activities in Institutes like AIIMS, PGIMER and JIPMER.

ACTION TAKEN
4.6 In so far AIIMS is concerned, the Project for Screening OPD could not be taken up because of the

- limited approved floor area ratio in the Institute. The Ministry of Urban Development has now agreed

to increase the floor area ratio and the ground coverage. The revised ground coverage and FAR have
since been ratified by the Government which has resulted in availability of increased ground coverage
and FAR.

Now, the proposal for construction of Screening OPD has been changed from Raj Nagar to the
existing space near present OPD building. The estimate for 8 storeyed building with double basement
amounting to Rs.9.19 crores has already been approved by the Standing Finance Committee of the
Institute. The conceptual plans have also been prepared. The usage of each floor has also been
finalized. The total covered area will be 18,810 sq. meters. The plans are to be submitted to the Civic
Authorities for approval after the Master Layout Plans are approved by the Civic Authorities of Delhi.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee strongly recommends that the Department get the necessary approvals
from the civic authorities of Delhi, at the earliest, so that early construction of screening OPD at
AIIMS can be taken up as the matter is hanging on fire for the last so many years and the ever-
increasing patient load is adversely affecting the patient care and _ research activities of the
Institute.

RECOMMENDATION

4.9 The major and long term solution to the problem of overcrowding in the hospitals, the Committee
feels, calls for improvement and expansion of medical facilities at the district and the State level, not
only in Delhi but also in the major hinterland regions of North India, to take care of the primary and
secondary health care needs of the people, so that patients needing specialist care only could be
referred to the Central Government hospitals or other prestigious tertiary care institutes, located mostly
in Delhi.

ACTION TAKEN

4.9 The delivery of primary and secondary level of health care services is the responsibility of State
Governments/Union Territories. They establish and improve such facilities keeping in view the felt
needs of the people and availability of funds. The Government of NCT of Delhi has constituted a
Central Co-ordination Council consisting of Medical Superintendents of hospitals under the control of
Central Government/ESIC and the Delhi Government to bring about greater coordination amongst
different hospitals of various agencies operating in the capital. The terms of reference of the Council
are as under:-

The Central Co-ordination Council calls for continuous _ consultation, mutual understanding and co-
operation between the various agencies.

To consider and recommend broad lines of policy in regard to matters concerning health in all its
aspects such as the provision of promotive, preventive and curative care.

35


To make proposals for legislation in the fields of activity relating to Medical & Public Health matters
and to lay down the pattern of development for the Delhi State as a whole.

To make recommendations to State Government regarding the prioritization of areas of health care
needed for the population of Delhi and to review periodically the work accomplished in different areas
through the vital statistical data available.

To consider regarding the area of responsibility inter-alia the catchment area so far as comprehensive
health care system in concerned.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

4.9 The Committee is not inclined to agree with the views of the Department that the entire
responsibility of developing peripheral hospitals lies with the State Governments. The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that a comprehensive plan to develop primary and
secondary health care services which are most neglected by many States may be chalked out in
consultation with the State Govts. at the highest level and a time frame to implement the plan
may be set. Special emphasis may be given for this aspect in the 10" Plan.

RECOMMENDATION

4.11 The Committee feels that conscious and urgent steps for reducing the waiting time and promoting
easily accessible and cheaper testing facilities would go a long way to mitigate, if not eliminate,
overcrowding in the hospitals. Increased waiting time, in the Committee’s opinion, is a direc
manifestation of overcrowding and in almost all the hospitals, the Committee found, that the waiting
period was very long, ranging from one hour to three hours.

ACTION TAKEN

4.11 The Ministry agrees with the observations. Efforts are being made to reduce waiting time and
to facilitate movement of patients.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee has been given to understand that number of OPD registration
counters has been increased in Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. RML Hospital and AIIMS.
However, this has not resulted in any significant improvement as rush of patients is still there.
The Committee recommends that immediate steps should ke taken to computerise the
OPD registration in all the Central Govt. Hospitals as being done in JIPMER,
Pondicherry. The Committee is also of the view that separate queues for senior citizen:
should be made mandatory in all the Central Govt. Hospitals.

RECOMMENDATION

5.2 The Committee is deeply concerned about the deteriorating standards of research and patient care
particularly in the hospitals attached to the AIIMS, New Delhi and PGIMER, Chandigarh.

5.3 An efficient and organized referral system, the Committee feels, can be a good edifice of a
competent medical care available in all the lower level peripheral hospitals. This means that hospitals
and health centres in and around Delhi and also in the States have to be sustained and simultaneously
developed with adequate funds over a period of time, so that a successful referral system can function
in premier hospital like PGIMER, Chandigarh and AIIMS, New Delhi. The experience of PGI,
Chandigarh, which, even through conceived and run as a referral hospital right from the outset,
illustrates the extent of inevitable pressure existing for direct admission. After considering various

36


practical difficulties, the Committee is of the view that there must be a clear objective to make them
purely referral hospitals by a fixed date, and all necessary short and medium term problems must be
sorted out within a definite timeframe. The Committec is convinced that this decision brooks no delay
and expects that appropriate mechanism would be developed to achicve this

ACTION TAKEN

(5.2 & 5.3).The question of making AIIMS. New Delhi and PGIMER. Chandigarh as referral hospitals
has been considered by the Government and the Institute Bodics. However. keeping in mind the aims
and objectives of these Institutes the question of converting them into fully referral hospitals has not
been finalized. Moreover. there is need to augment outpatient facilitics in Delhi and Chandigarh
before such a policy can be implemented in a meaningful manner.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee has been given to understand that despite the burden of patients, research
activities in AITMS and PGI have not been adversely affected. Thc Committee has been informed that
with the help of a proper infrastructure and funding, clinical. medical and bio-medical research of a
very high standard is being done in both these Institutes. The Committee is, however, of the view
that all necessary steps should be taken to maintain the referral character of these Institutes.
The Committee would be interested to know the details of papers read in national as well as
international seminars and published.

RECOMMENDATION

6. The Committee noticed that the use of computers for maintenance of patient-related records has not
been given due attention in most of the Central Government hospitals. The Committee is of the
opinion that there is an immediate need for providing computers in a big way, not merely for keeping
various records but also for effecting a better coordination between various Departments/wings of the
hospital. Computers should be used for improving patient care and follow-up.

ACTION TAKEN

6. Safdarjung hospital has already computerized the 1.५. Fluid distribution system in the hospital.
Computerization of the Medical Store, Medical Record Department. OPD Services, Emergency
Services and Accounts Department is under process.

In Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, the pay rolls of the employees have already been computerized.
The hospital has already submitted a plan to the Government for computerization of the other areas
like Purchase, Stores, Medical Records, patient admission, lab., etc. It is under the process of approval.

In AIIMS, computerization plan for admission, discharge and transfer for the in-patients has been
implemented in all the wards of the hospital. Computer facility has also been taken up in the
implementation of patient care system at C.N. Centre. Dr. R.P. Eye Centre and IRCH.

PGIMER, Chandigarh has entered into an understanding with AIIMS for computerization. and the
soft-ware developed by AIIMS will be used by PGI in its efforts to computerize patient care system at
PGIMER, Chandigarh.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee notes that some progress in computerisation has been made so far as
Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. R.M.L. Hospital and AIIMS are concerned. The Committee wou d,
however, like to emphasise that efforts should be made to fully computerise all the Central Govt.

37


Hospitals at the earliest. Adequate funds should be made available by the Central Govt. for
this purpose.

RECOMMENDATION

8. The arrangement suggested in the para above, the Committee feels, would not work unless there
exists effective coordination amongst various hospitals. The Committee notices total lack of
coordination among the Central Government hospitals in Delhi, not to speak of other hospitals.
Instances of patients going to different hospitals for the same ailment also came to the notice of the
Committee, which again, the Committee feels, is due to lack of a coordination mechanism among the
various hospitals. The Committee emphasizes the need for having a close liaison and coordination
among different hospital with a view to avoiding many problems which currently are bedeviling the
patient care services. Such type of coordination, to begin with, the Committee feels, can be worked
out between the Safdarjung Hospital and the AIIMS so as to help reduce the burden on both these
hospitals and also to increase the patients convenience. Possibility of such a linkage has been
discussed in para AJM 9 at page 14 Supra.

ACTION TAKEN

8. In Delhi, Central Government, National Capital Territory of Delhi Government, Ministry of
Railways, M.C.D., N.D.M.C., Ministry of Defence, ESIC etc. are providing hospital care services.
The Government of NCT of Delhi has constituted a Central Co-ordination Council consisting of
Medical Superintendents of _ hospitals under the —control of Central
Government, ESIC etc. to bring about greater coordination among different hospitals to various
agencies operating in the Capital.

The terms of reference of the Council are as under:-

a) The Central Co-ordination Council calls for continuous _ consultation, mutual understanding and
co-operation between the various agencies.

b) To consider and recommend broad lines of policy in regard to matters concerning health in all its
aspects such as the provision of promotive, preventive and curative care.

c) To make proposals for legislation in the fields of activity relating to Medical & Public Health
matters and to lay down the pattern of development for the Delhi State as a whole.

d) To make recommendations to State Government regarding the prioritization of areas of health
care needed for the population of Delhi and to review periodically the work accomplished in different

e) To consider regarding the area of responsibility inter-alia the catchment area so far as
comprehensive health care system is concemed.

The Council meets periodically under the Chairmanship of Health Minister of Delhi.

The Technical Committee headed by D.G. examined this issue and gave its report in September, 1996.
The Committee, inter-alia, recommended the need for co-ordination among hospitals so that proper
referral system, treatment and follow up could be made; emphasized the need for hot line/oz
wireless/or inter-conneeted computer geographic demarcation of the jurisdiction of referral
hospitals; need for effective referral system from PHC to tertiary care and vice-versa, especially
management and follow up of chronic diseases.

38


COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee has been informed that a Control Room has been set up since 1996 in
Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. RML Hospital and AIIMS where senior doctors remain available for
coordination with other hospitals for management and referral of patients. A proper referral system of
treatment and follow-up of both regular and casualty patients exists between Safdarjung Hospital and
AIIMS. The Committee is, however, constrained to point-out that these facilities are only on
paper. Instances of precious lives being lost due to some vital equipment being non-functional
continue to occur on a regular basis. Reality is that only those patients whose attendants can
manage some reference at the right place get the best medicare. The Committee is of the view
that such control rooms and coordination between the hospitals should be activated. Surprise
inspections by higher authorities can prove to be effective in this matter.

RECOMMENDATION

10. The Committee noted that the equipments available in different hospitals have not been properly
maintained. Repairs are not done promptly when they go out of order. The Committee feels that the
maintenance of equipments is very crucial as the patients face lots of problems if the equipments are
not repaired in time. They are fleeced by private labs/diagnostic clinics which charge exorbitant
amounts even for routine and normal tests. It has come to the notice of the Committee that patients are
referred to private labs/diagnostic centers for various tests on the pretext of equipments in the hospitals
being out of order and private diagnostic centers are allowed to import medical equipments at
concessional rates. The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate steps be taken for
providing necessary infrastructure for getting the medical equipments repaired in a reasonable time.

ACTION TAKEN

10. The equipments used in the hospitals are very sophisticated and have often been imported. These
electronic equipments are got serviced/repaired by the authorized service engineers by entering into
annual service contract. The Ministry does not feel that it would be advantageous to create an
independent infrastructure to repair medical equipments as technology is advancing day by day and
the infrastructure created may become outdated. It will also be difficult to ensure accountability for
losses or pilferage or misuse. The present system of entering into annual repair/maintenance contract
ensures departmental responsibility. New equipment is purchased keeping in mind after sale service
as an important constituting factor in deciding the selection.

The hospital have also been asked to study the down time of expensive equipment and a variety of
measures have been suggested on the use of the equipment to see that it is used and maintained
efficiently.

Department of Electronics have in the meantime set up service centers and plan to expand the
activities of these centers.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is not inclined to agree with the contention of the Department that the
present system of entering into annual repair/maintenance contract ensures Departmental
responsibility. Reports coptinue to come about there being instances of equipments not being
maintained/repaired timely or sophisticated equipments lying unutilised. | The Committee
strongly feels that there is an urgent need for evolving an affective monitoring mechanism to
check such instances both at the hospital level and in the Department. Appropriate action in
this regard should be taken at the earliest.

39


RECOMMENDATION

12. The Committee is disappointed over the fact that the functioning of the family welfare units, in
almost all the hospitals visited by it, was very poor. For example, in PGIMER only five vasectomies
were done against 417 tubectomies in the year 1994 indicating the gender bias of the programme.
While 1156 conventional contraceptives were distributed, there was not even a single case of insertion
of uterine devices during this period. Position prevailing in other hospitals is more or less the same. It
was found that the infrastructure provided for the purpose was not being put to optimum use. Near
total lack of motivation and dedication in the staff was also noticed. The Committee is surprised to
note the indifferent and nonchalant attitude of the Ministry in regard to such a high priority aspect of
our social-economic development. It, therefore, recommends that family welfare units provided in the
Central Government hospitals be strengthened and activated immediately. More emphasis should be
laid on vasectomy as family welfare device and suitable incentive/motivations be provided.

ACTION TAKEN

12. Department of Family Welfare has informed that for implementation of the Family Welfare
Activities in the Central Sector Hospitals, the Department has sanctioned Post Partum Centres, Urban
Family Welfare Centres and sterilization beds.

Department of Family Welfare is making efforts to utilize the present infrastructure effectively and
efficiently. In this regard some of the Post Partum Centres in Central Government hospitals requiring
certain equipments were strengthened by supplying Operation Theatre and Labour Room equipments.
The performance of Family Welfare activities are being monitored through quarterly progress reports,
regional review meeting at the central level and through monthly co-ordination committee meetings
under the Chairmanship of Medical Superintendent at the hospital level. The Central/State
Government representatives also participate in the meetings. Government of India regularly request
the States/UT Government to convene these meetings and give feed back to Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare. Besides review of the performance, these meetings act as catalyst to address to the
difficulties of the staff.

Further in order to strengthen the Family Welfare activities, the Department has entrusted the National
Institute of Health & Family Welfare and Population Research Centres for carrying out an evaluation
study of the Post Partum Centre and Sterilization Beds Scheme respectively during 2001-02.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee has been informed that no report has been finalized yet by the National
Institute of Health and Family Welfare. Reason being that out of 1562 Post Partum Centres, only 265
Post Partum Centres have furnished the filled in questionnaire to National Institute of Health and
Family Welfare. Out of these 265 Centres, in-depth study of 180 Centres were planned by National
Institute of Health and Family Welfare during February, 2002. Similarly, out of Seventeen Population
Research Centres entrusted to conduct the concurrent evaluation of Sterlization Bed Scheme, only
three Centres have completed their work. The Committee is not happy with the slow pace of
progress. This shows the importance given to family planning activities by the very Centres
which have been set up with the purpose of population control. The Committee is of the firm
view that all efforts should be made for completing these studies at the earliest so that remedial
measures can be taken.

40


RECOMMENDATION

14.1 Epilepsy, in our country, is mostly being treated in Neurological centers of the major hospitals.
The facilities available for treating epilepsy patients in these hospitals, including AIIMS, are
insufficient and unorganized. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is an imperative need to
establish an Epilepsy Centre, to begin with, in New Delhi, which should aim at developing a holistic
approach for treatment of epileptic patients. The Centre should endeavour evolving a national policy
and also promoting research in the indigenous system of medicine to provide best medical care to the
epileptic patients. Once the Centre is developed, similar centers, either separate or branches thereof,
should be set up in other parts of the country.

ACTION TAKEN

14.1 The. management of epilepsy patients is being carried out at Dr. RML Hospital, Safdarjung
Hospital, Lady Hardinge Medical College and Associated Hospitals under Central Government. It is
also felt that a community care approach needs to be adopted for covering peripheral areas.

A Technical Committee headed by DGHS examined this issue and gave its report in September, 1996
which is reproduced below:-

“Epilepsy clinics would be set up in the bigger hospitals like Safdarjung, Dr. R.M.L., Lok Nayak
Jaiprakash, Guru Teg Bahadur and Deen Dayal Upadhayay Hospitals with a holistic approach to
treatment emphasizing on health education, and awareness for the disease.

Regional Centres should be established as per the need and demand. At present there is no need of an
autonomous institution. However, research activity should be emphasized and undertaken at the
various tertiary level institutions.”

The recommendations were circulated for comments of Govt. of Delhi, Ministry of Labour, Railways,
MCD and Central Government hospitals before taking a final view in the matter.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee notes that a Technical Committee headed by DGHS had given specific
recommendations with regard to treatment facilities of epilepsy patients in its Report submitted
in September, 1996. The Committee is, however, surprised to find that no follow-up actio:
seems to have been taken as comments from the concerned authorities are still awaited. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Department should vigorously pursue this issue so that the
requisite action is taken at the earliest.

RECOMMENDATION

16. The Committee found that cleanliness and hygiene in various hospitals are very poor. Choked
sewage and leaking water pipes were seen in some hospitals. Toilets were very dirty and stinking.
Garbage and disposed cotton, etc. were found lying uncovered. The Committee is deeply concerned at
such state of affairs as stagnated water and open garbage become breeding grounds for various
organisms. The Committee feels that hospital authorities are not paying adequate attention to this
aspect and recommends that immediate steps be taken to keep the hospitals clean and hygienic.

41


ACTION TAKEN

16. Senior level Medical Officers have been made responsible for oversecing the cleanliness of
hospital premises. The premises have been divided into zones and responsibility assigned to Sanitary
Inspectors for the upkeep of the premises and laboratories. Hospitals arrange cleanliness drives
periodically. Incinerators are being used for the disposal of biological waste like dead foetus, etc. and
other infected waste including physical material like syringes, needles, bottles etc. As regards non-
infected, non-hazardous waste, the NDMC/local bodies are responsible for its collection and disposal.
The hospital authorities have been liaising with local bodies for disposal of this waste. The matter is
also being taken up in the Ministry of Environment and Forests to bring the problem into focus and
give a direction to the hospitals, local bodies and other engaged in the task of hospital waste
management. Ministry of Labour has permitted for relaxation of rule for engaging private contractual
labour for sanitation work of the hospital, particularly for three Central Government hospitals, i.e. Dr.
RML Hospital, Safdarjung Hospital and Lady Hardinge Medical College & Associated Hospitals for
the period upto February, 2002. The proposal for Safdarjung Hospital for engaging contractual labour
for sanitation works in the selected places of the hospital is under consideration.

Adequate attention is being paid by LHMC for the management of hospital waste. The cleanliness
and hygiene of the hospital is being improved and wherever necessary renovation of toilets has been
undertaken. Under the Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan, proposal for latest amenities for
sewerage, water supply and management of hospital waste have been incorporated.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee feels that even though some steps have been taken, a lot more needs to be
done _ in the area of cleanliness and hygiene in the hospitals. The action taken is not visible in
reality. There is absolute lack of coordination between the local bodies and hospital authorities
in removing waste from the hospitals. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that there is need
for regular and proper interaction between the two authorities. |The Committee is also of the
view that M/o Environment and Forests has a special role to play in waste management. The
Committee desires that the Department should take up the issue of waste management
vigorously.

The Committee finds that the Ministry of Labour has permitted for relaxation of rule for
engaging private contractual labour for sanitation work of Dr. R.M.L. Hospital, Safdarjung
Hospital and Lady Hardinge Medical College and Associated Hospitals for the period upto
February,2002. | The Committee has been given to understand that contract labourers are
engaged for sanitation work in Safdarjung Hospital and the experience is found to be
satisfactory. Similar proposal for Dr. RML Hospital and LHMC is under process. The
Committee hopes that Ministry of Labour has extended the permission for relaxation of rulz
beyond February, 2002.

RECOMMENDATION

16.1 The CPWD is responsible for the maintenance of hospital building, including operation
theatres and various wards. The Committee noticed that the upkeep and maintenance of hospital
buildings was very poor which needed urgent renovations. Some buildings, particularly in Safdarjung
Hospital, Dr. RML Hospital and Lady Hardinge Medical College and Associated hospitals were found
to be in an uninhabitable condition. When asked about the reasons, the Committee was informed that
due to absence of any check or control by the hospital Administration, the CPWD was not prompt.in
attending to the complaints. It was, therefore, argued, that either the hospitals should have their own
engineering departments or the CPWD units posted in the hospitals be brought under the
administrative control of the respective Medical Superintendents to expedite and improve the
maintenance work. The Committee feels that these suggestions deserve serious consideration by the

42


Department. The Department may appoint a Committee of experts to examine the present state of
buildings and suggest suitable measures.

ACTION TAKEN

16.1 The Ministry had taken up the matter with the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment for
transferring to Medical Superintendents the administrative control of CPWD Units posted in the
hospitals and responsible for the maintenance of the hospital buildings. The CPWD informed that
three separate divisions have been created to cater to the requirement of the Central Government
Hospitals exclusively. Besides this, the Executive Engineers have been regularly attending the
meeting called by the Medical Superintendents and the works are carried out as per the requirement.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee finds that the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment seems to have
reservation on the issue of transfer of administrative control of CPWD units posted in the
hospitals to the Medical Superintendents. The Committee is of the strong opinion that for a
proper maintenance of hospital buildings, CPWD units should be placed under the direct
supervision of Medical Superintendents. _ If that is not done, procedural delays would continue
to occur and upkeep of hospital buildings would remain unsatisfactory. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates that the Department should again pursue this issue with the Ministry of
Urban Affairs and Employment.

RECOMMENDATION

17.2 The Committee also found that the increase in the number of doctors over the years was much
more than the Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ staff. There is, no doubt, an acute shortage of such staff in all the
hospitals which ultimately is reflected in poor and truncated services. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that adequate number of posts-in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ categories be provided after
assessing the requirement of every hospital at the earliest and the process of filling the posts at various
levels should be reviewed and streamlined so as to avoid unnecessary delays. Special efforts are
needed to ensure that vacancies of teaching staff and the doctors are filled up as soon as possible.

ACTION TAKEN

17.2 Proposal for creation of Group C & 0 posts are examined in the Ministry on the basis of
recommendations of Dte.GHS who have to follow the norms for creation of specific category of posts.
Staff Inspection Units and Work Study Units have been undertaking staff assessment in various
hospitals on the basis of work-load and working norms. Efforts are being made to speed up the filling
up of vacancies of teaching staff and doctors.

Another Committee under the Joint Secretary in the Ministry also inter-alia looked into the
demands of the staff and the recommendations for the creation of posts is under process.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITEE

The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The Committee feels
that creation of Group C&D posts does not commensurate with the work load. The Committee
desires that the process of creation of posts in Group C&D may be completed without any
further delay to provide efficient and quality service to the patients.

43


RECOMMENDATION

19. The Committee received a number of complaints about the rude behaviour of a section of doctors
and staff towards patients and of lower staff with doctors. It also noticed that, ‘generally, the
relationship between the employees and the hospital administration is not cordial. The Committee
noticed, during its visits, that there is a general lack of discipline and courtesy in various hospitals.
Irresponsible unionism has become ramparit amongst the employees of the hospitals which culminates,
quite often, in ‘bandhs’ and ‘strikes’. For example, PGIMER, Chandigarh, AIIMS and Safdarjung
have witnessed many such incidents in the recent past. The Committee noticed that there was no
effective grievance redressal machinery available in any of the hospitals.

19.1 The Committee is of the view that the problems between the administration and the employees
should get immediate attention as and when they arise and should not be allowed to deteriorate.
Disruption in hospital services is a very serious matter which should be avoided at all costs as it is
ultimately the human life that suffers.

ACTION TAKEN

19 & 19.1 The Office Councils have been functioning in the hospitals under the JCM Scheme with a
view to redressing the grievances of the employees. The Office Councils meet periodically wherein
recognized staff association nominates their representatives.

RECOMMENDATION

19.2 The Committee, therefore, feels that deterrent punishment, coupled with an efficient grievances
redressal system/mechanism like JCMs in government establishments. should be provided in each
hospital immediately so as to prevent the staff from taking recourse to strikes, etc. Equally important
is the need for an ‘Ombudsman’ type of machinery at each hospital for looking into patient
complaints. Further, the Committee would suggest that time has come for hospitals to subject
themselves to social audit of their assorted activities.

ACTION TAKEN

19.2 In view of the fact that public grievances committee have been functioning in each hospital for
looking into the complaints of patients and there is a public grievances committee in the Dte.GHS
headed by D.G., the Ministry does not favour the idea of “Ombudsman” type of machinery at each
hospital for looking into patients’ complaints.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee feels that the present system of Public Grievances Committee addressing
the complaints of patients is not working satisfactorily because the Doctors themselves are
members of the Committee against whom complaints are made. | The Committee therefore,
reiterates its recommendation for creation of 'Ombudsman' type of machinery. The Committee
is constrained to point out that there is absence of work culture in the medical staff of the
Government hospitals. They are often found lacking in polite behaviour, reception,
responsiveness and discipline. The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that there is an urgent
need of change in work culture among medical staff. In this connection, the Department may
take necessary steps to include attitudinal training in the in-service training programme of
health workers.

RECOMMENDATION

19.3 The Committee would also recommend early redefinition of the role and functions of Hospital
Management Boards. Norntally, these boards are intended to be responsible for smooth functioning of
all aspects of a hospital's working But then, its effectiveness and credibility are constrained by the

44


fact that they are often (as in AIIMS) composed solely of those responsible for providing hospital
services and attending to internal management and coordination issucs. Unless outsiders are also
associated with such hospital management boards, their credibility will not improve. nor will the issue
of patient care remain at the center of the scheme of things.

ACTION TAKEN

19.3 Including outsiders in the Hospital Management Boards is being examined with a view to
improve patient care. This is already being done in specific areas as ०.४. in the implementation of
Transplantation of Human Organ Act at the hospital level.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee has been informed that inclusion of outsiders has been tried in the hospitals of
Delhi Govt. and has not been found to be beneficial either for the patients or for the hospital
administration. The Committee is not inclined to agree with this viewpoint. The Committee
reiterates that effectiveness and objectivity of the Hospital Management Boards will only be
there if besides hospital functionaries, outsiders are also made their members.

RECOMMENDATION

23. The concept of geriatric clinics in India has not gained momentum although problems relating to
the aged/elderly people in the country are becoming more complex with the disintegration of joint
family system and the fast increase in the number of upper age people. There is a growing feeling of
insecurity, coupled with related health problems, amongst elderly people. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Government should take necessary steps to develop ‘geriatrics’ as a specialized
subject, and provide sufficient number of specialists and infrastructure for opening Geriatric Clinics in
all the Central Government hospitals.

ACTION TAKEN
23. The Dte.GHS has been requested to examine the proposal for setting up of Geriatric Clinics.

The recommendations of the Technical Committee set up by the Ministry, to consider inter-alia this
issue. was examined. The recommendations were circulated in October, 1996 for comments to the
Government of Delhi, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Railways, MCD/NDMC and Central
Government hospitals before taking a final view.

No separate Geriatric Clinics have been set up in the Central Government hospitals though separate
counters, queues, seating arrangement etc. is provided to Senior Citizens.

As far as the problems of the aged are concerned, ESI Corporation has taken up setting up of Geriatric
Clinics in its Action Plan 2001-02. This will be followed up in coming years as well.

Railways have extended medical facilities to its retired employees in a scheme known as Retired
Employees Liberalized Health Scheme. This scheme provides medical care to the retired railway
employees at par with servingyemployees. As per feasibility, separate doctors, clinics, dispensing
counters, etc. have been provided in addition to comfortable waiting rooms in selected hospitals for
senior citizens. Medical officers and staff are being imparted training in geriatric care wherever
feasible.

45


The Delhi Government has not set up any Geriatric Clinics separately. However, Special Clinics on
Sunday for Senior Citizens of the age of 60 and above werc started in 9 hospitals under Govt. of NCT
of Delhi for two hours from 10 A.M. to 12 Noon in September, 1999 to provide services under
Medicine, Surgery, Orthopaedic, Gynaecology, ENT and Eye specialities supported with Pathological
tests and Radiological facilities. Senior Citizens are being given prefercial treatment in registration in
OPDs and at Medicine Counters in different hospitals.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is not happy to note that the proposal of setting up of Geriatric
still under examination of the Department even after expiry of more than six years and it has not
been able to take a decision regarding setting up of such clinics. The Committee expects the
Department to take an early decision in this matter.

RECOMMENDATION

24. The Committee is deeply concerned about inadequate facilities for treatment of poor patients for
major illnesses, especially those involving various complicated procedures. The Committee has noted
that (a) several major invasive procedures, ¢.g. cardiac surgery are too expensive for the poor people
(unaffordable even for middle class); (b) there is a wide disparity, amounting to almost a factor | to 3,
between private and public hospitals, even at the lowest priced public hospitals. For most of these life
conditions, the patient has to produce substantial private funds even after contributions are received
from the PM’s and CM’s relief fund, etc. and (c) the costs are unlikely to come down soon.

ACTION TAKEN

24. National Illness Assistance Fund has been set up with an initial contribution of Rs.5 crores. The
fund could be subscribed by individuals in India or abroad, corporate: bodies in private or public
sector, philanthropic organization and all contributions made to this fund is exempt from payment of
Income Tax under Section 80-G of Income Tax Act. The primary objective of the fund is to provide
financial assistance to patients living in States/ Union Territories, below poverty line in India,
suffering from major life threatening diseases, to receive medical treatment at any of the
superspeciality Hospitals/Institutes or other Government/Private hospitals. The financial assistance to
such patients would be released in the form of a one-time grant which will be released to the Medical
Superintendents of the hospitals in which the treatment has been/is being received. In a bid to speed
up the assistance to the needy patients, the scheme has been modified in January, 1998 to provide that
an advance payment of २5.10 lakhs be made to the Medical Superintendents of All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital and Lady Hardinge Medical

College & Smt. Sucheta Kriplani Hospital, New Delhi, PGIMER, Chandigarh and JIPMER,
Pondicherry to enable immediate sanction of an amount upto Rs.25,000/- in each deserving case
reporting for treatment in the respective hospital/Institute. This amount would be replenished as and
when the report of its utilization are received.

All the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations have been advised to set up an Illness
Assistance Fund in their respective States/Union Territories. It has been decided that grant-in-aid
from Central Government would be released to each of these States/UTs (with legislature) where these
funds are set up. The grants-in-aid to States/UTs would be to the extent of 50% of the contributions
made by the State Governments/UTs to the State Fund/Society subject to a maximum of Rs.5 crores to
States with larger number and percentage of population below poverty line viz. Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Kamataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal and Rs.2 crores to other States/UTs. The State/ UT level funds could also receive
contributions/donations from donors, as mentioned for National Illness Assistance Fund. The Illness
Assistance Fund at the State/UT level would release financial assistance to patients living in their

46


respective State/UT upto Rs. 1.5 lakhs in an individual case and forward all such cases to National
Illness Assistance Fund where the quantum of financial assistance is likely to exceed Rs. 1.5 lakhs.

It has been provided in the scheme that Union Territories which do not have a legislative assembly
will: be sanctioned a budget outlay of Rs.50 lakhs each from out of the National Illness Assistance
Fund as and when the UT Administration have set up an 1055 Assistance Socicty/Committce.

Budget provision of Rs.25 crores each had been made during the financial year 1998-99 and 1999-
2000. In 2000-01, a budget provision of R$.6.5 crores was made.

The States/UTs (with legislature) 1.6. Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh. Tripura, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil
Nadu, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Maharashtra, West Bengal. Kerala, Mizoram,
Rajasthan, Goa, Gujarat, Sikkim, Bihar and NCT of Delhi and Pondicherry have set up Illness
Assistance Fund. The States/UTs i.e. Assam, Haryana, Manipur. Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya,
Orissa, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and Nagaland have not yet sct up the Illness Assistance Fund.

The National Illness Assistance Fund is provided to Dr. RML Hospital, Safdarjung Hospital and
LHMC & Associated Hospitals to provide assistance to the poor and needy paticnts.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee feels that the states which have not set up National Illness Assistance
Fund may be persuaded to set up the Fund at the earliest, so that the poor patients living in
these states are able to take benefit out of the Fund. The Committee notes that even though the
Fund is in existence for quite some time not many poor patients are aware of its existence. The
Committee, therefore, desires that adequate publicity through the electronic/print media may
be given about this Fund.

RECOMMENDATION

24.1 While a point of view was expressed by some witnesses that procedure may not be a likely
priority for the poor, the Committee is not impressed with this argument. Urbanisation and its
attendant problems, considerable adulteration in food and drugs, tensions of a competitive modern life,
etc. are some trends increasingly affecting the rich and the poor alike, except that the poor are subject
to the double jeopardy of exposure to both infectious and non-communicable diseases. Therefore, the
Committee would suggest that the Ministry must urgently explore all appropriate sources of funds to
assist poor patients coming to AIIMS or other Central Government hospitals for treatment of specific
life threatening illness. If a mechanism can be set up, such as a National Catastrophic Illness
Assistance Fund, then resources can flow from all sources, including private charities and international
agencies and organisations. Besides, there can be many imaginative methods of requiring both
government and private hospitals of a certain size and even profit-making nursing homes to make
earmarked contributions to the fund. Procedures would, of course, have to be developed to create a
decentralized self regulating network of major participating hospitals to have early and quick help to
poor patients.

ACTION TAKEN

24.1. There is provision for exemption of poor and indigent patients from payment of diagnostic and
laboratory service charges in Central Government hospitals. The recommendation of the Committee
for setting up of a National Catastrophic Illness Assistance Fund under the Department of Health has
been accepted and National Illness Assistance Fund has been set up. Details have been given in reply
to para 24. *

47


COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is constrained to point out that public is not aware about the provision
regarding exemption of poor and indigent patients from payment of diagnostic and laboratory
service charges in Central Government Hospitals . The Committee, therefore, recommends that
steps should be taken for giving wide publicity through the electronic and print media. Such
information should also be made available at the Enquiry Counters of Central Government
Hospitals so that needy patients can take the maximum benefit.

RECOMMENDATION

25.1 In a place like Delhi, patients coming from outside face a lot of problems in getting a suitable
accommodation before/after they are admitted to hospital. Most of them are forced to spend their
nights on the footpaths or in make-shift tents in the hospital premises. The Committee feels that there
is an urgent need to construct Dharamshalas Sarais by the Government, in association with charitable
institutions, who may be interested in this noble cause. Such institutions should be provided all
necessary help in procuring land, etc., on concessional rates by the Government.

ACTION TAKEN

25.1 Safdarjung Hospital has already got a Dharamshala which has been renovated. The Dharamshala
can accommodate approx. 170 patients (persons) at a time.

A piece of land has been allotted to Dr. RML Hospital by the Land & Development Office Ministry of
Urban Development to construct a Dharamshala for the relatives of the patients admitted in Dr. RML
Hospital. A boundary wall has been got constructed on this land. Further action is in progress.

Under the Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan of LHMC which has already been submitted to
Central Design Bureau, provision for Dharamshala has been made for the benefit of attendants/
relatives of the patients.

In AIIMS, at present, there is one Dharamshala named Rajgarhia Vishram Sadan with an
accommodation of 122 beds as detailed below:

Dormitories - 72 beds,
Ordinary Rooms - 38 rooms - 38 beds
Special Rooms = 6 rooms - 12 beds.

The above accommodation falls short of the demand of the patients coming to AIIMS from
outstations.

Sri Sai Bhakt Samaj have also started constructing a Dharamshala comprising of 103 beds. The
present status of the Dharamshala is as under:-

All works such as sanitation, electric, doors, windows, fabrication etc. are in progress.

It is expected that the Vishram Sadan shall be completed in all respects by the end of October, 2001.
The ground area of about 500 sq. meters has been allocated towards construction of above
Dharamshala. The construction has been completed and the building will be taken over shortly.

M/s. Surekha Public Charitable Trust has proposed a Dharamshala comprising of 164 beds on the old
area of 1000 sq. meters. The same shall be built on backside of existing Dharamshalas. The present
status of the project is as under:-

The Project has already been approved by Delhi Urban Arts Commission and the Chief Fire Officer.

Drawings have been submitted to NDMC for obtaining the sanction to start construction. Once, the
approval of the NDMC is received, the construction work will be taken up by the Trust. It is expected

48


that the work will be completed within nine months of starting of the work. The construction work
has already started.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee observes that a number of Projects for providing accommodation
facilities to attendants accompanying the patients coming from outside Delhi have been
approved and are in various stages of implementation in Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. RML
Hospital, LHMC and AIIMS. The Committee recommends that all efforts should be made to
expedite the completion of these Projects. The Department may also explore the possibility of
augmenting these facilities wherever feasible.

ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES,NEW DELHI
RECOMMENDATION

AIM 16. The Committee found the facilities/instrastructure in Nephrology Wards inadequate. The
Committee was informed that the existing facilities including beds in the wards, are just enough for
only one-fourth of the patients needing immediate admission. These facilities, the Committee learnt,
are shared by the patients of Urology also. As a result, even the serious patients and those requiring
dialysis, have to wait for weeks for admission,

AIM 16.1 Increasing incidence of diabetes and stress-related diseases like hypertension, due mainly to
fast changing life style and high level of pollution, the number of persons having renal problem is
growing at an alarming rate. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to expand/strengthen
facilities in the wards and also to provide modem infrastructure for research and training in the
Department of Renal Sciences at the earliest.

ACTION TAKEN

16 & 16.1. It is admitted that there is a great load of work on the Dialysis unit of the Institute and the
present services are not capable of providing facilities to all patients approaching this Institute
However, to cope with this problem, a priority service is provided to those who need emergency care
and for those whose prospects of renal replacement therapy are high. AIIMS is not currently in a
position to cope with the requirements of life long dialysis for chronically ill patients on a long-term
basis. It is correct that there is a need to strengthen the unit in terms of space, equipments and staff
etc. and this is being looked into.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is deeply disturbed to note the reply of the Department that AIIMS which is a
premier institute of the country is neither able to provide dialysis facility to all patients approaching it
nor is currently in a position to: cope with the requirements of life long dialysis for chronically ill
patients on a long term basis. The Committee feels that while the Department feels the necessity of
strengthening the Nephrology unit, it is not serious in action. The Committee. therefore,
recommends that the existing Nephrology unit of the hospital should be strengthened in terms of
space, equipment and staff etc. at the earliest.

POSTGRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH

RECOMMENDATION

PGI 16. During its meeting with the representatives of employees and other associations of the
Institute, the Committee realised that the employees did not have cordial relations with the Institute

49


authorities. Warring fractions of employees’ associations traded charges against each other,
particularly against the Director of the Institute on different counts. The Committee was informed that
various categorics of staff and Resident Doctors had gone on strike several times in the recent past.
One particular incident involving nurses and sccurity staff was brought to the notice of the Committee.
Cases have gone to the Court even.

PGI 16.1 The Committee is deeply concerned about indiscipline and lawlessness prevailing in the
campus which adversely affects the functioning of the Institute. The committee found that there is no
proper grievance redressal machinery in the Institute. The Joint Consultative Machinery (JCM) is non-
existent. The committee feels that there is urgent need for creating a better understanding between the
authorities and employees of the Institute. It, therefore. emphasises the need for reviving the JCM
urgently. The hospital administration, the Committee feels, needs to be more flexible and transparent
in its functioning.

ACTION TAKEN

16 & 16.1 The Committee’s observations have been noted for necessary action. Efforts would
constantly be made to forge harmonious relationship and maintain discipline and the Institute is being
suitably advised.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Department is silent about the Committee's recommendation with regard to revival
of JCM in the Institute. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that
the JCM be revived without further delay, if not already done.

JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL
EDUCATION & RESEARCH, PONDICHERRY

RECOMMENDATION

JIPS. The Committee was surprised to note that the hospital of the Institute, which also runs graduate
and post-graduate courses, does not have a Neuro-surgery Department and facility for kidney
transplant. The Committee was informed that a proposal for providing these services was pending with
the government. The Committee recommends that the proposal should be considered and cleared
without further delay.

ACTION TAKEN

5. A draft EFC Memo which inter-alia contains the proposal for Neuro-Surgery Department of
JIPMER, Pondicherry is being processed in consultation with the concerned departments.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee expresses its displeasure over the undue delay in the matter. It finds
eth at the proposal is still being processed at different levels. The Committee recommends that

the proposal may be finalized and implemented without further loss of time under intimation to
it.

RECOMMENDATION

JIP 8. The question of granting autonomy to the Institute was also discussed which evoked mixed
response from the Institute/hospital community. While it was opposed by the Employees’ Association,

50


the students and the faculty members welcomed it. The Committee fecls that granting autonomy could
be conducive to the progress of the Institute and there is a need to initiate the process after convincing
the employees in this regard.

ACTION TAKEN

8. With regard to Academic autonomy, the University of Pondicherry to which JIPMER is affiliated, is
being approached for granting academic autonomy for the award of Degree and Diploma at both
Undergraduate and Postgraduate levels by the institute itself. Regarding Administrative autonomy. the
students and some faculty members are in favour of autonomy. However. the other staff and
employees union are opposing the same. Efforts will be made to convince the employecs union.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is not in a position to understand why the employees are opposing the
grant of autonomy. The Committee feels that the Department may make all out efforts to allay
their fears about the issue of autonomy and convince them about the necessity of granting
autonomy. It hopes that a consensus would be reached soon.

RECOMMENDATION

JIP 9. The Committee was informed that there is an acute shortage of residential accommodation for
the faculty members/doctors and the Group “C° and “D* staff. For nearly 2168 Group *C° and *D* staff
in the hospital, only 294 quarters are available. Thus, only 13.1 per cent of its employees have a
chance to get accommodation. The Committee is of the view that. in a remote place such as
Pondicherry. getting accommodation is very difficult and costly. Hospital staff doing emergency duty
informed the Committee that they were facing lot of problems on this count. The Committee feels that
there is an urgent need for providing adequate number of quarters for all categories of staff.

ACTION TAKEN
1. The construction of 14 Nos. of Type V Quarters has been completed and allotted to the
eligible staff.
2. The construction of 24 Nos. of Residential quarters for the Marricd Senior Residents has been
completed and being allotted.

3. The location for the construction of 24 Nos. of quarters each of Type I. 1 & III is already
marked in the Master Plan.

4. Additional 36 Nos. of Residential Quarters of Type I (12 Nos.). Type 1 (12 Nos.) and Type III
(12 Nos.) were constructed during the year 2000-2001 and the quarters were allotted to the
eligible staff members

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

Though the Institute has taken some steps in this regard as compared to the staff
strength, the Committee, feels the additions made are miniscule. It desires that steps may be
taken to construct more quarters inside the campus itself.

RECOMMENDATION

JIP 11 The Committee was informed about the vacancies in the teaching staff. particularly in
Departments like Radio diagnosis, ENT, Orthopaedics and Dentistry. Out of the sanctioned strength of
119 in the Faculty, the Committee was informed, the existing strength was only 93. The Committee is
distressed to note that a large number of faculty positions are lying vacant for sufficiently long time
and that nothing could be done in this regard despite several efforts made by the hospital authorities

51


and the students. The Committee notes with serious concern that against a total number of 2753 posts,
sanctioned for the Institute, the existing strength is 2527 viz. 226 posts are lying vacant. The
Committee feels that vacancies in teaching staff and those in Groups ‘C’ & “D* affect adversely not
only the quality of medical education but also patient care. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that all —out efforts be made to fill up the existing vacancies without further delay.

ACTION TAKEN

11. At present the vacancy position in respect of CHS Officers at JIPMER, Pondicherry is as under:-
Sanctioned Filled Vacant

MO/SMO 26 24 2
/CMO/SAG
Teaching 133 101 32

To fill up the vacant teaching posts at JIPMER, Pondicherry, in the requisition itself, it is being
indicated that initial posting will be at JIPMER, Pondicherry.

Regarding Group C & D posts, it is stated that the recruitment to these posts is a continuing on-going
process. Steps are being taken to fill up the vacant posts as per norms.

RECOMMENDATION

JIP 11.2 Abnormal delay in the sanction of posts by the government was also brought to the notice of
the Committee. It was informed that a proposal for creating posts, as recommended by the Staff
Inspection Unit (SIU), was pending with the Government. The Committee feels that there is an urgent
need for sanctioning those posts and recommends that the proposal of the SIU needs expeditious
disposal.

ACTION TAKEN

11.2. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare sanctioned 250 posts of various categories as
recommended by Staff Inspection Unit. The recruitment of Group C & D posts is a continuing on-
going process. There are 154 group C and 58 Group D vacancies. Most of these vacancies are due to
non-notification of draft recruitment rules. Steps are being taken to fill up the vacancies as per norms.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee expresses its concern over 32 vacancies in teaching faculty and desires that
suitable steps may be taken to fill up the vacancies at the earliest. As per the latest information made
available to the Committee, there are 136 Group (९! and 81 Group 0 vacancies It has been clarified
that most of these vacancies are due to non-notification of draft Recruitment Rules. Draft Recruitment
Rules are to be notified for 26 categories of Group ‘C’ and 10 categories of Group ‘D’ posts,
finalisation of which is under process. The Committee takes a serious view of the matter. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for delay in non notification of draft
Recruitment Rules and how does the Department propose to fill up the posts in the absence of
these rules. It also desires that the Recruitment Rules are notified without further delay.

SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL
52


RECOMMENDATION
SF 2.1 Buildings of certdin Departments, such as Orthopaedics. Gynaecology & Obstctric:,
Cardiology, etc., were found to bein poor condition. Overall cleanliness and maintenance in the
hospital was much below the desired level. Water pipes were leaking at different places and public
utilities were very dirty. Some operation: theatres were in a bad shape and needed major renovations.
The maintenance of the Nurses Hostel was totally unsatisfactory

SF 2.2 Members of the Committee, after ‘visiting various Wards and Departments, 180 9 discussion
with the Medical Superintendent and the Heads of various Departments regarding ;problems faced by
them in running the hospital efficiently. *

SF. 2.3 Lack of sufficient number of medical and paramedical staff. inadequate powers to the Medical
Superintendent ‘and shortage of residential accommodationYhostels for doctors and nurses were some
of the major problems put before the Committee. The need to have some super-speciality services,
more posts at different levels, recognising Burns and Plastics Department as a separate Institute,
recognising the hospital as a teaching hospital construction of a new Gynae OT, separate CGHS
Wing, ,६ library building, an Auditorium, Nursing Home and the Department of Rehabilitation and
Physiotherapy was also emphasised.

SF 2.4 The Committee also met the representativés of the Association of Resident Doctors, Nurses
Union and the Safdarjung Hospital Workers’ Union and enquired about the grievances and problems
faced by them.

SF 2.5 The Committee, after having a discussions with the officials of the hospital and the Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare (Department of Health), feels that the issues mentioned above need
immediate attention in order t6 provide satisfactory medical care to the patients.

SF 5.1 As regards accommodation for Resident Doctors, the Committee noticed that in spite of a five
fold increase in their strength (from 110 to.544 in 1994), the number of dwelling units for them has
remained the same (87 single rooms and 23 married two-room sets). Resident Doctors are supposed to
stay in the premises of the hospital or very near the hospital and work for 10 to 14 hours every day. By
providing adequate number of dwelling units to them, the Committee feels, the quality of patient care
would certainly improve. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a multi-storeyed hostel type
accommodation for Resident Doctors and Nurses be constructed at the earliest in the campus of the
hospital for which necessary funds be provided.

ACTION TAKEN

SF 2.1 to 2.5 & 5.1 - For filling up of the post of Medical Officer, UPSC had been requested to
expedite the matter urgently. Group ‘C’ & ‘D’ posts of para-medical staff had been filled up by the
Medical Superintendent of the hospital and the posts which were to be filled up by the DGHS is also
being taken on priority basis and about 80% of the posts have been filled up. For the 19.2 acres on the
North of Ring Road known as Defence Barracks Land, a sum of Rs.3,09,50,000/- has been paid to
Land & Development Officer and Safdarjung Hospital is awaiting ownership of 15.475 acres of land
after demarcation. The Right and Left Wings of the OPD Phase-III are under construction, which is
likely to be completed by July, 2002. The hospital proposes to construct resident doctors hostel
consisting of 400 rooms as well as type III quarters for housing the nurses there. The proposal was
submitted in October, 1996 for consideration and decision of the Committee of Secretaries on transfer
of title of this plot of land measuring about 19.2 acres on the North of Ring Road opposite Safdarjung
Hospital, where Defence barracks exist, to the Safdarjung Hospital. The Committee of Secretaries in
its meeting held on 23” October, 1996 observed that if formal possession of this land could be given to
the Safdarjung Hospital, then this area can be utilised for the construction of a multi-storeyed
residential complex to house the Resident doctors and nurses. The representative of the Ministry of
Defence clarified that this land did not belong to them. It was accordingly, decided that Ministry of

53


Urban Affairs & Employment would transfer this 19.2 acres of land to the Ministry of
Health/Safdarjung Hospital, who would bear the cost for re-locating the people reported to have
encroached upon a part of the aforesaid land. The land has not been transferred to Safdarjung Hospital
Once the land is transferred to Safdarjung Hospital then only the Architect can make final plans and
C.P.W.D. can be asked to prepare estimate. The Ministry of Urban Affairs & Employment was
addressed on 12.11.1996 requesting to issue final order relating to the transfer of this plot of land to
Safdarjung Hospital so that construction activity could be started as soon as possible. Further action
has been taken to acquire a plot of land measuring 2 acres in DWARKA for construction of residential
accommodation for nurses of the hospital. Money has been deposited with Delhi Development
Authority. Hospital Authorities have been requested to prepare a plan for construction of
hostel/residential accommodation. Till date D.D.A. has not handed over the land in Dwarka (2 acres)
to Safdarjung Hospital. The Burns and Plastic Department has been strengthened in terms of
manpower, equipments and construction/renovation of new ICCU Wards and Operation Theatres.
Further, it may be mentioned that Government have been giving special attention for improving the
conditions of the Burns & Plastic Ward of the Hospital. The Ministry have already sanctioned
Rs. 115.86 lakhs for the purchase of equipments and Rs.94.56 lakhs for construction/ civil works. This
included basically conversion of Bums OPD into “Burns ICU, conversion of Burns Casualty into
Bums OPD and Bums Physiotherapy Unit, renovation of toilets, improving the sewerage system of
Bums Ward and procurement of one Ambulance for the Bums Ward. Improvement of Burns & Plastic
Department is continuously being done under the guidelines of Hon'ble High Court.

RECOMMENDATION

SF 6 The Committee found that nearly 25 percent of the wing/wards of the Safdarjung Hospital are
located in old barracks, which are in a dilapidated condition. The Medical Superintendent informed
that 90 percent of these barracks were beyond repair and had been declared unfit for habitation. These
barracks, being single storeyed, occupy lot of space. The barracks do not belong to the Department of
Health/the hospital. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take up the matter for
getting these barracks transferred to the hospital, so that multi-storeyed buildings could house all
superspeciality departments such as Gynae OT, the CGHS Wing, Library, Auditorium, etc.

ACTION TAKEN

(6). Proposal for construction of superspeciality wing and private wards is going to be proposed. This
wing is proposed to be constructed in the area earmarked for the National Institute of Orthopaedics
building. Please also refer to Para 2.1 to 2.5 above.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is shocked to note that the authorities are not even aware, who is the
owner of the land, while they were pursuing the things with the M/o Defence and precious time
has been wasted in this futile exercise. The Committee is equally perturbed to note that money
has already been deposited for the said land, and the matter is still hanging on fire. The
Committee feels that the matter may be taken up on a regular basis at the highest level with
M/o Urban Development to hand over the possession of land without further delay since five
years have elapsed after the decision of the Committee of Secretaries.

RECOMMENDATION

SF 7A The Committee understands that the Department of Orthopaedics of the hospital had been
accorded the status of a National Institute, for which funds and land were also allotted. The Committee
came to know that no progress has been made in this respect and it appears that the proposal has been
put into cold storage. While Committee is not aware of the reasons for this, it feels that the proposal
needs to be revived and implemented as early as possible.

54


ACTION TAKEN

(7 A). The proposal has been included in the Ninth Five-Year Plan (1997-2002) by hospital
authorities.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

On. a specific query about the fate of proposal. for the Department of Orthopaedics of the
Sufdarjung Hospital being accorded the status of a national institute, the Committee has now been
informed that there is no such proposal. However, way back in early nineties, there was such a
proposal, provisionally land was also earmarked and plan was made. The Committee is perturbed
by this casual approach and fails to understand the reasons for envisaging a scheme in the early
days of a Plan period, doing some preliminary exercise and by the end of the Plan , simply
dropping the proposal.

DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL

RECOMMENDATION

RML 5.3. The possibility of earmarking some flats in the multi-story building being constructed
opposite the Casualty wing of the hospital for senior doctors should also be taken up with the
concemed Ministry so that their services are readily available. whenever required. at short notice.

ACTION TAKEN
(5.3). A request had been made to the Ministry of Urban Affairs & Employment.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee desires that the matter may be pursued vigorously at the appropriate
level.

RECOMMENDATION

RML 6. Some of the services in the hospital. the Committee feels. need further expansion/
modernization by providing adequate inputs/ infrastructure for improving the quality of patient care.
One are, for example, is the Buns and Plastic Ward. This Ward. located in the same complex as the
new Operation Theatre building, is in a poor condition and requires immediate attention. The
Committee emphasises the need for upgrading this Ward ds the bum paticnts gre highly prone to
infections.

ACTION TAKEN >

(6). The Medical Superintendent of the hospital has taken steps to reduce the congestion by shifting
OPD to the main OPD building from Bum and Plastic Surgery Department. A separate dressing room
and one air-curtain have been provided in the Department. Installation of two air-conditioners is being
processed in the hospital. Equipments like Bed Side Monitors. Bed Side Portable Spot Lamps. Optical
Loupes & Syringe pumps, small burn & plastic surgery instruments etc. are in the process of
procurement for Burng & Plastic Surgery Deptt.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

55


The Committee expresses its dismay over the lukewarm approach of the Department.
The Department has failed to procure necessary equipment for improving the Burns and Plastic
ward even after more than six years. The Committee desires that necessary action in this regard
may be taken without further loss of time. :

LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE AND ASSOCIATE HOSPITAL
RECOMMENDATION

LH 2.3 The Committee was also shown as to how the shopkeepers of Panchkuian Road have
encroached upon the boundary of the Hospital and were bumping their garbage etc. in its premises.
The Committee would like the Department of Health to take up the matter with the appropriate
authority with a view to get the encroachment cleared.

ACTION TAKEN

2.3 A part of the Panchkuian Road temporary market was shifted a few years back and the other
shopkeepers are required to be shifted.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee would like to be specifically apprised whether the entire encroachment
in the vicinity of the Hospital has since been removed.

RECOMMENDATION

LH 3. The Committee was distressed to sec that OTs of General Surgery and Orthopaedics, Eye and
E.N.T. are combined. On being asked, the M.S. informed that is was duc to shortage of group “C* and
‘D’ staff required as per recommendations of the Medical Council of India (MCI). The Committee is
of the view that opening of separate OTs is the need of the hour in view of fact that a large number of
patients are reporting for operations in these areas. The Committee, therefore, suggests that steps
should be taken to separate the OTs and adequate staff may be provided for the purpose.

ACTION TAKEN

3. In the proposed Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan, separate OTs are proposed to be constructed
for General Surgery, Orthopaedics, ENT, Eye etc. Once the OTs are bifurcated, increase in staff will
be proposed as per MCI norms.

RECOMMENDATION

LH 4. The Committee was told that projects pertaining to provision of an Accident emergency and
Cancer Centre in the hospital were pending with the Ministry. The Committee recommends that these
proposals should be cleared expeditiously.

ACTION TAKEN

4. The provision of Accident and Emergency Department has becn included in the Comprehensive
Redevelopment Plan which is under process. The proposal of establishment of Radiotherapy and
Oncology Wing is under process.

RECOMMENDATION

56


LH 5.2 The Committee was informed by the Employees’ Union that posts had not been
sanctioned/created, particularly in the categories of Group “C’ and “D* in the hospital, for a very long
time, whereas a large number of posts had been created in other hospitals like Dr. RML and posts had
been created in other hospitals like Dr. RML and Safdarjung. The Committee, was further informed
that.gmployees, who had rendered 25-30 years of service, had not been given even a single promotion
and most of them retired from the same post. When posts could be created in other hospitals as per the
Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) norms, the Committee wonders why the same could not be done in Smt.
Sucheta Kriplani Hospital. The Committee feels that this grievances appears to be genuine and
recommends that more posts should be created in Group C &D categories so that they are put at par
with their counterparts in other hospitals.

ACTION TAKEN

5.2. A total number of 19 temporary posts of Group 8, C and D were sanctioned by the’ Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare in 1998. A proposal for creation of various categories of additional posts is
under consideration.

RECOMMENDATION

LH 6, The Committee found the cleanliness and maintenance in the hospital to be very poor. Security
in the Hospital also is not upto the mark. The main reason given for this was lack of enough
sanitary/security staff. For detailed information please see Annexure XVII. The committee feels that
these services are equally important and recommends that enough security/ sanitary staff be provided
to the hospital at the earliest.

ACTION TAKEN

6. The Principal & Medical Superintendent, LHMC has already been permitted to engage private
security. Subsequent to this arrangement there is improvement in the security set up. Regarding the
sanitary staff, the requirement of the staff would be considered after assessment by S.I.U.

RECOMMENDATION

LH 7. The Committee observed, during its visit, that the hospital is so short of space that there is
hardly any scope for its expansion. It found the hospital and college building very old, requiring
massive repairs. It also found that the maintenance of the building was very poor. The Committee feels
that since the renovation cost of the building will be much higher, there is need for construction of
multi-storeyed buildings by demolishing the existing dilapidated structures in a phased manner.

ACTION TAKEN

7. The space constraints will be taken care of in the Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan with a view
to expand the existing patient care facilities. The construction of the multi-storey building for Kalawati
Saran Children’s Hospital under JICA Project has been completed. Other construction work is
proposed to be taken up in the Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan which is under process

RECOMMENDATION

LH 7.1 The Committee opines that there is an urgent need for construction of the following
complexes in view of the fact that there is an acute shortage of space in all the departments:-

(i) Accident Emergency Block
(ii) Operation Theatre Block
(iii) Central Sterilization Department

57


(iv) Radiotherapy - CT Scan Unit
(v) Matemity Centre.

LH 7.2 The Committee, therefore, urges the Deptt. to make available sufficient funds to construct
these complexes at the earliest.

ACTION TAKEN

Institute of Gynaecology & 7.1 & 7.2. The proposal of establishment of Radiotherapy and Oncology
Block is under process. Also, a 10 bedded ICU is proposed to be started soon within the existing
space and resources.

The construction of other departments/blocks is also included in the proposed Comprehensive
Redevelopment Plan which is under process.

A proposal to convert Department of Gynaecology & Obstetrics into a National Obstetrics is also
under process.

RECOMMENDATION

LH 9. In the case of Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital, the Committee was informed that a lot of
neonatal equipments had been purchased but no OT Technicians were there to operate them, and at
present this work was being done by doctors and nursing staff. The Committee feels that these costly
equipments require proper handling and recommends that the posts of OT Technicians should be
created and filled up at the earliest.

ACTION TAKEN

9. Posts in various categories in concerned OTs of Kalawati Saran Children Hospital have been
created

RECOMMENDATION

LH 10. The Committee found the facilities in the Delivery Room inadequate, when compared to the
number to deliveries that are being attended to i.e. 15,000 deliveries per year with only six obstetrics
tables and 12 beds and without the required number of staff. Considering the large number of
deliveries in the hospital, the Committee feels that necessity of strengthening the existing facilities in
the delivery room and recommends that more obstetrics tables and beds, with adequate staff, should be
provided

ACTION TAKEN

10. There is no further scope for expansion due to space constraints in the existing premises.
However, the recommendation will be kept in view while planning further expansion

RECOMMENDATION

LH. 11 The KSCH being the only hospital for Children in the entire North India attracts patients from
far and wide. Existing infrastructure is not sufficient enough to take care of patients coming for
treatment. There is, therefore, absolute necessity for the expansion of this hospital by providing
necessary inputs and infrastructure. The following facilities/services are required immediately in this
hospital:

1.24-hour Laboratory Services- Biochemistry, Haematology, Radiology, EEG and EMG.

2. Portable X-ray machine.

58


3. C.T. Scan facilities for children.
4. Echocardiography with coloured Doppler attachment.
5. 24-hour Central suction and oxygen facilities.
6. Infrastructure and equipments necessary for quick transportation of patients from Emergency to the
Wards
7. Strengthening of Emergency, 1.C.U. & OPD services.
Development of Super-specialities such as:
(a) Paediatric Cardiology
(b) Paediatric Cardio-thoracic surgery
(c) Paediatric Haematology
(d) Paediatric Gastroenterology
(ec) Paediatric Dermatology
(f) Paediatric E.N.T
(g) Paediatric Surgery
(h) Paediatric Orthopaedics

ACTION TAKEN
11. All these facilities/services are being covered by the Project for improvement of KSCH being
implemented with the assistance from JICA.

C.T. Scanner facilities already exist in Smt. $.K. Hospital. Hence, there is no need for separate C.T.
Scanner for KSCH.

RECOMMENDATION

LH. 11.1 The Committee recommends that the services/equipments mentioned above should be
provided to the hospital so as to make it a premier institution for pediatric care in the country.

ACTION TAKEN

11.1 A separate proposal for upgrading the KSCH into a National Institute of Paediatrics have
been sent for consideration of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).

RECOMMENDATION

LH 12.2 The Committee was informed that hostel accommodation for Resident Doctors is inadequate.
One remedial measure suggested to the Committee was to construct a multi-storeyed hostel in this
hospital. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should consider constructing a multi-storeyed
hostel accommodation at an early date.

ACTION TAKEN

12.2. Under the Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan, construction of a new Resident Doctors Hostel
is proposed to be constructed.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee, however, is
skeptical whether all theslacunae in the hospital can be remedied by implementing the
Comprehensive Development Plan. Moreover, the Plan is in conceptual stage and will be
implemented in stages and some of the issues require immediate attention. Further, no time
frame has been set by the Department to start and complete the Plan.

59


ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL MEDICINE & REHABILITATION
(AIIPMER), BOMBAY

RECOMMENDATION

AIP 3.1 The Committee notes that, in the absence of adequate staff, the services being provided in the
Institute are being affected adversely which needs to be avoided by all means. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that immediate steps be taken to create the required number of posts in all
categories and also fill up the posts lying vacant now.

AIP 3.2 There is only one Orthopaedic Surgeon in the Institute (in the Central Health Services Cadre)
and that is the Director himself. The Committee, after considering the fact that there was an overall
increase in the workload of the Institute and that its patients being mostly Orthopaedic based, feels that
there is an urgent need for providing adequate number of trained orthopaedic

AIP 3.3 It was also pointed out to the committee that the teaching staff of the Institute, specially M.Sc
(OT) and M.Sc (PT) did not have the corresponding designation nor did they have the pay-scale
equivalent to those in other teaching institutions. The committee feels that such a discrimination is not
justified and their demands for similar designation and pay scale should be considered for immediate
implementation.

ACTION TAKEN

3.1&3.2&3.3 The proposal for creation/upgradation/abolition of posts at All India Institute of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation, Mumbai submitted to Ministry of Finance in March, 1999 had been
received back in April-May, 2001 with the advice to defer the proposal in view of the austerity
measures announced by the Government. The proposal is being taken up afresh again.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The report of the
Committee was submitted in 1995, while the proposal was sent to M/o Finance in March, 1999.
The Committee regrets to note that nearly after four years the proposal was sent. If
immediate action had been initiated, the present situation could have been avoided.

RECOMMENDATION

AIP 4 The Committee was also informed that due to lack of adequate residential accommodation,
people who were posted to the Institute were reluctant to join even after they have been transferred to
the Institute. Similarly, the reason for lack of adequate nursing staff was also attributed to the shortage
of residential accommodation for them. The Committee feels that in a city like Bombay, where the
problem of accommodation is very acute, the Institute is deprived of eminent faculty and essential
staff because of shortage of residential accommodation. This ultimately affects patient care and
satisfaction adversely. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should provide
adequate number of quarters for doctors and staff of the Institute. The Committee feels that keeping
some quarters at the disposal of the Director, as is the case of Safdarjung Hospital, should also be
considered. Construction of a residential complex in the Institute’s premises on the land lying vacant
should be given a serious thought by the Department of Health.

ACTION TAKEN

4. The situation of residential accommodation for General Pool has since improved considerably due
to implementation of Vth Pay Commission’s report.


COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee notes the reply. However, the position would not have improved much
where in all the employees would have got residential accommodation. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates the recommendation made in its 31* Report.

61


CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED

RECOMMENDATION

5.1 The critical role that has been assigned to the referral system in National Health Policy (NHP)
deserves emphasis; for the PHC approach is predicated on the proposition that only 5% of ailments
need reach tertiary hospitals and the rest can be treated at primary and through referral to secondary
levels. Only through such an integrally related referral system, the poorer sections of society, living in
rural and remote areas, can get equitable access to quality medical care and preventive public health

measures.
ACTION TAKEN
Noted

RECOMMENDATION

5.4 While planning for an integrated and organized referral system from the PHC level up to the
Central hospitals at tertiary level, the Committee desires that utilizing the facilities available with non-
profit corporate sector hospitals in various parts of the country as supplementary and complementary

to the government infrastructure should also be considered.

ACTION TAKEN

5.4 Recommendations will be kept in view. Specialized groups have been set up to consider ways and
means to draw on the support of corporate as well as charitable hospitals which are not in the public

sector.

A Technical Committee headed by D.G. was set up in March, 1996 to consider the
observations/recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee on HRD and submit its report. The
Technical Committee has given its report in September, 1996. It has been recommended that referral
character of AIIMS/ PGIMER has to be strengthened by creating facilities of OPD in Tertiary care
hospitals at par with that.of AIIMS; after consultation in the referral hospital, the patient are to be
referred back to peripheral hospitals for their follow up; the role of secondary health care level in

referral system has been emphasized.

The report of the Technical Committee was circulated in October, 1996 to the Govt. of Delhi, Ministry

of Railways, Ministry of Labour, MCD/NDMC for comments before taking a view in the matter.

ESIC & Railways have a prescribed reference system for its employees.

NDMC provides only basic facilities. NDMC hospitals do not have any super-specialty services.

The Govt. of NCT of Delhi is going to propose measures during 10" Five Year Plan to make the
referral system among its various health delivery institutions more effective and result oriented.
RECOMMENDATION

7. The Committee noticed that there was a lot of duplication of facilities and services in the Central
Government hospitals. The Committee feels that in view of the shortage of space, beds and financial

62

— <TD nT



resources, duplication of services in different hospitals becomes wasteful which should be avoided to
the extent possible.

7.1 Duplication of specialists services among Central Government hospitals seems a case of non-
optimal use of resources, especially when hospitals are entirely under Central control. This calls for
better coordination and implementation at the level of the Ministry. The Committee concedes that
some overlapping of specialties is inevitable but duplication has led to skewed development of
facilities and mismatch between specialized facilities and trained manpower not only at the level of
doctors but at other levels also, since successful practice of specialties is a matter of integrated
development of complementary facilities and team work. The Committee recommends that steps be
taken to coordinate the development of specialties and super-specialties in various Central
Government hospitals and promote greater horizontal liaison among the specialists in hospitals. There
is also a need to evolve a scheme to link a number of smaller hospitals with a major hospital having a
critical mass of specialists’ expertise.

ACTION TAKEN

(7 & 7.1).

There is need to have a policy of future development of various hospitals so that duplication of
facilities does not occur. It is felt that each hospital could be identified for development as the center
of excellence in certain specialties. This will require a system of good co-ordination among the
hospitals and a referral network. This would require long-term planning. Duplication of facilities in
various hospitals cannot be altogether avoided, as basic facilities have to be made available in all the
major hospitals. However, the recommendation of the Committee that every hospital could specialize
in a particular area/discipline would be kept in mind while making future plans for the development of
super-specialities in the hospitals.

RECOMMENDATION

9. Director/Medical Superintendents of some hospitals voiced concern about their dependence on the
Ministry officials even for smaller and urgent works that needed immediate attention. Mention may
be made here of the filling/creation of posts, particularly those of the Groups “C* and ‘D’ employees.
Such of a state of affairs, it was argued, leads to avoidable delays which ultimately tell upon the
efficiency and quality of patient care in hospitals. More autonomy to the Directors/Medical
Superintendents (MSs) was, therefore, demanded. The Committee recommends that this aspect should
be given serious consideration by the Department in the interest of efficient administration of the
hospitals.

ACTION TAKEN

9. The Medical Superintendents of all Central Government Hospitals have been delegated powers of
the head of the Department under DFPR and GFR for the procurement of stores, equipment upto a
certain ceiling and they are also the appointing authority in respect of Group C & D posts. The
Ministry would consider further delegation as and when required.

Recommendation

9.1 Another related aspect brought before the Committee was the demand for redesignating medical
Superintendents of major hospitals as Directors with all the concomitant powers enjoyed by the latter
in certain hospitals/institutes. The Committee was informed that such redesignation would not have
any financial मम 22000 64 5 the post of MSs has already been upgraded to that of AddI.D.G. of Health
Services, which is equivalent to the rank of Additional Secretary, Government of India. This demand,
the Committee feels, appears to be reasonable and may be considered for implementation as it has
hardly any financial implications.

63


ACTION TAKEN

9.1 The Ministry accepts in principle the recommendations of the Committee to redesignate the post of
Medical Superintendent as Director and further action is being taken to implement this
recommendation.

RECOMMENDATION

20.4 The Committee is of the view that doctors and nurses are responsible for running the patient care
services 24 hours and are required to come frequently at odd hours and also at short notice. If they are
provided accommodation in or around the hospital they would be able to provide an efficient and
timely patient care. The Committee, therefore, recommends that sufficient number of residential units
for all categories of employees be provided in the hospital pool for this purpose. The Department
should take up the matter with the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment to get adequate number
of quarters earmarked for the hospital functionaries in the nearby government colonies. The
Committee also emphasizes the need for providing adequate hostel accommodation to Resident
Doctors and nurses, preferably within the campus of the hospital itself. The nurses should also be
given priority in the working women’s hostels situated near the hospital.

20.5 The problem of accommodation of doctors and nurses in all Central Government hospitals
deserves to be given priority. Inadequate capital budgets should not stand in the way of construction
of quarters for doctors and nurses, specially at PGIMER, Chandigarh and JIPMER, Pondicherry,
where vacant land is available. In t places, earmarked general pool accommodation must be
sought or if land is available at a distance, group housing for doctors and nurses must be planned in an
integrated way. Reliable transport provision could be made on a group basis. Investment in such
accommodation, in a phased manner, would ultimately contribute in providing a better patient care.

ACTION TAKEN

(20.4 and 20.5).

The Medical and para-medical staff of hospitals are eligible for Hospital Pool accommodation and
it is allotted as per date of priority and entitlement. Safdarjung Hospital and Dr. RML Hospital
employees have also been permitted to apply for general pool accommodation.

The Safdarjung Hospital plans to construct Resident Doctors’ hostel consisting of 400 rooms as
well as 40 Type III quarters for housing nurses.

A sum of Rs.3,09,50,000/- has been paid to Land and Development Office for 15.475 acres of land.
11 acres of this land would be handed over to Safdarjung Hospital and balance money will be
refunded. Once the possession is given, the Architect would be asked to prepare the plan for
construction.

A piece of land measuring 3.987 acres (Lower Hasting Square) has been allotted to Dr. RML
Hospital. It is proposed to construct the residential quarters for the staff, Resident Doctors Hostel and
other facilities on this land.

The construction of residential accommodation on that plot of land will improve the satisfaction
level of eligible hospital employees.

In JIPMER, Pondicherry, construction of new Type V quarters (14) has been completed and
allotted to eligible employees. The construction of 24 Nos. of residential quarters for the married
senior residents has been completed and allotted. Additional 36 Nos. of residential quarters of Type
1(12 Nos.), Type Il (12 Nos.) and Type III (12 Nos.) were constructed during the year 2000-2001 and
allotted to the eligible staff members.


In AIIMS, 200 Type III quarters at Ayurvigyan Nagar have already been constructed and allotted
to the Nursing Staff. 32.09 acres of land was allotted to the AIIMS at Masjid Moth Campus.
Approximately 24 acres of the said land was encroached upon by the jhuggies. The said jhuggy
cluster has been demolished by the MCD Slum Wings in the month of March, 2001. The protection
of land so vacated has been taken up on priority and a compound wall has been erected. The total
amount deposited by AIIMS with MCD for vacation of above jhuggy cluster is Rs.10.47 crores.

The proposal of LHMC for construction of Type II (30 quarters) and Type III (30 quarters) and
additional accommodation is already under consideration in consultation with NDMC, CPWD and
Central Design Bureau (Dte.GHS). This construction is likely to start very soon. 45 Type I quarters
have already been constructed and allotted to the LHMC employees in the year 2000. Out of the
original proposal for 105 quarters (Type I 45, Type II 30, Type III 30), construction of 45 Type I
quarters were completed and allotted to staff. The Plan for the remaining 30 Type II and 30 Type III
quarters have been got revalidated upto 10.1.2002 and it has been proposed to have the validity of the
plan extended for a year more. Further action for tenders for construction have been taken by the
CPWD and construction of Type II and Type III (30 each) are expected to start soon. There is also a
proposal for construction of 148 more Quarters (Type II 60, Type III 30, Type IV 30 and Type ५ 28).

ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES, NEW DELHI
RECOMMENDATION

AIM 11.2 The Committee recognizes the difficulty in evolving such a command structure in an
institution of high competence like AIIMS and other Central Government Institutions. But, while such
a command cannot be constructed in a bureaucratic fashion, it must remain sensitive to the fact that
these institutions must have adequate freedom of action, so that they are able to develop a sense of
pride and team work to aim at excellence in medical care, education and research. For this purpose the
Committee would suggest that the Government should urgently review how a structure composed of
collegiate and interactive leadership, greater transparent relationship and channels of each
communication between different levels of faculty, between faculty and students and among various
centers and discipline can be brought about within a y ear or so.

ACTION TAKEN

11.2 Discussion on the lines recommended by the Committee is under way in the Institute. There is a
need to balance the dual advantages of fostering specialization in the separate centres while deriving
the benefits of common administration. To nurture these objectives, it is necessary to maintain a
dialogue and encourage a spirit of consultation and mutual dependence, which promotes a
collaborative effort. This is a continuous process which is being encouraged.

RECOMMENDATION

AIM 13. Having regard to the main goal of AIIMS viz. to promote the growth of excellence in medical
education research and care, the Committee would suggest setting up of an independent technology
assessment group to look at directions of future development in medical science, relevant to our
epidemiological problems. In respect of disciplines available at the Institute and at different
Institutions of excellence all over the country, the group could be asked to suggest a framework for
their future growth path, avoiding needless duplication, and ensuring optimum utilization of facilities
in Government hospitals. The group should consider the plans of all known premier public and
private institutions in metropolitan cities and State capitals, starting with the network of larger
hospitals at Delhi. In the Committee’s view, such an exercise may help avoid duplication of facilities
and wasteful repetitive investment in high cost equipment and facilities which need to be cost-
effectively utilized. All such investment will not only be expensive to instal but will inevitably tie up

65


future investments also, almost compulsorily, in their own favour because of the prior investment
made in them.

ACTION TAKEN

13. Recently, the Academic Committee has been re-constituted and as such a proposal for setting up of
a Technolocy Assessment Group Committee at the AIIMS will be placed before the Academic
Committee in its next meeting as and when held. However. setting up of a Committee at National
level, may be constituted by the Government. The work of consortium has been completed curriculum
for MBBS students has been finalized and this has been used by MCI in revising curriculum for the
country.

In order to start a movement for reforming medical education in response to the emergent health
needs, the AIIMS formed a Consortium (network) of four medical colleges, which is now enlarged to
include 16 medical colleges. The Consortium approach has underlined the importance of conducting a
systematic inquiry into the health the disease patterns of the community so as to take corrective
measures for the curricular changes. The study of epidemiological patterns, need for strengthening
surveillance, establishing regional disease control centers has been entrusted for follow up to the
National Institute of Communicable Diseases who have plans and to network through regional centers
throughout the country.

As far as planning for hospital upgradation and involving the private sector institutions in providing a
network of services, the suggestions is acceptable. However, the success of such plans depends on
operation-aligning various conditions undertaken to be fulfilled by private institutions which have
received concessions through the Government by way of land or customs duty exemptions. State
Governments have been asked to monitor the provision of services particularly to the free sectors. In
order to rationalize the provision of expensive tertiary level medical facilities like M.R.1., CT Scan,
Lithotripsy etc., a unified view is taken by the Ministry of Health before sanctioning such equipment
to Central Government hospitals in Delhi and outside. For other States and the NCT of Delhi the
administrative authorities undertake their own exercises. In the private sector, however, market forces
operate by and large.

POSTGRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH (PGIMER),
CHANDIGARH

RECOMMENDATION

PGI 1.1 The main objectives of the Institute are (i) to train post-graduate students in all branches cf
medicines; (ii) to conduct research of the highest order; and (iii) to provide patient care of a high
standard. The PGIMER conducts post - graduate and post-doctoral courses in almost all disciplines of
medical sciences. It also imparts training and conducts courses in para-medical and medical
technologies. It proposes to start MD in Physical Medicine and B.Sc. in Physiotherapy shortly

ACTION TAKEN

The Institute has started B.Sc. in Physiotherapy and B.Ph.T (Bachelor of Physical Therapies) course of
4-1/2 years duration (4 years course and 6 months internship) since Sept. 1995 session.

The course in MD Physical Medicine has not yet been started since the necessary infrastructure for
running the said course is not available. The Institute has already advertised the post of Professor
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation in October 2000, for which selection is yet to be made. After
the faculty in the said discipline joins the Institute, the course in MD Physical Medicine may be taken
up further.



RECOMMENDATION

PGI 9 A. The College of Nursing, the Committee was informed. is facing acute shortage of faculty
members. Besides, there is a lot of resentment among them due to stagnation in cadre structure and
discrepancies in their pay-scales. Most of the faculty members of the college who joined as Lecturers
15 to 18 years ago, are still continuing in the same post, inspite of the recommendations/directions of
the PGI Academic Committee and the PGI Governing Body in this regard. The pay scale of the
Principal of the college is lower than that of an Assistant Professor.

In view of the above, the Committee feels that the Department appears to have adopted an
indifferent attitude to the grievances of the faculty members. It is surprising that a proper cadre
structure for the college had never been planned. The Committee recommends that the Department
should implement all the relevant recommendations/ directions of various bodies mentioned above.
Efforts should also be made for creating adequate posts in the college as recommended by the Nursing
Council of India.

ACTION TAKEN

9 A. The recommendations of the PGI Governing Body in its meeting held on 25.11.1995 had already
been implemented by granting the pay scale equal to the R.A.K. College of Nursing, New Delhi to the
Lecturers and Principal of College of Nursing, Chandigarh. The post of Principal, College of Nursing
has been redesignated as Professor, College of Nursing in the pay scale of Rs.4500-7300(Pre-revised).

Under the Plan Scheme of the 8" Five Year Plan, it had been planned to upgrade the College of
Nursing to the level of a National Institute of Nursing Education at a cost of Rs.9.58 crores. The
building for the Institute has already been constructed and the Institute is likely to be operationalised
soon. Under the upgraded Institute, many new posts are going to be created which will augment the
faculty and staff strength of the College of Nursing.

RECOMMENDATION

PGI 11. Residential accommodations in PGIMER, the Committee was informed, is available to about
27 per cent of its employees. The committee, during its visit, found that some residential houses for
staff were under construction. The committee, however, feels that the satisfaction level in this regard
is very low and it needs to be improved suitably. The Committee recommends that suitable provisions
be made in the budget of the Institute next year for constructing residential quarters for which enough
space is available in the premises of the Institute.

ACTION TAKEN

11. The recommendations of the committee shall be kept in view while making budgetary allocation
for this Institute

RECOMMENDATION

PGI 12. During its discussions with the officials the need for strengthening and expanding the Cancer
Centre and Neuro-Surgery Centres in the Institute was emphasised. The Director informed the
Committee that the Cancer Centre was being developed with their own efforts and that no specific
allocation was being made fos it.

PGI 12.1 In view of increasing cases of Cancer, the Committee feels that the demand for upgrading its
Radiotherapy Department into a Regional Cancer Centre appears to be justified.

67


PGI 12.2 The Committee was also apprised of the need to have a fully developed Trauma Centre in
the Institute. In the wake of more road accidents and extremist activities in Punjab and Jammu &
Kashmir, which form the Institute’s hinterland areas, the Committee feels, there is a dire need for
providing a Trauma Centre and also for strengthening the Neuro-Surgery Centre in the Institute. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends provision of adequate funds and other facilities at the
earliest (i) for upgrading Radiotherapy Department into a Regional Cancer Centre, (ii) providing a
Trauma Centre and (iii) for strengthening the Neuro-Surgery Centre.

ACTION TAKEN
(12, 12.1 & 12.2)
The recommendation will be kept in view depending on availability of resources.

JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION &
RESEARCH, PONDICHERRY

RECOMMENDATION

JIP 10. Absence of facilities for recreation, such as an Auditorium and infrastructure for indoor games
etc. for students was also brought to the notice of the Committee. The Committee feels that these
facilities should be provided at the earliest.

ACTION TAKEN

10. Every hostel has recreation facilities in the common Hall. Indoor games are also available in the
Students Hostel. Gymnasium for students/staff with necessary equipments has been provided and is
functioning well.

A draft EFC Memo which inter-alia contains the proposal for Auditorium of JIPMER, Pondicherry is
being processed in consultation with the concerned departments.

SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL
RECOMMENDATION

SF 5 There is an acute shortage cf residential accommodation and hostels in the hospital for doctors
as well as paramedical staff and nurses. The Committee is alarmed to see the poor satisfaction level in
the case of employees of all categories (Annexure XII). The Committee feels that this is a genuine
problem, which needs to be looked into by the Department of Health, in consultation with the Ministry
of Urban Affairs and Employment.

ACTION TAKEN

SF 5 Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment have been requested for transferring the ownership

of the land measuring 19.2 acres on the north of Ring Road, opposite to Safdarjung Hospital to
Safdarjung Hospital. The land in question is in possession of the Hospital. The hospital plans to
construct Resident Doctors’ hostel consisting of 400 rooms as well as 400 Type III quarter for housing
nurses on this land on which presently barracks exist. The matter was placed for decision of the
Committee of Secretaries. The ownership of land measuring 19.2 acres is transferred to the Hospital,
action would be taken to provide funds for construction of multi-storeyed hostel type accommodation.

68


4. Permit affiliation with well-established medical colleges in the developed countries.
ACTION TAKEN

14.1. The matter for upgradation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics Department into a National Institute
of Gynaecology and Obstetrics is under process. which aims at providing intcr-alia the facilities of
Super-specialities like Reproductive Endocrinology including Assisted Reproductive Techniques (c.g.
IVF-ET) Genetics, Endoscopes surgery. Perinatology (High Risk Pregnancy) and Obstetric ICU ete.

Once the upgradation of Gynaecology & Obstetrics Department is undertaken. it would definitely be
come an ideal centre for research and training in Gynaccology and Obstetrics.

Even at present, research projects from ICMR and Ministry of Health are on going. Further, research
grants from National and International Agencies, will be beneficial for the students, patients and
public.

A proposal has been approved to link the LHMC with the National Medical Library and necessary
Internet facility in this regard are being installed. Further. Tele-medicine facilities are being installed
in this Institution very soon which will strengthen linkages with other Institutions

ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL MEDICINE & REHABILITATION
(AIIPMER), BOMBAY
RECOMMENDATIONS

AIP 7 Another problem that is being faced by the Institute is lack of space. The Committee saw an
open space on the left side of the main Institute building, lving vacant. The Committee is of the
opinion that the space could be utilised for physical expansion of the Institute. The committee is also
of the opinion that the old building in which the workshops are being run, can be demolished and a
multi-storeyed building can be constructed where some of the Departments can also be shifted.

AIP 7.1 The Committee was informed that a proposal for constructing a building had already been
finalised and an amount of Rs.50 lakhs was provided for this purpose. It, however. could not be
utilised as the Planning Commission did not approve it. Planning and designing process also had taken
a longer time because the architect was Delhi-based and had to come to Bombay for this purpose. In
view of the acute shortage of space and accommodation. the Committee recommends that the
Department should get the necessary approval in this regard from the Planning Commission at the
earliest. Appointing an Architect based in Bombay or taking the help of CPWD, Bombay, should also
be considered.

ACTION TAKEN
7. The construction of Annexe Building started on 29.9.2000. The construction work is in full swing.

Foundation and plinth work has been completed. Super structure work is under progress. The
construction of the building is expected to be completed by August. 2002.


OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE

CHAPTER-III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee notes the various steps taken /proposed for augmentation of health
services in the NCT of Delhi. The Committee is, however, apprehensive that the envisaged plan
may not be completed in the Tenth Five Year Plan. While agreeing that the Central
Government can only supplement the medical facilities provided by the State Governments, the
Committee wishes to point out that due to financial constraints, the required health system is
missing in the States. The Committee has been informed that Schemes like setting up of Local
Self-Government Dispensaries , developing of Regional Diagnostic Centres , World Bank aided
State Health System Development Projects etc. have been initiated by the Central Government.
The Committee hopes that these steps would result in a better medicare system in the States
which would gradually lessen the burden of Central Govt. Hospitals. The Committee would,
however, emphasise that the Central Govt. should constantly monitor the medical facilities being
provided in the States, specially the adjoining States of the Capital. ( Para 4.3&4.4)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee desires that all necessary steps may be taken to finalise and implement
the Comprehensive Re-development Plan in time for LHMC and Associated hospitals and
complete the construction of additional buildings in Dr. RML hospital and A and D wings of
OPD complex in Safdarjung hospital at the earliest. (Para 4.5)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee strongly recommends that the Department get the necessary approvals
from the civic authorities of Delhi, at the earliest, so that early construction of screening OPD at
AIIMS can be taken up as the matter is hanging on fire for the last so many years and the ever-
increasing patient load is adversely affecting the patient care and research activities of the
Institute. (Para 4.6)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is not inclined to agree with the views of the Department that the entire
responsibility of developing peripheral hospitals lies with the State Governments. The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that a comprehensive plan to develop primary and
secondary health care services which are most neglected by many States may be chalked out i:
consultation with the State Govts. at the highest level and a time frame to implement the plan
may be set. Special emphasis may be given for this aspect in the 10" Plan. (Para 4.9)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee recommends that immediate steps should be taken to
computerise the OPD registration in all the Central Govt. Hospitals as being done in
JIPMER, Pondicherry. The Committee is also of the view that separate queues for
senior citizens should be made mandatory in all the Central Govt. Hospitals. (Para 4.12)

72



COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is, however, of the view that all necessary steps should be taken to
maintain the referral character of these Institutes. The Committee would be interested to know
the details of papers read in national as well as international seminars and published.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee notes that some progress in computerisation has been made so far as
Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. R.M.L. Hospital and AIIMS are concerned. The Committee would,
however, like to emphasise that efforts should be made to fully computerise all the Central Govt.
Hospitals at the earliest. Adequate funds should be made available by the Central Govt. for
this purpose. (Para 6) ..

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is, however, constrained to point-out that these facilities are only on
paper. Instances of precious lives being lost due to some vital equipment being non-functional
continue to occur on a regular basis. Reality is that only those patients whose attendants can
manage some reference at the right place get the best medicare. The Committee is of the view
that such control rooms and coordination between the hospitals should be activated. Surprise
inspections by higher authorities can prove to be effective in this matter. (Para 8)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is not inclined to agree with the contention of the Department that the
present system of entering into annual repair/maintenance contract ensures Departmental
responsibility. Reports continue to come about there being instances of equipments not being
maintained/repaired timely or sophisticated equipments lying unutilised. The Committee
strongly feels that there is an urgent need for evolving an affective monitoring mechanism to
check such instances. both at the hospital level and in the Department. Appropriate action in
this regard should be taken at the earliest. (Para 10) :

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee notes that a Technical Committee headed by DGHS had given specific
recommendations with regard to treatment facilities of epilepsy patients in its Report submitted
in September, 1996. The Committee is, however, surprised to find that no follow-up action
seems to have been taken as comments from the concerned authorities are still awaited. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Department should vigorously pursue this issue so that the
requisite action is taken at the earliest. (Para 14.1)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee feels that even though some steps have been taken, a lot more needs to be
done in the area of cleanliness and hygiene in the hospitals. The action taken is not visible in
reality. There is absolute lack of coordination between the local bodies and hospital authorities
in removing waste from the hospitals. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that there is need
for regular and proper interaction between the two authorities. ©The Committee is also of the
view that M/o Environment and Forests has a special role to play in waste management. The
Committee desires that the Department should take up the issue of waste management
vigorously. हु

73


The Committee finds that the Ministry of Labour has permitted for relaxation of rule for
engaging private contractual labour for sanitation work of Dr. R.M.L. Hospital, Safdarjung
Hospital and Lady Hardinge Medical College and Associated Hospitals for the period upto
February,2002. The Committee has been given to understand that contract labourers are
engaged for sanitation work in Safdarjung Hospital and the experience is found to be
satisfactory. Similar proposal for Dr. RML Hospital and LHMC is under process. The
Committee hopes that Ministry of Labour has extended the permission for relaxation of rule
beyond February, 2002. (Para 16)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee finds that the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment seems to have
reservation on the issue of transfer of administrative control of CPWD units posted in the
hospitals to the Medical Superintendents. The Committee is of the strong opinion that for a
proper maintenance of hospital buildings, CPWD units should be placed under the direct
supervision of Medical Superintendents. _If that is not done, procedural delays would continue
to occur and upkeep of hospital buildings would remain unsatisfactory. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates that the Department should again pursue this issue with the Ministry of
Urban Affairs and Employment. (Para 16.1)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITEE

The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The Committee feels
that creation of Group C&D posts does not'commensurate with the work load. The Committee
desires that the process of creation of posts in Group C&D may be completed without any
further delay to provide efficient and quality service to the patients. (Para 17.2)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee feels that the present system of Public Grievances Committee addressing
the complaints of patients is not working satisfactorily because the Doctors themselves are
members of the Committee against whom complaints are made. |The Committee therefore,
reiterates its recommendation for creation of 'Ombudsman' type of machinery. The Committee
is constrained to point out that there is absence of work culture in the medical staff of the
Government hospitals. They are often found lacking in polite behaviour, reception,
responsiveness and discipline. The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that there is an urgent
need of change in work culture among medical staff. In this connection, the Department may
take necessary steps to include attitudinal training in the in-service training programme of
health workers. (Para 19.2)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is not inclined to agree with this viewpoint. The Committee reiterates

that effectiveness and objectivity of the Hospital Management Boards will only be there if
besides hospital functionaries, outsiders are also made their members. (Para 19.3)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is not happy to note that the proposal of setting up of Geriatric clinics is
still under examination of the Department even after expiry of more than six years and it has not
been able to take a decision regarding setting up of such clinics. The Committee expects the
Department to take an early decision in this matter. (Para 23)

74


COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee feels that the states which have not set up National Illness Assistance
Fund may be persuaded to set up the Fund at the earliest, so that the poor patients living in
these states are able to take benefit out of the Fund. The Committee notes that even though the
Fund is in existence for quite some time not many poor patients are aware of its existence. The
Committee, therefore, desires that adequate publicity through the electronic/print media may
be given about this Fund. (Para 24)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is constrained to point out that public is not aware about the provision
regarding exemption of poor and indigent patients from payment of diagnostic and laboratory
service charges in Central Government Hospitals . The Committee, therefore, recommends that
steps should be taken for giving wide publicity through the electronic and print media. Such
information should also be made available at the Enquiry Counters of Central Government
Hospitals so that needy patients can take the maximum benefit. (Para 24.1)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee observes that a number of Projects for providing accommodation
facilities to attendants accompanying the patients coming from outside Delhi have been
approved and are in various stages of implementation in Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. RML
Hospital, LHMC and AIIMS. The Committee recommends that all efforts should be made to
expedite the completion of these Projects. The Department may also explore the possibility of
augmenting these facilities wherever feasible. (25.1)

ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES, NEW DELHI
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is deeply disturbed to note the reply of the Department that AIIMS
which is a premier institute of the country is neither able to provide dialysis facility to all
patients approaching it nor is currently in a position to cope with the requirements of life long
dialysis for chronically ill patients on a long term basis. The Committee feels that while the
Department feels the necessity of strengthening the Nephrology unit, it is not serious in action.

The Committee, therefore, recommends that the existing Nephrology unit of the hospital
should be strengthened in terms of space, equipment and staff etc. at the earliest.(16.1&16.2)

POSTGRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Department is silent about the Committee's recommendation with regard to revival
of JCM in the Institute. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that
the JCM be revived without further delay, if not already done. (Para 16 & 16.1)

JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL
EDUCATION & RESEARCH, PONDICHERRY
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee expresses its displeasure over the undue delay in the matter. It finds
that the proposal is still being processed at different levels. The Committee recommends that

75


the proposal may be finalized and implemented without further loss of time under intimation to
it. (Para 5)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is not in a position to understand why the employees are opposing the
grant of autonomy. The Committee feels that the Department may make all out efforts to allay
their fears about the issue of autonomy and convince them about the necessity of granting
autonomy. It hopes that a consensus would be reached soon. (Para 8)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

Though the Institute has taken some steps in this regard as compared to the staff
strength, the Committee, feels the additions made are miniscule. It desires that steps may be
taken to construct more quarters inside the campus itself. (Para 9)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee takes a serious view of the matter. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the reasons for delay in non notification of draft Recruitment Rules and how does
the Department propose to fill up the posts in the absence of these rules. It also desires that the
Recruitment Rules are notified without further delay. (Para 11.2)

SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is shocked to note that the authorities are not even aware, who is the
owner of the land, while they were pursuing the things with the M/o Defence and precious time
has been wasted in this futile exercise. The Committee is equally perturbed to note that money
has already been deposited for the said land, and the matter is still hanging on fire. The
Committee feels that the matter may be taken up on a regular basis at the highest level with
M/o Urban Development to hand over the possession of land without further delay since five
years have elapsed after the decision of the Committee of Secretaries. ( Para 6)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is perturbed by this casual approach and fails to understand the reasons
for envisaging a scheme in the early days of a Pian period, doing some preliminary exercise and
by the end of the Plan , simply dropping the proposal. (Para 17.1)
DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee desires that the matter may be pursued vigorously at the appropriate
level. (Para 5.3)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee expresses its dismay over the lukewarm approach of the Department.
The Department has failed to procure necessary equipment for improving the Burns and Plasti:

76



ward even after more than six years. The Committee desires that necessary action in this regard
may be taken without further loss of time. (Para 6)

LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE AND ASSOCIATE HOSPITAL
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee would like to be specifically apprised whether the entire encroachment
in the vicinity of the Hospital has since been removed. (Para 2.3)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee, however, is
skeptical whether all the lacunae in the hospital can be remedied by implementing the
Comprehensive Development Plan. Moreover, the Plan is in conceptual stage and will be
implemented in stages and some of the issues require immediate attention. Further, no time
frame has been set by the Department to start and complete the Plan. (Para 12.2)

ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL MEDICINE & REHABILITATION
(AIIPMER), BOMBAY.

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The report of the
Committee was submitted in 1995, while the proposal was sent to M/o Finance in March, 1999.
The Committee regrets to note that nearly after four years the proposal was sent. If
immediate action had been initiated, the present situation could have been avoided. (Para 3.1)

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE

The Committee notes the reply. However, the position would not have improved much
where in all the employees would have got residential accommodation. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates the recommendation made in its 31* Report. (Para 4)

77


Fone

imme? SAF

37 aid) nd स0ी3४ ६ छ2 95990 157: -

UATiseOH एव

का 2
deel at Sine et 40

2 उ&# igtogerg. git zr
£ पा date

2

2५००० का्फ Seed sort bhaqw



MINUTES अं डक


i
THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 30" January, 2002 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

"3 ७४ ७» + ० >

कि 5 9 ७ अु 29 के (०

MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri 5.8. Chavan नमः Chairman

MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Bachani Lekhraj

Shri B.P. Apte

Prof. R.B.S. Varma

Shri Bratin Sengupta

Smt. Vanga Geetha

Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik

LOK SABHA

Shri Kirti Jha Azad

Shri Baliram Kashyap

Shri Ramakant Angle

Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
Shrimati Jaskaur Meena
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
Shri 0. S. Baswaraj

Shri Kantilal Bhuriya

Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
Dr. M. Jagannath

Kumari Bhavana Pundlikrao Gawali
Smt. Renu Kumari

Shri K.K. Kaliappan

Smt. Kumudini Patnaik

Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
Shri Shriniwas Patil

Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
Shri Ramesheth Thakur

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

Shri J.A. Chowdhury, Secretary (Health)
Shri G.P. Patwardhan, Additional Secretary (Health)
Dr. S.P. Agarwal, DGHS
Prof. P.K. Davé, Director (AIIMS)
Dr. S.K. Sharma, Director, PGI, Chandigarh
Dr. Sambasiva Rao, Director, JIPMER
Dr. B.D. Athani, Director, AIIPMER
Prof. A.S. Bais, Principal, LHMC
Dr. Jagdish Prasad, MS, Safdarjung Hospital
81

HEALTH


10. Dr. C.P. Singh, MS, Dr. R.MLL. Hospital
11. Shri RLL. Srivastava, Addl. Secretary (Health) NCT, DELHI

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shrimati. Vandana Garg, Director

Shri C. B. Rai, Under Secretary

Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer

2 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the officials of the Department of Health. The
Chairman, then, asked the Secretary , Department of Health to make a presentation on the Action
Taken by Government on Thirty-first Report of the Committee relating to Functioning of Central
Govt. Hospitals.

2: The Secretary, thereafter, made a presentation on the state of the major public hospitals
functioning under Central Govt. in Delhi and outside. He explained that these Hospitals are working
under tremendous pressure as there is heavy load of patients, both from Delhi and outside. He also
informed the Committee about the various steps taken by the Govt., from time to time, to improve the
functioning of these Hospitals.

4. Regarding Safdarjung Hospital , the Secretary stated that Lithotripsy for treatment of kidney
stones and CAT-Lab for carrying out heart operations have been set-up. Burns ward in the Hospital
has also been upgraded quite substantially. A medical College has been recently set-up at the
Safdarjung Hospital which will start functioning soon. For the RML Hospital, a C.T. Scan has been
sanctioned and is in the process of installation . A new Emergency Block has also been sanctioned
and the work has already started on the site. For PGI, Chandigarh, construction of a Trauma Centre, a
Paediatric Centre and three other speciality departments have been sanctioned. In JIPMER,
Pondicherry , Pharmacy Building, Emergency Services Block and Administrative Block have become
operational.

For AIIMS , the secretary stated that a Trauma Centre has been sanctioned and funds for
construction of a screening OPD are available. PET-scan equipment has also been sanctioned for
AIIMS. He also elaborated the proposals made in the Tenth five year Plan for various Central Govt.
Hospitals.

5: Thereafter, members shared their experience in various hospitals and the problems being
faced by the general public in getting treatment in these Hospitals. Members wanted to know why long
dates are given to the patients by some of these hospitals even'in complicated cases. They also felt
that sometimes even the diagnosis was also not correct and wanted the Secretary to take corrective
steps in this regard. Members were generally not satisfied with the kind of service being provided by
the government hospitals to the general public. Cleanliness in the hospitals was also raised.

6. The Chairman wanted to know when the referral character of AIIMS and PGI, Chandigarh
was changed to one of regular hospitals He enquired whether the Finance Ministry's austerity
measures applied in case of hospitals also. He also felt that there was a need for improving the work
culture in Delhi Hospitals.

7, The Secretary, in his reply, gave the details of additional beds added in the various hospitals,
including some in the peripheral hospitals of Delhi .He also gave an idea about the hospitals being
set up in Delhi during Ninth Plan period. He informed that setting up Local self Government
Dispensaries and developing Regional Diagnostic Centres with central assistance are some of the
measures for improving the state health systems.

82


8. Due to paucity of time all the replies could not be made. The Chairman asked the Secretary to
furnish written replies to the remaining points at the earliest.

A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

9. The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 12.30 P.M.

83


LV:
FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.30 A. M. on Monday, the 18" February, 2002 in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri $.B. Chavan — Chairman

MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Eduardo Faleiro

Shri Bachani Lekhraj

Prof. R.B.S. Varma

Smt. Vanga Geetha

Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”

SA ४० ९७

LOK SABHA

7. Shri Kirti Jha Azad

8. Shri Baliram Kashyap

9. Shri Ramakant Angle

10. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
11. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
12. Shri Samik Lahiri

13. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
14. Dr. M. Jagannath

15. Smt. Renu Kumari

16. Shri Shriniwas Patil

17. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati. Vandana Garg, Director

Shri C. B. Rai, Under Secretary

Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer
Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Action Taken Report on 31*. Report on Functioning of
Central Government Hospitals. The Committee, after some discussion, adopted the Report with
certain modifications.

=e The Committee decided that the Report may be presented to Rajya Sabha and /laid in Lok
Sabha in the Budget session. The Committee, in this connection, authorized Smt. Vanga Geetha
and Shri Bachani Lekhraj to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Shriniwas Patil and Dr.
M. Jagannath to lay the same in the Lok Sabha.

84



4. The Committee also decided that it would meet on the 26", 27" , 287 March and 34 April,
2002 to consider Demands-for-Grants of the related Departments/Ministries.

5. The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 11.15 A.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on 26"
March, 2002.