PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT
घट ON
DREADED DISEASES

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH DEC., 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8TH DEC., 1998)

‘I

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

OCTOBER, 1998/ASVINA, 1920 (SAKA)

4310/RS/F—1-A


C:O-NEENoT-S

Paces
1: COMPOSITION OR THE COMMITTEE «557 +जर ४ ० a as eee ee hae ee (i)}—(iii)
25 PREFACE 3 ४ ५ 0० aide fos toe See OEE Rite eT aot Peat eget ene Oh eh ० मलबे (iv)
3. REPORT, OF THE COMMITTEE. ५ ८० २०६ ३०४३ ० ३ a ace to eS a eae 1-12
+ 78४७४; ८२ ५ २५०६ aun Ue ४ २० eater # Sia laa 7५५8 eee cs Fag? ame ts ele een 13

3 MINUTES 5० २5६३४ ato hee ona arate जे २ ०6 का Sree Bit ie eae ope eae 15—24


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1998-99)

1. Shri 5.8. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Balkavi Bairagi

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri O. Rajagopal

. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Shri M. P. A. Samad Samadani
. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

. Dr. Akhtar Hasan Rizvi

Bee ee
छू + ७० [७ ९ & ० 9० :७ 9 (५ + ४० ९७

LOK SABHA

16. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
17. Shri Sartaj Singh

18. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan

19. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
20. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
21. Dr. Sanjay Singh

22. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

23. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

24. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
25. Shri Ashok Singh

26. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
27. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
28. Shri Ashok Gehlot

29, Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
30. Shri Ajit Jogi

31. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

32. Shri Laxman Singh

33. Shri Shankar Pannu

34. Shri Abdul Hamid

35. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
36. Shri Samik Lahiri

37. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
38. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja

(i)

4310/7 RS /F—2-A


39;
40.
41.
42.
43.
44,

(i)
Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
Shri H.P. Singh
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
Smt. Krishna Bose
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
Shri S. Arumugham
SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

4310/RS/F—2-B


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(1997-98)

. Shri $.B. Chavan — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo

Dr. B.B. Dutta

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar

. Shri Raj Nath Singh

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr. Mohan Babu

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi

Shri Sartaj Singh

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Shri Jai Prakash (Hardoi)

Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Maharani Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

. Dr. 0. Silvera

. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
. Shri Dutta Meghe

. Shri 1.0, Sanadi

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Pawan Diwan

. Shri Krishna

5. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

५. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri 5.6. Kaarvendhan

. Shri Mukhtar Anis

. Dr. M. Jagannath

. Dr. Bali Ram

. Shri Ranen Barman

. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

(iii)


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventy-third Report of the Committee on
Dreaded Diseases.

2. The Committee in this connection appointed a Sub-Committee under the convenor-
ship of Dr. Shrikant Ramachandra Jickhar, in its meeting held on 16th January, 1997 to look
into the various aspects of Dreaded Diseases for making an in-depth study on the subject
and to present a report thereon to the Committee at an early date.

3. The Sub-Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received
from the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard oral
evidence of the Officials of that Department on the subject. The Sub-Committee also heard
the views of various experts in the field and got valuable and detailed information on the
subject particularly on AIDS and Hapatitis-B.

4. The Draft Report submitted by the Sub-Committee was cansidered and adopted on

9th October, 1998. The Committee at its meeting held on 19th November, 1998 decided to
present the Report in the House during the Winter Session of Parliament.

New DELHI; S.B. CHAVAN,
Chairman,

aera Department-Related Parliamentary
Asvina 17, 1920 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human

Resource Development.

4310/RS/F—3-A (श)


REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION

1.1 According to the Oxford Dictionary, ‘Dreaded’ means a thing or a disease which is
greatly feared or one from which one shrinks or looks forward with great apprehension.

1.2 Generally three considerations are taken before terming a disease as dreaded
(i) morbidity, (ii) mortality, and (iii) social stigma attached to the disease.

1.3 Accordingly, the following diseases may be classified as dreaded (i) AIDS,
(ii) Cancer, (iii) major heart diseases or Internal diseases which damage the Kidneys or
other Important organs, (iv) major neurological or nephrological Problems, (v) Hepatitis-B,
and (vi) Hepatitis-C.

1.4 Of the above diseases the Committee has taken up AIDS and Hepatitis-B to make a
detailed study about the impact of these diseases in the country.

II. AIDS
2.1 The first case of AIDS in India was noticed in Tamil Nadu in 1986 when some sex-
workers were detected HIV Positive. The main problem during that time was poor

monitoring of the disease. Despite the Central Government spending a lot of money, there
was no feedback about AIDS from the States.

2.2 According to a WHO source, there are about 27.5 million people who have been
infected with HIV in the world, and out of this, there are 21.5 million people’ living with
HIV Positive. As far as the sex distribution between the male and female, the ratio is 50 : 50
and it is around 20 per cent in children.

2.3 The position in India as on date is, 8.13 million cases Positive and out of this 4,725
have developed into full fledged AIDS cases. In 4,725 cases, 4% children are infected by
HIV virus. There is a chance of even all the 65,200 may finally emerge as AIDS cases, but
the time period to mature into a full fledged AIDS case varies. Internationally the average
period to develop into a full fledged AIDS case is 7 years whereas in India it ranges from 5
to 8 years.

2.4 Considering the prevailing situation, the Government of India launched a Centrally
sponsored scheme, in the National AIDS Project in 1992. This project is being implemented
with committed IDA Credit of US$ 84 million with the objective to slow the spread of HIV
in India so as to reduce the future morbidity, mortality and impact of AIDS. It attempts to
achieve the following:—

(a) involving all States/UTs in developing HIV/AIDS preventive activities with a

special focus on the major epicentres of the epidemics;

(b) to attain a satisfactory level of public awareness on HIV transmission and

prevention; zh

(c) developing health promotion interventions among risk behaviour group;

(d) to screen the majority of blood units collected for blood transfusions;

(e) decreasing the practice of professional blood donations;

(0 developing skills in clinical management, health education and counselling, and

psycho-social support to HIV sero-positive persons, AIDS patients and their
associates:


Zz

(g) to initiate steps to strengthen STD control; and
(h) to monitor the development of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the country.

2.5 Deposing before the Committee, the project Director NACO stated that as far as
the policy of the Government is concerned the objective is to slow down the spread of HIV/
AIDS infection through creation of awareness and aiming at behavioural change. He also
stated that earlier the emphasis of the Government was confined to the high risk groups i.e.
commercial sex workers and intravenous drug users and now the strategy of the Government
is to expand and spread across the country about AIDS through the State Governments and
district administration. In this situation, the role of State Governments in the programme is
very crucial, he added. The Government has also directed its efforts towards strengthening
the hands of the State AIDS Control Organisation in turn they will be able to spread the
message right up to the district level. The Committee was also informed that actually in rural
areas HIV is still less than 0.4 per cent and the response is good in rural areas to the
programme when compared to towns and urban areas.

2.6 Further elaborating about the project to the Committee, he informed that the
Government is adopting a very comprehensive strategy aimed at addressing all the aspects of
the disease which includes AIDS prevention, strengthening the programme management
capacity at national and State level including surveillance and clinical management and to
provide necessary infrastructure to start a counselling service in the States.

2.7 The Committee. was also informed that the programme was subject to a mid-term
review by the World Bank Mission and Inter-alia recommended discontinuance of credit to
the slow performing States until they utilise their unspent balances. It was also stated that
the Review Mission expressed its pleasure on the action taken by the Ministry and overall
improvement of the programmes at the Centre and several States.

2.8 The Committee heard the views of the Experts on 8th September, 1997. Experts
who appeared before the Committee apprised that the standard for confirming HIV
diagnosis is the culture of the virus which is very difficult and not possible. It was informed
that whenever diagnosing takes place, diagnosing does not takes place based only on
laboratory tests and it was added that more specific tests are required to confirm HIV virus
and specificity is most important in the third test. Further, they informed that the equipment
and the machinery required for testing is highly expensive and it would not be possible to
have these at all the labs. The Committee was further informed that there is a need for
identifying some laboratories which aré involved in conducting the third test.

2.9 The Experts further informed the Committee that for proper implementation of the
programme there is a need for uniform testing system in the entire country and it means that
the entire programme should be decentralised and every State should have a reference
centre.

2.10 The Committee was further informed by the Experts that there is a need for
developing our own kits for testing. They felt it necessary because the import of kits is very
costly and another thing is that kit should be developed based on the virus that is affecting
the particular area. It was also informed that whereas the western kits are based on’ virus
sub-type B, the viruses that are affecting our country is either sub-type A or C, and in some
areas it is sub-type B. So, the experts stressed that there is a need for developing our own
kit, which is best suited to our needs.

2.11 Elaborating on the progress made in the context of developing a kit suiting our
needs, it was informed by one of the experts that NIC has developed a synthetic base kit.
Another kit has been developed by Delhi University and Cancer Institute, Mumbai has


3

developed a kit for HIV-1 and HIV-2. These locally developed kits were evaluated by
NICD, New Delhi and a lot of Pitfalls were found, and suggestions to rectify the same were
given and they are still working on it, it was informed.

2.12 The Committee was informed by the experts that blood screening is one area
where all our efforts should be directed, It was also informed that the most distressing
problem is blood transfusion. It was due to the yawning gap between the demand and supply
of blood and also because of the fact that majority of the blood is being donated by
professional donors and they have a very objectionable kind of life-style. Under normal
medical regulation, one is not supposed to donate blood more than once every three
months. Professionals keep on donating once in 15 days and once they get money they
immediately go to a red-light area. It was also informed that dependence on voluntary blood
donation is not adequate.

2.13 The Committee was also informed that in the case of HIV testing there is a need
for training of the technicians and doctors, because they never had any training of this kind.
So when the concept of quality assurance and quality control is introduced,, they virtually |
had no idea, It was further informed that whenever training programmes are conducted,
such people are being trained who had never seen any HIV case, this infact results in
training going waste. It was stressed that people at the grass root level should be trained, so
that the benefits of the training can be reaped.

2.14 The Committee was also informed by the experts that the customs duty for
importing kits for testing HIV and medicines for curing HIV are very high and pleaded with
the Committee for its reduction for making worthwhile progress to curb the spread of AIDS,
in the country.

2.15 The officials who deposed before the Committee stated that one of the problem
that is being faced by the Government is utilisation of funds by the State Government. It
was due to the fact that earlier State Governments were not showing much interest in the
programme but now the State Governments have taken up the task very seriously and all the
States have formed State level AIDS Committees. Even some States have formed
Committees at the district level it was added.

2.16 Further elaborating on the steps taken by the Government, it was informed that as
far as the counselling service is concerned still now these were only very few counselling
centres in the country. There was one centre at Chennai and one in Mumbai. Considering
the present situation the Government has now taken a decision that there must be at least
one or two counselling centres in each and every State.

2.17 Commenting on the role of NGOs it was informed that NGOs are involved in
NACO programmes. There are at present 48 NGOs working with NACO. The Committee .
was further informed that in some States like Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, West Bengal, the
NGO participation is quite strong. It was also informed that each state Government has
been requested to appoint a consultant to co-ordinate the activities with NGOs because the
nature of work requires specialisation, and the NGOs need to be trained on all the aspects
of the programme. The Committee was informed that the Net-working of the NGOs is also
very poor in India.

2.18 On the steps taken by the Government on curative side, it was informed that right
now there is no permanent cure to the AIDS. And at present there is no company in the
country which is importing the drugs for curing AIDS, since the drugs are very costly. It was
also informed to the Committee that currently the Company ‘Rosch’ has applied to the Drug

4310/ RS/F—4-A


4

controller for licence to import drugs and it will be cleared shortly. It was further informed
that as a matter of policy the Government has not included in the list of drugs the drug for
AIDS, because it is not a cure and it can only reduce the viral lead in the body. However, it
was informed that the Government is making every effort to make available the drugs in the
open market for private use and hospital use.

2.19 Asked to give their views on developing a vaccine for the disease, the officials
informed that the development of Vaccine and DNA Vaccine are still in stage-III trial and
only after completion of the trials something can be done. The officials further informed
that HIV infection is caused not by one strain but by different strains and the work that is
being done on the B-strain in India has proved that majority of infection is because of
C-Strain. It was also informed that they are not sure whether a vaccine which is meant for
B-strain would be effective in the infection caused by C-strain, only after testing the efficacy
of the vaccine. :

2.20 As far as information and education is concerned the Committee was informed that
the approach of the Government is in two or three specific areas. Firstly, emphasis is given
for prevention. The message being delivered through media is that sexual relationship,
should not be maintained outside the marital relations.

2.21 Secondly, the approach is on the promotion of condoms and this has been taken up
by the NACO with the collaboration of the Department of Family Welfare in distributing
the condoms to users. In this regard, the Department of Family Welfare has developed five
types of machines and all the condoms are put in the machines and left to the consumers to
make their choice.

2.22 In the case of sexually transmitted diseases a person stands a greater chance of
getting affected by HIV. The problem is compounded by the fact that twenty or twenty-five
per cent persons suffering from HIV Positive report to the Government clinics and rest of
them go to quacks. The Government is printing brochures, giving out the symptomatic
treatment for this disease and it will be circulated through IMA to all the registered medical
practitioners in the country and to all family planning clinics of the Department of Family
Welfare.

2.23 Elaborating further be stated that the Government has launched IEC activities
through Doordarshan and All India Radio. The Campaigning programme aims to bring in
youths, political leaders, film stars, etc. The awareness has to be brought at every level.
Even the Prime Minister has agreed to launch the campaign himself that touching somebody
or sharing a cup of tea does not spread AIDS.

2.24 Another aspect the Government is directing is creating awareness among the
medical community especially among the doctors. Because some of the doctors are reluctant
to admit a patient in the hospital who is suffering from AIDS, and even they refuse to
attend to the patient.

2.25 IEC activities have also been undertaken to spread this message that for conducting
a surgery on HIV patient, there is a need for training.

2.26 As far as school education is concerned, it was informed that a Review, was
recently undertaken and found that even a State like Jammu and Kashmir has included
AIDS in the curriculum of children. It was also informed that school education being a State
subject, it is the responsibility of the States to take it up at all the levels.

4310/RS/F—4-B


Sot

2.27 In order to remove the misconception about AIDS, it was
suggested that a professional body be roped in to develop a very user friendly Website to
give adequate publicity to the programme that the Government intends to do is menu-
driven, it was stated.

2.28 In a note submitted to the Committee on the strategy that is being adopted by the
Government on the question of securing and supplying safe blood it was stated that the
following strategies are being adopted:

(i) Licensing of blood banks;

(ii) Establishment of 154 Zonal Blood Testing Centres (ZBTCs) where HIV testing
facilities are made available which could be availed of by all the blood banks linked
to these ZBTCs;

(iii) Establishment of 40 blood component separation facilities;

(iv) Strengthening of the blood banks in the public sector;

(v) Training of the blood banks staff; and

(vi) Promotion of voluntary donation. -

2.29 It was also stated that initially the agreement with the World Bank was for only 90
blood banks later on it was extended to cover all the blood banks in Public Sector withthe
concurrence of World Bank for strengthening.

2.30 Elaborating the financial requirements, it was stated the agreement with the World
Bank for the project was for an estimated cost of $ 99.6 million including $ 1.5 million from
WHO in the form of technical assistance. The scheme placed before the EFC and approved
by the Cabinet was only for a sum of Rs. 222.66 crores. The actual expenditures incurred for
the project so far is as under:

(Rupees in crores)

Year Actual expenditure
1992-93 29.71
1993-94 32.90
1994-95 44.00
1995-96 53.40
1996-97 141.00(BE)

Torat: 301.01

2.31 It was also stated that in order to utilise the full credit before the close of the
project viz., 31.3.97 a provision of Rs. 180 crores was requested in BE 1996-97. The
Planning Commission allocated a sum of Rs. 141 crores only.

2.32 The following steps have been taken to ensure full utilisation of this allocation
during 1996-97:

1. The State Governments were requested to send their Action Plans for 1996-97 by

February, 1996 so that these could be examined and approval conveyed before 31st
March, 1996. Action plans were examined and approval conveyed to the States/UTs
for implementation of the Plans. It has been ensured that adequate funds are
available with States/UTs for the purpose.

2. The slow performing States have been offered assistance in the form of full time

consultant for providing necessary thrust and direction to the programme.


6

2.33 Explaining the disbursement position it was stated that so far US $ 40.00 million has
been received for disbursement. The Claims and disbursement mostly relate to expenditures
incurred upto 1995-96. It was also stated that reimbursement claims worth US $ 4 million are
in the pipeline. During 1996-97, it is proposed to utilise the balance credit of US $ 40 million.

Ill. OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

3.1 The Committee is constrained to note that funds granted to the States are not
utilised fully. The matter of low utilisation of funds has been of grave concern at all levels.
The main problem is that State Aids Promotion Organisations (SAPO) face a number of
difficulties in receiving and utilising funds due to the current financial system at the State
level. The major hindrance is that they do not have the direct power to spend the money
and yet are accountable for it under the project. This is peculiar system and needs to be
changed immediately. The country is facing such a gigantic task of dealing with the problem
of AIDS and frivolous matters such as delayed release of funds etc. should not hinder the
implementation of the project. The Committee strongly recommends that the Centre in
coordination with the States should take all required steps to see that funds flow smoothly to
the grass root level for successful implementation of the programme. The Committee was
given to understand that the funds were released by State Finance Department at the last
moment or sometimes at the end of the current financial year. The Committee feels that this
kind of situation should not prevail any more. The funds should be released in advance,
atleast six months before, and on receiving the expenditure certificate, the next instalment
may be released immediately.

3.2 The Committee is pained to note that a number of states have not filled in the
sanctioned posts. The reason given that this has been done in view of the fact that the
National Aids Control Programme is a time bound project, is not convincing to the
Committee. The Committee feels that this aspect could have been tackled by the Centre in a
better manner by convincing the States about the importance of the programme and the
necessity of creation of the posts and a via-media for the continuance of the posts created
could have been found out. It is surprising for the Committee that the Department has not
done anything in this regard till now. This aspect needs to be considered immediately and all
the States should be asked to create the number of posts as are required.

3.3 The Committee was given to understand that IMA and NACO are making a
combined effort to train general medical practitioners for clinical management of AIDS and
HIV infected persons. The training given is too less to cover a chunk of general physicians in
the country, particularly in the States where AIDS and HIV are rampant. A large scale
training to the physicians and nurses is required so that they may be able to effectively
tackle the patient. The Committee is also given to understand that many physicians and
nurses do not turn up or attend to the HIV and AIDS patients mainly because of the lack of
general awareness and the skills to treat and tackle them. Therefore, the Department should
chalk out a massive scheme to cover, atleast once, for some period for training most of the
general physicians in the major cities of the country. Nurses training is also not very
satisfactory. They need to be given specialised skill training.

3.4 The Committee understands that blood banks are the area which needs to be
strengthened and modernised for securing safe blood supply. Blood banks are the places
from where infected blood is donated and transfused. The Committee is, however,
constrained to note that many blood banks in the public sector are yet to be taken up for
modernisation to achieve the goal of securing safe blood supply. All the blood banks, atleast


7

in the public sector, should be immediately covered to ensure supply of safe blood. The
Committee also feels the necessity of a regular monitoring on the public sector blood banks
on any possible violation of norms. Similarly, the Committee is equally concerned about the
blood banks in the private sector. There is hardly any monitoring over the activities of the
private blood banks. Efforts are also required to modernise Government Blood Banks and
provide necessary facilities for testing AIDS/HIV etc. Similarly, Government should also see
to it that the recently amended Drugs and Cosmetics Rule which provide that no blood bank
shall collect blood from professional donors, is strictly adhered to by all the blood banks.

3.5 The Committee is aware that there is no cure for AIDS. Prevention is the only
aspect which has to be strengthened. For prevention a large scale public awareness is
required. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the awareness programme
has not picked up in India. Even though the problem of AIDS is enveloping the whole
country, the Committee has come to note that the literature prepared and the programmes
initiated are either not related to the local needs of the people or the local dialects. Half of
India’s population are illiterate. One aspect on which one can feel happy is that the AIDS
syndrome has not yet touched, in a bigger way, the horizons of the rural areas. This is,
therefore, the area which is to be protected with very well chalked out programmes. The
programmes to be launched should take into view the local people’s conditions, their culturql
behaviour and the language. Unless the message transmitted is not properly received the
whole effort will go waste. The Committee strongly recommends the department to give a
serious consideration on this. The Committee is of the view that in the awareness
programme participation of NGOs, students, local bodies etc. should be given preference to
the maximum extent because these are the groups which can effectively transmit the
messages through the language understandable to the local community.

3.6 The Committee was given to understand that the IECs material for strengthening
awareness programme was reviewed and revised material have been finalised. The
Committee desires that a local scrutiny should be kept on the IECs materials being used and
whenever any review is made the State Government concerned should also be consulted.
There is also a necessity of training the people who handle the IECs material and also those
involved in making the audio and video programmes. Specialised skills are required for this
and Government should consider strengthening the training programme for every group
including NGOs.

3.7 The Committee is given to understand that care, support and medicines for people
living with HIV/AIDS is very inadequate. This is particularly in view of the social stigma
attached with this infection and the affected persons being treated as social outcast by the
community as a whole. Infected persons are also required to be counselled to ensure that
they take all precautions to avoid any further infection to others. For this, the Committee
feels, highly skilled and efficient counselling and education are required. The Committee has
the evidence to note that very few counselling centres are existing in the country. This
counselling should have been started much earlier and the Committee is pained to note that
much effort has not been done in this direction. Therefore, much more emphasis should be
laid on this aspect and also on educating the general populace about their behavioural
pattern with the infected people. Similarly, as already recommended earlier, medicines to
the infected people should be regularly ensured and Government should provide sufficient
budget for this purpose and assistance from foreign agencies may be obtained, if need be.

3.8 The Committee is of the firm view that much emphasis under the AIDS Control
Programme has not been so far laid on the high risk behaviour groups like sex workers and
frequently travelling males and drug users. These are main groups which are highly

4310/RS/F—S-


8

vulnerable to HIV/AIDS infection. Awareness and counselling are much more required on
these people than on the other groups of the society. They should be made to understand
the danger of the STDs/HIV/AIDS and the risk factor involved in not using condoms and
taking other precautions. Special awareness programme should be taken up particularly for
sex workers and frequently travelling males.

3.9 NGOs have a very vital role in: AIDS Control Programme. They are the groups
which can work in close proximity to the people particularly the high risk behavioural
groups. The Committee, however, is constrained to note that the Central Government which
sanction funds to the NGOs and the Central Government does not have even the list of
NGOs working under the programme in various States. But the Committee feels that Centre
should take initiative in bringing the NGOs forward under the implementation of the
programme.

3.10 The Committee has learnt that various international agencies are implementing
various programmes in different parts of the country for tackling the problem of HIV/AIDS.
In this connection the Committee is constrained to note that NACO is not involved in the
implementation of all the projects in all parts of the country. For example, even though
many pilot programmes are being implemented in Tamil Nadu, NACO is involved with the
implementation of only USAID Project. The Committee recommends that NACO should be
involved in the implementation of all pilot projects in all parts of the country so that it has
complete information about the implementation of all the projects.

3.11 The Committee is constrained to note that many States were performing very slow
and the World Bank Mission in its mid-term review in 1995 recommended discontinuance of
credit to such states. The Committee was given to understand that the reasons for slow
performance were non-adherence to action plans, non-availability of infrastructure, political
and social problems. It also appears that many States do not perceive the AIDS Control
Programme as their own concern. The Empowered Committees of the States have also not
been effective and have little control over initiating activities. The Committee perceives that
there is still lack of awareness and enthusiasm in the States. If the State Government do not
rise to the occasion and pool in all the sources and energies available with them, it would be
difficult to tackle the problem of AIDS/HIV either by the Central Government or any
International Agency. It is the State Governments which are nearer to the people and which
implement the programme. They should therefore, be more concerned about the problem.
The Central Government should therefore, seriously consider this aspect.

3.12 The Committee was informed that efforts were being made to introduce AIDS
education in the Schools. It is true that young people in India are equally vulnerable to HIV
infection and they are also required to be educated in a proper atmosphere. Inclusion of
AIDS education as a part of the curriculum is of course one of the best alternatives to
increase awareness about it. The Committee desires that it should be finalised as early as
possible and it should be introduced from the academic year 1998-99 onwards.

3.13 The fact that there being no cure for AIDS is agitating the minds of scientific
communities the world over. Whatever medicines that are available are only to give
temporary relief. Even those medicines are not available to a large number of infected
population because of the high cost. The Committee is pained to learn from the
representative of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that there is no company which
is importing the drugs. Even if the Government does not want to introduce the drug for
treatment, efforts should at least be made to ensure the availability of the drug in the
market. The Committee recommends that the Government should consider this and see that


bh

9

medicines which are available in other parts of the world are brought/made available in
India at a cheaper cost. The Committee was also given to understand that the Indian systems
of medicines such as Ayurveda and Homoeopathy claim to have got medicines for curing
AIDS. Government should seriously examine and have research done on the efficacy of all
those medicines as early as possible. This is all the more necessary because if indigenous
medicines are found to be efficacious these could be made available at a cheaper cost.

3.14 The main concern facing the world community now is non-development of any
vaccine for HIV/AIDS so far. Many countries are still in the process of research on this.
However, the Committee is constrained to note that no research on development of vaccine
for this has been initiated in India so far. The Committee desires that our country also
should contribute its own mite, for it may so happen that the research conducted in India
may ultimately lead to success.

IV. HEPATITIS-B

4.1 Hepatitis is an acute infection of the liver caused by hepatitis virus. To date, several
hepatitis viruses have been documented and designated. At present, there are six types of:
hepatitis virus i.e. from A to G. Out of them, hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a major cause of
morbidity and mortality world-wide and it is therefore a serious global health hazard.

4.2 The Committee heard the views of the experts who are working on Hepatitis-B on
8th September, 1997. The Committee was informed by the experts that acute Hepatitis-B is
a serious disease. This is because it is most infectious and hundred times more infectious
than HIV. A tip of a needle which has been injected is sufficient to cause a disease as the
blood needed to transmit Hepatitis-B from an infected individual to a healthy person is very
small being only 0.00004 ml.

4.3 According to the experts who appeared before the Committee, India, with a
population close to 930 million, has approximately 40 million HBV carriers contributing an
astonishing 10% of the world estimated total of 400 million carriers. The number of cases
and deaths due to hepatitis as reported by the state health authorities to the Central Bureau
of Health Intelligence (CBHI) in the last five years is as given below:

Year Cases Deaths
1992 98047 1268
1993 117789 1267
1994 98880 1183
1995 98940 943
1996 116031 799

4.4 It was also pointed out to the Committee that data regarding this disease is not
based on all India’s figures as it has been observed that no information about North-eastern
and Central part and hilly areas is available. Based on the limited data available on
prevalence of Hepatitis-B in the country, it is estimated that the carrier rate of Hepatitis-B
virus ranges. from 3—5%, with an average estimated rate of 4% among the general
population. However, most of the carrier rates relate to the urban areas as extremely small
amount of data is available from rural areas. Not only this, there is a difference in carrier
rate in rural and urban areas. Use of unsterilised needles by Registered Medical
Practitioners (RMP) were to a large extent responsible for the higher carrier rate prevalent
in rural areas.


10

4.5 The Committee was also informed by one of the experts that as far as children
below six years are concerned, the carrier rate happens to be very high partly because they
acquire this carrier status from their infected parents and also from their community.
Between the age of 16 to 18 years it sets about 4 to 4.5 per cent and is the same both in
rural and urban child population. However, in the case of children coming from high
economic strata, the carrier rate is less as compared to the corporation school going
children, because of their background and living conditions, it was informed.

4.6 The Committee notes that evidence of higher positivity rates among orphans as
compared to normal children leads to the conclusion that low economic status, poor hygenic
conditions are indirectly responsible for transmission of this disease. A positivity rate of
14.7% has been observed in children where as the positivity rate among healthy adult
populations ranges between 10—38%.

4.7 According to the data available on Pregnant women, 3.7 to 4 per cent is the carrier
rate. At least 25 per cent of Hepatitis impregnancy is caused by Hepatitis-B. Twelve per
cent or One eighth of maternal mortality is contributed by Hepatitis-B. Out of this 12 per
cent, at least 20 per cent are highly infective as they will transmit the disease to the new
born during the immediate post delivery period. It was pointed out that 90 per cent of the
new born who get this virus, develop chronic liver disease.

4.8 The Common mode of transmission is the transfusion of blood. This was due to the
fact that most of the blood banks, in the country use unstandardised kits. However, this ca:
be effectively checked by making the screening method for Hepatitis-B standardised and
adhering to all the Government rules.

4.9 The medical and paramedical staff are also a high risk group for HBV infection due
to repeated contact with infected individuals and waste with blood and body fluids. Among
the medical and paramedical staff, it is the dentists who are the most vulnerable.

4.10 The Department apprised the Committee that the Hepatitis-B virus spreads mainly
through contaminated blood and blood products, contaminated (unsterilised) syringes and
needles, unsafe sex and from mother (if she is a carrier) to the unborn child. As far as other
hepatitis are concerned, Hepatitis C, D and G are spread by the same route as Hepatitis-B
virus. Hepatitis A and E viruses are water-borne and spread through contaminated water.

4.11 The experts explained to the Committee that the transmission of Hepatitis-B virus
takes place in five ways namely, transplacental, horizontal, parenteral, sexual and vector-
mediated. Elaborating the peculiar mode of transmission in the country, one of the Experts
clarified that below 1rd of them get from mother at birth and the rest 2rd are infected by
horizontal mode that is from one person to other person. Of these 22rd, about 14rd are
infected during their pre-school age i.e. from 1 year to 5 years.

4.12 Some of the experts were of the opinion that revamping the existing screening
method in the various blood banks and laboratories was very essential so as to prevent the
Hepatitis-B cases. In order to assess the situation, cases of acute viral Hepatitis-B and also
liver chronic diseases were taken up for study. It was found that 62 per cent of blood
transfusion cases suffered from Hepatitis-B infection. In other words, proper screening has
not been done in such cases unstandardised type of kits also seemed to a large extent
responsible for this situation, The experts, therefore, emphasised that the screening method
for Hepatitis-B must be properly standardised and all Government rules must be adhered to.
Studies have revealed that at least three out of hundred infected with this virus would
develop chronic liver disease or liver failure. This may eventually lead to liver cancer

Ly


ह 8 ६

1 because this virus has been classified by WHO as Type I oncogenic virus. Effective measures
for prevention of this disease are required.

4.13 It has come to the notice of the Committee that at present there are two types of
vaccine which are safe and effective (a) Plasma Derived Vaccine (b) Recombinant DNA
Vaccine. It was pointed out that the raw material for Plasma Derived Vaccine is the human
blood and for Recombinant hepatitis it is yeast cell line and cloned into Elcoli Bacterial
Plasmids. The officials also added that as far as the cost of the vaccine is concerned, the
Plasma Derived Vaccine is cheaper in comparison to Recombinant DNA Vaccine.

4.14 The Department informed the Committee that the total requirement of vaccines for
the country cannot be met. At the current population of 943 million, with the birth rate of
28.3 per thousand and 3 doses per child, 80 million doses are required annually. However,
there was no single unit in India which can today sell even 20 million doses. Production
capacity all over the world is very limited. Foreign firms would invest in infrastructure if
specific requirements are made to them.

4.15 To the question as to what action has been taken by the department to reduce the
risks of Hepatitis-B infection, the Department submitted that guidelines have been issued for
mandatory testing of blood in all blood banks; promotion of safe sex under the National
AIDS Control Programme; health awareness campaigns regarding the dangers of using
unsterilised syringes and needles under the National AIDS Control Programme. Guidelines
have also been issued to the state health authorities for the use of a separate sterile syringe
and needles for each injection.

4.16 The Committee’s attention has also been drawn by Department to the
recommendations of the Experts Committee which are as under:

(i) Sub-group for drafting the Ninth Plan

(a) HBV should be introduced under the National Immunization Programme
to be administered to children and high risk population.

(b) The immunisation may be carried out according to CSSM design, if
logistics do not permit coverage of the whole country.

(c) The Department of Bio-technology may look into the possibility of
indigenous production :of the vaccine.

(ii) Department of Family Welfare
(a) Very high cost (Rs. 1.06 crores per district per year)
(b) Indigenous production essential to sustain a National Programme.

(iii) Meeting under the Chairmanship of DCG (I)
(a) Generation of community based data on carrier rates.
(b) Hospital staff be immunized with HBV at the cost of the Government.
(c) Efforts should be made to produce HBV indigenously.

५. OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

5.1 The Committee is constrained to note that the country has 40 million carriers of
HBV and the Government has not woken up yet to meet the challenge. Even though some
steps have been taken by the Department, they are far from adequate. The Committee is of
the view that prevention is better than cure. During the course of its interactions with


12

experts, it was emphasised again and again that mass vaccination was the only fool proof
method for eradication of this ever spreading disease. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that it should be taken up by the Government on a large scale and steps should
be taken by the Government to include it in the universal immunisation programme. Taking
into account the fact that WHO has recommended that countries with a carrier prevalence of
2 per cent and above should consider inclusion of HBV in routine immunisation programme
for infants and as India has a prevalence of 4 per cent, the Committee feels that vaccination
programme should be started without further delay.

5.2 This measure becomes all the more necessary keeping in view the fact that infants
and young children who generally have mild infection, can become life-long carriers without
showing any symptoms all along. And after 20-25 years about 25 per cent of chronic carriers
can develop hepatitis cirrhosis (liver failure) and liver cancer. The Committee feels that
successful implementation of pulse polio programme can be taken up as a role model for
starting vaccination programme for Hepatitis-B. The Committee is constrained to note that
the proposal to include vaccination against Hepatitis-B can only be implemented if adequate
‘resources become available during the 9th plan. The Committee feels that this is a sorry
state of affairs. Government has to provide sufficient funds during 9th plan period, if future
generations are to be saved.

5.3 The Committee feels that apart from vaccinations there are some other areas where
there is a chance of spreading HBV which cannot be ignored like rampant use of unsterilised
syringes in hospitals. This unethical practice was more rampant in rural areas. Mere issuing
guidelines to state authorities for the use of a separate sterile syringe and needles for each
injection would not suffice. The Committee feels that stringent measures are required to
check this dangerous practice. Steps should also be taken to educate the general masses
about fatal consequences of such use of unsterilised syringes.

5,4 The Committee views with concern that mass awareness about Hepatitis-B has not
yet been taken up by the department. People need to be educated about Hepatitis-B virus
the way it is being done in the case of HIV. The IEC activities in this regard need to be
stepped up, and the department should make use of all modes of IEC to spread the message
about Hepatitis-B. Special efforts need to be taken by the Department especially in the rural
areas where people are still unaware of it. Steps should also be taken to print pamphlets in
the vernacular languages to address the issue among the rural people. NGOs can be
successfully involved in this awareness campaign.

5.5 The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that a large number of blood
banks are existing in this country without basic facilities for testing. The Committee while
appreciating the recent steps taken for issuing licenses to the blood banks has been informed
that they also use unstandardised kits and there is no uniform kit available for testing. The
Committee, therefore, feels that the screening method for Hepatitis-B must be properly
standardised. The Committee is aware that law already exists where under-screening is
mandatory for blood banks. What is sadly lacking is non-implementation of this mandatory
requirement. The Committee feels that it is the duty of the Government to find ways and
means for getting this provision implemented effectively all over the country.

5.6 The Committee also notes that the medical and paramedical staff, who are working
in rural areas are not trained to perform the test. The department should focus its attention
in giving specialised training to the medical and para medical working staff in rural areas and
the Regd. Medical Practitioners.


ANNEXURE

EXPERTS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON AIDS AND

1,

10.
11.

1%

13,

HEPATITIS-B

Dr. P.K. Naik, National Institute of Cholera & Enteric Diseases, Peliaghat,
Calcutta.

. Dr. George Babu, Microbiology Department, Christian Medical College, Vellore,

Tamil Nadu.

. Dr. P. Sinoy, Professor, Department of Gastroenterology, Medical College,

Trivandrum.

. Dr. S.R. Naik, Professor and Head of Department of Gastroenterology, Sanjay

Gandhi Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research, Lucknow.

. Dr. ५.७. Arankalle, Head, Hepatitis Unit, National Institute of Virology, Pune.

Dr. Y.K. Chawla, Additional Professor, Department of Hematology, PGI,
Chandigarh.

. Dr. $.O.P. Thyagrajan, Professor of Microbiology, Dr. ALM PG IBMS, University

of Madras, Taramani, Madras-600 113.

. Dr. LS. Gilada, Hony. Secretary, Indian Health Organisation, Municipal School

Building, J.J. Hospital Campus, Mumbai-400 001.

. Dr. R.K. Tandon, Professor and Head of Department of Gastroentrology, All India

Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
Dr. S.K. Panda, Professor of Pathology, AIIMS, New Delhi.

Dr. Pradeep Seth, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, New
Delhi.

Dr. Usha Baweja, National Institute of Communicable Diseases, Shyam Nath Marg,
Delhi.

Dr. D. Chattopadhyay, National Institute of Communicable Diseases, Shyam Nath
Marg, Delhi.

13



MINUTES



“x
TENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 16th January, 1997 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.B. Chavan — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
Dr. M. Aram

Shri Raj Nath Singh

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Dr. Mohan Babu

LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
9. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
10. Shri Jai Prakash
11. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Chaudhary Paragi Lal
14. Dr. C. Silvera
15. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
16. Shri 1.0. Sanadi
17. Shrimati Krishna Bose
18. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
19. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi
20. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
21. Shri Samik Lahiri
22. Dr. Bali Ram
23. Shri Ranen Barman
24. Shri Surender Singh
25. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT
Shri S.C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. * * *

SEN छा Se कहे

3. be . *

4. The Committee, thereafter discussed about its future programme and appointed seven
Sub-Committees on different subjects for detailed examination thereon. The subjects allotted to
each Sub-Committee and the tentative composition of the seven Sub-Committee are as under:

*Minutes of ist to IXth meeting of the Committee relate to other matters.
***Relate to other matters.

17


18

() * . .
Gi f ‘
(iii) * * *
(iv) * * *
(v) Sub-Committee on Dreaded Diseases

1. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar, Convenor

2. Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray, Member

3. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 55

4. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome vs

5. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya मे ny

6. Shri Sartaj Singh ts
(vi) - Me i ‘
(vii) id x bg

5. The Committee then discussed about the role of the Sub-Committees and also
decided that the Sub-Committees after the detailed examination of the respective subjects
would submit their Reports to the main Committee.

6. * * *

7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 Noon.

***Relate to other matters.


I
FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Monday, the 4th August 1997 in Committee Room
‘C’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. B.B. Dutta

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Baksh Singh Varma
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
8. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
9. Shri Sartaj Singh
10. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
11. Shrimati Krishna Bose
12. Shri Krishna
13. Dr. Bali Ram
14. Shri Ranen Barman
15. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

9 ७ + ५० (०

Dose के *

3. The Committee then reviewed the work done by the previous Committee. The
Chairman informed the Committee that the following subjects were taken up by the previous
Committee for detailed study and a separate Sub-Committee on each of the subjects was
appointed:—

. Value Based Education;

. Vocational Education;

Non-Formal Education;

Adult Education;

. Problem of Drop-Outs;

. Dreaded Diseases;

Drug Control; and

. National Family Welfare Programme.

PAANSWNE

The Committee, after some discussion, decided that since none of the Sub-Committees
has completed the work, it was necessary to identify the same subjects again. The

***Relate to other matters.

19


20

Committee then authorised the Chairman to constitute the Sub-Committees on each of the
subjects identified. The Chairman informed the Committee that he would re-constitute the
same Sub-Committees.

42% * *

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

***Relate to other matters.


“XII
TWELFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Friday, the 9th October, 1998 in Committee Room
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav

छ० जे 9 एमी ७०१०

LOK SABHA
9. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
10. Shri Sartaj Singh
11. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
12, Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
13. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
14. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
15. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
16. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
17. Shri Ajit Jogi
18. Shri V.M. Sudheeran
19, Shri Shankar Pannu
20. Shri Abdul Hamid
21. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
22. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja
23. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
24. Shri H.P. Singh
25. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
26. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
27. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES
* * *
SECRETARIAT

Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

2, * * *

* Minutes of the Ist to XIth meetings of the Committee relate to other matters.
*** Relate to other matters.

vA


22

3. The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft Reports of the Sub-Committee on
Problem of Drop-Outs and Dreaded Diseases and adopted the same with some
modifications.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m. to meet again on 23rd October, 1998.


re
हट

“XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 19th November, 1998 in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi
Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
Shri Dina Nath Mishra
Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA
9. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
10. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
11. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
12. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
13. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
14. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
15. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
16. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
17. Shri Shmanur Shiv Shankarappa
18. Shri V.M. Sudheeran
19. Shri Abdul Hamid
20. Shri Samik Lahiri
21. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
22. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja
23. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
24. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
25. Smt. Krishna Bose
26. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
27. Shri S. Arumugham

2००9 ७9३ ७७०

WITNESSES

* * *
* * *
SECRETARIAT

Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary

2% * *

* Minutes of the XIIIth Meeting of the Committee relate to other matters.
*** Relate to other matters of the committee.

23


24

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate requisite number of Members
for presentation of some Reports of the Committee to the Rajya Sabha and lay the same in
the Lok Sabha during the ensuing session of Parliament.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 p.m.