» PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA



PORT



Website: http//rajyasabha.nic.in
E.mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.i



PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

HUNDRED EIGHTY-SIXTH REPORT

ON
THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
(RESERVATION IN ADMISSION) BILL, 2006

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON'1S* DECEMBER, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 DECEMBER, 2006)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2006/ Agrahayana, 1928 (SAKA)


vy

we

YD ws

‘Minutes

CONTENTS

Paces

Composition Or THe COMMITTEE ............. (i)-(ii)
INTRODUCTION (iii)
1-8

9

OBseRVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE ... 10-11
ANNEXURE 13-23

25-34


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

we

we NAH s

(2006-07)
Shri Janardan Dwivedi — Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
Shri Shantaram LaxmanNaik
Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani

Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
Smt. Brinda Karat

Shri S. Anbalagan

Shri Uday Pratap Singh

Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri Ali Anwar

LOK SABHA

Shri Ashok Argal

Shri Basudeb Barman

Shri Harishchandra Chavan
Shri Harisinh Chavda

Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
Shri R. L. Jalappa

Shri Ramswaroop Koli

Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar

Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
Smt. Archana Nayak

Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat

Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
Shri Chengara Surendran

Dr. Thokchom Meinya

Shri K. Virupakshappa

Shri Ravi Prakash Verma

Shri Francis K. George


30.
31.

Shri Anantkumar Hegde

Shri Rahul Gandhi

Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
SECRETARIAT

Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director

Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary

Shri Swarabji, B., Committee Officer

@)


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee, do hereby present this Hundred Eighty-sixth Report
of the Committee on ‘The Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Bill, 2006°*.

2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee, the
Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha had referred** ‘The Central Educational
Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Bill, 2006’ (Annexure), as introduced in the Lok Sabha and
pending therein, to the Committee on the 4th September, 2006 for examination and report within three
months.

3. The Committee considered various documents and relevant papers received from the Department of
Higher Education, and heard the Chairpersons, National Commission for Backward Classes and National
Commission for Minorities as well as the Chairman of the Oversight Committee on the Implementation of the
New Reservation Policy in Higher Educational Institutions in a series of meetings held on the Ist and 2nd
November, 2006. The Committee also heard the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Higher
Education on the Bill in its meeting held on the 9th November, 2006.

4. The Committee in its sitting held on the 16th November, 2006, took up “clause-by-clause consideration’
of the Bill and adopted the draft report with amendments in Clause 2 sub-clause (e), Clause 2 sub-clause (f).
Clause 2 sub-clause (j) and Clause 4 of the Bill. Besides, the Committee has also made some gencral
recommendations/observations about certain important issues involved.

& On behalf of the Committee, I would like to thank all those who appeared before the Commilice and
those who provided important inputs and clarifications on the provisions of the Bill.

6. A note of dissent jointly given by Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat, Shri Vijaykumar Rupani, Shri Laxmi
Narayan Sharma, Shri Ashok Argal, Shri Ramswaroop Koli and Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh is appended to the
Report.

7. For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been provided in
bold letters in the body of the report.

JANARDAN DWIVEDI

Chairman,

New Denn Department-related Parliamentary
November 16, 2006 Standing Committee on
Kartika 25, 1928 (Saka) Human Resource Development

* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2 dated 25th August, 2006.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part Il No. 43442 dated Sth September, 2006.

(a)


REPORT

1. The Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Bill, 2006 seeks to provide for reservation
in admission of the students belonging to the Scheduled Castes (15%), the Scheduled Tribes (7.5%) and the
Other Backward Classes (27%) to the Central Educational Institutions established, maintained or aided by the
Central Government, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Biil seeks to exclude
certain premier institutions in the country from the ambit of reservation.

2s Having regard to the composition of population in the tribal areas under the Sixth Schedule of the
Constitution, Central Educational Institutions established in these areas have been exempted from reservation
for the Scheduled Castes or the Other Backward Classes.

3. Central Government, in consultation with the appropriate authority (statutory council for maintaining
standards of education) has been empowered to exempt from reservations, certain courses or programmes
of high levels of specialization including at the post-doctoral level under any branch of study or faculty.

4. For reasons of financial, physical or academic limitations to be notified by order in the Gazette, the
Central Government, in consultation with the appropriate authority, has been empowered to permit an
institution to implement reservation for the Other Backward Classes within a maximum period of three years
beginning with the academic session commencing in the calendar year 2007.

Bs Where increase in the number of seats required to maintain the !evel available outside reservation is
not possible due to resource constraints or without affecting the standards of education, the Central
Government has been empowered to permit phasing of implementation over a maximum of three years.

6. The Committee noted that the present policy of reservation in matters of admission to Centrally
maintained and aided institutions was limited to 15% for the Scheduled Castes and 7.5% for the Scheduled
Tribes subject to the prescribed standards of eligibility in the respective categories. This policy of reservation
for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes was being impiemented through Executive Order by the
Central Government. At present, there is no law for the purpose and the present Bill would provide a statutory
basis for reservation of seats in admissions relating to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
Besides, this Bill also seeks to provide for the first time reservation for students belonging to the Other
Backward Classes (OBCs) in educational institutions maintained or funded by the Central Government.

7. In this regard during its deliberations, attention of the Committee was drawn to the following
recommendation of the Backward Classes Commission:

“Seats should be reserved for OBC students in all scientific, technical and professiona!
institutions run by the Central as well as State Governments. This reservation will fall
under article 15(4} of the Constitution and the quantun of reservation should be the
same as in Government services, i.e. 27%. The States which have already reserved more
than 27% seats for OBC students will remain unaffected by this recommendation"
(Mandal Commission Report: 1980, Vol. I, p. 53).

8. While this recommendation ofthe Mandal Commission was implemented by the Central Government
for reservation in Government jobs, it could not be done for admission in educational institutions.

9. The Committee was informed that in the PA inamdar vs State of Maharashtra & Ors. Supreme Court
held that the State could not reserve seats in unaided educational institutions. This had led to demand from


almost all State Governments, as well as from almost all political parties in Parliament, for a Central law and
if need be for amending the Constitution so as to ensure that access to the weaker sections in higher
education, particularly in professional courses was not denied or curtailed. Accordingly, the
Constitution (93rd Amendment) Act, 2005 was passed which introduced section (5) in Article 15
of the Constitution. It empowers the State to make special provision, by law, for the admission of students
belonging to the Scheduled Castes (SCs), the Scheduled Tribes (STs) and socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens in educational institutions including aided or unaided private educational institutions
Minority educational institutions established under Article 30(1) of the Constitution were exempted from it.
Therefore, the Centre as well as the States have to make laws to implement this provision in respect of
institutions under their purview.

10. Accordingly, the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Bill, 2006 has been
introduced in the Lok Sabha for this purpose. It was clarified that such a law was required also in view of the
fact that cach higher educational insiitution functioned under its own law, statute, orders, etc. [t was,
therefore, necessary to have an enabling law by Parliament that would override such individual Acts and
other legal provisions.

Il. With a view to understand the key issues involved in the proposed legislation as well as implications of
its provisions, the Committee decided to interact with the stakeholders. Accordingly, the Committee heard
the views of the Chairmen of the National Commission for Backward Classes, the National Commission for
Minoritics and the Oversight Committee on the implementation of the New Reservation Policy in Higher
Educational Institutions in its meetings held on the Ist and 2nd November, 2006. From the deliberations that
the Committee had with these witnesses, the consensus which emerged was that the initiative taken by the
Government was a welcome step for protecting the interests of socially and educationally backward
classes. However, certain apprehensions and reservations were also voiced which were not confined to the
provisions of the Bill but also raised certain fundamental issues and their possible implications.

12. | The Committee was informed that while reservation in admission for students from the SC and ST
conununitics was already in operation for a long time, a begisining was yet to be made for students from the
backward classes. Another fact noticed was that after 1931 census, till date no comprehensive caste-bascd
census had been carried out so as to obtain authenticated details of population- caste or comununity wise.
Whereas in respect of SCs and STs, periodical census had been carried out. As a result, with the changes in
the percentages of SCs/STs in total population, their reservation percentage had also undergone a revision. It
was cmphasised before the Committee that in view of there being no comprehensive caste-based survey
after 1931 and different data coming from different sources, there was an urgent need for carrying out a
census on caste and community basis.

13. The Committee was informed that the Mandal Commission by adopting multiple approach for the
preparation of a list of OBCs arrived at the population of Hindu and Non-Hindu OBCs to nearly 52 per cent
of the country’s population (43.70% Hindu OBC and 8.40% of non-Hindu OBCs). However, in view of
Supreme Court restricting all kinds of reservations [under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) of the Constitution] to 50
per cent, only 27 per cent reservation for OBCs was recommended by the Mandal Commission. The Chairman
of the National Commission for Backward Classes was of the view that reservation proposed for the Backward
Classes in the Bill was not proportionate to their population.

14... Committce’s attention was also drawn to chances of anomalies arising as a result of proposed staggered
increase in the number of seats in a Central Educational Institution over a maximum period of three years. As
envisaged in clause 5(2) of the Bill, number of seats available to 0865 for each academic session would be
commensurate with the increase in the permitted strength for cach year. The Committee was given to
understand that strict implementation of this sub-clause would lead to a situation where reservation of scats


for OBC candidates would be staggered with increase in seats flowing to other reserved categories. It was,
accordingly, emphasized that 27 per cent reservation for OBCs should be given in the first year itself.

15. With regard to application of the concept of ‘Creamy layer’, strong reservations were expressed
by the Chairman of the National Commission for Backward Classes. It was emphasized that exclusion
of a section of OBCs in the field of higher education on the economic criteria would amount to negative
discrimination. Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that concept of the creamy layer did not find
place anywhere in the Constitution; all the Articles relating to the Backward Classes contained the expression
“socially and educationally Backward Classes of citizens’. The witness was of the firm view that there was
no justification for dividing the list of socially and educationally backward communities on economic criteria.

16. No response was forthcoming from the Chairman of the Backward Classes Commission about the
query of the Committee for the need for having a creamy layer among the OBCs in view of separate categories
of OBCs based on social and economic deficiencies. No categorical reply was given to the possibility of OBC
scats remaining unfilled in the event of creamy layer being excluded.

17. The question about the nced for suci a provision for the socially and educationally backwards amongst
the minorities was also raised before the Committee.

18. The Chairman of the National Commission for Minorities informed that out of the 18.4%
recognized religious minorities in the total population of the country, 13.4% were Muslims. Condition of this
single largest minority in higher education “was both disturbing and disquieting”. Broadly speaking, the social
and educational status of Muslims in general was comparable to that of the Hindu OBCs, while the position
of Muslim OBCs that constituted above 40%, was comparable to that of SCs/STs. He, therefore, made out
a strong case for extending the policy of reservation for the Muslim OBCs also.

19. The Chairman, National Commission for Minorities strongly advocated about a monitoring
mechanism to be included in the Bill so as to ensure equitable share for the socially and educationally backward
classes of minorities in higher education. Two options for activating this monitoring mechanism were placed
before the Committee. The first was a classification of the 0805 into Category I (OBCs) and Category II
(MBCs). Since the majority of Muslims are falling into the OBC category, benefits of reservation would
be the maximum. Sccond option suggested was the carmarking of a numerical sub-quota for the Muslim
OBCs on the basis of the accepted criteria of identification of most backward classes. It was pointed out that
such a classification of OBCs had been tried with success in Karnataka, Maharashtra, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh,
Assam and Tamil Nadu. In Andhra Pradesh, even the Scheduled Caste category has been sub-divided into
four categories. It was further argued that if SC category could be successfully divided into four catcgorics,
OBC category could also be sub-categorized more or less on the same pattern.

20. Ona specific query about inclusion of dalit Christians or dalit Muslims, 1.6. those who get converted
from other communities, it was admitted that there was a need to examine this issue. As regards dalit
Muslims, it was argued that they should be given Scheduled Caste status, because not being OBCs, they
would not be covered under the present Bill.

21... Issuc of reservation of Muslim OBCs in the minority institutions without eroding their rights guaranteed
by the Constitution was also raised before the Committee. Attention was also drawn about the feasibility
of having exclusion of creamy layer for all OBCs. The. Committee was given to understand that among
Muslims OBCs, creamy layer formed a very small segment.

22. Another aspect brought to the notice of the Committee was that the identification of the backward
classes ought to have been in relation to the work conditions existing at the time of conferment of benefits
for the purpose of upliftment. It was pointed out that the classification of the Mandal Commission was a
combination of three or four factors which were social, economic, educational but essentially occupational.


4

Apprchensions were raised about the sanctity oP having occupation-based classification for backward classes.
An obvious fallout of tremendous professional development was also the rapid change in occupation.

23. The Committee had the final recommendations made by the Oversight Committee on the Implementation
of the New Reservation Policy in Higher Educational Institutions, before it. The Chairman of the Oversight
Committee who deposed before the Committee gave a brief idea about the historical background of the
reservation policy for the backward classes. The Committee was informed that the estimate of 52 per cent
backward classes made by the Mandal Commission was made by excluding the percentage of SCs,
STs and Forward Castes/ Communities from the total population as enumerated in the 1931 census.

24. The Committee was informed that the Central List of Backward Classes at present contained a total of
2303 castes/ communities. Several additions were made in the first Central List prepared in 1993. However,
there had hardly been any exclusion so far from this list. It was emphasized that the process of inclusion of
casies/ communities could not be continued indefinitely; there was a need for putting a cap on the inciusion
or further additions. Task of review of the Lists of Backward Classes needed to be taken up by the Government
in consultation with the Backward Classes Commission as envisaged under section 1! of the National
Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993 governing it. It was advocated that castes/ communities which
had reached a certain level of advancement should yield place to those who were yet to reach that stage of
development and were in greater need of reservation. The Committee was also given to understand that there
had been a long pending and consistent demand from some State Governments/ State Backward Class
Commissions for undertaking a comprehensive census survey of Backward Classes. It was emphasized that
if this task was not accomplished, such affirmative action as extending reservations would not have legitimate
and just basis.

25. Chairman of the Oversight Committec, thereafter, dwelt upon in detail on the issue of exclusion of
creamy layer from reservation. While clarifying that Oversight Committee has not made any recommendation
ou this much debated issue, it was informed that deliberations took place among the members which have
boon reflected in Appendix-1 of its report. The viewpoints which emerged were :

Inclusion of creamy layer would result in reserved seats being pre-empted by OBCs from
higher income groups. Thus, almost all rural as well as urban OBCs from the northern,
central and eastern regions would be deprived. Other view was that, if the creamy layer
of OBCs was denied access to reservation, the reserved seats might not get filled up.
However, a case study from Karnataka had shown that the OBC quotas had been utilised
without any compromise with academic excellence in a situation where the cream ry layer
had been excluded. Another alternative formulation suggested to the Committee was
that the creamy layer should be excluded in the first instance. A provision should be
made that, keeping in view the prescribed threshold of qualifying marks, ifafter admitting
non-creamy layer OBC candidates, some reserve quota seats remain vacant, access could
then be given to the creamy layer candidates in order of merit.

26. In addition to the above viewpoints, the Committee was also given to understand that in some of the
southern States, due to consistent reservation policy, OBCs have been adequately empowered. With the
creamy layer included and absence of categorization amongst OBCs, only advantaged sections amongst
them would continue to be benefited. It was also emphasized that in the event of exclusion of creamy layer
from the purview of reservation, the criteria for deciding the creamy layer should be laid and periodically
reviewed. It was also suggested that in the event of candidates below the creamy layer not making up, the
scais could go to the creamy layer on the basis of merit. On a specific query about the need for having a
proviso for retaining 27 per cent reservation for OBCs on exclusion of creamy layer, it was clarified that in
view of present figure of 52 per cent OBCs, 27 per cent reservation for OBCs was still far less and should
continue to be there.


uw

27. Committee’s attention was drawn towards the following study made by the Planning Commission on
the status of OBCs that has been included as Appendix-2 in the Report given by the Oversight Committee.

1.4 "Indicators relevant to reservation for OBCs:

1.4.1 The Southern region has a significantly higher share of the OBC population in the
country than its over-all population share. This is particularly true of Tamil Nadu
(22.4% of the country’s OBC population). In the Northern region, the shares are
more or less balanced; whereas in the East and the West, their share of OBC population
is significantly lower than their overall population share.

1.4.2 There is evidence to buttress the hypothesis that the ability to access reservations in
Central institutions of higher learning will be higher among : (a) the urban
population; and (0) the higher income classes. The four southern States collectively
account for 44% of the total urban OBC population. Of this, more than 22% is in
Tamil Nadu alone. Another four States, namely Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar and Maharashtra, account for another 40%. Thus the remaining seven major
States, namely Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Orissa, West Bengal, Gujarat and
Assam, collectively have only 16% of the urban OBC population.

1.4.3 If we now consider the State-wise distribution of OBCs in the top two income classes
in urban areas, i.e. those who stand the best chance of accessing the reservations,
more than 68% are in the Southern region, with Tamil Nadu alone accounting for
37%. In fact, just 5 States, the 4 Southern States plus Maharashtra, together account
for nearly 80% of OBCs in this category."

28. The Committee was also given an idea about the detailed exercise and assessment made by the
Oversight Committee underlying the implementation of 27 per cent reservation in a staggered form as
envisaged in clause 5(2) of the Bill. Extensive deliberations had taken place with all the stakeholders likely to
be brought under the new reservation policy. An in-depth study with regard to the existing faculty and
infrastructure, their augmentation, additional funding required for proposed expansion with the underlying
principle of retaining the level of excellence as also the number of seats available for general category was
made by the Oversight Committee. मु

29. Opinion was also sought on the need for having reservation for OBC women. Both the Commissions
did not give any clear suggestion in this regard.

30. Specific query was made about the need for excluding the institutions of excellence, research
institutions, institutions of national and strategic importance specified inthe Schedule to this Act as
mentioned in clause 4(b). The Committee was informed that the exemption clause tended to be a
little too generic and could lead to institutions of excellence being left out.

30.1 It was argued before the Committee that access to quality education is of utmost importance
for ensuring advancement of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward
Classes. This is also the objective of the Directive Principles of State Policy as laid down in Article 46 in Part
IV of the Constitution.

30.2 The representatives of the Ministry submitted before the Committee that these provisions were
included mainly due to the fact that the intake to these institutions and courses was generally very few and,
therefore, implementing reservations will be difficult.

31. | The views, suggestions and apprehensions expressed during the deliberations of the Committee were
put before the Secretary of the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development
in the meeting of the Committee held on 9th November, 2006.


6

32. The Committee received a written memorandum from an organization named ‘Youth for
Equality’. While accepting the need for affirmative action for the upliftment of the down-trodden,
the memorandum raised scrious reservations about the methodology adopted by the Government for
ideatification of Backward Classes and the steps proposed for their upliftment.

33. These extensive deliberations and the inputs from all the concemed have greatly helped the
Committee in understanding the subject matter and formulating its views on various Provisions of the proposed
Icgislation.

34. The Committee wishes to make it amply clear at the outset that it is unanimously in favour of
the policy of making reservation for backward communities in the educational institutions of higher
and professional learning. It is not only in keeping with the constitutional provisions
contained in Article 15(5) but also necessary for providing socially and educationally
backward communities with equal opportunities.

35. The Committee considered arguments. for and against, presented before it as also various problems/
lacunae witnessed and associated with implementation of the policy of reservation for backward communities.
The Committee also notes the suggestions made before it for addressing some of the basic issues related
with this policy for an effective and judicious implementation,

36. The Committee notes that there is a major limitation on data about the social, economic and educational
profile of our population in general and about OBCs in particular. The last caste-based census in India was
done in 1931. Accordingly, there are no periodic data available on the demographic spread of OBCs and their
access to amenities. Even the Mandal Commission had used the 1931 Census data. Whatever limited data
are available, pertain to surveys conducted by NSSO from 1998-99 onwards, which are only ‘sample surveys’.

37. The Committee found that there exists no accepted mechanism/criteria to group the people into different
categories. As a result, existing list of backward castes/communities are termed, in some cases, as inaccurate,
Besides, any regular process of review is also not in place. Such a review implies both ‘inclusion’ and
‘exclusion’. The Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for taking urgent measures/
steps for identifying and removing all such lacunae and problems by putting in place scientific and
objective mechanism/benchmarks for this purpose.

38. The Committee recommends that a comprehensive survey of the total population which can
bring out the social, educational and economic profile of cach caste/community/sections of society,
may be undertaken, followed by periodic reviews.

Clause 2(c) of the Bill Definitions

39. Clause 2(c) defines faculty as “faculty of a university or of any other educational institution”. The
Committee feels that the definition is quite wide and it may include each and every educational institution
The Committee, therefore, recommends that sub-clause(e) of clause 2 may be substituted with the
following:
(c) faculty means the faculty of a central educational institution as defined in sub-

clause(d) of clause 2.

Clause 2(f) of the Bill

40. The Committee notes that the Central Government has also been given powers to declare an institution
as minority cducational institution. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “or by the
Central Government” may be deleted from line 26 of page 2 [sub clause (f) of clause 2] of the Bill,


Clause 2(j) of the Bill

41. The Committee finds that the sub-clause (j) of clause 2 of the Bill defines “teaching or instruction in
any branch of study” These words, however, do not appear anywhere in the Bill. The Committee notes that
this sub-clause mentions branches of study at three principal levels of qualifications.

41.1 The Committee finds that some other fields of study have not been mentioned in this sub-clause. For
example, there is no mention about Humanities & Social Sciences in this list. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that instead of mentioning branches of study by name, the words ‘all the branches of study’
should be inserted in clause 20).

Clause 4 of the Bill
Act not to apply in certain cases

42. Clause 4(b) of the Bill provides that the provisions of section 3 shall not apply to “the institutions of
excellence, research institutions, institutions of national and strategic importance specified in the Schedule to
this Act’. Exception was taken by some members to the proviso to section 4(b) of the Bill that empowers the
Central Government to amend the Schedule to the Act. The Schedule contains list of institutions of national
and strategic importance that are sought to be exempted from the reservation.

42.1 The Committee is not aware of the basis on which the institutions contained in the
Schedule have been selected.

42.2. The Committee also feels that the power of amending the Schedule provided to the Central
Government needs to be exercised only with the concurrence of Parliament. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that suitable mechanism be provided in the Bill so that no notification made
by the Central Government in this regard becomes effective without the approval of Parliament.

42.3 Section 7 of the Bill pertains to laying of all the notifications made under this Act before both
the Houses of Parliament. The Committee found the language of this Section too technical and
complex to understand easily. The Committce, therefore, recommends that section 7 be re-drafted
in clear and categorical manner.

Candidates admitted on the basis of open competition should not be adjusted against the reserved
quota.

43. During the course of deliberations of the Committee, apprehensions were expressed
about the possibility of adjusting a candidate belonging to backward classes against the reserved quota,
even if the candidate was admitted to the institution on the basis of merit. The Committee appreciates the
concern of the members and, therefore, impresses upon the Ministry to ensure that the candidates
belonging to backward classes who get admitted to educational institutions on the basis of merit
should not be adjusted against the reserved quota of 27%.

Monitoring Mechanism

44. There have also been suggestions that the Bill lacks the teeth in the absence of any provision for
monitoring the implementation of the proposed legislation. The Committee also feels that a suitable
mechanism to monitor the implementation of reservations envisioned in the Bill needs to be
considered by the Government. While doing so, efforts may be made to see that functional autonomy
of the institutions of higher learning was not impaired.

Reservation for women

45. There have been suggestions from some members of the Committee to consider fixing some
quota for women students also in the reservation policy. The Committee calls upon the Government to


ensure that women in this scheme of things do not get sidelined as usualiy happens.

Creamy Layer

46. There have been suggestions/counter-suggestions on the issue of exclusion of the “creamy layer’
amongst OBCs in the proposed legislation. On the one hand, it was argued that the concept of creamy
layer did not apply in the case of reservation in admission. It was pointed out that the debate on the exclusion
of the creamy layer was misplaced as the Supreme Court’s observation regarding the exclusion of the
creamy layer within the SCs and STs from the purview of reservation was only for public employment and
promotion. The other view in this regard was that the inclusion of the creamy layer in reservation would
defeat the very purpose of providing reservation to the backward classes. It was also stated that the exclusion
of the creamy layer would ensure that the intended benefits of the reservation reach to the really deserving
among the Backward Classes. It was further stated that this in itself would not suffice and should be
supplemented by categorization of the backward classes in various groups depending upon their degree of
backwardness and apportioning of appropriate percentage of reservation to each group. It was also brought
to the notice of the Committee that similar experiments in States of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil
Nadu, Maharashtra etc. have, in fact, stood the test of time and yielded the desired results.

46.1 The Committee deliberated extensively on pros and cons of the issue of creamy layer. The
Committce arrived at the conclusion that at the first instance reservation should be given to the
non-creamy layer of OBC candidates. After admitting such non-creamy layer candidates, if OBC
vacancies remain unfilled, these may be filled up from the creamy layer in order of merit.

47. It was argued before the Committee that the social and educational status of a large section of
minorities particularly Muslims was comparable to that of OBCs. It was also argued that a mechanism
may be provided in the Bill to ensure equitable share for the socially and educationally backward classes of
Minorities in higher education.

47.1 Some of the Members of the Committee argued that the Muslim 0805 may be given reservation in the
minority educational institutions also. However, the Committee is aware that Article 15(5) exempts minority
educational institutions from reservation.

47.2 The Committee was informed that a number of socially and educationally backwards amongst the
minorities were already included in the OBC list but in reality they have had very limited access to the
benefits. In view of this, the Committee is of the considered opinion that interests of the socially and
educationally backwards amongst the minorities may be taken care of through suitable mechanism
to ensure proper access.

48. The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
49. The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.

50. The Committce recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amendment/additions
suggested by it.

31. The Committee would like the Department to submit a note with reasons on the recommendations/
suggestions, which could not be incorporated in the Bill.

ककंककंके


NOTE OF DISSENT
Member of Parliament 5B, Parliament House
(Lok Sabha) New Delhi-110001
November 16, 2006

सत्यमेब जयते

The Chairman
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development

Parliament House, New Delhi.

Subject : Dissent note regarding using of words ‘Minority O.B.C."

Sir,

It is submitted in respect of above subject that at the end of discussion on final draft report of ‘Central
Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Bill, 2006”, We, the following members of BJP had
recorded oral protest against the amendment-’special attention towards Minority OBC in the 27 per cent
Reservation for OBC advocated by some members of the commitiee. We, the following members are submitting
a dissent note to be included in final draft report for record purpose.

“We, the members of BJP fully support the 27 per cent reservation for socially and educationally
backward classes based on caste but we oppose the religion based reservation which is neither conforming,
to the Constitution nor in the interest of Backward Classes”.

Therefore, we do fully oppose the above amendment. Our dissent note may kindly be included in this
draft report.

Thanking you,
Yours sincerely,
-sd/-
. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
. Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
. Shri Laxmi Narayan Sharma
. Shri Ashok Argal
. Shri Ramswaroop Koli
. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

9. ७ # WN ९-८


OBSERVATION S/RECOMMENDATIONS — ATA GLANCE

1. The Committee wishes to make it amply clear at the outset that it is unanimously in favour of
the policy of making reservation for backward communities in the educational institutions of higher

2. The Committee found that there exists no accepted mechanism/criteria to group the people into different
Categorics. As a result, existing list of backward castes/communities are termed, in some cases, as inaccurate.
Besides, any regular Process of review is also not in place. Such a review implies both ‘inclusion’ and
‘exclusion’. The Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for taking urgent measures/
steps for identifying and removing all such lacunae and Problems by putting in place scientific and
objective mechanism/benchmarks for this Purpose. The Committee recommends that a comprehensive
Survey of the total Population which can bring out the social, educational and economic profile of
cach caste/community/sections of socicty, may be undertaken, followed by periodic reviews,

(Paras 37 and 38)

Clause 2(e) of the Bill 2(e) of the Bill

Definitions

3. Clause 2(e) defines faculty as “faculty of a university or of any other educational institution”. The
Committee feels that the definition is quite wide and it may include each and every educational institution,
The Committee, therefore, recommends that sub-clause(e) of clause 2 may be substituted with the
following: (०) faculty means the faculty of a central educational institution as defined in sub-
clause(d) of clause 2.

Clause 2(f of the Bill 2(f) of the Bill

4. The Committee notes that the Central Government has also been given powers to declare an institution
as minority educational institution. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “or by the
Central Government” may be deleted from line 26 of page 2 [sub clause (f) of clause 2] of the Bill.

(Para 40)
Clause 2(j) of the Bill 26) of the Bill

5. The Committee finds that some other fields of study have not been mentioned in this sub-clause. For
example, there is no mention about Humanities & Social Sciences in this list. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that instead of mentioning branches of study by name, the words * all the branches of

(Para 41.1)
Clause 4 of the Clause 4 of the Bill

Act not to apply in certain cases not to apply in certain cases

6. The Committee is not aware of the basis on which the institutions contained in the
Schedule have been selected. The Committee also feels that the Power of amending the Schedule

10


ll

provided to the Central Government necds to be exercised only with the concurrence of Parliament.
The Committce, therefore, recommends that suitable mechanism be provided in the Bill so that no
notification made by the Central Government in this regard becomes effective without the approval
of Parliament.
6.1 Section 7 of the Bill pertains to laying of all the notifications made under this Act before both
the Houses of Parliament. The Committee found the language of this Section too technical and
complex to understand easily. The Committee, therefore, recommends that section 7 be re-drafted
in clear and categorical manner.

(Paras 42.1, 42.2 and 42.3)

Candidates admitted on the basis of open competition should not be adjusted against the reserved admitted on the basis of open competition should not be adjusted against the reserved
quota.

7. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to ensure that the candidates belonging to
backward classes who get admitted to educational institutions on the basis of merit should not be
adjusted against the reserved quota of 27%.

(Para 43)

Monitoring Mechanism

8. The Committce fecls that a suitable mechanism to monitor the implementation of reservations
envisioned in the Bill needs to be considered by the Government. While doing so, efforts may be
made to sce that functional autonomy of the institutions of higher learning was not impaired.

(Para 44)
Reservation for women
9. The Committee calls upon the Government to ensure that women in this scheme of things do
not get sidelined as usually happens.

(Para 45)

Creamy Laver
10. The Committee deliberated extensively on pros and cons of the issue of creamy layer. The
Committee arrived at the conclusion that at the first instance reservation should be given to the
non-creamy layer of OBC candidates. After admitting such non-creamy layer candidates, if OBC
vacancies remain unfilled, these may be filled up from the creamy layer in order of merit.

(Para 46.1)
Il. The Committee was informed that a number of socially and educationally backwards amongst
the minorities were already included in the OBC list but in reality they have had very limited access
to the benefits. In view of this, the Committee is of the considered opinion that interests of the
socially and educationally backwards amongst the minorities may be taken care of through suitable
mechanism to ensure proper access.

(Para 47.2)


ANNEXURE



3 of 1956

As IntropuceD IN Lox SABHA
25 AUG 2006
Bill No. 76 of 2006
THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
(RESERVATION IN ADMISSION) BILL, 2006
A
BILL

to provide for the reservation in admission of the students belonging
to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward
Classes of citizens, to certain central educational institutions
established, maintained or aided by the Central Government, and
Sor matters connected therewith or incidental thereto

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Central Educational Institutions
(Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “academic session” means the period in a calendar year, or a part
thereof, during which a Central Educational Institution is open for
teaching or instruction in any branch of study or faculty;

(b) “annual permitted strength” means the number of seats, in a
course or programme for teaching or instruction in each branch of
study or faculty authorised by an appropriate authority for admission
of students to a Central Educational Institution;

(c) “appropriate authority” means the University Grants Commission,
the Bar Council of India, the Medical Council of India, the All India
Council for Technical Education or any other authority or body
established by or under a Central Act for the determination,
coordination or maintenance of the standards of higher education in
any Central Educational Institution;

(d) “Central Educational Institution” means—

(i) a university established or incorporated by or under a
Central Act;

(0). an institution of national importance set up by an Act of
Parliament;

(iii) था institution, declared as a deemed University under
section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956,
and maintained by or receiving aid from the Central
Government;

(iv) _ an institution maintained by or receiying aid from the Central

15

ANNEXURE,

Short Title

Definitions


Reservation of
seats in central
educational
Institutions

16

Government, whether directly or indirectly, and affiliated
to an institution referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii), ora
Constituent unit ofan institution referred to in clause (iii);

(v)  aneducational institution set up by the Central Government
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860;

(e) “faculty” means the faculty of a university or of any other
educational institution;

() “Minority Educational Institution” means an institution established
and administered by the minorities under clause (1) of article 30 of
the Constitution and so declared by an Act of Parliament or by the
Central Government or declared as a minority educational institution
under the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions
Act, 2004;

(g) “Other Backward Classes” means the class or classes of citizens
who are socially and educationally backward, and are so determined
by the Central Government;

(h) “Scheduled Castes” means the Scheduled Castes notified under
article 341 of the Constitution;

(i) “Scheduled Tribes” means the Scheduled Tribes notified under
article 342 of the Constitution;

@) “teaching or instruction in any branch of study” means teaching
or instruction leading to three principal levels of qualifications at
bachelor (undergraduate), masters (postgraduate) and doctoral levels
in agriculture and allied sciences, architecture, dentistry, engineering,
law, management, medicine, nursing, pharmacy, technology,
veterinary science or such other branch of. study, as may be notified
by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.

3. The reservation of seats in admission and its extent in a Central
Educational Institution shall be provided in the following manner,
namely:—

() out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of
study or faculty, fifteen per cent, seats shall be reserved
for the Scheduled Castes;

Gi) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of
study or faculty, seven and one-half per cent, seats shall
be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes;

(iii) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of
study or faculty, twenty-seven per cent, seats shall be
reserved for the Other Backward Classes.

Actnot to apply 4. The provisions of section 3 of this Act shall not apply to—

in certain cases

(a) aCentral Educational Institution established in the tribal areas
referred to cases. in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution;

21 of 1860

21 of 2005


17

(b) _ the institutions of excellence, research institutions, institutions of
national and strategic importance specified in the Schedule to this Act: ,

Provided that the Central Government may, as and when considered
necessary, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule;

(c) aMinority Educational Institution as defined in this Act;

(व). acourse or programme at high levels of specialisation, including
at the post-doctoral level, within any branch of study or faculty,
which the Central Government may, in consultation with the
appropriate authority, specify.

5 (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (iii) of
section 3 and in any other law for the time being in force, every
Central Educational Institution shall, with the prior approval
of the appropriate authority, increase the number of seats in a
branch of study or faculty over and above its annual permitted
strength so that the number of seats, excluding those reserved
for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, is not less
than the number of such seats available for the academic session
immediately preceding the date of the coming into force of this
Act

(2) Where, on a representation by any Central Educational
Institution, the Central Government, in consultation with the
appropriate authority, is satisfied that for reasons of financial,
physical or academic limitations or in order to maintain the
standards of education, the annual permitted strength in any
branch of study or faculty of such institution cannot be increased
for the academic session following the commencement of this
Act, it may permit by notification in the Official Gazette, such
Institution to increase the annual permitted strength over a
maximum period of three years beginning with the academic
session following the commencement of this Act; and then, the
extent of reservation for the Other Backward Classes as
provided in clause (iii) of section 3 shall be limited for that
academic session in such manner that the number of seats
available to the Other Backward Classes for each academic
session are commensurate with the increase in the permitted
strength for each year.

6. The Central Educational Institutions shail take all necessary
steps, which are required in giving effect to the provisions of sections
3,4 and 5 of this Act, for the purposes of reservation of scats in
admissions to its academic sessions commencing on and from the
calendar year, 2007.

प. Every notification made under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it
is in session, fora total period of thirty days which may be comprised

Mandatory
increase of
seats.

Reservation of
seats in
admissions to
begin in clander
year 2007.

Laying of notifi
cations before
parliament



18

in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
notification in the notification or both Houses agree that the
notification should not be made, the notification shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that notification.


THE SCHEDULE
[Sce section 4(b)]

S. No.

Names of the Institutions of Excellence, etc.

1.

Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai and its constituent
units, namely:—

(@ Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay

(i) Indira Gandki Centre for Atomic Research,
Kalpakkam

(ii) Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology,
Indore

(iv) Institute for Plasma Research, Gandhinagar
(v) Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre, Kolkata
(vi) Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Kolkata
(vii) Institute of Physics, Bhubaneshwar

(viii) Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai
(ix) Harish-Chandra Research Institute, Allahabad
(x) Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai.

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai

North-Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health
and Medical Science, Shillong

National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Gurgaon

Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research,
Bangalore

Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad
Space Physics Laboratory, Thiruvananthapuram

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Part IV of the Constitution Containing the Directive Principles of State Policy, in article 46, lays down

that the State shall Promote with special care the educational and €conomic interests of the weaker sections
of the People, and, in Particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall Protect them.
from social injustice. Access to education is of utmost importance in insuring advancement of persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, and the socially and educationally backward classes
of citizens, who are also referred to as the Other Backward Classes (OBCs).
2 The Constitution (93rd Amendment) Act, 2005, inserted clause (5) in article 15 of the Constitution,
with a view to Promote the educational advancement of the socially and educationally backward classes of
citizens, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes through special Provisions relating to admission of
students belonging to these Categories in all educational institutions, including private educational institutions,
whether aided or un- aided by the State. In terms of this provision, Parliament as well as the State Legislatures
are empowered to make appropriate laws for the educational advancement of the weaker sections of the
People,

New Deum; ARJUN SINGH.
The 23rd. August, 2006.

20


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill makes provision for mandatory increase of seats in the Central Educational Institutions,
which will be attained over a maximum period of three years beginning with the academic session following
the commencement of provisions of the Bill. Though, it may not be possible to quantify the financial requirement
on this account at this stage, whatever be the expenditure, it would be met from the Consolidated Fund of
India through Budgetary provision under the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development.

The Bill does not involve any other expenditure.

21


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-clause (g) of clause 2 of the Bill defines the expression “Other Backward Classes” so as to mean
the class or classes of citizens who are socially and educationally backward and are so determined by the
Central Government. Sub-clause @) of clause 2 empowers the Central Government to notify other branches
of study.

2 Proviso to sub-clause (b) of clause 4 empowers the Central Government to amend, as and when
considered necessary, the Schedule to the Bill, containing the names of the institutions of excellence, research
institutions of national and strategic importance. Sub- clause (d) of clause 4 empowers the Central Government
10 specify the courses or programmes at high levels of specialisation, including at the post-doctoral level, to
which the provisions of the Bill shall not apply.

2. Clause 5 empowers the Central Educational Institutions to increase the number of seats in a branch of
study or faculty with the prior approval of the appropriate authority; and provides that the Central Government
may, in consultation with the appropriate authority, permit, by notification, the Central Educational Institutions
to increase the annual permitted strength over a maximum period of three years in certain exigency.

4 Clause 7 provides that every notification made under this Bill shall be laid before both the Houses of
Parliament.
5. All the matters in respect of which notifications may be made are matters of procedure and administrative

detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.

22


LOK SABHA

A
Bill

lo provide for the reservation in admission of the students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other backward Classes of citizens, to certain central educational institutions
established, maintained or aided by the Central Government, and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

(Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of Human Resource Development)

23


MINUTES



Vit
SEVENTH MEETING

The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the Ist November
2006 in Room No 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Janardan Dwivedi = — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah

Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik

ee fe

Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
Smt. Brinda Karat

Shri Uday: Pratap Singh
LOK SABHA

8. Shri Ashok Argal

9%. Shri Basudeb Barman

10. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
Ll. Shri Harisinh Chavda

12. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
13. Shri R. L. Jalappa

14... Shri Ramswaroop Koli

15. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
16. Smt, Archana Nayak

17. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
18 Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
19. Shri Chengara Surendran
20. Dr. Thokchom Meinya

21. Shri K. Virupakshappa

22. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
23. Shri Francis K. George
24. Shri Anantkumar Hegde
25. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
SECRETARIAT

Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary

Shri N.K. Singh, Director

ome

27


28

Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
National Commission for Backward Classes
I; Mr. Justice $. Ratnavel Pandian, Chairperson.
2, Shri S. K. Purkayastha, Member Secretary.
National Commission for Minorities
E; Mohammad Hamid Ansari, Chairperson.
2. Professor Zoya Hassan, Member.

2 At the outset, the Chairman outlined the issues that had been raised during the earlier deliberations of
the Committee. The Committee then heard the Chairman of the National Commission for Backward Classes

‘the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Bill, 2006". The Chairman and Members
of the Committee sought clarifications on various aspects of the Bill, to which the Chairman, National
Commission for Backward Classes, replied. The witnesses then withdrew.

3 The Committee, thereafter, heard the Chairman of the National Commission for Minorities. The Chairman
of the Commission made the presentation on the issues involved in ‘the Central Educational Institutions
(Reservation in Admission) Bill, 2006'. Members of the Committee put queries to which the representatives
replied.

4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 p.M. to meet again on 2nd November, 2006.



शा
EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 2nd November
2006 in Committee Room’A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe » New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

Shri Janardan Dwivedi = — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah

Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani

eR

Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
Smt. Brinda Karat

Shri S. Anbalagan

Shri Uday Pratap Singh
LOK SABHA

Shri Ashok Argal

9. Shri Basudeb Barman

10. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
11... Shri Harisinh Chavda

naw

oo

12. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan

13. Shri R. L. Jalappa

14. Shri 0.9५ Harsha Kumar

15. Smt. Archana Nayak

16. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat

17. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh

18. Shri K. Virupakshappa

19. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma

20. Shri Francis K. George

21 Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Committee Officer

29



30

WITNESSES
Shri M. Veerappa Moily, Chairman,
Oversight Committee on Implementation of the new Reservation Policy in Higher Educational Institutions

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee then heard
Shri M. Veerappa Moily, Chairman, Oversight Committee on Implementation of the new Reservation Policy
in Higher Educational Institutions on various aspects of ‘the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in
Adumission) Bill, 2006’. The Chairman and Members of the Committee sought clarifications to which Shri
Moily replied.

The witness then withdrew.

5 कक
4 ee

5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m. to meet again on the 9th November, 2006.

*** - relates to other matter.



x
NINTH MEETING

The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 9th November
2006 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
Ts Shri Janardan Dwivedi = Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

to

Shri Dwijeadra Nath Sharmah

Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik

ue

Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
Shri S. Anbalagan

Shri Uday Pratap Singh
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary

हू हुक की की दि

Shri Ali Anwar

LOK SABHA

9... Shri Ashok Argal

10. Shri Basudeb Barman

li. Shri Harisinh Chavda

12. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan

13. | Shri Ramswaroop Koli

14. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar

15. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat

16. | Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh

17 Dr. Thokchom Meinya

18. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma

19. Shri Francis K. George

20. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
SECRETARIAT

Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director

Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Committee Officer

31


32
WITNESSES
Department of Higher Education
I. Shri R.PAgrawal - Secretary
2: Shri Ravi Mathur - Joint Secretary
3. Shri Sunil Kumar - Joint Secretary

2. At the outset, the Committee deliberated and identified the issues on which clarifications from the
Tepresentatives of the Department may be sought.

3. The Committee then heard the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Higher Education
on ‘The Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Bill, 2006' on the issues and clauses
so identified.

4. A verbatim record of the Proceedings was kept.

3, The Committee directed to have the draft report prepared on the Bill to be considered and adopted in
its next meeting.

6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.05 p.m. to meet again on 16th November, 2006.



x
TENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 16th November,
2006 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Janardan Dwivedi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani

Smt. Brinda Karat
Shri 5. Anbalagan
a Shri Uday Pratap Singh

9 Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary

10. Shri Ali Anwar
LOKSABHA

ll. Shri Ashok Argal

12. Shri Basudeb Barman

13. Shri Harisinh Chavda

14. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan

2
3
4
5. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6
कर
8

15. Shri Ramswaroop Koli

16. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat

17. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh

18. Shri Chengara Surendran

19. Dr. Thokchom Meinya

20. Shri K. Virupakshappa

21. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma

22. Shri Francis K. George

23. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
SECRETARIAT

Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director

Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Committee Officer

33



34

2 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee, thereafter,
took up for consideration the draft Report on ‘the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission)
Bill, 2006'. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the report with some modifications.

3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to decide suitable date to present/lay the 178th to 186th
Reports adopted so far by the Committee in the winter session of Parliament and also nominate members
from both the Houses to present/lay the report.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 P.M.