PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 233
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON HUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED-THIRTY THIRD REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SECOND REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-2011 (DEMAND NO. 58)
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8 MARCH, 2011)TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8 MARCH, 2011)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8 MARCH, 2011)TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8 MARCH, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED-THIRTY THIRD REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SECOND REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-2011 (DEMAND NO. 58)
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8 TH MARCH, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8 TH  MARCH, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—51
CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government .................................................... ............................ 2
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply ....................... 3—31
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 32—50
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government are still awaited ............................................................... 51
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 52—55
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 57—60

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2010-11)
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Kirti Azad
12.  Shri P.K. Biju
13.  Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14.  Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
15.  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
16.  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
17.  Shri Rahul Gandhi
18.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
19.  Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhao
20.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi
21.  Shri P. Kumar
22.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
23.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
24.  Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
25.  Shri Tapas Paul
26.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
27.  Shri Ashok Tanwar
28.  Shri Joseph Toppo
29.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
30.  Shri P. Viswanathan
31.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred-Thirty Third Report on Action Taken by Government
on the Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Second Report on Demands for
Grants (Demand No. 58) of the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development for the year 2010-11.
2. The Two Hundred-Twenty Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on
the Table of Lok Sabha on 29
th April, 2010. Replies of the Government to the recommendations/
observations contained in the Report, were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on
the 17
th January, 2011.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
the 17 th January, 2011.
OSCAR FERNANDES
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
January 17, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Pausa 13, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Two Hundred Twenty Second Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 58) of the Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Human Resource Development) for the year 2010-11.
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations
contained in the 222
nd Report, have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government-paras
3.6
(Chapter-I) Total – 1
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s reply-paras
2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 3.2, 3.3,  4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.6,
6.9, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7, 8.8, 9, 10.1, 10.2, 11.1, 11.2,
12.1, 12.2, 12.4, 12.5, 12.6, 12.7, 12.9, 12.10, 14.1, 14.2, 15.1, 15.2, 16.1, 16.2,
16.3, 16.4, 17.1, 17.2, 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4, 18.5, 18.6, 19.1, 19.2, 19.3, and 19.4.
(Chapter-II) Total – 63
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee-paras
2.4, 3.1, 3.4, 3.5, 3.8,  4.6, 6.5, 6.8, 8.9, 8.10, 11.3, 12.3, 12.8. 12.11, 12.12,
12.13, 13.1, 13.2 and 15.3.
(Chapter-III) T otal – 19
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are
still awaited.
(Chapter IV) Total – Nil

2
2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
III. UTILISATION OF FUNDS
Recommendations/Observations
3.6 The Committee is not convinced by the Department’s clarification that unspent balances in
itself do not adversely affect the working of institutions as all such institutions have also
corresponding liabilities/commitments which are taken into account while deciding further releases.
The Committee would like to point out that the very fact that small institutions have unspent
balances and corresponding liabilities also, indicates that not only financial norms are not being
adhered to but they are also not functioning as per their mandate. The Committee would, therefore,
appreciate if corrective measures are initiated by the Department at the earliest. Committee’s
apprehensions are confirmed by pendency of audit paras against ICSSR, New Delhi, Central Hindi
Directorate and CIIL, Mysore.
Action Taken
The number of UCs pending as on 31.03.2010 has been reduced from 2115 to 1952.
Further, the amount of unutilized fund available with autonomous bodies/other implementing
agencies has been reduced from Rs.834.41 crore to Rs.688.16 crore as on 31.03.2010.
The Committee’s observations regarding unspent balances have been noted by the
department for compliance in future. The department has been taking appropriate measures so that
financial releases are made as per the laid down norms and financial prudence is strictly observed.

3
3
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.1 The budgetary allocations of the Department of Higher Education during the last three
years, i.e., 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 has been as under:–
(Rs in crores )
Year Plan Non-Plan Total
2007-08 6483.00 2729.00 9212.00
2008-09 7600.00 3259.00 10855.00
2009-10 9600.00 5833.00 15433.00
In 2010-11, the Department has received a total outlay of Rs.16,994 crores including
Rs. 11,000 crore plan and Rs. 5,994 crore non-plan allocation. The Committee notes that while
there was 17.32 per cent increase in plan outlay in 2008-09 in comparison to 2007-08, the plan
allocation increased by 26.32 per cent in 2009-10 in comparison to previous year. A hike of 14.58
per cent in allocation for 2010-11 is comparatively low.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
2.2 The Sector-wise allocations during 2009-10 and 2010-11 are as under:–
(Rs. in crores )
Sector BE RE BE
(2009-10) (2009-10) 2010-11
1. University and Higher Education 4419.00 3630.00 4976.90
2. Technical Education 3902.00 3687.00 4706.00
3. Distance Learning, Scholarships and ICT 1 100.00 460.00 1120.00
4. Languages Development 145.00 142.00 157.00
5. Others (including Book Promotion, copyright 34.00 33.00 40.10
and planning, etc.).
T
OTAL 9600.00 7952.00 11000.00

4
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
2.3 It was brought to the notice of the Committee that the Department of Higher Education
had submitted a proposal to the Planning Commission for a plan allocation of Rs.20,947 crores for
the financial year 2010-11 but finally an allocation of Rs.11,000 crores has been approved. The
Department of Higher Education had, therefore, to re-work all the schemes. No Plan-Scheme of
the Department has, however, been dropped.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
III. UTILISATION OF FUNDS
Recommendations/Observations
3.2 The Department has clarified that out of the provision of Rs. 4375.94 crore for UGC in
2009-10, a sum of Rs. 827 crore was meant for establishment of new Central Universities and
Rs. 1033 crore was earmarked for implementation of Oversight Committee recommendations in
Central Educational Institutions. However, due to issues of site selection and the transfer of land
for Central Universities by State Governments, construction activities could not be initiated, leading
to allocation remaining unspent. Similarly, due to delay in recruitment of faculty, shortfall of
Rs. 213 crore was envisaged under Oversight Committee at RE stage. Delayed approval of the
Scheme of National Knowledge Network under the National Mission on Education was the other
main factor leading to reduction in allocation.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
3.3 The Committee can presume that but for failure in achievement of physical projects, the
plan allocations were accordingly reduced at RE stage after the pre-budget review. There has
been shortfall in non-plan expenditure due to delay in finalisation of the pay scales, corresponding
to the Sixth Pay Commission recommendations, for faculty of the centrally funded Technical
Institutions and the consequent delay in pay fixation and payment of arrears of salary. A sum of
Rs.250 crore provided for the scheme of “Improvement in Salary Scales of University & College
Teachers” remained unutilized in the absence of required proposals/ details from the States. The
Committee was informed that pace of expenditure was being reviewed in the Bureau Heads
meeting twice a month and necessary steps were being taken to overcome the identified
problems.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.

5
Recommendations/Observations
3.6 Availability of unspent balances and outstanding utilisation certificates are the two basic
indicators of achievement level of both physical and financial targets of any scheme. The
Committee has been monitoring the status of these two components. The Committee is happy to
note that considerable progress has been made in both bringing down the number of pending UCs
and the quantum of unspent balances. From 2914 UCs amounting to Rs. 7493.61 crore as on 1st
April, 2009, 2115 UCs amounting to Rs. 834.41 crore are outstanding as on 31 st December , 2009.
Similarly Unspent Balances amounting to Rs. 353.91 crore as on 1st April, 2009 have been brought
down to Rs. 35.44 crore by 30th September, 2009. The Committee would, however, like to point
out that number of UCs (2115 as on 31 st December, 2009) is still considerably high. The
Committee also notes that unspent balances are available with autonomous bodies/other
implementing agencies. As per the latest details furnished by the Department, unspent balances,
both under plan and non-plan are available with 12 institutions, out of which maximum availability
is with the following 5 institutions:
(Rs. in crores )
Institutions Plan Non-Plan
ISM University, Dhanbad 1.24 –
NERIST, Itanagar 3.15 1.37
ICSSR, New Delhi 2.19 –
Central Hindi Directorate 2.98 5.13
CIIL, Mysore 20.53 3.81
The Committee is not convinced by the Department’s clarification that unspent
balances in itself do not adversely affect the working of institutions as all such institutions
have also corresponding liabilities/commitments which are taken into account while deciding
further releases. The Committee would like to point out that the very fact that small
institutions have unspent balances and corresponding liabilities also, indicates that not only
financial norms are not being adhered to but they are also not functioning as per their
mandate. The Committee would, therefore, appreciate if corrective measures are initiated
by the Department at the earliest. Committee’s apprehensions are confirmed by pendency
of audit paras against ICSSR, New Delhi, Central Hindi Directorate and CIIL, Mysore.
Action Taken
During 2009-10 Planning Commission had earmarked Rs.9600 crore under plan expenditure.
It is a fact that the pace of expenditure upto December 2009 was not upto the targeted level, on
account of various reasons, some of which were not within the control of Department of Higher
Education. Keeping in view the pace of expenditure and requirement of funds, the plan outlay at
Revised Estimates stage was scaled down to Rs.7952 crore as against Rs.9600 crore in BE
2009-10. The pace of the expenditure was geared up in the last quarter of financial year 2009-10
and the Department spent Rs.7839.98 crore under Plan during 2009-10 which is about 98.59% of
the Revised Estimates. As far as non-plan is concerned, the Department of Higher Education had
earmarked Rs.5833 crore as non-plan expenditure in BE 2009-10 which was subsequently enhanced
to Rs.6437 crore in the RE stage. The actual non plan expenditure during 2009-10 was Rs.6179.36
crore which is nearly 96% of the RE figure. The allocation provided for the new schemes could

6
not be fully utilized due to delay in approval of some of the schemes during 2009-10. The
department has been making concerted efforts to improve the funds utilization position.
IV. TARGETS FOR ELEVENTH PLAN
Recommendations/Observations
4.1 The Committee has noted that during the first three years of Eleventh Plan, Higher
Education System of the country has seen a major expansion. Various new initiatives have been
taken by opening new institutions and upgrading the existing ones. Many reform measures have
also been taken to improve the quality of higher education. ‘Inclusiveness’ is also one of the major
concerns during the Eleventh Plan. Many new schemes such as Women’s Hostel; Model Colleges
in Educationally Backward Districts, Education Loan Interest Subsidy, etc. have been initiated to
ensure inclusiveness apart from making special provisions for reservation of seats for the
disadvantaged sections.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
4.2 Furthermore, the Government has initiated a process of academic reforms which includes
the introduction of the semester system, regular upgradation and updating of syllabi, introduction
of the choice-based credit system, which allows students to pick and choose courses to earn
credit, etc. Apart from encouraging the State Governments to make investments for new
institutions of higher learning, the Department is also expecting them to improve the infrastructure
of the existing institutions as part of educational reforms.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
4.3 Besides, a number of new laws for bringing major reforms like establishment of an
overarching authority for Higher Education and Research, mandatory accreditation mechanism for
higher educational institutions, prevention and prohibition of unfair practices and for setting up
Educational Tribunals are proposed to be introduced in the near future.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
4.4 One of the important targets for Eleventh Plan is to achieve 15 per cent of Gross
Enrolment Ratio. While it was expected that State Government would also allocate more funds for
education, the Central Government has taken the following measures to achieve the goal of 15 per-
cent GER:–
(i) Setting up 16 new Central Universities.
(ii) Setting up of 7 IIMs.

7
(iii) Setting up of 8 IITs.
(iv) 10 new NITs.
(v) Setting up of 374 Model colleges in Educationally Backward Districts.
(vi) Setting up of Hostels for women.
(vii) 1000 new polytechnics.
(viii) National Mission of Education through ICT.
(ix) Capacity expansion in Central Educational Institutions.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
4.5 To ensure the growth of GER, number of initiatives for the participation of private sector
in the higher education sector particularly relating to governance issues are being taken so that
while on the one hand, private participation is encouraged on the other hand, quality is also
maintained by making accreditation and assessment mandatory for all institutions instead of the
present system of voluntary accreditation. Scheme of scholarships and interest subsidy on
educational loans, have also been launched so that talented students are not denied opportunity to
pursue higher education because of financial constraints.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
V. UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
Recommendations/Observations
5.1 The UGC was set up under an Act of Parliament in 1956 for the purpose of co-ordination,
determination and maintenance of standards in universities. Apart from providing assistance grants
to all eligible Universities and colleges, the Commission also advises the Central and State
Governments to take measures which are necessary for the development of Higher Education.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
5.2 Plan Allocation for UGC and utilisation thereof during the first three years of the Eleventh
Plan is as follows:–
(Rs. in crores )
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals
2374.00 1805.10 1805.10 3439.95 3105.95 3165.95 4374.95 3584.85 2773.50

8
Although there has been steady increase in the plan allocation for UGC during the first three
years of the Eleventh Plan, the same cannot be said about the utilisation. Every year, plan allocation
had to be brought down at the RE stage. What is more worrisome is that percentage of increase
in 2009-10 when compared with 2008-09 has been matched with the reduction at the RE stage.
Action Taken
Although it is a fact that the utilization of funds by UGC was short compared to the Bugdet
allocation, but the Commission had made realistic project through seeking the lower funds
requirement at RE stage, which the department was able to fully utilize during 2007-08 & 2008-09
and was close to utilize in 2009-10. Making realistic projections at RE stage provides space to re-
appropriate the amount in other scheme.
Recommendations/Observations
5.3 Explaining the reasons for skewed variations in BE and RE outlay, the Department has
clarified that in the BE for 2009-10, a sum of Rs. 827 crore was earmarked for the establishment
of new Central Universities and Rs. 1033 crore were set aside for implementation of the Oversight
Committee recommendations. However, due to delay in the issue of site selection and the transfer
of possession of land identified by the State Governments for the Central Universities, the initiation
of construction activities has to be staggered as a result of which the said sum could not
be utilised. At the RE stage, while carrying out an assessment of the expected expenditures in
2009-10, the allocation of this component was revised to Rs. 277 crore which was further reduced
to Rs. 200 crore after re-appropriation. Secondly, under Oversight Committee recommendations,
recruitment of faculty did not progress sufficiently as a result of which a shortfall of Rs. 213
crores was envisaged at RE stage. The actual expenditure up to 31
st December, 2009 against the
RE allocation of RE 3589 crore was Rs. 2773.50 crore and as on 28th February, 2010, expenditure
figures stood at Rs. 3233.45 crore. The Committee appreciates the initial bottlenecks coming
across in developing the infrastructure for new Central Universities but delay can certainly
be checked through better coordination with the state authorities. The Committee also
expects the desired level of cooperation from the states as it is on their initiatives the
decision to open the Central Universities was taken by the Central Government. The
Committee is, however, not satisfied with slow pace of faculty recruitment in accordance
with the implementation of Oversight Committees’ recommendations. The Committee
recommends that urgent corrective measures needed to be taken up for addressing the
requirement of additional faculty lest the very purpose of legal framework for reservation
for OBC category might be seriously jeopardized.
Action Taken
UGC has informed that the Empowered Committee has already allocated/sanctioned teaching
posts based on the DPRs submitted by Universities. In accordance with the implementation of
Oversight Committees’ recommendations, the status of appointment of teachers under OBC grant
is given.
According to UGC, the major delay in the filling up of vacancies, as reported by the
Universities is the non-finalization of the UGC Notification for appointment of teachers.  Some
other administrative problems viz. non-availability of reserved candidates, litigation related to
appointments etc. are also among the reasons.
The draft UGC Notification, after examining representations against certain provisions of the
notification from FEDCUTA (Federation of Central University Teachers’ Association), has since
been notified by UGC.

9
All the new Central Universities are in the process of framing their Statutes on establishment
of Schools of Studies and Teaching Departments. Once these Statutes are framed, School-wise
Selection Committees will be constituted for selection of regular faculty in accordance with the
relevant Statutes. Meanwhile, the various Universities have appointed temporary/guest faculty on
short-term contract basis to meet their immediate requirements.
Recommendations/Observations
5.4 The Committee is not aware about the exact proposed outlay for UGC in Eleventh Plan,
but from the trend of allocation and pace of utilisation, it can be concluded that it would be
difficult to match the plan outlay, with only two years of the plan period remaining. The Committee
notes that there is only marginal increase in the plan allocation for UGC from Rs. 4374.95 crore
in 2009-10 to Rs. 4390.00 crore in 2010-11. Enhanced funds in 2010-11 when compared with RE
provision in 2009-10 are meant for establishing 374 model degree colleges, one-time support for
colleges and state universities and for new Central Universities. The Committee would appreciate
if with constant monitoring during 2010-11 reduction at the RE stage is avoided and allocated funds
are utilised as envisaged.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
6.2 Research is an important component to ensure quality of higher education in the country.
The Committee has noted that in order to promote basic scientific research in the Central
Universities, greater emphasis is being laid on upgradation of infrastructural facilities, creation of
networking centres in leading departments of Universities for collaborative research with national
level institutions, including CSIR laboratories. The University Grants Commission has been advised
that while releasing grants-in-aid to the institutes of higher learning, 20% of the grant may be
earmarked exclusively for research related activities. The Central universities have also been given
freedom to enter into Memorandum of Understanding with foreign universities for joint research
collaborations.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
6.3 The following additional measures have been taken to promote research in universities:
(i) Enhancing rates of Junior and Senior Research Fellowships by about 50%;
(ii) Strengthening science based education and research in Universities;
(iii) Disbursement of grant for presentation of research papers in international fora/
conferences;
(iv) Enhancing the quantum of research grant to Universities aimed at encouraging
research;
(v) Permitting the Universities to engage adjunct/guest faculty to meet the shortfall;
(vi) Allowing contractual appointments for Faculty;

10
(vii) Introducing Bose Fellowship aimed at strengthening research background of the
distinguished faculty serving in India;
(viii) Allowing consultancy charges to be shared by the faculty;
(ix) Revamping Academic Staff Colleges; and
(x) Organizing summer schools to train teachers; etc.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
6.4 It was informed to the Committee that to achieve excellence in teaching and research
activities, UGC identifies universities for granting the status of “Universities with Potential for
Excellence”. In the first phase during the Ninth Plan, five universities viz. Jawaharlal Nehru
University, University of Hyderabad, University of Madras, Jadavpur University and University of
Pune were identified in 2000 for granting the status of Universities with Potential for Excellence.
During the Tenth Plan, four universities, viz., Madurai Kamraj University, North Eastern Hill
University, University of Mumbai and University of Calcutta were selected. Under the scheme, each
university is to be provided Rs.30 crore during a Plan period. Out of this, 30% (Rs.9 crore) is
to be spent on the focused area identified for the university. The remaining 70% (Rs.21 crore) is
to be spent on holistic development of the university.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
6.6 Closely related with quality is the aspect of accreditation of the institution. The National
Assessment and Accreditation Council has the mandate to assess the standards of higher education
institutions. The Committee has been given to understand that important institution, like Kumaon
University, University of Roorkee and IIT are running though their validation expired long back.
The Secretary during her oral evidence before the Committee clarified that since accreditation is
not mandatory, it is not incumbent on the university to apply for revalidation. Once the mandatory
nature of validation is in force, then the universities will be duty bound to come back for
revalidation. She informed the Committee that 80 universities have valid accreditation so far. Fifty
eight universities have not applied for revalidation of their accreditation. Fourteen universities are
under the process of revalidation. Of the 80 universities which have valid accreditation, 35 are in
the first cycle of validation and they are yet to be ripe of validation. The remaining are in the
second cycle.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
6.9 The Committee also takes this opportunity to urge upon the Government to include
the aspects of character building and physical fitness as important components in the
educational reforms so as to ensure holistic growth of our students. In this connection the

11
Committee desires to draw the attention of the Department to its recommendations/
observations contained in its 86th Report on value based education.
Action Taken
According to University Grants Commission (UGC), it has introduced Human Rights
Education, scheme during 1985 and it is a continuing scheme. The scheme has the following main
components:–
(a) Human Rights and Duties;
(b) Human Rights and Values;
(c) Human Rights and Human Development.
The UGC provides financial assistance to the Universities/Colleges for introduction of the
following courses:
(i) A Foundation Course;
(ii) A Certificate Course;
(iii) An Undergraduate Course, i.e., B.A. or B.A. (Hons.);
(iv) A Post-Graduate Diploma Course;
(v) A Post-Graduate Degree (MA/LLM) Course;
(vi) Integrated Master Programme;
(vii) Seminars/Symposia/Workshops;
(viii) Moot Court/Mock Trial;
(ix) Promoting Nodal Centers of Excellence;
(x) Encouraging Publication of Books and Journals.
The following activities are also supported by the UGC under the scheme:
(1) Research;
(2) Teaching;
(3) Organization of Seminars/Workshops/Conferences etc.
During, 2007-08, the UGC released Rs.30.00 lakhs to 30 Universities/Colleges. During 2008-09,
as many as 173 Proposals out of 242 Proposals were approved and an amout of 5.13 crores was
released to these institutions. During 2009-10, out of 436 Proposals, as many as 317 Proposals
were approved and an amount of Rs.6.31 crores was released to these institutions. The proposals
are being invited from Universities and Colleges for the year 2010-11.
VII. NEW CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES
Recommendations/Observations
7.1 The Committee understands that the Department of Higher Education has made efforts to
have at least one Central University in each State of the Union. At present, there are 40 Central
Universities including 17 new Central Universities created with effect from 15th January, 2009. Out
of the 17 new Central Universities, three State Universities have been converted into Central

12
Universities in Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Uttarakhand. For each of the 14 Central
Universities, the concerned State Government is to provide about 500 acres of land free of cost.
Sites for 5 new Central Universities have been identified, land has been allotted to 5 such
Universities out of the remaining 4 universities. Most of these Universities have started their
academic activities from temporary premises during the year 2009-10 pending finalization of sites,
allotment of lands and development of their permanent campuses. Government decision on
recommendation of the Site Selection Committee for location of University in Himachal Pradesh
was expected by 15th April, 2010. Site Selection Committee was to shortly visit the sites for
University in Jharkhand. However, State Governments of Bihar and Kerala have been requested to
suggest alternate sites. The Committee also notes that while land has been acquired for Central
Universities in Karnataka, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu, identified land in Gujarat,
Haryana and Jammu and Kashmir is yet to be acquired and handed over. All the Universities except
those in Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir are functioning from temporary campuses.
Universities in Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir were yet to start academic programmes.
The Committee was also given to understand that requisite faculty positions for all the Central
Universities have been sanctioned by UGC which were expected to be filled up before the academic
session 2010-11. The Committee observes that all the New Central Universities created in January,
2009 are in the process of identification / allotment of land and thus are operating from temporary
campuses.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
7.2 Most of these Universities are in the process of framing their Statutes/Ordinances on
establishment of Schools of Studies and teaching Departments and on appointment of faculty. The
action for appointment of the required faculty will be initiated by the respective Universities after
the requisite Statutes/Ordinances are in place. Meanwhile, these Universities are running their
academic programmes by appointment of contract/guest teachers.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
7.3 As things stand today, the Committee can only conclude that it would be a long drawn
affair for the Central Universities to become fully operational, functioning from their permanent
campuses with the required faculty and infrastructure in place. It has taken more than a year
to identify and get allotted the sites for these universities and the process is still not complete
in respect of some universities. As a result, funds amounting to Rs. 827 crore earmarked for
their establishment in 2009-10 remained unspent. The Committee strongly feels that process
of construction should commence in respect of all the Central Universities in 2010-11 and
got completed in a time bound manner. The Committee is unhappy that despite the
preparatory exercise done by the Department and the UGC with regard to arrangements
of faculty in newly created universities, the vacancies could not be filled up due to delay
in finalization of statutes by respective universities. Given the seriousness of the issue,
the Department should have fixed a time frame for finalizing these statutes. The
Committee desires that the framing of statutes may be done without further delay so that
the process of recruitment for the vacant posts of faculty could be started at the earliest.

13
It would be better if a Central Committee with representation from concerned State
Government is assigned the task of monitoring both the required faculty and
infrastructure of these Universities. This action is required to be taken if cost and time
overruns are to be avoided.
Action Taken
It is submitted that, since the site selection for all the new Central Universities, except for
Bihar and Kerala has been finalized, process of construction is expected to commence in 2010-11
and is expected to be completed in a time bound manner without the cost and time overruns. Site
selection and commencement of construction in 3 Central Universities as mentioned above would
also be ensured.
The first statutes appended to the Central Universities Act are in force;  however, as regards
finalizing the statutes by new Central Universities, since they have complete academic and
administrative autonomy, the Department can only impress upon the universities to expedite the
process. The Department would continue to encourage the new Central Universities to ensure
finalisation of statutes so that the process of recruitment for the vacant posts of faculty can be
started at the earliest. As regards the formation of central committee with representation from
concerned State Government to monitor recruitment of faculty and development of infrastructure,
it is submitted that State Governments have no role in the recruitment of faculty as well as
infrastructure development of new Central Universities other than to facilitate allotment and
possession of land for the Campus at site. UGC has been asked to frame an appropriate mechanism
to ensure recruitment of faculty and infrastructure development in a time bound manner.
VIII. V ACANCIES IN FACUL TIES OF CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES
Recommendations/Observations
8.1 The Committee notes that about 3761 posts as against 9825 sanctioned posts are lying
vacant in 15 Central Universities as on 1st January, 2010. Delhi University alone accounts for –
965 vacancies against 1702 sanctioned posts followed by Banaras Hindu University (BHU) having
905 vacant posts against 2395 sanctioned posts.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
8.2 On a specific query in this regard it was clarified by the Department that so far as BHU
is concerned, though the number of reported vacancy is 905, filling up of 277 vacancies in the
Institute of Technology have been kept in abeyance due to the proposal for upgradation of the
Institute as an IIT being at an advanced stage of consideration of the Government. Besides, 492
posts, recently sanctioned for implementation of OBC recommendations are to be filled up in a
phased manner. The number of effective vacancies in the University at present is, therefore, much
lower than that of the reported vacancies. The University has completed scrutiny and short-listing
of applications for 296 vacancies at the level of Lecturer and interviews in different Faculties are
being scheduled one by one. The University has also recently advertised 55 vacancies at the level
of Reader and 23 at the level of Professor in the Institute of Medical Sciences and is also in the
process of advertising the vacancies at these levels in the remaining faculties. These vacancies are
planned to be filled up in the next six months.

14
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
8.3  As regards the University of Delhi, out of the 965 vacancies, 646 posts have been
sanctioned only recently for implementation of OBC recommendations. The posts are to be filled
up in a phased manner, over a period of three years. 202 of these posts would become available
for filling up only w.e.f. 2010-11. The number of vacancies to be actually filled up during the
current year is, therefore, 763. The University has already advertised 729 posts. It was informed
that the interviews for several Departments under the Faculties of Arts, Social Sciences, Commerce
& Business and Mathematical Sciences have been scheduled to be conducted in the coming three
months.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
8.4 The Department while mentioning the reasons for vacancies clarified that the process for
selection of faculty in Central Universities is quite lengthy and time consuming. These applicants
are listed post-wise and category-wise for the Screening Committee constituted by the Executive
Council to shortlist the candidates to be called for the interview. Sometimes it becomes difficult
for the Visitor’s nominees, particularly in multi-department Faculties, to give dates frequently for
holding Selection Committee meetings which also causes delay in filling up of the vacancies. As
a possible solution, the feasibility of having more than one nominee for each faculty was proposed
but the same has not been found acceptable by the Visitor.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
8.5 According to the Department, besides other administrative problems like non-availability of
reserved candidates, litigation related to appointments etc., the major delay in the filling up of
vacancies is the non-finalization of the UGC Notification for appointment of teachers. UGC has on
18 February, 2010 issued instructions to all State/Central/ Deemed Universities informing them that
the regulations on service conditions of teachers based on Pay Review Committee for Teachers are
likely to be finalized shortly.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
8.6  The Secretary of the Department during her presentation before the Committee conceded
that the quality of faculty remains a very severe and significant challenge. She added that with the
kind of expansion of higher education and increase in the number of institutions, the Department
is faced with a problem of very serious dimension. Still they are making very conscious and
concerted efforts to address the issue. She assured the Committee that they would not make any
compromise in the quality and in the qualification framework prescribed for faculty. For that

15
matter, a large number of teachers are being put through the winter schools and summer schools
for training exposures. She also accepted that there are problems in finding the right kind of
faculty. The Committee was informed that regular faculty in new Central Universities would be
appointed only after the requisite statutes and establishment of Schools/Departments are framed and
the school wise Selection Committees are constituted in accordance with the relevant statutes. A
total under of 70 teachers have so far been appointed on ad-hoc/contract/deputation basis. Besides,
teachers/retired teachers of other universities are invited by these universities from time to time as
guest/visiting faculty.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
8.7  It has come to the notice of the Committee that earlier the Federation of Central
Universities Teachers Association (FEDCUTA) had demanded that for promotion of Assistant
Professors to Associate Professors in colleges, the requirement of publication of three articles
should be done away with. The Association had further demanded that the process of selection and
promotion should be different for direct recruitment of Assistant Professors, Associate Professors
and Professors from that of promotion from Associate Professor and Professor, and that weightage
should be given for “teaching” activities in the matter of promotions, higher AGP of Rs.12000/-
to all Professors, and increased retirement age of 65 for Librarians.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
8.8 Moreover the Federation of Central Universities Teachers Association (FEDCUTA) does not
favour introduction of Academic Performance Indicator (API) system, particularly in relation to
research and academic contributions on the ground that sufficient research facilities are not
available in colleges. Representatives of FEDCUTA had raised strong objections to the proposed
UGC regulations on 30.1.2010 particularly against the Academic Performance Indicator (API),
Weightage Points (WP) and Performance Based Appraisal System (PBAS) and point system for
promotion of teachers. The Committee was given to understand that a final decision was to be
taken after consultation with UGC and others based on the inputs received from FEDCUTA. The
Committee would appreciate if this issue is resolved at the earliest so that studies are allowed to
continue in a healthy atmosphere at Delhi University.
Action Taken
UGC has constituted an Anomaly Committee to examine the proposed UGC regulations.
The Committee has already invited suggestions from all concerned for evaluating expediency of
modifications in the proposed regulations.
IX. STRENGHTNING OF 6000 COLLEGES IN 150 STATE UNIVERSITIES
Recommendations/Observations
The Eleventh Plan envisages a scheme to extend one-time support for strengthening 6000

16
colleges in 150 State Universities which are not presently declared fit to receive grants under
Section 12B of the UGC Act. The Committee was informed that the UGC (Fitness of Certain
Universities for Grants) Rules, 1974 and the UGC (Fitness of Institutions for Grants) Rules, 1975
require certain conditions to be met before grants could be provided by UGC which prevented the
UGC from implementing the envisaged scheme. The Committee is happy to note that in order
to operationalise the scheme, amendments to the aforesaid Rules have been notified on 8th
August, 2009. At present the process of formulation of guidelines for the implementation
of the scheme by the UGC is going on. The Committee would like to point out that already
considerable time has been taken since the notification of the Rules in August, 2009. In
fact, the guidelines should have been circulated to the concerned State Universities by now.
The Committee would appreciate if the process is expedited and the scheme is implemented
from 2010-11 itself.
Action Taken
UGC has informed that it has framed the guidelines for the implementation of the Scheme
which have been approved in the meeting of the Commission held on 4
th May, 2010. It has been
decided to provide a grant limited to Rs.2.0 crore to each uncovered college and Rs.10.0 crore to
each uncovered university on a matching grant basis (50:50). The Department has allocated an
amount of Rs.500 crores for the implementation of the Scheme during the financial year 2010-11.
UGC has assured that the guidelines shall be notified to all State Governments and universities
shortly and the Scheme shall be implemented in 2010-11.
X. DEEMED TO BE UNIVERSITIES
Recommendations/Observations
10.1 Deemed to be Universities are the institutions of higher education other then universities
that are so declared, on the advice of UGC, by the Central Government under Section 3 of UGC
Act, 1956.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
10.2 There are 130 Deemed Universities in the country out of which 58 institutions were
declared as deemed to be universities during the last five years only. The Committee is aware
of the recent developments with regard to de-recognition of Deemed University status in respect
of 44 institutions, a decision which was later stayed by the Apex Court. When the Committee
desired to know the exact policy with regard to awarding status of deemed university, the
Department clarified that a Task Force has been constituted by the Government to prepare an
action plan for implementation of the recommendations of the Review Committee which has
given its part-final report only, i.e., on only one of the two terms of references – protecting the
interest of students on revoking declaration of the concerned deemed to be university. The Task
Force is yet to give its report on regulation of deemed universities, the draft of which was
forwarded by UGC to the Central Government and had been referred to the Task Force by the
Government. The proposed regulations would replace the UGC guidelines, 2000, which are
currently in force. The Committee would like the Department to keep the interests of
students uppermost while revising the regulations. It desires that the much awaited UGC
regulations may be formulated after due consultations with all stakeholders. It would also

17
urge upon the Department to expedite the notification of regulations without any further
delay.
Action Taken
In view of the changes in the field of education and the fact that the extant UGC
Guidelines on ‘deemed to be universities’ were framed in 2000, the University Grants
Commission decided to review these guidelines in December, 2004. The process continued till
May, 2006. However, in 2007, the Commission decided to frame comprehensive ‘regulations’
instead of ‘guidelines’ with regard to institutions deemed to be universities. This was independent
of the PIL that was filed in the Hon’ble Supreme Court by Shri Viplav Sharma in April, 2006
[WP(C) No. 142/2006 – Viplav Sharma vs. UOI & Ors], which alleged indiscriminate
proliferation of ‘universities’ and urged for framing new regulations for declaring an institution
as an institution deemed to be a university.
Meanwhile, the Government being aware of the public perception regarding decrease in
academic standards in certain institutions deemed to be universities, decided (on 4.6.2009) to
review the functioning of the existing deemed to be universities and to examine the process of
declaration and the extant guidelines/draft regulations. Accordingly, a Review Committee comprising
of independent experts was constituted by the Government on 06.07.2009 to review the functioning
of existing institutions ‘deemed to be universities’ to ascertain whether these institutions were
indeed serving the purposes for which they were so declared and whether they complied with the
conditions stipulated in the notification. It was also decided to freeze all new applications for
declaration, as institutions ‘deemed to be university’.
After receipt of the report of the Review Committee, a Task Force, consisting of the same
members as that of the Review Committee, was set up to advise the Government on an action plan
for implementation of the recommendations of the Review Committee. The terms of reference were
– (a) protecting interests of students and (b) examining draft UGC Regulations on deemed to be
universities on the lines of the observations of the Review Committee. The Task Force has since
submitted their report.
The review is presently sub judice in the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Viplav Sharma matter
[WP(C) No. 142 /2006] and the Hon’ble Apex Court has directed the Government to maintain
status quo  with regard to the institutions deemed to be universities which were found unfit to
continue as such by the Review Committee.
The draft UGC regulations on institutions deemed to be universities were sent by the
Commission for the Government’s approval. After examining the recommendations of the Task
Force on this point, the Government conveyed approval of ‘UGC (Institutions deemed to be
Universities) Regulations, 2010’. The notification has been published in the Official Gazette on
21/5/2010.
XI. PRIV ATE UNIVERSITIES IN THE COUNTRY
Recommendations/Observations
11.1 As on 18.03.2010, there are 59 Universities established by State Legislatures without public
funding ( i.e. Private Universities). Under the UGC (Establishment of and Maintenance of Standards
in Private Universities) Regulations, 2003, UGC is supposed to call for information in prescribed
proforma for ascertaining the norms and standards of Private Universities and constitute Expert
Committees for their inspection to ascertain the physical and infrastructural facilities provided by
Universities and also to call for their compliance on the deficiencies, if any.

18
Action Taken
The suggestion has been noted for appropriate action.
Recommendations/Observations
11.2 The Committee was informed the UGC has inspected 23 private universities so far. Status
of inspected universities has been posted on the UGC website for information of public at large
and the student community in particular. UGC has also issued a public notice with regard to the
jurisdiction of State Private Universities in which the UGC has categorically stated that such
Universities cannot operate beyond their jurisdiction i.e. the State in which their main campus is
situated. As a result a number of many off-campuses, which were being operated by these
Universities earlier, have been closed.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
XII. STA TUS OF WOMEN IN HIGHER EDUCATION
Recommendations/Observations
12.1 The Committee was informed that the UGC has five schemes for Women i.e.
(i) ‘Development of Women’s Studies in Indian Universities and Colleges’ and (ii) Capacity Building
for Women Managers in Higher Education (iii) Construction of Women Hostel for Colleges
(iv) Indira Gandhi Scholarship for Single Girl Child pursuing higher education and (v) Post Doctoral
Fellowship for Women. The University Grants Commission had promoted, strengthened and given
direction to the Women’s Studies Programme in the country since the VII
th Plan period. Women’s
Studies Centres have been established in the University System in the VIII th, IX th, X th and XI th Plan
periods. They have contributed significantly to the expansion of Women’s Studies teaching,
research and field action. Now, the thrust is to develop field action projects for action, research,
evaluation and enhancement of knowledge and partnership across boundaries of caste/class/
religion, community and occupations and to involve many more people and many more
organizations in the network as well as to ensure the focus and the quality of newly emerging
disciplines are maintained.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
(i) DEVELOPMENT OF WOMEN’S STUDIES IN UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES
Recommendations/Observations
12.2 The scheme envisages assistance to Universities for setting up new women study centres
as well as to strengthen and sustain the university study centres set up in Tenth Plan by
establishing them as statutory departments in the university system, as also to facilitate their
capacity to network with other constituents so that they are mutually reinforcing as well as
synergizing one and another. The primary role of these centres is to make knowledge stimulation
and knowledge transmission through teaching and research. It was informed that prior to Eleventh
Plan, 67 Women Studies Centres were in existence. During Eleventh Plan, 64 new centres have
been established in various Universities/Colleges. At present, there are 131 Women Studies Centres

19
(72 in universities and 59 in Colleges). Universities/Colleges with deficient proposals have been
requested to send their revised proposals for establishment of Women Studies Centres. As per
Eleventh Plan Guidelines, the UGC provides annual financial assistance to Women’s Studies Centres
in Universities @ Rs. 5 lakh in Phase-I, Rs. 8 lakh in Phase-II and Rs. 12 lakh in phase-III. For
the Centres set up in colleges, annual assistance is given @ Rs. 3 lakh in phase-I, Rs. 5 lakh in
Phase-II and Rs. 8 lakh in Phase-III.
During the Eleventh Plan so far grants amounting to Rs. 11.53 crore have been released to
the Universities/Colleges for Women Studies Centres.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
(ii) CAP ACITY BUILDING FOR WOMEN MANAGERS IN HIGHER EDUCATION
Recommendations/Observations
12.4 The scheme for the Capacity Building of Women Managers in Higher Education is focused
on women in higher education in the academic and administrative streams to sensitise and motivate
them and, subsequently, equip them for decision-making positions in the higher education system
where currently they occupy very few such positions. The purpose of this scheme is to develop
a critical mass of gender sensitised women administrators to create a gender friendly environment
and to remove the glass ceiling. Capacity building is through activities like Sensitization Awareness
Motivation Workshops, developments and distribution of resource material, research stimulation
workshops, management skill workshop etc.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
12.5 During Eleventh Plan, 15 Training of Trainers Workshops, 4 Refresher and 109
Sensitisation Awareness Motivation Workshops have been organized by various universities and
colleges. During Eleventh Plan, the grants released to the Universities/Colleges for this scheme are
Rs.0.54 crore in 2007-08, Rs.3.00 crore in 2008-09 and Rs.1.63 crore in 2009-10.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
12.6 The Committee would like to have an idea about the level of participation,
university-wise during Eleventh Plan. The Committee would appreciate if an evaluation of
scheme is also undertaken so that an assessment about its impact can be made and
necessary corrective measures initiated, wherever required.
Action Taken
According to UGC, the participants in the workshops organized by various Universities/
Colleges under the scheme of “Capacity Building for Women’s Managers in Higher Education” are
Middle and Senior level Lecturers, Readers, Professors, Head of the Departments, Deans,
Principals, Registrars, Deputy Registrars, Librarians and Deputy Librarians.

20
The evaluation of the scheme is being done by the members of the National Consultative
Committee on the scheme of “Capacity Building for Women’s Managers in Higher Education” i.e.
one from the Core group and one Regional Co-coordinator. The report is currently being prepared
and will be reported to the UGC in the next meeting of National Consultative Committee on the
scheme. The meeting of the members of the National Consultative Committee is held in once in
a year to discuss the impact of the programme. Region-wise and University-wise list of workshops
organized during XI
th Plan is given.
(iii) CONSTRUCTION OF WOMEN HOSTELS FOR COLLEGES
Recommendations/Observations
12.7 The main objective of the scheme is to support all the eligible colleges for construction of
hostels for women in order to provide accommodation for women students/researchers/teachers
and other staff. Preference is given to women colleges located in rural areas, followed by colleges
located in urban areas, co-education colleges in rural areas, co-education colleges located in urban
areas and women colleges and coeducation colleges located in metro cities. Rate of assistance is
from Rs. 40 lakh to Rs. 80 lakh in non-metro cities and from Rs. 80 lakh to 120 lakhs in metro
cities, depending on the size of women enrolment in the colleges.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
(iv) INDIRA GANDHI SCHOLARSHIP FOR SINGLE GIRL CHILD FOR PURSUING
HIGHER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION.
Recommendations/Observations
12.9 There is an important scheme namely Indira Gandhi Scholarship for Single Girl Child for
Pursuing Higher and Technical Education under which the girl students upto the age of 30 years
at the time of admission to Postgraduate courses are eligible for a scholarship of Rs.2000/- per
month for 20 months. Under this scheme 1200 scholarships can be awarded every year.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
12.10 The selection of the candidates for the scholarship is made on the basis of the
recommendations of an Expert Committee appointed by the UGC as per the basis of the following
criteria:
(i) The applicant-girl should be the only child in the family.
(ii) The applicant-girl should have been admitted to a non-professional Master’s Degree
course.
(iii) The applicant-girl should be less then 30 years of age at the time of admission.
According to information made available to the Committee, 1538 scholarships were awarded
during 2009-10 under the Scheme. The Committee notes that the students from West Bengal (496),

21
Kerala (287), Tamil Nadu (262), Andhra Pradesh (102) and Karnataka (89) have dominated in the
number of scholarships awarded under the Scheme. This is the position when wide publicity to the
Scheme was given by the UGC by publishing advertisements in all National Dailies (Hindi &
English) along with regional publications, the Employment News/Rojgar Samachar. The Scheme has
also been publicised through the website of UGC. During the current year, UGC has received over
2500 applications for the award of scholarships under the Scheme.
Action Taken
Position clarified in Action Taken with respect to Para 12.11.
XIV. SCHOLARSHIP FOR COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY STUDENTS
Recommendations/Observations
14.1 Under this scheme financial assistance is given to cover 82 thousand meritorious students
not belonging to the creamy layer for pursuing higher studies every year. Student getting 80 per
cent marks in Class–XII Board exam identified by the State Boards are eligible for the assistance.
Scholarship of Rs.1000/- p.m. is paid for the first three years of graduation level and Rs.2000/-
p.m. for next two years of post-graduate level in general courses and for graduation level in
professional courses.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
14.2 The Committee notes 26,552 students in 2008-09 and 34,172 students in 2009-10 were
granted scholarship under the scheme. State-wise details indicate an uneven spread of the scheme.
While in 2008-09 maximum beneficiaries were from Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Karnataka
and the students recommended by CBSE, in 2009-10 majority of the students were from Gujarat,
Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Karnatka along with the students sponsored by
CBSE. The Committee notes that the scholarship allocation to the States has been in the ratio of
population for the States in 18-25 years age group. The Committee is not prepared to believe
that States like U.P. and Bihar having a big concentration of youth in the 18-25 years age
groups do not have students securing 80% marks. While not even a single student from
Bihar was covered during 2008-09, only 2 students from the State could get the benefit in
2009-10. Similarly, while 1477 students from U.P. were covered in 2008-09, only 39 students
from the State could be covered during 2009-10. Chhattishgarh is another peculiar case.
While the State failed to submit the eligibility list during 2008-09, no student could be
covered during 2009-10, reason being that UCs were not furnished in spite of funds
sanctioned for 1387 scholarships in 2008-09. It seems that there is no monitoring
mechanism under the scheme and even if it is there the same cannot be treated effective
enough. The Committee wonders as to why both the State Boards and also the students
seem so disinclined to get the benefit of the scheme. The Committee recommends that an
effective monitoring mechanism needs to be put in place to ensure maximum coverage as
per the prescribed criteria. In this age of IT advancement when results are available on
Internet, it is not a complicated job to get the data of eligible students from the State
boards which can be then pursued to approach the selected students for getting the
formalities completed.

22
Action Taken
It is learnt from the State Education Boards of U.P. and Bihar that the system of marking
in these States is very stringent and thus very few students could score 80% and above marks.
Keeping this in view and in order to provide more students, especially from these States, an
opportunity to avail of this scheme, the criteria has been revised to 80
th percentile in the respective
stream, from the academic year 2010-11.
In the case of Chhattisgarh, since no eligibility list was furnished by the State Education
Board for 2008-09, funds were sanctioned on a pro rata  basis. In the absence of the Utilization
Certificate, renewal  scholarship for 2008-09 could not be sanctioned. For 2009-10, no State was
given the funds on a pro rata  basis and since the State Education Board of Chhattisgarh did not
furnish the eligibility list, funds were not sanctioned to them. Funds can be sanctioned even at this
stage as soon as the eligibility list is furnished by the State Education Boards.
It is pointed out that many students avail of some other scholarship which is more
beneficial to them and since a student can avail of only one scholarship scheme at a time, some
States are not able to utilize the full quota of scholarships allocated to them. The progress of
disbursement of scholarship is being monitored through the State Education Boards which inform
this Department about any problem that may arise in the disbursement. Also in this regard meetings
are held in this Department with Chairmen/Secretaries of the State Education Boards, from time to
time.
XV. EDUCATIONAL LOAN INTEREST SUBSIDY
Recommendations/Observations
15.1 The scheme for providing interest subsidy on educational loans obtained by students
belonging to economically weaker sections of the society for pursuit of professional education was
approved by the Government in August, 2009. The objective of the scheme is that talented students
are not deprived opportunity to pursue higher education because of financial constraints. The
scheme is applicable from the academic year 2009-10. The Ministry has written to the Indian
Banks’ Association (IBA) on 8.9.2009 to inform all the Scheduled Banks, who are its members, of
the Scheme and to give wide publicity to it. Under this scheme, it is proposed to provide subsidy
on the interest on loan borrowed from the banks for pursuing professional education. Canara Bank
is the nodal bank for the Department for the implementation of the scheme. The entire amount of
interest on loans during the moratorium period (course duration + 1 year or date of employment
whichever is earlier) will be met by Central Government for eligible students. The benefits under
the Scheme would be available to those students belonging to economically weaker sections, with
an upper limit of annual parental income of Rs. 4.5 lakh per year.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
15.2 The Committee was informed that a sum of Rs. 500 crore has been earmarked in 2010-11
for the scheme. A sum of Rs. 10 lakh earmarked for 2009-10 could not be utilized as no advise/
claim was received in that regard.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.

23
XVI. INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY
Recommendations/Observations
16.1 IGNOU was established under an Act of Parliament in 1985 to provide access to higher
education to all sections of the population, especially the disadvantaged groups, to impart continuing
education to upgrade knowledge and skill, and to initiate special programmes of higher education
for specific target groups like women, people living in backward regions, hilly areas, etc.
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
16.2 Under the existing pattern of funding, IGNOU is supported by Ministry of Human Resource
Development (Department of Higher Education) only by way of Plan funding. No non-Plan funds
are released to the University which mobilises its own resources through academic receipts, income
from investments, royalty, publications, interest earned and other income, etc. The details of the
receipts (including Budgetary allocation by Ministry of Human Resource Development) and
expenditure of IGNOU during the last three years are indicated below:
(Rs in crores )
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09
Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure
(*including (**including (***including,
GIA GIA GIA
released by released by released by
MHRD MHRD) MHRD)
280.67 236.24 307.00 261.64 432.20 428.56
*2006-07 **2007-08 ***2008-09
Rs.95.05 Rs.67.66 Rs.86.78
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
16.3 The Annual Plan Outlay for 2010-11 in respect of IGNOU is Rs.91 crore which includes
Rs. 90 crore as plan allocation of which IGNOU had submitted its new Plan Proposals for Eleventh
Plan period, which were examined in the Department and placed before the EFC on 24.11.2009
wherein IGNOU was asked to modify their new schemes viz. Skill Development and Community
College scheme. No document/proposal form was received from IGNOU. The Budget outlay as
approved in respect of IGNOU for 2010-11 will be sufficient for the existing scheme of IGNOU
and new schemes shall be started only after the approval by EFC during the remaining period of
XI
th Plan.
Action Taken
Annual Plan out lay for IGNOU for the year 2010-11 has been approved as 101.00 crore
(including 1.00 crore as token provision under Non Plan). As regards new proposal included in the

24
EFC of IGNOU for 11 th Plan period is concerned, IGNOU has not submitted the recast proposals
under Skill Development and Community Colleges  as per the directive given by EFC in its meeting
held under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, Department of Expenditure on 24.11.2009.  However,
IGNOU has been reminded in the matter.
Recommendations/Observations
16.4 The Committee is quite satisfied to know that more than 2.5 million students are
enrolled in IGNOU. It has been possible because of good quality and affordable education
available to the common people through this renowned institution. The Committee, however,
notes that though there is a marginal increase of Rs. 10 crores in the outlay for 2010-11,
with the surplus receipts the University should be in a position to take care of the
investment for its diverse activities particularly those aimed to improve the quality of
educational facilities. In fact more similar institutions should be set up to address the
growing needs of education in the country particularly to help the poor people. The
Committee would, therefore, recommend higher allocation for expansion of open
universities and institutions in the country. At the same time, the Committee would advise
IGNOU to monitor its activities in North Eastern Sector where funds are not being utilized.
IGNOU should also review both its reach as well as the quality of education offered for
ensuring both deeper access and improved quality.
Action Taken
The University has been requested to take note of the observations of PSC for compliance.
The other recommendations of the Committee have also been noted by the Ministry for appropriate
action.
XVII. NA TIONAL MISSION IN EDUCATION THROUGH I.C.T.
Recommendations/Observations
17.1 The objective of this scheme is to develop system of identification and nurture the talent
of human resources of the country and providing learning modules to address the personalised
needs of the learners. The scheme also envisages effective utilisation of intellectual resources,
certification of knowledge acquired by the learners either through formal or informal system, as
also building database of capabilities, capacities and talent of country’s human resources.
Action Taken
Factual position.
Recommendations/Observations
17.2 The Committee notes that out of Rs. 900 crores plan allocation for 2009-10, only Rs. 78
crore could be utilised upto 29th March, 2010. The budgetary allocation of Rs. 810 crore in BE
2009-10 was revised to 280 crore at RE stage and now Rs. 810 crores again have been earmarked
for year 2010-11. The Committee finds that even during 2008-09, out of Rs. 502 crores, the
Department could manage to utilise only Rs. 361 crore. The Department has clarified that the
shortfall was because the scheme was approved by the Government in January, 2009 only. As
regards the underutilization in 2009-10, the Ministry has clarified that the universities which were
to be provided connectivity with the POP of National Knowledge Network could not be connected
because the scheme of National Knowledge Network has been recently approved by the

25
Government. The Committee fails to understand the inordinate delay in such administrative
and procedural issues. The Committee is of firm view that corrective measures should be
taken to ensure optimum utilisation of fund under this scheme during the current financial
year.
Action Taken
Comments expressed by the Committee have been noted for compliance.
XVIII . TECHNICAL EDUCATION
Recommendations/Observations
18.1 T echnical education plays a vital role in human resource development of the country by
creating skilled manpower, enhancing industrial productivity and improving the quality of life. It
covers courses and programmes in engineering, technology, management, architecture town
planning, pharmacy and applied arts and crafts, hotel management and catering technology.
Technical education in India can be broadly classified into three categories viz.: (i) Central
Government funded institutions, (ii) State Government/State funded institutions and (iii) Self-
financed institutions. As per the information made available to the Committee there are 65 Centrally
funded institutions of technical and science education as per the following details :
Centrally Funded Institutions Number of
Institutions
Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) 15
Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs) 7
Indian Institute of Science (IISc.) 1
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISERs) 5
National Institutes of Technology (NITs) 20
National Institutes of Technical Teachers Training and Research (NITTTRs) 4
Others 4
School of Planning and Architechture (SPAs)-3, Indian School of Mines
(ISM), North-East Regional Institute of Science and Technology (NERIST),
National Institute of Industrial Engineering (NITIE), National Institute
of Foundry and Forge Technology (NIFFT), Sant Longowal Institute
of Engineering and Technology (SLIET), Central Institute of Technology (CIT) 9
In 2009-10 several measures were taken to implement the Government’s vision of providing
increased access with the quality and excellence. Setting up of new Indian Institutes of Technology
(IITs), Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs), Indian Institutes of Science Education and
Research (IISERs), assisting the State Government in setting up new Polytechniques and the
initiation of process for setting up of Indian Institutes of Information Technology (IIITs) and
National Institutes of Technology (NITs) are the new steps in this direction. Besides the Central
Government is also implementing two schemes/programmes viz. (i) Technical Education Quality
Improvement Programme (TEQIP) assisted by the World Bank; and (ii) Indian National Digital
Library for Science and Technology (INDLST).

26
Action Taken
During the XIth Plan Period, it has been decided to open ten new National Institutes of
Technology (NITs) in those States/UTs which do not have an NIT as on date. During the year
2009-10, Government has approved the establishment of 10 new NITs in the States of Sikkim,
Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Uttarakhand, Goa (catering to the
needs of Daman and Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep), Delhi (also catering to the
needs of Chandigarh) and in the UT of Puducherry (also catering to the needs of A and N Islands).
The Ministry of Human Resource Development has already initiated a time-bound programme for
their establishment. The first academic session of these new NITs is to start from July, 2010.
Recommendations/Observations
18.2 The total allocations for technical education during 2010-11 is Rs. 6011.55 crore which
includes Rs. 4266.03 crore as Plan and Rs. 1745.52 crore as non Plan outlay. The Committee notes
that the Plan allocation for 2010-11 has increased by 20 per cent in comparison of 2009-10.
However, the non Plan outlay has gone down from Rs. 1890 crore to Rs. 1745.52 crore.
Action Taken
Factual position.
Recommendations/Observations
18.3 The Committee while deliberating upon the budgetary allocations of technical education has
focused its attention on two issues namely, (i) the infrastructure in the Indian institutions and
(ii) the shortage of faculty. Vacancy position in IITs and IIMs is as follows:
Name of Faculty Faculty in V acant V acancy as %
Institute sanctioned position positions of sanctioned
strength strength
IITs 4367 2982 1345 30%
IIMs 468 387 81 17%
The Department has informed that the following steps have been taken with regard to
faculty recruitment, inculcation and retention in Government and Centrally funded technical
institutes :
(i) The age of retirement has been increased from 62 to 65 years and can go upto 70
years with the approval of the Visitor.
(ii) The Sixth Central Pay Commission has substantially increased the salary of faculty
and staff, which is proving to be effective in attracting and retaining good faculty.
(iii) The Directors of IITs have been conducting special interviews abroad for outstanding
faculty.
(iv) The leave rules in these premier institutions have been relaxed in order to encourage
the faculty to take research and consultancy work within and outside the country.
(v) Attractive start-up grants are provided by the institutes for research.

27
(vi) For attracting outstanding young  faculty members, fellowships are offered in addition
to salary. Similarly, for senior faculty, chairs have been instituted which are attractive
add-ons to the salary.
(vii) The Institutes strive to provide good facilities such as good residential
accommodation as also medical and educational facilities for the family of the faculty.
(viii) The IITs have increased the intake in PhD programmes so that there is an increase
in the number of eligible persons to take up faculty positions in future.
(ix) The faculty can attend national and international seminars/workshops during a block
period of 3 years for which a grant of Rs.3.00 lakhs is made available.
Action Taken
The faculty recruitment in Indian Institute of Management (IIMs) is a continuous process
and highest standards of efficiency and competence are important considerations in the selection
process. While new faculties are intended to be added in line with the expansion in academic
activities, there is acute shortage of suitable candidates. Suitable candidates find Institutes’
compensation low as compared to University options outside India or Industry options within
India. Following sourcing methods are adopted to get best faculty: (a) Advertisement in national
daily and other publications, (b) Display of advertisement in our website and notice boards,
(c) Display of Qualitative Requirement in other Management Institutions/Universities/Foreign
embassies, etc. The IIMs are making various efforts to fill all the sanctioned faculty posts. A
total of 483 faculty posts have been sanctioned to IIMs in which 388 posts are filled up as on
December, 2009.
Recommendations/Observations
18.4 The Department has shared the following status of faculty recruitment in respect of the
newly established IITs:
Institute Number of faculty posts
Sanctioned intake Joined
IIT, Hyderabad 60 35
IIT, Patna 60 32
IIT, Jodhpur 60 12
IIT, Bhubaneswar 60 34
IIT, Gandhinagar 60 24
IIT, Indore 30 24
IIT, Mandi 30
IIT, Ropar 60 12
The Committee finds that in most of these newly established IITs the faculty in position
is very low. Surprisingly no recruitment has taken place against the 30 sanctioned posts in IIT,

28
Mandi. The Committee is deeply concerned about the 30 to 80 per cent vacancies of faculty
existing in our IITs. These institutions are pioneer institutions of our country and
showcase our intellectual property to the world at large. Therefore, vacancies to that
extent cannot be allowed to continue. The Committee calls upon the Department to ensure
filling up all such positions within the first quarter of the academic session 2010-11. The
Committee would like these institutions to constitute a strategic group to monitor every
quarter, the progress made in filling the existing vacancies and place it before their
respective Board for guidance on steps needed to substantially bring down the existing
vacancies.
Action Taken
Several steps have been taken to rectify the position of shortage of faculty. These measures
have been enumerated in the reply to the Parliamentary Standing Committee. In the case of new
IITs where the shortage could have been upto 80% at the time of review, the situation has greatly
improved since selection for recruiting new faculty is going on. The new IITs are also engaging
visiting faculty from mentoring IITs to bridge the gap.
The suggestion of the Parliamentary Standing Committee to constitute a strategic group to
monitor quarterly progress made in filling the existing, vacancies and placing it before their
respective Boards will be placed in the next meeting of the Council of IITs for a decision.
Recommendations/Observations
18.5 The Department has furnished the following schedule for completion of infrastructure with
regard to 8 IITs:
Indicators 2009-10 2010-11 201 1-12 2012-13
Fixing of Done — — —
location
Acquisition of Done — — —
Land
Civil Started in 3 out Start Continue in all Will be
Construction of 8 IITs construction in 8 IITs. completed in
all 8 IITs all IITs.
It transpires from the above chart that while fixing of location and acquisition of land in
respect all eight IIT’s has been done, the civil construction in respect thereof would be
completed by 2012-13. Elaborating further, the Department apprised that civil construction
including construction of boundary walls has started in IITs at Bhubaneshwar, Ropar and
Hyderabad. In rest of the IITs, the work will start during 2010-11. The Committee would like
the Department to strictly adhere to the schedule which they have shared with the
Committee. Any delay in completion should not only amount to cost overrun but also
deprive the students of the precious opportunities to be made available through these
premier institutes.
Action Taken
The suggestions have been noted for compliance.

29
Recommendations/Observations
18.6 The Committee observes that out of new six IIMs, four IIMs at Raipur
(Chhattisgarh), Rohtak (Haryana), Ranchi (Jharkhand) and Tiruchirappalli (Tamil Nadu)
would become functional from the academic session 2010-11. The Committee hopes that
there would be no hurdles in this regard. There should be no undue delay in finalisation
of temporary campuses for the remaining two new IIMs proposed for Kashipur
(Uttarakhand) and Udaipur (Rajasthan). The Committee would also appreciate if process for
creation and selection of faculty for all the IIMs also starts at the earliest. Similarly, since
land has already been allotted for all the IIMs, preparatory exercise for commencement of
construction work must have started by now. If not, it should start without further delay
followed by construction in a time bound manner. The Committee calls upon the
Department to prepare a status report at the end of four months in the fiscal year and
furnish the same for its consideration.
Action Taken
The societies of IIMs at Rohtak (Haryana), Ranchi (Jharkhand), Raipur (Chhattisgarh),
Tiruchirappali (Tamil Nadu) and Kashipur (Uttarakhand) have been registered. Regular PGP course
at IIM-Rohtak and IIM-Ranchi has started from the academic year  2010-11. In case of IIM Raipur
and Tiruchirappalli, short-term executive courses will be started from academic session 2010-11.
The regular PGP course in these IIMs would start from next academic session.
Minister of HRD has approved the name of person for appointment to the posts of
Directors of four new IIMs at Rohtak, Ranchi, Raipur, Tiruchirappalli and the same has been sent
to the ACC for its approval/concurrence. As soon as regular Director takes charges at respective
IIMs, the construction work would start.
XIX. ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION
Recommendations/Observations
19.1 All Indian Council for Technical Education (AICTE) grants approval for starting new
technical institutions and for introduction of new courses. It also lays down norms and standards
for such institutions. It further ensures quality development of technical education through
accreditation of technical programmes. In addition to its regulatory role, the AICTE has also a
promotional role which it implements through schemes for promoting technical education for
women, handicapped and weaker sections of the society, promoting innovations, faculty
development and research giving grants to technical institutions. Technical institutions under the
AICTE include Post-Graduate, Under-Graduate and Diploma in whole spectrum of technical
education, covering engineering/technology, pharmacy, architecture, hotel management and catering
technology, management studies, computer applications and applied arts and crafts.
Action Taken
Factual position.
Recommendations/Observations
19.2 According to the Department, a provision of Rs. 200 crore has been allocated for AICTE
during 2009-10 and an allocation of Rs. 220 crore has been made for AICTE in BE 2010-11.

30
Elaborating the achievements of AICTE the Department has mentioned that AICTE has introduced e-
governance in its approval process through a web portal which was placed in the public domain on
10th January, 2010. The Council has also revised the norms and standards for granting various kinds
of approvals to the technical institutions. These revised norms have already been notified on 6th
February, 2010 and uplo aded on the AICTE’s portal www.aicte.india.org along with the “Approval
Process Handbook-2010”. AICTE has launched another portal www.nba.india.org. The Department
has claimed that both the portals have been very effective in terms of their use to the stakeholders.
In two months since launching of AICTE portals over 20 lakh users have visited the same. The entire
approval process for establishing new institutions has been made online. 2206 applications have been
received for setting up new institutions in the country which is more than the applications received
last year in paper mode. The Department claims that students’ interest was constantly before the
Government to ensure that the AICTE adheres to the deadlines for granting approvals to institutions
and address the grievances of students.
Action Taken
Factual position.
Recommendations/Observations
19.3 The Committee had extensively deliberated upon the functioning of AICTE including the
amendments to the AICTE Act in its 211th Report and gave a number of suggestions for
improvement in the approval/inspections mechanism, fee structure, the issues relating to
unapproved institutions, the faculty etc. The Action Taken Notes received from the Department
were not found satisfactory and the Committee had to take oral evidence of the representatives of
the Department along with AICTE officials twice. The Committee intends to continue its study on
those Action Taken Notes received from the Department. The new portals of AICTE have been the
matter of interest for the Committee during recent deliberations on the Demand for Grants. The
Committee pointed out that there are complaints from the applicants that although they have been
able to upload their registration but failed to make the payment. There are instances where payment
was made but the uploading of the application failed. Then there are doubts prevailing about the
loans applied online. The Chairman of AICTE informed that they have issued 17954 passwords and
IDs for people who have applied for extension of approval. He conceded that there are several
problems in the operation of portal. It was mentioned that the bandwidth that is required at the
user end is 2 mbps and 1:1, not shared line. The institutions were expected to follow these
minimum specifications. He further conceded that there is problem both at user end as well as at
AICTE end. As regard the procedure for approvals, he mentioned that the entire information about
the institutions applied online will be made available in public domain. On scrutiny by Screening
Committee the applicants through an appeal mechanism will be allowed to upload the data
subsequently. Each bank has its own scheme and then make application to the portal. As regards
students loan AICTE has provided 41 bank links. Students can go to these portals, chose their link,
go through the entire conditions, and accept them depending on their requirement. He added that
the portal has come up only on 10th January, 2010 and all the data with an interface with the bank
will be provided probably in three months.
Action Taken
Factual position.
Recommendations/Observations
9.4 Whatever changes may occur in the status of AICTE after National Council for
Higher Education and Research coming into the picture the Committee opines that system

31
of approvals and facilities to the students needs to be streamlined in the interest of the
technical education in its entirety. The Committee hopes that the new system of online
applications and information about institutions in public domain would bring forth the much
desired transparency under the new regulatory system.
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee has been noted.

32
32
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
I. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.4 The Committee notes that of 3.78 per cent of the GDP, flowing to the Education
Sector in 2008-09, the share of the State Governments and the share of the Central
Government seem to be going for a change while Chapeau Clause  of the Eleventh Plan on
education, as a whole, enjoins upon the Government to give six per cent of the GDP to the
education sector. The Committee is of the view that the allocation for Department is
definitely lower than the vision statement of the Government.
Action Taken
National Policy on Education, 1986 (modified in 1992) stipulates that investment in
education should be gradually increased so as to reach a level of expenditure of 6% of the National
Income as early as possible. XI
th Five Year Plan Document also pledged to raise public spending
on education to 6% of the GDP. The Plan allocation for higher education shows that there has been
a phenomenal increase in the Plan allocation during XI
th Plan vis-à-vis X th Plan. As against a total
allocation of Rs.9500 crore during X th Plan, the allocation of higher education during XI th Plan has
gone up to Rs.84943 crore which is an increase of 9 times. However, the existing infrastructure
facilities available with the higher education institutions need to be enhanced to meet the investment
targeted for the expansion of the higher education sector. Further, investment under education also
depends on the  cooperation from the State Governments as land and other input are required to
be provided by them for setting up of new educational institutions, etc. With the several initiatives
taken by Central Government in the recent past, it is expected that expenditure in the education
sector will be faster and the State Governments will also come forward for investing in the
education sector, as the 6% of GDP has to come from Centre as well as State Governments.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee made a specific observation that the allocations for the Department are
lower than vision statement. Although there has been a tremendous increase in the allocation over
the years however, fact remains that it is yet to attain the level of six per cent as has been declared
in various Five Years Plans and policies of the Government. The Committee again reiterates that
this process of gradual increase should be speeded up to ensure that the desired levels of
allocations are attained  at the earliest.
III. UTILISATION OF FUNDS
Para 3.1 The budgetary allocation of the Department, on the other hand also needs to be
appropriated in the context of utilization of funds. The Committee notes a grim picture of fund
utilization in the Department so much so that plan allocation had to be reduced at the RE stage

33
every year and even that reduced allocation remained under-utilised. Plan allocation for Higher
Education during the first three years of the Eleventh Plan indicate a poor pace of utilization as
indicated below:-
(Rs. in crores )
2007-2008 2008-2009 2009-2010
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals
upto to
31.12.2009
6479.48 3261.32 3139.26 7593.50 6800.00 6711.96 9596.00 7952.00 5500.00
A perusal of the above mentioned figures indicates that during all the first three years of
Eleventh Plan, the allocation was revised downwards at RE stage and even that reduced allocation
remained underutilized. The fund utilizations has particularly been utterly poor in 2009-10 as only
Rs. 5500 crore could be spent up to the end of third quarter i.e. 31
st December, 2009 against the
Plan allocation of Rs. 9596 crore.
Action Taken
Based on the recommendations of the Site Selection Committees constituted by the Ministry
for the purpose, sites for all new Central Universities, except for the Central Universities of Bihar
and Kerala, have already been finalized. While the matter relating to the Central University of Kerala
has been taken up at the highest level in the State Government, in view of the announcement of
the Schedule of General Election to the Legislative Assembly of Bihar and coming into effect of
the Model Code of Conduct, further consideration of the matter relating to the Central University
of Bihar has been kept in abeyance. Six of the State Governments have since allotted the identified
lands to the respective Central Universities and four of these Universities have already started
construction activities on their respective sites. The remaining Universities are also expected to start
campus development during the current financial year once possession of the land is taken over.
In a review meeting held with the Chairman, UGC as well as in a separate meeting with Vice-
Chancellors of Central Universities, the Ministry has again emphasized upon the need to have clear
timelines for infrastructure development in case of each University. The UGC is following up the
matter with these Central Universities emphasizing on the need for each Central University to draw
out time-bound action plan.
Pending finalization of sites, allotment of lands and development of their permanent
campuses, all of these Universities, except Central University of Jammu, have started their
academic activities from temporary premises.
The Statutes on establishment of Schools/Departments in respect of seven Central
Universities have since been assented to by the Visitor, four of which have also been provided
Visitor’s nominees on the Selection Committees for appointment of teachers.  The Universities are
in the process of holding meetings of the Selection Committees for appointment of regular faculty.
Comments of the Committee
The plea of the Department for the under-utilisation of the Plan Fund allocation
during the year 2009-10 is not only unrealistic but also based on wrong interpretation. Out
of the total of Rs. 9600 crores, allocated as the Plan allocation to the Department during
this period at BE level, only Rs. 4976 crores pertain to the Universities and higher
education. As per data provided by the Department, out of Rs. 4976 crores, only Rs. 4376 crores

34
have been earmarked for the UGC. And even out of this amount (Rs. 4376 crores), only a
meager amount of Rs. 827 crores has been reserved for the establishment of the new
Central Universities. The Committee fails to understand the reasons such as delay in the
finalization of sites, allotment of lands, development of permanent campuses, etc. for the
establishment of new Central Universities. Committee opines that there are many other
grey areas where the Department is lagging behind in timely implementation thereof
because of which the funds allocated to the Department are being grossly under-utilised.
The Committee would like the Department to make an introspection in the under-utilisation
of the Plan fund allocation and bring out all grey areas wherever the Department is lagging
behind its projections.
Recommendations/Observations
3.4 The Committee agrees that the infrastructure development for recently approved 12 Central
Universities may be a time consuming affair and for that matter the achievement of financial targets
would entirely depend on physical targets. Similarly, the shortfall in non Plan outlay of 2009-10 due
to delay in finalization of pay and salaries on account of Sixth Pay Commission recommendation
is also acceptable. The Committee, however, impresses upon the Department to strictly monitor the
progress of infrastructure development for new Central Universities so that at least the Plan outlay
now available for the purpose is optimally utilized. Nobody can deny the fact that functioning of
any educational institution from temporary site for a prolonged time cannot be considered an ideal
proposition. Our Central Universities, envisaged to be role model of higher education functioning
from temporary campuses is bound to adversely affect both the quality of education as well as the
performance of the students. A time-bound completion schedule should, therefore, be drawn out
to ensure that infrastructure of these universities is in place without cost and time overruns.
Action Taken
Based on the recommendations of the Site Selection Committees constituted by the Ministry
for the purpose, sites for all new Central Universities, except for the Central Universities of Bihar
and Kerala, have already been finalized. While the matter relating to the Central University of Kerala
has been taken up at the highest level in the State Government, in view of the announcement of
the Schedule of General Election to the Legislative Assembly of Bihar and coming into effect of
the Model Code of Conduct, further consideration of the matter relating to the Central University
of Bihar has been kept in abeyance. Six of the State Governments have since allotted the identified
lands to the respective Central Universities and four of these Universities have already started
construction activities on their respective sites. The remaining Universities are also expected to start
campus development during the current financial year once possession of the land is taken over.
In a review meeting held with the Chairman, UGC as well as in a separate meeting with Vice-
Chancellors of Central Universities, the Ministry has again emphasized upon the need to have clear
timelines for infrastructure development in case of each University. The UGC is following up the
matter with these Central Universities emphasizing on the need for each Central University to draw
out time-bound action plan.
Pending finalization of sites, allotment of lands and development of their permanent
campuses, all of these Universities, except Central University of Jammu, have started their
academic activities from temporary premises.
The Statutes on establishment of Schools/Departments in respect of seven Central
Universities have since been assented to by the Visitor, four of which have also been provided
Visitor’s nominees on the Selection Committees for appointment of teachers. The Universities are
in the process of holding meetings of the Selection Committees for appointment of regular faculty.

35
Comments of the Committee
The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Department regarding
infrastructure development at the Central Universities. However, the Committee feels that
still a lot needs to be done as the work in at least 3 universities viz. Bihar, Kerala and
Jammu, is yet to be finalized. A strict, monitoring is required for the purpose to achieve
any tangible results. It, therefore, again reiterates its earlier recommendation that a time
schedule should be drawn up and timelines are strictly adhered to.
Recommendations/Observations
3.5 The Committee observes that not only under University Education, but also under two other
major components of Higher Education, i.e. Distance Learning and Technical Education, the trend
of allocated funds being brought down drastically in the middle of the year and that too remaining
under-utilised by the end of the year is evident. Following details are self-explanatory:–
(Rs. in crores )
Scheme 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals
up to
1.12.09
Distance
610.00 108.00 67.66 622.00 511.08 447.79 990.00 390.00 38.26
Learning
Technical
324.00 1103.20 1066.79 3205.00 285.22 2833.34 3902.00 3687.00 2557.22
Education
Not only this, the Committee views with serious concern the low level of utilization by the
end of first three quarters during 2009-10. The Committee is surprised to note that smaller
schemes like Scholarships, Book Promotion also do not seem to have been functioning as
envisaged. Scheme of Scholarships, very crucial for both the meritorious and poor students
continues to remain almost non-functional. Funds allocated for 2007-08 under this Scheme
remained unspent. Position was the same upto third quarter of 2009-10. Similarly, Scheme of Book
Promotion which needs to be propagated extensively seems to be the most neglected as year after
year negligible allocation under this scheme somehow remained grossly under-utilised. The
Committee would like to point out that in the process of massive expansion of higher/technical
education, schemes like Book Promotion and Scholarships should not be allowed to be implemented
in a routine manner. Their role though smaller is equally crucial for our young students.
Action Taken
Scholarship
In 2007-08, Rs.14.00 crore was earmarked for the National Merit Scholarship Scheme. The
11
th Five Year Plan started w.e.f. 2007-08. The Planning Commission did not provide funds during
2007-08 for this scheme hence the scheme was discontinued w.e.f. 1.4.2007. Thus no expenditure
could be made for the scheme during that year.
In 2009-10, funds could not be utilized up to the 3 rd quarter of 2009-10 since it is only
after the process of admission is complete that the State Education Boards can prepare the final
eligibility list and send the same to this Department for sanction of funds. It is stated that all the

36
funds allocated for this scheme were ultimately utilized and scholarships were disbursed to the
eligible students through the respective State Education Boards.
Technical Education
The actual expenditure upto 31.3.2010 under Technical Education has gone up to
Rs.3628.39 crore against the RE of Rs.3687.00 crore. The unspent fund of Rs.51 crore
approximately is largely on account of non finalization of lands/sites for the proposed new IITs to
be set up during the period.
Book Promotion
As regards low level of utilization of funds by the end of first three quarters, the NBT  take
applications from the V oluntary Organizations and Publishers’ Association for organizing seminars/
book fairs in the different parts of the country. After receiving the applications, NBT scrutinize
the applications as per guidelines and put up for approval of the Grants-in-aid Committee.
The organizations take time in submitting the requisite documents. In some cases, fresh as well
as old observations are conveyed and furnishing the clarifications/documents by Grantees takes
time.
NBT had put up the scheme of Book Promotion on its website. To further popularize the
scheme, the NBT is advertising the scheme through newspapers also.
Apart from the above, the NBT has been advised to ensure full utilization of allocated funds
in a constructive manner.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department as it made a very
specific observations that smaller schemes like scholarships, Book Promotion are not
functioning smoothly and that the allocated funds are either not being spent or remain
under utilized. The reasons given by the Department are of routine nature and do not
appear to be convincing at all. The Committee therefore desires that these schemes which
are very important from the students point of view, needs special attentions because these
are crucial for them. The Committee, therefore, recommends that these schemes be
implemented seriously and sincerely so as to provide encouragement to our young students.
Recommendations/Observations
3.8 The Committee is surprised to find that shortfall is noticed even in the projections approved
by the Planning Commission for the Eleventh Plan. Out of projected outlay of Rs. 89,943 crore,
only Rs. 35,504 crore could be spent in the first three years of the Plan period. The Committee
can only conclude that given the poor utilization trend, the Department would not be able to meet
the shortfall between the projected outlay and the budget allocation. The Department shall have to
blame itself in case there is an overall cut by the Planning Commission in the projected outlay for
Twelfth Plan. Obviously the annual budgetary allocations are also likely to be affected adversely.
There appears to be deficiencies in the financial management as well. The Department has got
money but it has not been able to utilize the same imaginatively and skillfully Though the
Department is claiming about a number of interventions introduced for access, excellence and
inclusiveness and also building a knowledge society, but the pace of expanding higher education is
not commensurate to the projected outlay approved by the Planning Commission. In such a
scenario, Department’s vision for investing 6 per cent of GDP for the Education Sector, seems to
be a distant dream. Given the level of utilization of allocated funds, the Committee is apprehensive

37
about the outcome of Departments’ efforts for increasing Gross Enrolment Ratio from 12.4 per
cent to 15 per cent by 2010-11. The Committee hopes the Department would adopt better fiscal
management techniques supported by strong monitoring mechanism to ensure that the outlays are
utilized optimally and the demand for higher allocation could be a justifiable preposition. The
Committee recommends that the Department should undertake quarterly review of allocation and
pace of expenditure as well as identifying deficiencies and shortfalls with a view to achieving the
target of 15 per cent GER at the end of Eleventh Plan.
Action Taken
It is a fact that out of the approved Plan outlay by NDC for XI
th Plan of Rs.84,943 crore,
Department incurred an expenditure of only Rs.17,808 crore during the last three years. Rs.35,504
crore as shown in the ATN is the total Plan and Non-Plan allocation for Department of Higher
Education during first 3 years of the XI
th Plan as per detailed given below:
(All figures in Rs. crores )
Year Plan Non-Plan Total
2007-08 6483 2729 9212
2008-09 7600 3259 10859
2009-10 9600 5833 15433
2010-11 1 1000 5694 16694
(proposed) (proposed) (proposed)
It is a fact that the funds allocated on year to year basis have not been fully utilized mainly
on account of spill over amount of the previous years, delay in implementation of OSC
recommendations on account of legal difficulties, delay in approval of projects, etc. It may be
mentioned that as a follow up of the Constitution (93
rd) Amendment Act, 2005, inserting clause (5)
in Article 15 of the Constitution of India, Parliament enacted the Central Educational Institutions
(Reservation in Admissions) Act, 2006 (CEI Act), making special provisions for reservation of seats
for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the Socially and Economically Backward Classes/
Other Backward Classes (SEBCs/OBCs) in admission to such institutions. In terms of section 6 of
the Act, Central Educational Institutions (CEIs) were to give effect to reservation of seats in
admissions to their academic sessions commencing on and from the calendar year 2007.  However,
a bunch of Writ Petitions were filed in the Apex Court, challenging the constitutional validity of
the 93
rd Amendment as well as the CEI Act, 2006. The Apex Court finally disposed of the petitions
on the 10 th April, 2008, upholding the constitutional validity of the 93 rd Amendment [Article 15(5)]
of the Constitution in so far as the Central Educational Institutions, established, maintained or aided
by the Central Government are concerned.
As regards the issue relating to delay in implementation of projects, the same has been
addressed in the meetings with the State Governments as well as CABE and Education Ministers’
Conference.  Some times allotment of land and other issues concerning the State Governments,
hampers the project implementation thereby non-utilising of the fund for the projects.  In order to
overcome the problem, Secretary (HE) is reviewing the Plan expenditure on regular basis and
appropriate measures are being taken for the timely execution of the project scheme.
As regards investment of 6% of GDP in education, Centre and State Governments both are
required to contribute adequately to education so as to reach expenditure of 6% of GDP on
education. While Central Government is making all efforts to increase the investment in education,
which can be vouched by enhanced allocation in education in XI
th Plan period vis-à-vis X th Plan, the

38
percentage of investment in education by States is not commensurate with the stipulation made in
the National Policy on Education of 1986 modified in 1992. It is worth mentioning that since 1999-
2000, while the Central expenditure in education as a percentage of GDP has gone up from about
0.61% to over 0.91% in the year 2006-07, the expenditure on education of all States put together
has gone down from about 3.58% in the year 1999-2000 to about 2.73% in the year 2006-07.
Comments of the Committee
Problems being faced in the implementation of Oversight Committee
recommendations have been cited as a major factor for under-utilisation of allocated funds.
The Committee would like to point out that legal difficulties have already been resolved by
the disposal of all the petitions on 10 April, 2008. More than two years have elapsed since
then. This cannot be considered a justified reason. The Committee views with great
apprehension the decreasing trend being noticed in the State contribution in GDP percentage
on education. Equally disturbing is very meager increase in Central share from 0.61% in
1999-2000 to 0.91% in 2006-07. Required initiatives need to be taken both at the State and
Central level.
IV. TARGETS FOR ELEVENTH PLAN
Recommendations/Observations
4.6 Closely related with the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) is the issue of access to education.
In spite of massive expansion in higher and technical education both in the Government and private
sector in the recent years, the fact remains that even meritorious students do not get the
opportunity to join course of their liking. Every year, students both talented and average students
compete for admission in IITs and IIMs and other premier educational institutions. However, very
few get admission in institutions of their choice. For example, during 2009, out of 3,84,977
students who sat for IIT entrance test, 3,74,942 failed to qualify. Such a trend is visible in other
Entrance Tests also. Not only this, State-wise details indicate that success rate of students from
N-E States like Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Ma nipur, Maghalaya and Sikkim in such exams is
virtually nil. Thus, issue of access to higher education, in spite of a large number of significant
initiatives taken by the Government continues to remain the major challenge. The Committee can
only say that more vigorous efforts with focus on weak areas are required to be continued for
quite some time. Though, the exact figures of students not able to get admissions in different
universities in Delhi was not made available to the Committee, gap between demand and supply is
very wide there also. The Committee would like the Department to consider this issue and devise
a mechanism by which such category of aspiring students get opportunities for higher education.
One straight answer to this issue could be to open more colleges and universities in the country
but at the same time the Department should also focus on diversifying the curriculum to include
other things that will be of help to students’ growth. The focus should be on developing students’
entrepreneur skills or providing vocational education to them. Committee feels that it is crucial to
improve the supply side response.
Action Taken
Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-2012) aims to increase the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GRE) by
5% by the end of the current Plan period. Several technical institutions are taking care of the
higher education in the North Eastern Region. Presently, there are two NITs located at Silchar
(Assam) and Agartala (Tripura). During the Eleventh Five Year Plan, there is a proposal to set up
10 New NITs out of which 6 NITs have been decided to be set up in NER at Meghalaya, Mizoram,

39
Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Sikkim. In addition, Government has set up 8 new IITs
at Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh), Patna (Bihar), Jodhpur (Rajasthan), Gandhinagar (Gujarat),
Bhubaneswar (Orissa), Ropar (Punjab), Indore (Madhya Pradesh), and Mandi (Himachal Pradesh)
and have started academic function. Further, the Eleventh Five Year Plan envisages the
establishment of ten more IIITs in the country in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode.
Government has also approved the establishment of 07 new IIMs at Shillong (Meghalaya), Rohtak
(Haryana), Ranchi (Jharkhand), Raipur (Chhattisgarh), Tiruchirappali (Tamil Nadu), Kashipur
(Uttarakhand) and Udaipur (Rajasthan). The Societies of all new IIMs have been registered and
RGIIM – Shillong has commenced first academic session from the academic year 2008-09 while
IIMs at Rohtak, Ranchi and Raipur have commenced their first academic session from the current
year 2010-11.
Government is also providing Central assistance to States to set up 374 Model Degree
Colleges in educationally backward Districts.
In order to enhance employability by creation of facilities for technical and skill oriented
courses, under the Sub-Mission of Polytechnics, this Ministry is extending financial assistance to
State Governments for setting up of 300 new polytechnics in unserved/under served Districts of
the Country. This is besides strengthening 500 existing polytechnics and modernizing them with the
introduction of courses in latest Technology. For Skill orientation of unorganized sectors, several
short term courses are offered through Community Development through Skill Building by
Polytechnics.
UGC has informed that it has taken a number of steps for providing education with
relevance. For example, education has been made career oriented by starting career counseling
cells, centers for studies in Social Exclusion and Inclusive Policy, Non-formal Education, Women
Education, Population Education and Adult Education etc. Thus, all possible efforts are being made
to develop students’ entrepreneur skills and providing vocational education.  A status note on Career
Oriented Courses.
Comments of the Committee
From the response of the Department it may be seen that most of the schemes which
have been mentioned therein are only on the paper as these are proposals to set up more
national level institutions for higher education to provide the necessary access to it. The
Committee feels that the issue of enhancement of GER and access to higher education
directly effects the careers of the students and therefore, needs special care and attention
and requires expeditious implementation. Also, the development of entrepreneurial skills
and vocational education would go along with improving the employability of the students.
The Committee therefore, again recommends that a better and effective mechanism may be
evolved to provide smooth and easy access to higher education so as to make them more
employable.
Recommendations/Observations
VI. HIGHER EDUCATION-QUALITY AND NEED FOR REFORMS
Recommendations/Observations
6.5 The Committee observes that higher education in our country is in a flux. It does not give
a coherent picture because we have various institutions, quality institutions and institutions which
do not have any quality at all. We have the institutions which give best of education and also

40
the institutions which provide substandard quality of education. With the number of institutions
continue to grow, a seemingly absence of quality is felt. We have poor infrastructure in most
of the universities and colleges. Our courses are irrelevant and there are very less number of
quality teachers in the institutions. One of the important reasons for poor quality of education
is that our libraries in the colleges and universities are not properly equipped. The Committee is
of the firm view that development of work culture in our educational system is the need of time.
We need to develop the talent who could infuse the quality aspect. Our institutions require a
visionary management, enlightened minds of faculty and inspired students  to produce quality
education .
Action Taken
Higher Education in India is a large and growing system with more than 500 university level
institutions and over twenty two thousand colleges both publicly and privately funded catering to
12.5 million students enrolled in the formal higher education system.
It has seen huge expansion in the last few years. Government’s aim is to increase the GER
to 25% by the end of the 2015-16 and 30% by 2020. To achieve this, the enrolments in
universities/colleges need to be substantially raised at an annual rate of 8.9% to reach 21 million
by 2011–12. This requires an additional enrolment of 870,000 students in universities and 6.13
million students in colleges. While the government is making every effort to ensure increase in
access to education by expansion and inclusion, ensuring improvement in quality throughout the
higher education system by initiating major institutional and policy reforms has also been at the
core of its efforts. Government has initiated several reforms in the higher education sector. A
legislation to provide for a new regulator subsuming the existing regulatory bodies in university,
technical and professional education with the main aim of overhauling the regulatory system is
being finalized. Government has also introduced four Bills providing for a mandatory accreditation;
prohibition and punishment of unfair practices in technical and medical education and in the
university system; an independent fast-track adjudication process to adjudicate disputes in higher
education and to facilitate the entry of foreign educational providers.
According to UGC, to ensure quality of higher education, it has taken a number of steps
in this direction like – framing of UGC (Minimum standards of Instructions for the grant of the
First Degree through formal Education Regulation) 2003, establishment of quality assessment cell
in universities and colleges; regulations for deemed universities; regulations for admissions and fees
in deemed universities; regulations for affiliation of colleges by the universities; (i) the UGC
(Minimum Qualification required for appointment and Career Advancement of teachers in
Universities and Institutions affiliated to it) (3
rd Amendment) Regulation 2009 and (ii) the UGC
(Minimum  Standards and Procedure for Award of M.Phil/Ph.D Degree) Regulation, 2009.
It is expected that major institutional and policy reforms initiated by the department coupled
with major academic and administrative reform measures initiated by UGC, will go a long way in
developing a work culture in our educational system.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee welcomes the introduction of four major Bills dealing with vital areas
of higher education. The Committee also takes note of formulation of regulations meant for
quality control of higher education by UGC. While all these initiatives can be considered a
step in the right direction, the Department will have to play a pro-active role in co-
ordination with State authorities so as to ensure the effective implementation of all these
measures.

41
Recommendations/Observations
6.8 The Committee appreciates the initiatives the Department has taken for the much awaited
reforms in the field of higher education. While examining the Demands for Grants of the
Department of Higher Education, the Committee also took opportunity to deliberate on the
impending educational reforms particularly with regard to the opening and recognition of different
sets of universities. In this context, the existing provisions of UGC Act and the Regulations came
under close scanner of the Committee. The Committee has noticed that our university education
is confronted with lot of practical difficulties in implementation of those provisions. Monitoring of
fees and quality of education in private universities being not fully under control of the
Government, both students as well as parents are facing a lot of problems. The issue of
indiscriminate recognition of institutions as Deemed to be Universities has become quite
controversial and the Apex Court is seized of the matter. Recently one more controversy has
generated in the conversion of Central Universities into State Universities and the glaring example
is Delhi Technical University, formerly known as Delhi College of Engineering (DCE). The students
of this University are up in arms against the granting of State University status to DCE which
before such conversion was part of Delhi University i.e. a Central University. The matter is now
sub-judice. There are other sets of university education in the name of foreign universities and also
fake universities which have opened campuses across the country. In a nutshell, a host of teething
problems have cropped up due to complexities of provisions under UGC Act and Regulations.
Needless to mention these infirmities have occurred because the existing policy for opening
universities is not clearly laid down and the regulations are open to different interpretations. The
Committee hopes that the Department will take into consideration all these issues and formulate a
comprehension policy/regulation while finalising the proposed legislation for National Commission
for Higher Education and Research.
Action Taken
It may be submitted that the matter concerning the Delhi College of Engineering (DCE) has
since been decided by the High Court of Delhi upholding its conversion through state legislation
as Delhi Technical University.
The proposal for the establishment of the NCHER has its origin in the Address of the
President to Parliament on 4
th June, 2009 wherein the Government declared its intent to establish
an overarching body in higher education to reform the current regulatory structure based on the
recommendations of the National Knowledge Commission and the Prof. Yash Pal Committee. The
Government has constituted a Task Force to aid and assist it in the establishment of a Commission
for Higher Education and Research. The Task Force has prepared a draft legislation which was
placed in the public domain for wider consultations. The Task Force has visited various locations
in the country to interact and consult prominent academics, educational administrators, Vice
Chancellors, and Education Secretaries of State Governments for suggestions on the draft proposal.
The Task Force has revisited the draft legislation on the basis of the suggestions received and
concerns expressed during the interactions. Since the Task Force has held such wider
consultations, it is expected that the draft legislation will suitably include comprehensive policy and
regulations to overcome the concerns expressed by the committee. It is expected to submit a final
proposal to the Government shortly. On receipt of the proposal, the Government would consider
the introduction of an appropriate legislation for the purpose, as suggested by the hon’ble
Committee.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes with disappointment the reply of the Department as it does not
throw any reflection on various issues highlighted  by it like monitoring of fees, quality of

42
education  in private universities, problems faced by  students  and parents, indiscriminate
recognition of deemed to be universities, fake universities to name few. These problems
areas may be dealt with when NCHER is established but till then these issues cannot be
sidestepped and we cannot close our eyes to them. The Committee, therefore, desires that
the Department must take corrective action to not only protect the student community
from harassment but also ensure that these unwanted unfair practices especially in the
private sector run institutions must be handled with strong hands.
VIII. V ACANCIES IN FACUL TIES OF CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES
Recommendations/Observations
8.9 The Committee observes that UGC was advised by the Department to notify qualifications
for Assistant Professor at the entry level in the first instance, so that Universities and colleges
which were in the process of recruiting fresh talent into teaching in these positions could do so
without any delay. However, the UGC issued a letter to all universities permitting them to go ahead
with the recruitment and promotion of teachers under the Career Advancement Scheme (CAS) as
per UGC Regulations of 2000 in the interim till the finalization of Regulations on service conditions
for teachers based on the recommendations of the Pay Review Committee. The Committee was
given to understand that the two letters appeared to have crossed each other. The latest position
was that the Department was in consultation with UGC to resolve the matter. The Committee is
not happy with this state of affairs. Both the UGC and the Department are mandated to
work in coordination so that all the Central Universities continue to function smoothly.
Action Taken
The Department and UGC work in tandem to ensure smooth functioning of Central
Universities. The draft UGC Regulations on “Minimum Qualifications for Appointment for Teachers
and Other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of
Standards in Higher Education in 2010” have since been approved by the Government with slight
modifications, keeping in view the representations against certain provisions of the Regulations
which it had received from Federation of Central University Teachers Association (FEDCUTA).
Comments of the Committee
The Committee while noting the reply of the Department regarding in tandem
working with the UGC still feels that there is something important lacking between the
Department and the UGC. The Committee however, hopes that in future there would be
complete harmony between the two for smooth functioning and generation of synergy to
overcome various problems.
Recommendations/Observations
8.10 The Committee notes that an operation of Faculty Recharge is being launched, under which
1000 faculty positions are being created and to be filled at national level through global
advertisement. Despite seeking details in that regard, the feedback was not received from the
Department. The Committee would like to know the status of the scheme.
Action Taken
According to UGC, for implementation of this scheme the MoU has been signed between
UGC & JNU as per the recommendation of the M.M. Sharma Empowered Committee. UGC has

43
sanctioned a sum of Rs.25.00 lacs for establishment of UGC cell in JNU. The UGC would be
providing financial assistance to JNU to create the UGC facility at JNU for the programme and for
its maintenance. UGC has informed that draft advertisement for inviting applications from
outstanding highly motivated individuals for positions of Assistant Professors, Associate Professor
and Professor has been deliberated in the Empowered Committee meeting held on 3 rd May, 2010.
The same may be finalised in the meeting of the Empowered Committee so that it may be
Advertised in leading Journals/Newspapers. The proposed budget estimate for “Operation Faculty
Recharge” the year 2010-2011 is Rs.30.00 crores.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee appreciates the efforts made in implementing the faculty Recharge
Scheme but feels that it is still lying at a nascent stage only. It appears that only half
backed reply has been giving. The Committee, therefore, desires that the scheme may be
implemented more speedily and its complete and up-to-dated status may be furnished at the
earliest.
XI. PRIV ATE UNIVERSITIES IN THE COUNTRY
Recommendations/Observations
Para 11.3 The Committee is aware about the role of private investment in the field of higher
education given the existing constraints, the country is confronted with so far as needs of higher
education are concerned. However, the experience of private universities has been a mixed one. We
have got some world class universities set up in private sector. In contrast, there are private
institutions operating at the cost of quality education. In either case these institutions are blamed
for exorbitant fees being charged from students. The quality of education in some cases has
also been found questionable. There being no firm regulation the students have been the
victims and the education the casualty. In such a scenario, less than half of the private
universities being inspected by UGC so far cannot be considered a very satisfactory
situation. Secondly, it is also not known whether serious shortcomings were noticed in the
functioning of the inspected private universities. Details of follow-up action are also not
known. The Committee would appreciate if information about private universities found
wanting is given wide publicity through print and electronic media. The Committee would
like to have a status note in this regard along with the private universities to be inspected
and by when.
Action Taken
UGC has informed that as on 21.05.2010 there are 60 Private Universities  established by
the State Legislatures. Out of the 60 Universities 29 have been inspected so far on the basis of
UGC (Establishment of and Maintenance of Standards in Private Universities) Regulation, 2003.
The Commission, as part of the normal process of inspection, uploads on its website the
information regarding names of the inspected Universities and the report of the Expert Committee.
The Commission has assured that, as desired by the Committee, it would draw up a time bound
plan of inspection of the remaining private universities.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is constraint to note that no corrective steps have been taken by the
Department to control whims of the Private Universities which are functioning as
independent entities without adhering the rules and regulations of the UGC (Establishment

44
of and Maintenance of Standards in Private Universities) Regulation, 2003. As per the data
made available by the Department, out of 60 Private Universities, only 29 Private
Universities have been inspected by the UGC under its Act as on 19
th May, 2010. The
Committee notes that it is matter of serious concern to check functioning, including quality
of education, faculty position, fee structure, syllabus standard, etc., of these Universities.
The Committee opines that more and more stringent regulations should be brought in by
the Department so as control disorder prevailing in these universities.
XII. STA TUS OF WOMEN IN HIGHER EDUCATION
Recommendations/Observations
12.3 The women study centres have played a prominent role in achieving the objective of
increasing women’s enrolment in higher education. The present number of 131 centres, in the
opinion of the Committee, is not commensurate to the number of universities which is at present
504. That means only 22 per cent universities have women study centres while remaining 78 per
cent are yet to set up these centres. The Committee would like the Department to devise a time
bound action plan to cover all the universities and even expand the scheme to all institutions of
technical education in view of increasing enrolment of women in these institutions as well.
Action Taken
As per information provided by UGC, prior to Eleventh Plan, there were 67 Women Study
Centres established in various Universities/Colleges. During Eleventh Plan, the proposals for
establishment of Women’s Studies  Centres were invited by UGC from all the  Universities and
colleges covered under Section 2(f) & 12 (B) of  UGC  Act 1956. Total 185 proposals were
received from various Universities and Colleges for establishment of Women Study Centres out of
which 65 proposals were approved by the Standing Committee appointed by it. Now there are
132 Women’s Study Centres (72 in Universities and 60 in Colleges). 29 Universities/Colleges were
requested by UGC to send revised proposals as per Eleventh Plan guidelines of the scheme and
keeping in view the recommendations of the Standing Committee. At present, 26 proposals are
pending with the Standing Committee. The same, alongwith proposals received thereafter, will be
considered by the Standing Committee.
Comments of the Committee
It is matter of serious concern that out of 185 proposals received from various
Universities and Colleges for establishment of Women Study Centr es, only 65 proposals
were approved by the Standing Committee established by the Department. It seems that the
norms framed by the Department for the establishment of the Women Study Centres are
strict. The Committee recommends that the Department should simplify these norms and
a drive should be launched so as to cover more and more States for this purpose, which,
in turn, would promote the higher studies amongst women .
(iii) Construction of Women Hostels for Colleges
Recommendations/Observations
12.8 The Committee notes that out of 2208 colleges assisted for women hostels during the
Eleventh Plan, maximum number of such hostels getting grant is in Maharasthra (607), Karnataka
(238), Andhra Pradesh (207), Tamil Nadu (174), Assam (164) and U.P. (107). The Committee
would like to be apprised about the break-up of women hostels set up in urban/rural areas

45
and metro/non-metro city-wise. The Committee would also appreciate if an assessment is
made about the functioning of these women hostels so as to have an idea about the problem
areas and corrective measures required therefore.
Action Taken
The desired information as received from UGC is tabulated below:
 ( Rupees in lakhs )
State Urban Areas Rural areas
No. of Amount Amount No. of Amount Amount
colleges allocated paid colleges allocated paid
Andhra 98 3258.80 2248.13 51 1569.04 1185.97
Pradesh
Arunachal 01 45.00 30.00 01 25.00 22.50
Pradesh
Assam 58 2380.50 1341.00 71 3018.55 1515.31
Bihar 50 3283.90 1541.95 59 3364.11 1619.55
Chhattisgarh 11 842.38 446.19 09 479.00 2.19
Jharkhand 10 798.29 399.14 06 455.22 227.61
Karnataka 108 47.56 29.5 130 65.54 39.73
Kerala 60 36.63 17.24 87 42.37 27.78
Madhya 51 3209.73 1657.61 22 1207.60 6.66
Pradesh
Maharashtra 468 21266.86 10607.79 139 9864.05 4239.09
Manipur 13 382.40 291.25 10 286.35 153.75
Meghalaya 08 470.22 275.00 06 354.00 178.10
Mizoram 09 375.00 237.00 08 336.92 160.27
Nagaland 05 170.00 120.75 03 80.00 62.50
Orissa 53 3204.22 1533.36 95 5002.76 2428.46
Rajasthan 34 2161.11 1189.30 01 40.00 0.20
Tamil Nadu 46 1252.59 834.29 71 2232.80 1613.43
Tripura 02 60.00 30.50 00 0.00 0.00
West Bengal 55 4133.93 1990.77 43 2686.33 1259.93
TOTAL 1140 47379.12 24820.77 812 31109.64 14743.03
UGC has informed that as desired by the Committee it would take appropriate steps for
assessment of the scheme so that the problem areas are known and corrective measures required
can be taken.

46
Comments of the Committee
The Committee had been given to understand that under this Scheme, preference is
given for the construction of Women Hostels for colleges located in rural areas followed by
those located in urban areas and lastly in metro cities. State-wise details furnished by the
Department clearly indicate that Women Hostels set up in urban areas is higher than those
set up in rural areas. Not only this, the Committee is surprised to note that gap between
urban and rural areas Women Hostels is very wide in respect of some States, i.e. Andhra
Pradesh (Urban-9 and Rural-51), Madhya Pradesh (Urban-51 and Rural-22), Maharashtra
(Urban-468 and Rural-139) and Rajasthan (Urban-34 and Rural-1). The Committee views
with serious concern non-adherence to the prescribed norms. The Committee is also
constrained to observe that funds released to various States are less than half of total
allocated funds position being very unsatisfactory in respect of Women Hostels located in
rural areas. The Committee strongly feels that this scheme is yet to take off in the real
sense. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates that an assessment about the status of
Women Hostels for colleges needs to be made without any further delay, followed by
corrective measures.
Recommendations/Observations
12.11  The Committee appreciates the initiatives with regard to scholarship for single girl
child. However, uneven spread of this scheme needs to be looked into. A fixed number of
scholarships per State on the pattern of Scheme of Scholarship for College and University
Student can be included. The scheme also needs more publicity to educate the masses
particularly in our rural and remote areas about the benefits of the scheme so that they
get motivated to send girl child for higher education. The Committee hopes that
Department would adopt a focused approach towards this scheme to ensure equal
opportunity to women and increasing the overall GER in higher education.
Action Taken
UGC has informed that communication is being sent to all the Universities and PG colleges
to publicize the scheme of Indira Gandhi Scholarship for Single Girl Child so that people get
motivated to send girl child for higher education. Committee’s suggestion that fixed number of
scholarships per State on the pattern of Scheme of Scholarship for College and University Student
has been noted and UGC will take appropriate measures to modify the scheme so that due
representation to all the States is ensured.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is happy to note that some initiatives have been taken to give
publicity to the Scheme of Indira Gandhi Scholarship for Single Girl child. The Committee
would appreciate if the exercise of modifying the scheme so as to have fixed number of
scholarships per State is expedited.
(v) POST DOCTORAL FELLOWSHIPS FOR WOMEN
Recommendations/Observations
12.12 This scheme is meant for the unemployed women candidates holding Ph.D Degree in their
respective subject area. The number of slots available under the scheme is 100 per year. The tenure
of the award is five years @ Rs. 6000 per month and Rs. 8000 per month. The Committee notes
that an amount of Rs. 9.98 lakhs has been released during 2009-10 upto 31-12-2009.

47
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
12.13 On a specific query the Committee was informed that the applications for 2008-09 have
been invited by the UGC and the meeting of the Screening Committee for short listing of
applications was fixed for 5-7 April, 2010. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for
undue delay in the award of fellowships. Action needs to be taken on an urgent basis so
that the selection process does not become a protracted exercise. The Committee would like
to have a status report along with the details of monitoring mechanism, if any, for the
scheme.
Action Taken
UGC has informed that, under the scheme, application for the year 2008-09 were called for
during the months of September-October 2009 and the Expert Committee to screen the applications
and shortlist the candidates was constituted in January, 2010. The first meeting of the Expert
Committee was held on 5
th to 7 th April, 2010 to screen the applications and short-list the candidates
for award of the fellowships. About 1500 applications were received out of which about half of
the applications were scrutinized during the first meeting.  Since the remaining applications were
largely from language and science stream, and keeping in view the volume of work, the Committee
had proposed that there should be two more members one each to scrutinize the applications of
the language and the other for the science stream to complete the task in hand.
Accordingly, two more experts were nominated by the Chairman, UGC during May, 2010
and the second meeting of the Expert Committee was fixed on 15
th to 17 th June, 2010 to screen
the remaining applications. Screening will be followed up by inter-face meeting with short-listed
candidates.
UGC has been suggested to device appropriate monitoring mechanism to cut short the delay
in the award of fellowship.
Comments of the Committee
Feedback detailing the exercise of selection of candidates for award of Post Doctoral
Fellowships for women for the year 2008-09 confirms Committee’s apprehensions about
undue delay taking place under the Scheme. The very fact that applications for 2008-09
were invited as late as in September-October, 2009 and by June, 2010 Screening Process of
applications remained to be over. The Committee has its doubt about the final outcome of
this process. The Very fact that about 1500 applications were received indicates that
adequate number of beneficiaries is there. The Committee reiterates that such well-
intended schemes are mandated for the implementation in the real sense.
XIII. INCLUSIVENESS IN HIGHER EDUCATION
Recommendations/Observations
13.1 The Committee is happy to note that UGC is implementing a number of schemes as listed
below keeping in view the needs and constraints of students belonging to disadvantaged social
groups:

48
■ Establishment of Equal Opportunity Cells for SC/ST/OBCs/Minorities.
■ Establishment of Residential Coaching Academy for SC/ST/Minorities and Women in
Universities and Colleges.
■ Post Doctoral Fellowship for SC/ST.
■ Post Graduate Scholarships for SC/ST students in professional courses.
■ Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SC/ST
Action Taken
No comment to offer as the statement is based on facts.
Recommendations/Observations
13.2 The Committee has noted that the special component plan allocation for these disadvantaged
social groups has decreased from 16.2 per cent in 2009-10 to 13.2 per cent 2010-11. In terms
of amount Rs. 330 crores was denied to the SCP. Similarly the allocation for TSP comes out to
only 4.5 per cent against 8.1 per cent last year which means an amount of Rs. 392 crores has
been denied to the TSP. Given this declining trend of allocation the Committee is of the opinion
that the objectives of inclusive education would remain elusive. No replies to the query of
Committee seeking details of Equal Opportunity Cells and the monitoring mechanism with regard
thereto was received from the Department. The Department has also preferred to remain silent on
the status of Residential Coaching Academies and the details about post doctoral fellowship given
to SC, ST. The Committee, therefore, feels constrained to make any recommendations on these
two important interventions in the absence of all these details. It would like the Department to
furnish the requisite information within one month of the presentation of this Report. The
Committee also feels that wide publicity at regular intervals through print and electronic media and
also at university/college level needs to be given to such schemes. Only then the targeted
beneficiaries would be covered optimally.
Action Taken
The objective of setting up Equal opportunity Cells (EOCs) was to put emphasis on learning
and creating space for the deprived groups to bring them to the mainstream. The cells are expected
to run specific schemes of coaching for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, OBC (Non creamy
layer) and Minorities in order to enhance their employability. One time grant of Rs.2.00 lakhs for
establishing office of Equal Opportunity Cell is provided by UGC to Central Universities, State
Universities and Institutions Deemed to be Universities.
According to the information provided by UGC, it has provided assistance for establishment
of Equal Opportunity Cells to 22 Central Universities, 12 Institutions Deemed to be Universities and
89 State Universities. According to UGC funds for establishment of Equal Opportunity Cells are
provided as component of the Merged Schemes of UGC for which a composite assessment is
carried out at the conclusion of the plan period.
UGC has assisted 118 Universities including 23 Central Universities, 12 Institutions Deemed
to be Universities and 83 State Universities, under the coaching schemes for disadvantaged sections
of society. UGC has provided grants to the extent of Rs.46.31 crore to 4 Universities (3 Central
and 1 Deemed University) for establishment of residential coaching academies for students from
the minority community in FY 2009-10 viz., Aligarh Muslim University, Maulana Azad National Urdu
University, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University and Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi .

49
The onus for implementation of the Schemes, including adequate local publicity to attract
eligible students, is cast by UGC upon the concerned university. No assessment of outcomes of
the Coaching Schemes has yet been conducted by UGC.
As regards the Post-Doctoral Fellowship for SC/ST candidates, during the XI Plan, UGC
has awarded 100 Fellowships, 91 Fellowships and 100 Fellowships in 2006-07, 2007-08 and
2008-09 respectively. UGC has informed that the selection of fellowship awardees will be finalized
by the commission shortly for the year 2009-10.
Comments of the Committee
Details furnished about the Status of Residential Coaching Academics in Aligarh
Muslim University, Maulana Azad National Urdu University, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar
University and Jamia Hamdard are not very encouraging. Not only there are very visible
gaps in funds sanctioned and released, hostel facilities have also not been made available
so far. Although few students have been enrolled under the Scheme by the four universities,
in the absence of any assessment, it is not possible to have an idea about the exact status
of this scheme. The Committee strongly feels that centre’s role cannot remain restricted to
formulation of a scheme and provision of funds therefore. The Department/UGC has to play
a pro-active role in co-ordination with the implementing agencies.
XV. EDUCATIONAL LOAN INTEREST SUBSIDY
Recommendations/Observations
15.3 While the Committee appreciates the noble objectives behind the scheme, it is of the opinion
that the cut off point of Rs. 4.5 lakh parental income is too restrictive and would benefit very few
families given the poor income level of majority of our countrymen. Higher education being costlier
is getting beyond the reach of middle class leave alone the poor masses of the country. Therefore,
the ceiling of Rs. 4.5 lakh per annum needs to be raised appropriately in view of increasing
financial burden due to general inflationary trend. The Committee would like the Department to
explore the feasibility of raising the parental income ceiling to Rs. 10 lakh per annum considering
the increased cost and fee structure in these institutions so that more and more students get benefit
of the scheme.
Action Taken
It is submitted that under the Scheme of interest subsidy on Educational Loan, the cut-off
point in respect of income has been presently kept at Rs.4.5 lakh for the economically weaker
sections,  (for example, as in the case of non-creamy layer of OBC population) and is subject to
revisions from time to time.
The Ministry shares the concern expressed by the Hon’ble Committee.  However, with a
view to enable more students to purse higher education, a proposal is under consideration for
setting up a National Education Finance Corporation (NEFC).
Under this proposal, the NEFC will, among other things, grant loans and advances to any
scheduled public sector bank or such other financial institutions approved by the corporation for
refinancing of educational loans to students. The proposed NEFC will also set up an endowment
and corpus management fund of higher educational institutions which can manage the endowment
funds of the universities and higher educational institutions and provide a higher return than bank
deposits. The proposal for National Education Finance Corporation (NEFC) is with the Planning
Commission for its advice.

50
Comments of the Committee
As pointed out by the Committee earlier, higher education being costlier is getting
beyond the reach of middle class, leave alone the poor masses of the country and the ceiling
of Rs. 4.5 lakh parental income per annum needs to be raised appropriately in view of
increasing financial burden due to general inflationary trend. The proposal of the
Department for setting up a National Education Finance Corporation (NEFC) for refinancing
of educational loans to students would not help in meeting the financial requirements of the
students. Even if it is implemented, student should be given soft loans on subsidy basis. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that those students who has been selected by scheduled
public sector banks which are covered under National Education Finance Corporation (NEFC)
should be directed to provide soft loan to the students who desire to pursue the higher
studies and that the process should be speedily computed.

51
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
- NIL -
51

52
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee made a specific observation that the allocations for the Department
are lower than vision statement. Although there has been a tremendous increase in the
allocation over the years however, fact remains that it is yet to attain the level of six
percent as has been declared in various five year plans and policies of the Government. The
Committee again reiterates that this process of gradual increase should be speeded up to
ensure that the desired levels of allocations are attained at the earliest. (Para 2.4)
III. UTILISATION OF FUNDS
The plea of the Department for the under-utilisation of the Plan Fund allocation
during the year 2009-10 is not only unrealistic but also based on wrong interpretation. Out
of the total of Rs. 9600 crores, allocated as the Plan allocation to the Department during
this period at BE level, only Rs. 4976 crores pertain to the universities and higher
education. As per data provided by the Department, out of Rs. 4976 crores, only Rs. 4376
crores have been earmarked for the UGC. And even out of this amount (Rs. 4376 crores),
only a meager amount of 827 crores has been reserved for the establishment of the new
central universities. The Committee fails to understand the reasons such as delay in the
finalization of sites, allotment of lands, development of permanent campuses, etc. for the
establishment of new central universities. Committee opines that there are many other grey
areas where the Department is lagging behind in timely implementation thereof because of
which the funds allocated to the Department are being grossly under-utilised. The
Committee would like the Department to make an introspection in the under-utilisation of
the plan fund allocation and bring out all grey areas wherever the Department is lagging
behind its projections. (Para 3.1)
The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Department regarding
infrastructure development at the central universities. However, the Committee feels that
still a lot needs to be done as the work in at least 3 universities viz. Bihar, Kerala and
Jammu, is yet to be finalized. A strict, monitoring is required for the purpose to achieve
any tangible results. It, therefore, again reiterates its earlier recommendation that a time
schedule should be drawn up and timelines are strictly adhered to. (Para 3.4)
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department as it made a very
specific observations that smaller schemes like scholarships, Book Promotion are not
functioning smoothly and that the allocated funds are either not being spent or remain
under utilized. The reasons given by the Department are of routine nature and do not
appear to be convincing at all. The Committee therefore desire that these schemes which
are very important from the students point of view, needs special attentions because these
are crucial for them. The Committee, therefore, recommends that these schemes be
implemented seriously and sincerely so as to provide encouragement to our young students.
(Para 3.5)
Problems being faced in the implementation of Oversight Committee
recommendations have been cited as a major factor for under-utilisation of allocated funds.
52

53
The Committee would like to point out that legal difficulties have already been resolved  by
the disposal of all the petitions on 10 April, 2008. More than two years have elapsed since
then. This cannot be considered a justified reason. The Committee views with great
apprehension the decreasing trend being noticed in the State contribution in GDP percentage
on education. Equally disturbing is very meager increase in Central share from 0.61% in
1999-2000 to 0.91% in 2006-07.  Required initiatives need to be taken both at the State and
Central level. (Para 3.8)
IV. TARGETS FOR ELEVENTH PLAN
From the response of the Department it may be seen that most of the schemes which
have been mentioned therein are only on the paper as these are proposals to set up more
national level institutions for higher education to provide the necessary access to it. The
Committee feels that the issue of enhancement of GER and access to higher education
directly effects the careers of the students and therefore, needs special care and attention
and requires expeditious implementation.  Also the development of entrepreneurial skills
and vocational education would go along with improving the employability of the students.
The Committee therefore, again recommends that a better and effective mechanism may be
evolved to provide smooth and easy access to higher education so as to make them more
employable. (Para 4.6)
VI. HIGHER EDUCATION-QUALITY AND NEED FOR REFORMS
The Committee welcomes the introduction of four major Bills dealing with vital areas
of higher education. The Committee also takes note of formulation of regulations meant for
quality control of higher education by UGC. While all these initiatives can be considered a
step in the right direction, the Department will have to play a pro-active role in co-
ordination with State authorities so as to ensure the effective implementation of all these
measures. (Para 6.5)
The Committee notes with disappointment the reply of the Department as it does not
throw any reflection on various issues highlighted  by it like monitoring of fees, quality of
education  in private universities, problems faced by  students  and parents, indiscriminate
recognition of deemed to be universities, fake universities to name few. These problems
areas may be dealt with when NCHER is established but till then these issues cannot be
sidestepped and we cannot close our eyes to them. The Committee, therefore, desires that
the Department must take corrective action to not only protect the student community
from harassment but also ensure that these unwanted unfair practices especially in the
private sector run institutions must be handled with strong hands. (Para 6.8)
VIII. V ACANCIES IN FACUL TIES OF CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES
The Committee while noting the reply of the Department regarding in tandem
working with the UGC still feels that there is something important lacking  between the
Department and the UGC. The Committee however, hopes that in future there would be
complete harmony between the two for smooth functioning and generation of synergy to
overcome various problems. (Para 8.9)
The Committee appreciates the efforts made in implementing the faculty Recharge
Scheme but feels that it is still lying at a nascent stage only. It appears that only half
backed reply has been giving. The Committee, therefore, desires that the scheme may be
implemented more speedily and its complete and up-to-dated status may be furnished at the
earliest. (Para 8.10)

54
XI. PRIV ATE UNIVERSITIES IN THE COUNTRY
The Committee is constraint to note that no corrective steps have been taken by the
Department to control whims of the Private Universities which are functioning as
independent entities without adhering the rules and regulations of the UGC (Establishment
of and Maintenance of Standards in Private Universities) Regulation, 2003. As per the data
made available by the Department, out of 60 Private Universities, only 29 Private
Universities have been inspected by the UGC under its Act as on 19
th May, 2010. The
Committee notes that it is matter of serious concern to check functioning, including quality
of education, faculty position, fee structure, syllabus standard, etc., of these Universities.
The Committee opines that more and more stringent regulations should be brought in by
the Department so as control disorder prevailing in these universities. (Para 11.3)
XII. STA TUS OF WOMEN IN HIGHER EDUCATION
It is matter of serious concern that out of 185 proposals received from various
Universities and Colleges for establishment of Women Study Centr es, only 65 proposals
were approved by the Standing Committee established by the Department. It seems that the
norms framed by the Department for the establishment of the Women Study Centres are
strict. The Committee recommends that the Department should simplify these norms and
a drive should be launched so as to cover more and more States for this purpose, which,
in turn, would promote the higher studies amongst women . (Para 12.3)
(iii) Construction of Women Hostels for Colleges
The Committee had been given to understand that under this Scheme, preference is
given for the construction of Women Hostels for colleges located in rural areas followed by
those located in urban areas and lastly in metro cities. State-wise details furnished by the
Department clearly indicate that Women Hostels set up in urban areas is higher than those
set up in rural areas. Not only this, the Committee is surprised to note that gap between
urban and rural areas Women Hostels is very wide in respect of some States, i.e. Andhra
Pradesh (Urban-9 and Rural-51), Madhya Pradesh (Urban-51 and Rural-22), Maharashtra
(Urban-468 and Rural-139) and Rajasthan (Urban-34 and Rural-1). The Committee views
with serious concern non-adherence to the prescribed norms. The Committee is also
constrained to observe that funds released to various States are less than half of total
allocated funds position being very unsatisfactory in respect of Women Hostels located in
rural areas. The Committee strongly feels that this scheme is yet to take off in the real
sense. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates that an assessment about the status of
Women Hostels for colleges needs to be made without any further delay, followed by
corrective measures. (Para 12.8)
The Committee is happy to note that some initiatives have been taken to give
publicity to the Scheme of Indira Gandhi Scholarship for Single Girl child. The Committee
would appreciate if the exercise of modifying the scheme so as to have fixed number of
scholarships per State is expedited. (Para 12.11)
(v) POST DOCTORAL FELLOWSHIPS FOR WOMEN
Feedback detailing the exercise of selection of candidates for award of Post
Doctoral Fellowships for women for the year 2008-09 confirms Committee’s apprehensions
about undue delay taking place under the Scheme. The very fact that applications for
2008-09 were invited as late as in September-October, 2009 and by June, 2010 Screening

55
Process of applications remained to be over. The Committee has its doubt about the final
outcome of this process. The Very fact that about 1500 applications were received
indicates that adequate number of beneficiaries is there. The Committee reiterates that
such well-intended schemes are mandated for the implementation in the real sense.
(Paras 12.12 and 12.13)
XIII. INCLUSIVENESS IN HIGHER EDUCATION
Details furnished about the Status of Residential Coaching Academics in Aligarh
Muslim University, Maulana Azad National Urdu University, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar
University and Jamia Hamdard are not very encouraging. Not only there are very visible
gaps in funds sanctioned and released, hostel facilities have also not been made available
so far. Although few students have been enrolled under the Scheme by the four universities,
in the absence of any assessment, it is not possible to have an idea about the exact status
of this scheme. The Committee strongly feels that centre’s role cannot remain restricted to
formulation of a scheme and provision of funds therefore. The Department/UGC has to play
a pro-active role in co-ordination with the implementing agencies. (Paras 13.1 and 13.2)
XV. EDUCATIONAL LOAN INTEREST SUBSIDY
As pointed out by the Committee earlier, higher education being costlier is getting
beyond the reach of middle class, leave alone the poor masses of the country and the ceiling
of Rs. 4.5 lakh parental income per annum needs to be raised appropriately in view of
increasing financial burden due to general inflationary trend. The proposal of the
Department for setting up a National Education Finance Corporation (NEFC) for refinancing
of educational loans to students would not help in meeting the financial requirements of the
students. Even if it is implemented, student should be given soft loans on subsidy basis. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that those students who has been selected by scheduled
public sector banks which are covered under National Education Finance Corporation (NEFC)
should be directed to provide soft loan to the students who desire to pursue the higher
studies and that the process should be speedily computed. (Para 15.3)

MINUTES

XII
TWELVETH-MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the
17th January, 2011 in Committee Room. ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
LOK SABHA
5. Shri P.K Biju
6. Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela
7. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
8. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
10. Shri P.C Gaddigoudar
11. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
12. Shri P. Kumar
13. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
14. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
15. Shri Ashok Tanwar
16. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
17. Shri Joseph Toppo
18. Shri Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
19. Shri P. Vishwanathan
20. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
59

60
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened for consideration and adoption of four Action Taken Reports on 219 th, 220 th, 221 st and
222nd Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of the Departments/Ministries
under the purview of the Committee and also the Report on the Architects (Amendment) Bill, 2010.
** *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.05 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

61

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.