145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED – FORTY FIFTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE HUNDRED THIRTY NINTH     REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS 2003-2004 (DEMAND NO. 57) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF SECONDARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION
 (MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   12TH DECEMBER, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2003)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)
E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
                                                                       Website: http//parliamentofindia.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.         PREFACE
3.         REPORT        
CHAPTER I    Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee          
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final Replies of the Government are still
awaited
ANNEXURE                                                                                                                                                              
                                      
4.         MINUTES
      
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
(2003)
 
Shri Arjun Singh           ¾¾                Chairman
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Dr. Abrar Ahmed        
Dr. Akhilesh Das
Shri B.P. Apte 
Shri Bachani Lekhraj
Shri Eduardo Faleiro
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
Shri Lalhmingliana
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi
Shri R. Sarath Kumar
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
^Shri Mrinal Sen
Smt. Vanga Geetha
*Shri Dara Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri Ambareesha
Shri Ramakant Angle
Shri Kirti Jha Azad
Shri G. S. Basavaraj
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria
Prof. Kailasho Devi
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
Shri R.L. Jalappa
Shri Baliram Kashyap
Shri Brij Lal Khabri
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Y.G. Mahajan
#Shri  G.Mallikarjunappa
Dr. Manda Jagannath
Smt. Nivedita Mane
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
^ Ceased to be member w.e.f.26
th August, 2003
*  Nominated   w.e.f. 26th September, 2003.
# Died on 30th November, 2003.
 
^Shrimati Jas Kaur Meena
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik
Smt. Renu Kumari
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
Shri Sunil Dutt
Shri Ramsheth Thakur
Dr. N. Venkataswamy
Smt. Ganti Vijaykumari
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
*Shri G.J. Javia
*Shri Ali Mohammed Naik
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
^ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 29
th   January, 2003
*  Nominated   w.e.f. 7th April, 2003.
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this
Hundred-Forty Fifth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Hundred Thirty
Ninth Report onDemands for Grants (Demand No.57) of the Department of Secondary and Higher Education,  Ministry
of Human Resource Development for the year 2003-2004.
2.         The Hundred Thirty Ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23
rd  April, 2003.  Replies
of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on
the 9th December, 2003.
 
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 9
th December,  2003.
 
NEW DELHI;
December 9, 2003      
Agrahayana 18, 1925 (Saka        
ARJUN SINGH
Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development
REPORT
 
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in its One Hundred Thirty Ninth Report onDemands for Grants (Demand No.57) of the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development for the year 2003-2004 presented to Rajya Sabha and laid
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23
rd April, 2003.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in
the Report.  They have been categorized as follows:-
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 1.2, 2.3, 2.4, 3.2, 3.4, 5.3, 5.4, 6.3, 7.1,
7.2, 7.3, 8.3, 9.9, 9.11, 10.16, 10.17, 10.19, 12.9, 12.10
 (Chapter I) Total- 19
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
5.1, 5.2, 5.5

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
 (Chapter II) Total- 3
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee: 1.3, 1.4, 1.6, 2.2, 3.3, 3.5, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 6.2, 7.4, 8.4, 8.5, 9.6, 9.8, 9.10, 10.18, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 12.8
(Chapter-III) Total- 21
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited by the Committee:
 (Chapter IV) Total- NIL
CHAPTER I
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICHHAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
I           INTRODUCTION
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
1.2       The system of education in India has broadly been divided in two categories: elementary education and
secondary and higher education.  It has been observed over the years that new initiatives are being taken to strengthen
school education.  Programmes like National Open School (renamed National Institute of Open Schooling) are being
strengthened to reach out more and more children in distant areas. National Council of Educational Research and
Training is playing an active role in providing resource support in the areas of education research and training at school
level.  The Navodaya Vidyalayas have been set up with the objective of providing a progressive and forward-looking
school system in the rural areas.
 
Action Taken
 
1.2       The National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) provides opportunities for continuing education to those who
have missed opportunities to complete school and developmental education through courses and programmes of general,
life enrichment and vocational education from primary to pre-degree level.
 
            The enrolment at Secondary and Senior Secondary stage is approximately nine lakh.  With enrolment of such a
magnitude, the NIOS is operationalising the largest open schooling system in the World. The NIOS has a huge
infrastructure comprising five Departments at the Headquarters, ten Regional Centres and more than 2100 Study
Centres in various States of India.  Some Study Centres are located outside the country also, particularly in Canada,
Nepal and Middle East.
 
1.Some significant initiatives taken by NIOS are as follows:
Development of New Curricula and Self Learning Materials for Secondary stage keeping in view the provisos of the
National Curriculum Framework (2000).  The new curricula for Senior Secondary stage are being prepared.
NIOS took a bold initiative of starting Open Basic Education (OBE) programme for (i) children below 14 years and (ii)
adults above 14 years.  For implementation of OBE programme, the NIOS is partnering with NGOs and the Zila
Saksharta Samities (ZSSs) respectively.
           
 
3.         The NIOS is conducting the Child Labour Project in collaboration with (i) Union Ministry of Human Resource
Development and (ii) Union Ministry of Labour.
 
The NIOS has introduced about 60 Vocational Education Courses in major areas of Agriculture, Business and
Commerce, Engineering and Technology, Paramedical and Health, Applied Science and Social Services.  Some more
need based Vocational Education Courses are in the pipeline.
5.         The NIOS is developing reading materials for Life Enrichment Programmes (LEPs) such as (i) Bharatiya Culture
and Heritage, (ii) Education in Human Values, (iii) Peoples of India, (iv) Lives of Great Personalities of India, (v) Yog
and(vi) Performing Arts (Music, Dance, Painting).
6.         In order to make the NIOS Examinations more transparent, the NIOS switched over from home evaluation to
spot evaluation and complete computerization of processing of results.  The Question Papers and Marking Schemes are
placed on the Internet (websites www.nos.org and www.nios.ac.in) immediately after the examinations are over.  The

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
examination results are also placed on Internet.  At the time of examinations, observers are appointed at the levels of (i)
Regional Directors of NIOS and (ii) the Chairman, NIOS.  The observers send their reports daily by FAX which are
studied and suitable actions are taken. Under the Open Schooling System, the NIOS has envisaged an innovative ICT
based On Demand Examination System (ODES).  ODES envisages to give freedom to learner, to appear in examination
in the subjects of his/her choice whenever he/she feels confident of taking examination.  ODES has been started at Open
Basic Education terminal stage (equivalent to class VIII) in some Accredited Agencies.  Steps are being taken to launch
ODES at the Secondary stage from the academic session 2003-04.  Besides the registration of candidates for NIOS
courses through the Accredited Institutions (Study Centres), NIOS has started direct registration of candidates for its
examinations at Secondary and Senior Secondary levels from the academic year 2001-02.
7.         The NIOS has been organizing orientation programmes for the training of open schooling personnel at regional
level.  In order to make the orientation/training programmes more effective, training packages are being prepared.  The
NIOS has set up an International Centre for Training in Open Schooling (ICTOS).  This Centre is soon going to start
Certificate and Diploma Courses in Open Schooling for personnel from India and from other countries in collaboration
with Commonwealth of Learning (COL) and UNESCO.  The training of officials from Swaziland, Bangladesh and
Namibia is on cards.
 
8.         In its endeavour to promote open schooling in the country, NIOS has been persuading the States to set up State
Open Schools (SOSs).   Nine States (Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamilnadu, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Haryana) have already set up State Open Schools.  A State Centre for Open Schooling has been set
up in Himachal Pradesh.  A National Consortium for Open Schooling (NCOS) has been set up for promotion of Open
Schooling in India as also for discharging coordination and clearing house functions.  The Headquarter of NCOS is
located in NIOS.
 
            Negotiations are under way with more States (Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Jammu and Kashmir, Delhi etc.,)
for setting up State Open Schools (SOSs).
 
9.         In order to provide forums for exchange of ideas and information among various Commonwealth Countries, the
Open Schooling Association of Commonwealth (OSAC) has been set up.  NIOS acts as the Headquarter of OSAC. 
NIOS has started publishing, since November, 2001, the half-yearly “OSAC Journal of Open Schooling” of
international standard.
            In order to give fillip to the programme of international relations, the NIOS in collaboration with UNESCO-
BREDA and the Commonwealth of Learning (COL) organized an Advocacy Meet of Senior Decision Makers from
eleven African Countries (Bostwana, Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, Somalia, Swaziland, Tanzania,
Uganda, Zimbabwe) from 9
th to 13th September, 2002.  Besides detailed interaction with NIOS faculty members on
matters such as development of relevant and need based curricula and self-learning materials, modes of programme
delivery, teaching-learning strategies, training of personnel, methods of pupil evaluation and certification, life
enrichment programmes and innovative programmes like ICT based ‘On Demand Examination System’(ODES), the
delegates from the above mentioned countries prepared Draft Frameworks for Promotion of Open Schooling in their
respective countries.  A Memorandum of collaboration was also signed between NIOS and UNESCO-BREDA to
support development of open and distance learning at all levels of education and training in Sub-Saharan Africa.
II          BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.3       In absence of any authoritative figures the Committee has taken the total outlay (plan and non plan) of Rs.4749
crores and maximum number of students who registered themselves for 2002 examinations i.e. 530401.  The total outlay
per head comes to Rs.9345 half of which is non-plan expenditure.  The Plan expenditure per student is thus Rs.4500/-
approximately which includes expenditure on creation of infrastructure, peripheral or administrative expenditure.  The
net available per student is thus a pittance.  The Committee, therefore, observes that there is a need to provide more
funds in this section as this is an investment to secure the future of our young generation.  Government must provide at
least six percent of the national income to this sector, which is much starved of funds.
Action Taken:
 
2.3       The Budget Estimates during 2002-2003 was Rs. 4886.85 crore (Plan Rs. 2124.24 crore and Non-Plan Rs.
2762.61 crore).

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
            The National Policy on Education envisages that the investment on education be gradually increased to reach a
level of 6 per cent of the national income as early as possible.  It has been the constant endeavour to raise the allocation
for education, subject to availability of resources and other competing priorities.
 
 
Recommendation/Observation
2.4       At the same time in many of the schemes/projects, the Committee has observed that substantial funds are lying
with State Governments/NGOs and Utilization Certificates are not forthcoming from them for years together.  The
Committee does not know whether these funds have been utilized at all.  The Department must give a serious thought to
this aspect and take necessary remedial measures for optimum utilisation of funds.  
Action Taken
2.4       Under the Scheme of Educational Technology (ET), position regarding utilization of funds has not been
forthcoming from 17 States/UTs.  The matter is being vigorously pursued with the States/UTs.  As a result of the efforts
made by the Department, concrete action plan has been received from the States of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Punjab and Himachal Pradesh for revalidation of the Grant to enable the States to make the purchase of
Radio-cum-cassette-players (RCCPs)/ Colour TVs (CTVs).  Ministry of Human Resource Development has revalidated
the sanction for all the above States except Punjab from whom certain details have been sought.  The remaining
defaulting States have been asked to refund the amount by 15
th August, 2003 failing which the funds will be adjusted
under other Schemes of the Department, as the ET Scheme has since been discontinued.
 
            The grants under Scholarship Schemes are released to the States/UTs after getting their realistic requirement and
the unspent balance if any, lying with them.  The unspent balance is adjusted while releasing funds.  Whenever unspent
balances are lying with the States for long periods, they are requested to refund the same to the Government of India. 
The States are also requested, from time to time, at various levels, to report the progress of expenditure.
 
            According to the information furnished by the University Grants Commission, UGC does not justify the release
of grant to those institutions which have not submitted the utilization certificate of earlier grant received from UGC.  
On the contrary, all the universities have been informed that their proposals for 10
th Plan allocation will only be
considered by the UGC when the utilization certificate for the grants released in earlier years are submitted and found in
order.  The recent judgment of Hon’ble High Court has further strengthened the hands of the UGC which directs that no
grant would be released to any institutions unless the utilization certificate of the earlier grant are received.  The stand of
the UGC has been made very clear to the institutions, receiving non-plan and plan grant from the
Commission
III        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING
Recommendation/Observation
3.2                   The Committee notes with satisfaction that non-utilisation of funds has declined from 22.68 percent in
1999-2000 to about zero percent by 2002-2003.  In fact, the NCERT has asked for more funds than Rs.15.05 crore
which was allocated to it at RE stage for the financial year 2002-2003.  The Committee recommends that the
requirement of extra funds by NCERT must be looked into with a view to help the organization in its pursuits.
Action Taken
3.2                   The demand for grants for the year 2003-2004 has already been passed by the Parliament keeping in view
the requirement sent by the Council. If any additional funds will be required, the same will be considered at the time of
RE stage.
Recommendation/Observation :
3.4                   The Committee observes that there is need to cover more and more areas in a bid to vocationalise the
education.  At the same time, there is a need to introduce some ‘Earn and Learn’ kind of schemes to inculcate the
feelings of self-sufficiency among the students.
Action Taken
3.4                   New occupational areas are continuously being identified and curricula developed for the same.
                        Efforts are being made to encourage schools to start Production-cum-Training Centres (PTCs) wherein
the student trainees can get hands on experience of the work and have the opportunity of earning while learning. The
Guidelines for the start of PTC have been prepared by PSSCIVE, NCERT and sent to the States for adoption of the
same.

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
 
V         KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN
 Recommendation/Observation
5.3                   The Committee notes with concern the tardy pace of land transfers. The Committee observes that certain
transfer cases have been pending for last twenty seven years. The Committee desires that these cases be looked into with
a sense of urgency.
Action Taken
5.3                   During the last three years, KVS have been able to settle 65 cases of land transfer from the sponsoring
authority. For settlement of remaining cases, as per the observation raised by the Committee in its earlier report about
delays in transfer of land, Secretary, Ministry of HRD has taken up this issue through his DO letters to the Secretary,
Ministry of Defence, Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and Chief Secretary of concerned State to expedite transfer of
land to these Kendriya Vidyalayas being sponsoring agencies. (Annexure- I)
 
Recommendation/Observation
5.4                   The Committee has been informed that Government have since decided not to open new KVs. While the
rationale behind such a decision is not known to the Committee it feels that it is the responsibility of the State to cater to
the requirements of increasing population.  Such a decision would be inconsistent with the requirements of the
people.The Committee also notes that the KVS intend to open some new schools without creating any additional
liability on Non-Plan side.
Action Taken
5.4                   The Govt.’s approval for opening of 100 Kendriya Vidyalayas over a span of five years from the year
1993-94 expired in 1997-98.  In the absence of additional budget allocation under Non-Plan head of the budget, no new
Kendriya Vidyalaya could be opened thereafter (excepting against a few KVs closed/merged under Civil/Defence
Sector).
           
In compliance with the recommendations of the  Academic Advisory Committee of the Ke         ndriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan, the Sangathan has sanctioned expansion in about 200 existing Kendriya Vidyalayas, creating additional
avenues for the admissions.  The teachers identified surplus on account of marginal increase of their work-load have
been re-deployed meaningfully in existing Kendriya Vidyalayas where expansion was granted and by creating the
matching new posts, new Kendriya Vidyalayas could be opened up. The Sangathan has so far sanctioned 60 (sixty) new
Kendriya Vidyalayas in Civil Sector during the session 2003-2004 without burdening Government’s exchequer in this
regard.
VI        NAVODAYA VIDYALAYA SAMITI
Recommendation/Observation
6.3       The Committee, feels concerned about students who have dropped out. The Committee also notes with concern
that the target of constructing 275 Vidyalayas buildings during the Ninth Plan could not be achieved. The building
constructed were less by 27 in number. The Committee, recommends that the Department must examine the cases of
drop outs as also the non-achievement of the target of construction of buildings and take necessary remedial steps.
Action Taken
6.3       The reasons for not meeting the targets of constructing 275 Vidyalaya buildings during the 9
th Plan is mainly
due to non submission of suitable land & temporary accommodation proposal by the concerned State Govts.,
disturbances in the States like J&K, Meghalaya, Tripura &  Nagaland etc. and non availability of adequate funds to meet
out the time bound completion of construction of JNV buildings.
Efforts are being made to complete the construction of 86 JNV buildings as detailed below, subject to availability of
funds as per requirement:
 
1 No. of JNVs where construction work is sanctioned upto 15.6.03 425
2 No. of JNVs shifted to permanent site 339
3 JNV Pithoragarh (land dispute) 01
4 Position of remaining JNV:
 a)    To be completed by 12/03   -     44
b)    To be completed by 12/04   -     30
c)    To be completed by 12/05   -     02

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
d)    To be completed by 12/06   -     09
 
VII       VOCATIONALISATION OF EDUCATION
Recommendation/Observation
7.1       The Department has been implementing a centrally sponsored scheme of vocationalisation of secondary
education at 10+2 level since 1988 and in its revised format since 1992-93. The scheme has not been a runaway success
and acknowledging this, the working group under the chairmanship of Director, NCERT, recommended for the
establishment of block-level vocational training institutes, treating vocational stream at par with other streams of
education, appointment of full-time teachers, coordination and utilisation of resources with other implementing
agencies/ departments/ ministries, development of national vocational qualification of development of a short-term
course and linkages with major industrial outfits.
Action Taken
7.1       Keeping in view the recommendations of the Working Group of NCERT and other review committees the
scheme of vocationalisation of secondary education is being revised. The proposed revised scheme will be implemented
through schools/polytechnics etc. For treating the vocational education and training at par with other streams of
education, National Qualification Framework is being prepared. There is a provision for setting up National
Competency Testing Agency (NCTA) for assessing the competencies. The proposed scheme envisages full participation
of the concerned agencies/departments/ministries in the implementation process and utilization of resources. The
revised scheme will take care of the national level issues including recognition of short-term courses, linkage with
industry etc. No temporary or permanent posts are proposed to be created under the proposed revised scheme but the
teaching staff will be hired on contractual basis depending upon the requirement of the activities. For practical training
staff from the local industry/ user organization will be engaged
 
Recommendation/Observation
7.2       The Committee appreciates the proposed changes. In fact, the system of education developed during British
period and still being largely followed aims at producing white collar jobs which are decreasing day by day because of
Government's policy of down sizing and right sizing the Departments. The students thus face a bleak future with
growing unemployment. The Committee observes there is thus a need to re-orient the system of education by making it
more vocational to suit the present day situation and at the same time ensure balanced development as envisaged by
Mahatma Gandhi. Vocationalisation of the education should ensure that after completing certain level of education
students can stand in the world on their own. This would inculcate the sense of self-sufficiency among students and
possibly help in reduction of white-collar crimes, which are the result of one's hunger and bleak future sofar as
employment opportunities are concerned.
Action Taken
7.2       The proposed revised scheme envisages training of students in such occupational areas wherein self or wage
employment opportunities are available. The selection of the courses will be done on the scientific survey for manpower
need.
            Service sector courses shall be given high priority, due to high employment opportunity.
            A few areas in which sizeable jobs have been created and a good potential exists for the next five years is
indicated in Annexure - II
 
Recommendation/Observation
7.3       The Committee also desires that the participation of NGOs and voluntary organisations for implementation of
specific innovative projects for conducting short-term courses should be encouraged more vigorously. The Committee
apprehends that grants given to many NGOs are not being utilized for the purpose for which these are given to them.
The Committee also apprehends whether the NGOs are pursuing the mission for which they have come up. The
Committee, therefore, feels the need for an effective monitoring system which can oversee the implementation of the
schemes and note the concrete achievements, if any, made by the NGOs.
Action Taken
7.3       Under the revised Scheme, it is proposed to strengthen the NGOs sector by selecting only the credible NGOs for
implementing the scheme. For an effective monitoring system, a standard monitoring mechanism, known as
Management Information System (MIS), which shall help in expeditious information gathering from institutions at
various management structures, is proposed to be developed.
 

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
VIII      ACCESS WITH EQUITY
Recommendation/Observation
8.3       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the scheme would help in boosting girl's education, thereby, reducing
the gender gap. The scheme would also help in the expansion of infrastructure. Much more needs to be done to create
infrastructure to cater to the huge influx from elementary education level to secondary level.
Action Taken
8.3       The observations are noted for compliance.
IX        INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY IN SCHOOL
Recommendation/Observation:
The Committee also takes a serious view of under utilisation of the funds under the School Computer Literacy and
Studies in School (CLASS).
Action Taken
9.9       Under the CLASS Scheme, the entire amount of Rs.74 crore (RE) was released to States/UTs.  The BE was
reduced due to Budgetary constraints.  Thus, there was no shortfall in utilization of funds.
Recommendation/Observation
9.11     Under the scheme relating to audio programmes and procurement of CTV, the Committee feels that there is also
a need to produce sufficient number of programmes to cater to the educational needs of students. The Committee
recommends that the Department should take up the matter with appropriate agencies so as to gear them up for
production of adequate number of requisite programmes.
Action Taken
9.11     The educational audio/video programmes are being produced by the 7 State Institutes of Educational
Technology (SIETs), to telecast/broadcast on Gyan Darshan and Gyan Vani.  To gear up the production of such
programmes, during the 10
th Plan, SIETs will be provided funds on project mode, as a result of which the grants will be
linked with the number of programmes to be produced by each SIET during the year.
 
X         UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
Recommendation/Observation
10.16   The Committee appreciates the efforts of UGC in the field of university and higher education.  Higher education
system has made great strides under the aegis of UGC since independence as there has been a 13 fold increase in the
number of universities and a 26 fold increase in the number of colleges.  Still the fact remains that only 19% of students
are able to reach university education.  There is, thus, a need to make university and higher education system more need
based and responsive to the requirement of students so that more students can avail of these opportunities.
Action Taken
10.16   The access parameter (formal + non-formal) in the higher education in the relevant age group of 17-23 years
rose from 5.8% in 1992-93 to 6.9% in 1999-2000.  During the X Plan, UGC envisages to reach an access parameter of
10%.  This would be realized by ensuring the convergence between conventional & distance learning mode.  Besides,
efforts will also be made to encourage institutions to ensure optimum utilization of existing infrastructure by introducing
multiple shift system. 
            The UGC has already launched many programmes to make the education more relevant to the needs of the
society.  The major scheme of Vocational Education at the Undergraduate level has been designed to equip graduates
with necessary add on skill for gainful employment.  UGC during the X Plan has also decided to permit the students to
have dual degrees at the Undergraduate level whereby they shall be entitled to an additional certificate/diploma/
advance diploma in conjunction with the regular degree.
            The UGC also keeps a vigil on the curriculum revision to update it, in accordance with the needs of the society
and the time.
Recommendation/Observation
10.17   The Committee observes that UGC have developed a tendency to utilize the funds at the fag end of the year.  In
the year 2001-2002, UGC could utilize only 72.84% of its allocated plan funds till 13
th March, 2002.  However, it
reported full utilisation of entire allocation made to it viz. Rs.439.78 crore for the year 2001-2002 by 31st March, 2002. 
The Committee feels that such a trend reveals poor planning and inadequate monitoring of the funds allocated to UGC. 
The Committee feels that such last minutes spending defeats the very objective of planned development.  The
Committee therefore, observes that there should be adequate planning and monitoring to ensure the steady out flow of
funds through out the year.

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
Action Taken
10.17   UGC makes all efforts to ensure that the funds flow to the universities in a regular manner.  However, at times
due to lack of utilization certificates or progress report from the universities, UGC is constrained to withhold the funds
for a brief period of time.  The universities are pressurized to send utilization certificates well in time and whenever they
are received, the funds are released.  UGC is not able to sanction money without receiving utilization certificates for the
previous grants as per the directions of the High Court of Delhi on 24.10.2000 & 18.12.2000.  This leads to delay in
release of grants and at times more funds are released during the end of the financial year.
Recommendation/Observation
10.19   The Committee has been given to understand that there are a number of unaccredited universities in the country
to which UGC does not appear to have given a thought.  The UGC must initiate the exercise to determine the status of
such universities and, if infrastructure available in these universities meets the standard requirements laid down in this
regard, UGC must initiate steps to bring them to its fold.
Action Taken
10.19   The UGC has established National  Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC), Bangalore as an Inter-
University Centre of UGC in 1994 to assess and accredit institutions of higher learning and help them to continuously
upgrade the quality of education.  NAAC has so far accredited 533 educational institutions (97 universities & 456
colleges) spread over 24 States.  The UGC has made accreditation through NAAC mandatory for all the universities and
colleges under UGC’s purview.
XII       COMMUNITY POLYTECHNICS
Recommendation/Observation
12.9     The committee notes that the plan allocation during 2002-2003 had been reduced to Rs 35.00 crore at RE stage
from Rs 63.00 crore at BE due to non submission of Utilisation Certificates by some of the Community Polytechnics
and also because the revised funding pattern approval for the Tenth Plan period could not be obtained.
Action Taken
12.9     The Utilisation Certificates in respect of grants released under the scheme were pending since long.  Serious
efforts were made to liquidate the outstanding UCs.  As on date, out of 675 existing Community Polytechnics, UCs in
respect of 50 CPs are pending for the grants released upto the financial year 2000-2001.  Moreover, the cause of
reduction of Budgetary provision at RE stage was due to the slow pace of expenditure by some of the CPs as well as the
unspent balance of Grants-in-aid lying with the CPs out of the grants-in-aid released during the financial year 2001-
2002. So far as revised funding pattern during the 10
th Plan period is concerned, efforts are being made to get the same
finalised during the current financial year 2003-2004.
 
Recommendation/Observation
12.10   The Committee expresses its serious concern over non-submission of UCs by some of the Community
Polytechnics.  The Committee observes that the Department should ensure optimal utilisation of funds by the recipients. 
The Department should also ensure that it gets the revised funding pattern for the Tenth Plan approved without further
loss of time.
Action Taken
12.10               UCs are pending in respect of 50 Community Polytechnics(CP) only for the Grants-in-aid released upto
the financial year 2000-2001.  These CPs have already been reminded and asked to submit the UCs immediately. 
Efforts are on to liquidate all the outstanding UCs. For optimal utilisation of funds scheme is being monitored at
State/Regional level from time to time.  Efforts are being made to get the proposed revised funding pattern finalised 
during the current financial year 2003-2004.
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
V         KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN
Recommendation/Observation
5.1       KVS was set-up in 1965 as a registered body wholly financed by Government to establish, control and manage
Kendriya Vidyalayas, the main objectives of which are to meet the educational needs of the children of transferable
Central Government employees. The Sangathan administers 843 Kendriya Vidyalayas located in different parts of the
country, out of which 706 Vidyalays are in the Defence/Civil Sector and the remaining are under the project sector.
5.2       The Committee has been informed that out of 706 Vidyalayas in Defence/Civil Sector, 612 Vidyalayas are

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
operating from permanent buildings and construction work is in progress in respect of 75 Vidyalayas. Besides that, there
are still 68 Kendriya Vidyalas in respect of which land is yet to be transferred which are in Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, New Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Jharkhand,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, UP,
Uttranchal and W.Bengal. 
Action Taken
(5.1 & 5.2)       There are 841 Kendriya Vidyalayas (as on 30-4-2003) functioning in the country excluding 02 (two) 
Kendriya Vidyalayas abroad.  Out of this, 135 KVs are located in Project Sector/Institutions of Higher Learning where
Project authorities have provided permanent school buildings.  In the remaining 708 KVs located in Civil and Defence
Sector, KVS has already constructed 512 permanent school buildings. Hence, 647 KVs are with permanent school
building.  In 98 KVs, permanent school buildings are under construction.  This includes 47 new sanctioned school
buildings.  In 33 KVs school buildings are at planning stage.  However, in remaining 63 KVs, sponsoring agencies have
not yet transferred/allotted plot of land earmarked for Kendriya Vidyalayas.
 
Recommendation/Observation
5.5       The Committee observes from the number of questions raised in the Parliament in the recent years that the level
of discontentment among staff and teachers of KVS has been very high. Rather, it appears that trade unionism is
brewing in with the result each and every minute decision of the Government is questioned whether it relates to
transfers, purchases, decision taken by individual authorities or Board. Something appears to be amiss somewhere. The
Department must check this tendency as the trade unionism in education sector is not in the overall interest and more so
in the case of students. At the same time if a teacher is not contented and satisfied it would only affect the students. The
Department must evolve a ‘satisfaction platform’ where the grievances of teachers can be redressed.
Action Taken
            Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan has a well settled Grievance Cell in its Headquarters office  under the charge of
Deputy Commissioner (Personnel).  Similar  Cell now exist in each Regional Office of the Sangathan and one of the
Education Officer has been nominated as Regional Grievance Officer.  This has given an umbrella for  the quick
redressal of the grievance. 
            In this regard, the details of Parliament Questions asked during the last five-years are given below:
                        YEAR 
             NO. OF           NO. OF            AVERAGE
                                                DAYS              QUESTIONS     PER-DAY
                        1999                  21                     97                  4.6
                        2000                  33                 168                  5.1
                        2001                  34                169                   4.9
                        2002                  33                137                   4.1
                        2003                  14                 38                    2.7
            From the details given above, it is evident that there is decline in Parliament Questions relating to grievances
pertaining to the functioning of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan.
 
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
1.         INTRODUCTION
 
Recommendation/Observation
1.3       Secondary Education is of crucial importance to our students who spend formative years of their life here.  The
secondary stage of Education gains more importance as hardly 19% students reach the university level of education. 
While changes have been made from time to time by the Government, fact remains that this stage of education does not
lead students anywhere.  In fact, on the other hand, the subjects like English, Hindi and mathematics (i.e. modern
mathematics) which has been introduced in the recent years etc. are beyond one’s comprehension and on an average
parents are not able to support their children financially.  These reasons alone have compelled students more so from the
vulnerable sections of the society to drop out at secondary level only.  There is thus a need to involve the school more
effectively to prevent drop-outs and reorient the education at this level, may be in the form of making it more vocational
and need based so that in case of students who are not able to enter the university stage, at least the secondary education

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
helps them to stand in the world on their own account.
Action Taken
Keeping in view the needs and requirements of students, the NIOS has given complete freedom in choice of subjects
whatsoever at both Secondary as well as Senior Secondary levels.  A decision has been taken to remove all restrictions
and allowing the students to choose any five subjects.  NIOS will award a certificate as per the achievement of the
students in the subjects chosen.  Although NIOS gives full freedom in choice of subjects, yet if the candidates wishes to
use NIOS certificate for higher studies, it is in his/her interest that he/she will have to keep in mind the requirement of
Board/University etc., he/she wishes to enter.  Thus sovereignty of the learner is recognized in matters of what (s) he
wishes to learn.
In tune with the philosophy of open schooling where flexibility and choice are important, a student of NIOS is also
allowed to take as many additional subjects as he/she desires at Secondary as well as Senior Secondary levels.  This will
also meet requirement of certain State Education Boards for equivalence.
At the Secondary and Senior Secondary Stages,NIOS has made provision for flexibility in choice of subjects, self-paced
learning and transfer of creditsfrom other Boards and State Open Schools.  A student can avail as many as nine chances
to appear in public examinations spread over a period of five years.  The credits in subjects are accumulated till the
student clears required subjects for certification.  In order to expand the outreach of its Secondary and Senior Secondary
programmes, NIOS has inter aliaprovided for direct registration of candidates for appearing in examinations. 
NIOS has made provision of flexibility in selecting Academic and Vocational Courses.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the flexibility and range of subject being offered by the National Institute of Open
Schooling at Secondary as well as senior Secondary level. However, similar position does not exist for those enrolled
for regular courses. Further, the Department should endeavour to introduce rational and scientifically developed
curricula which is comprehensible to the children for whom they are prepared.   The Committee also believes that the
Department should take measures to make Secondary education more relevant, practical and career-oriented.
Recommendation/Observation
1.4       More so, vocationalisation of education is the need of the hour as the country faces a paradox of more and more
number of children at entry level and corresponding flow of students at exit level of secondary and university stages
with meagre opportunities in the development of one’s career, or, for that matter, employment.
Action Taken
1.4       Based on the recommendations of the various review groups/committees, the existing scheme of
Vocationalisation of Secondary Education at +2 level is being revised.  The proposed Vocational Education Scheme
shall be a distinct stream intended to prepare students for identified occupation spanning several areas of activity.  It
envisages training of students in such occupational areas wherein self or wage employment opportunities are available. 
Under the proposed revised scheme, the industry and user organizations will be involved at all stages of implementation
of the scheme from identification of courses, preparation and design of curriculum to actual on-site training.  The
courses shall be competency based, modular in nature and demand driven based on the need based surveys to make
them employment oriented.  Opportunity for acquisition of multiple skills shall be available to students to improve their
employability.
            The UGC has already launched many programmes to make the education more relevant to the needs of the
society.  The major scheme of Vocational Education at the Undergraduate level has been designed to equip graduates
with necessary add on skill for gainful employment with major emphasis on self-employment.  Since the introduction of
the Scheme in 1994-95, 2162 institutions (2124 colleges and 38 universities) have been identified by UGC to provide
assistance under the Scheme on selective basis.  UGC has identified 38 vocational subjects under the Scheme.  UGC
during the X Plan has also decided to permit the students to have dual degrees at the Undergraduate level whereby they
shall be entitled to an additional certificate/diploma/advance diploma in conjunction with the regular degree. 
            The National Institute of Open schooling (NIOS) is gearing its programmes to offer relevant and need based
vocational courses.  Entrepreneurial skills are being integrated in all Vocational Courses in a phased manner.  The
emphasis is on development of non-traditional technology oriented vocational courses and making the students value
oriented entrepreneurs and job providers and not simply the job seekers.  The NIOS has visualized offering some
vocational education courses on-line.  The Certificate in Computer Application Course is already available on-line.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates that vocational courses are being promoted at various levels and it desires that all out efforts
be made so that vocational education gets a real push.  The Committee notes that the revised programme of vocational
education at different levels still remain to be implemented.

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
Recommendation/Observation
1.6       The challenge before the nation is how best to tap the potential of this upcoming workforce and gainfully
employ them in projects of national importance and provide them a need based system of education and keep them away
from the world of crime and ignorance and help them become a useful citizen of the society. 
Action Taken
1.6       The observations are noted for compliance.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is concerned at the future of students from this category. Experience has shown that their employability
in very poor.  The Committee sincerely believes that unless there is a supporting plan to gainfully employ them, the
solution might prove to be worse than the problem.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should
immediately implement the idea through a holistic/integrated scheme or programme. If need be, the private sector be
roped in and aids, both external and internal, be arranged for the purpose.
II          BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.2       The Committee was informed that as state funding of the education sector has been inadequate and the desired
six percent of the national income could not be set apart for education, the Department has decided to constitute the
‘Bharat Shiksha Kosh’ for mobilizing extra-budgetary resources by receiving donations/contributions/endowments from
individuals and corporates, central and state Governments, NRIS and People of Indian Origin (PIO) in order to fill in the
gap between actual requirement and the available budgetary support.
 
Action Taken
2.2       The ‘Bharat Shiksha Kosh’ has since been constituted as a registered Society with its office in Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi.  The Kosh was launched on 9
th January, 2003 during the celebration of ‘Pravasi Bharatiya Divas’.  The
Government has made its one time contribution of Rs.1.00 crore to the Kosh.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee feels that the contribution of the Government to the Bharat Shiksha Kosh should definitely have been
more than Rs. 1.00 crore considering the mammoth task of funding from the Kosh.
 
III        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING
Recommendation/Observation
3.3       The Committee notes that NCERT undertakes programmes and activities in relation to improvement of courses
in vocational education.  The developmental programmes/ activities in progress include norms and standards for
accreditation of institutions and programmes of vocational education, database for vocational education, software on
question bank, competency-based curriculum on agro-forestry, curriculum for NVQ in the area of transport service,
curriculum and modules in specific areas related to the entertainment industry, revision of general foundation course,
modernization of vocational curricula in purchasing and store keeping, accounting and auditing, pre-vocational
instruction-cum-practical manual on setting up of a plant clinic, instructional material for selected modules in marine
fisheries, pre-vocational module in rural marketing, modular vocational course on E-business and course on small
business management, module on dry cleaning, decorative candle making and instructional material for some vocational
and pre-vocational courses.     
Action Taken
3.3       The status of the developmental programmes/activities are as given below:
Norms and standards for accreditation of institutions and programmes of vocational education  -  Matter is under
finalization.
Database for vocational education - This is continued activity. Information is being collected from states.
Software on question bank - Under finalization.
Competency-based curriculum on agro-forestry - Completed, being sent for publication.
Curriculum for NVQ in the area of transport services - Draft Under finalization.
Curriculum and modules in specific areas related to the entertainment industry - Occupations identified curriculum
under preparation.
Revision of general foundation course - Completed, under print.
Modernization of vocational curricula in purchasing and store keeping, accounting and auditing – Under finalization.
Pre-vocational instruction-cum-practical manual on setting up of a plant clinic - Draft under preparation.

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
Instructional material for selected modules in marine fisheries - Draft under preparation.
Pre-vocational modules in rural marketing - Draft under finalization.
-           Modular vocational course on (i) E-business and (ii)course on small business management – (i) Feasibility
undertaken, (ii) Draft finalized.
Module on (i) dry cleaning (ii) decorative candle making –  (i) Work Initiated, (ii) Under finalization.
Instructional material for some vocational and pre-vocational courses - A regular activity of Pt. Sunderlal Sharma
Central Institute of Vocational Education(PSSCIVE).
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that NCERT has initiated programmes/activities in relation to improvement of   Vocational
Courses, but it is concerned about the long time taken for completion of different programmes.  Most of them are still in
the process  of finalization. The Committee desires that the process of finalisation be expedited.
Recommendation/Observation
3.5       The Committee is of the view that there is a need to tap the vast potential of upcoming force of students who
generally remain idle during holidays including summer vacation.  Millions of work days are just available at the asking
with virtually no cost.  If they could be gainfully employed in projects of national importance or otherwise it will secure
many purposes including out-station visits for students which are also a virtual education.  NCERT must give a serious
thought to this aspect.
Action Taken
3.5       As a part of their curriculum, the vocational students are required to undertake On-the-Job training for 4 to 6
weeks during the summer vacations, during which they are attached to factory or other work place, so that they can gain
experience of actually working on the job. Some States like Punjab are providing opportunities of On-the-Job Training
particularly in the engineering based vocational courses.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the existing scheme of internship for students of vocational courses during their summer
vacations. However, the Committee feels that similar schemes for students of non-vocational courses, if provided  can
enable them  to spend their vacation learning something constructive while being gainfully employed in projects of
national importance.  This would also help them identify themselves with national activities and take pride in them.
Further, the Committee also desires that Department should step up its efforts to persuade more States to provide
opportunities of On-the-Job Training to students of all vocational courses.  Also, in cases where students are coming
from the industrially backward States, they should be provided training opportunities in other States, which are
industrialized.  
IV        NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OPEN SCHOOLING
Recommendation/Observation
4.1       The National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS)  has been pursuing its mission of reaching the unreached by
providing opportunities for continuing education to those who have missed opportunities to complete school education
and developmental education through courses and programmes of general education, life enrichment and vocational
education from primary to pre-degree level. As an apex level resource organisation in school education through
Distance and Open Learning Mode and as a National Board of School Education, the NIOS has been (i) developing
curricula and self learning materials, (ii) organising Personal Contact Programme (PCP) at accredited study centres for
enrolled students and (iii) examining them for its school level courses. Steps are being taken to ensure that the NIOS
curricula inter-alia take care of the children. Keeping in view the educational needs of its clientele groups, the NIOS has
been providing flexibility in selecting academic, pre-vocational and vocational courses as well as in examinations so
that a candidate can learn and proceed according to his/her own pace.
4.2       The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by NIOS in making available courses for physically, mentally
and visually challenged children. The Committee observes that NIOS must endeavour to reach more and more such
children and also try to make its system of education more responsive and need based.
Action Taken
(4.1 & 4.2)       The NIOS is aware of the fact that there are about 6.5 crore children in the age group of 14 to 18, who
are out of school.  Normally the children in this age group should have been enrolled at Secondary and Senior secondary
levels.
            The gap of such a magnitude is required to be covered mainly by formal schooling and partly by open schooling
system.  The number of students on roll currently at Secondary and senior secondary stage in NIOS is about 11.00 lakh
as on 31.03.2003.  Efforts are being made for expansion of the open schooling system substantially.
            The NIOS has prepared a Scheme of Education of Girls at Secondary stage through open schooling in 148

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
Educationally Backward Districts and submitted it to the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource
Development.  Approval of this large scale scheme is awaited from the Ministry of Human Resource Development.
            Under the Scheme of Rural Community Workshop, the NIOS has started identifying potential Vocational
education institutions for giving financial assistance.  The approach is tripartite in which NIOS, NGOs and local artisans
join hands to provide education skills and entrepreneurship.
            In order to put the Vocational Education programme on sound pedestal, the NIOS is visualizing Apprenticeship
Service for Vocational Education students in collaboration with industries.
            The NIOS working on development of a Framework for Education of the disabled, self-learning materials
(adaptation as per needs of disabled children), teaching-learning strategies and pupil evaluation.  Capacity building of
teachers etc. engaged in the programmes related to Education of the Disabled will be a priority agenda of NIOS
programmes.   Draft of a Training Package has been prepared.  Among other modes, teleconferencing will be used for
training of open schooling functionaries.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
            The Committee notes that only 11  lakh children had been on the rolls of NIOS till March 2003, out of about 6.5
crores children in the age group of 14-18, who are out of school. We have thus miles to go in this regard. The
Committee also notes that the programmes such as Education for Girls, Rural Community Workshop, Apprenticeship
Service for  Vocational Education and framework of Education for Disabled  are only in conceptual stage only. The
Committee is not aware when are these going to be put in place for operationatisation. The Department should give a
concrete shape to these schemes without further delay.
Recommendation/Observation
4.3       The Committee is also concerned about the recognition and acceptability of the Certificates and Diplomas for
employment in both public and private sector.  While NIOS should endeavour to make its courses responsive and need
based, Government must endeavour to ensure that the certificate and Diplomas awarded by NIOS are accepted by NIOS
are accepted by the industry.
Action Taken
4.3       The National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS), previously known as the National Open School (NOS) has
been vested with the authority for holding examinations up to pre-degree level vide MHRD Resolution dated 14
th
September, 1990.  By virtue of it being the National Board, the Certificates awarded by NIOS have recognition in
educational arena at par with the certificates of other Boards.
            The Association of Indian Universities had already informed granting equivalence of the courses of NIOS with
examinations of other Boards and also brought it to the notice of all universities in the country.
            However, there is still a need of greater Advocacy programmes which NIOS is attempting through media.   The
MHRD has informed the Education Secretaries of all States and UTs to accord recognition to the Examinations at
Primary and Middle level conducted by NIOS.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is particularly concerned about the recognition and acceptability of the certificates and Diplomas of
Vocational Courses awarded by NIOS for employment purposes in both public and private sector. The Committee is of
the view that the Department should take steps to ensure that industry recognizes the certificates and Diplomas awarded
by NIOS so that more and more people from backward and remote areas would be able to stand on their feet after
acquiring vocational skills  from NIOS at a cost effective price.
VI        NAVODAYA VIDYALAYA SAMITI
Recommendation/Observation
6.2       The Committee observes that out of 94 JNVs to be established during the Ninth Plan, only 80 could be
established. The Committee feels that the remaining 14 JNVs should be established immediately. As regards the number
of students enrolled on 31.3.2002 there is still a gap of 11,191 students to achieve the target of 1,51,983 students fixed
during the Ninth Plan. The Committee has also been given to understand that there have been considerable numbers of
drop-outs and the Department intended to recoup the drop outs by enrolling more students in Class IX and XI in the
functional Vidyalayas by the end of Ninth Five Year Plan.
Action Taken
6.2       Efforts are being made for getting temporary accommodation from the State Govts. concerned.  On receipt of the
suitable proposal from the States,  JNVs will be made functional.

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
            As far as issue of dropouts of the students is concerned, there are various reasons like Medical grounds of the
students, transfer of parents, unwillingness of the children to move on migration as per NVS policy, personal family
problems and admission in polytechnic and other diploma courses after passing Xth Class.  These circumstances are
beyond control in order to ensure optimum utilization of infrastructure; it has been decided to introduce lateral
admission for class IX.  Accordingly, NVS has taken up the programme for admission in class IX against the vacant
seats in JNVs.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee feels that the Department should make sincere efforts for getting temporary accommodation on a
priority basis from the concerned State Governments.  Side by side efforts be continued for permanent construction at
the earliest.   The Committee is dismayed to see that  extra-academic reasons like medical condition of the students,
transfer of parents, unwillingness of the children to move on migration as per NVS policy were behind the drop-outs.
The Committee is of the opinion that the targets of student enrollment, though not very high, have not been achieved. 
The Committee desires that NVS should bring suitable amendments to its policy to ensure that there are no drop-outs on
extra-academic grounds without affecting the quality of education it intends to impart. 
VII       VOCATIONALISATION OF EDUCATION
Recommendation/Observation
7.4       The Committee also recommends creation of a data bank on employment and self employment status of the
student who undergo vocationalisation courses in order to take stock of the contribution of the programme.
Action Taken
7.4       The revised scheme will be implemented based on the surveys conducted for manpower requirements.
Appropriate Data bank will be created for the purpose and monitored through Management Information System (MIS).
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates that the Department propose to conduct surveys for manpower requirement in order to make
the scheme of vocational education more practical and relevant. However, the Committee has recommended that data
bank on employment and self employment status of students, who have undergone vocational courses, be prepared by
the Department so that the programme can be measured in terms of its delivery capacity in the direction of gainful
employment and its relevance.
VIII      ACCESS WITH EQUITY
Recommendation/Observation
8.4       Against a financial target of Rs.60.00 crore the expenditure incurred amounted to Rs.11.78 crore which works
out to 19.63 per cent. The utilisation of expenditure is thus far from satisfactory and indicates the performance at a
snail's pace.
8.5       The Committee notes that barring Andhra Pradesh and, to some extent, Karnataka, the participation of NGOs in
managing girl's Hostels has not been very encouraging. The Committee would like the Department to analyse the
reasons for this poor participation and take remedial steps to ensure increasing participation of NGOs in this area.
Action Taken
(8.4 & 8.5)       The expenditure incurred during 9
th Five Year Plan was less due to non-receipt of adequate good
proposals from NGOs for implementation of the Scheme.  Education Secretaries and District Magistrates of
Educationally Backward States/Districts have been requested to give wide publicity of the Scheme. 
            The Scheme was evaluated by the Department through NCERT in the year 1998-99.  The NCERT evaluation
indicated that :
1. The scheme seems to have generated an upsurge and demand for more hostels;  
2.         The recurring and non-recurring grants were found to be insufficient and required enhancement considerably;
3.         Funds for construction of building be made available to accommodate at least 100 girls provided land is made
available free of cost by the State Government/NGOs; and
4.         The maximum number of girls be raised from 50 to 150.  The study further states that the scheme has generated
a good response and it has potential to grow into a major central intervention for reducing the gender gaps in
enrollment.   The improved enrollment may increase the age at marriage and in turn reduce the rate of growth of
population.  The study also analyses that the existing scheme is rigid in the sense that it limits implementation of the
scheme to the NGOs already running hostels, number of students between 25-50 and it does not have provision either
for hiring a building or for the construction of building for starting a hostel & boarding facilities.  
 
            Keeping the above recommendations of the NCERT evaluation in view, the scheme was modified in the year

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
1999-2000 with the approval of the cabinet.  The items of revised scheme are as under:
1.         The recurring grant has been revised to Rs.10,000/- per annum per boarder form the existing sealing of
Rs.5,000/-.  This amount is basically used for food and honorarium of cook and warden.
2.                     Non-recurring grant per girl boarder has been revised from the existing limit of Rs.1,500/- to Rs.3,000/-. 
This amount is spent on purchase of furniture, utensils, recreational aids, sports and game material, reading room,
equipment and books.
3.                     Reimbursement of rent, repairs and maintenance upto 75% of expenditure subject to an upper limit of
Rs.5,00,000/- per annum in each case.
4.                    The girl boarders who are studying in classes VI to XII will be eligible for assistance under the scheme.
5.                    The upper limit of the girl boarder has been revised from 50 to 150 per hostel depending upon the
capacity of the organisation.
            It is also informed that during the first year of 10
th Five Year Plan the expenditure was to the tune of Rs.17.92
crores.
            The scheme details are available on the website of the Ministry – www.education.nic.in.
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the items of the revised scheme but it feels that the Department has not taken enough
initiatives to encourage more NGOs to come forward as a responsible partner in the scheme. The Committee
recommends that the Department should frame a set of standard guidelines for NGOs so that they can do their
homework before they submit their proposals for the implementation of the scheme and thereby avoid the
inconvenience of rejection and consequent delay. This would also ensure better utilization of funds which remained
non-utilised in the absence of good proposals.
 
IX        INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY IN SCHOOLS
Recommendation/Observation:
9.6       The Committee notes that under Educational Technology (ET) Scheme the audio programmes, 51 in number
made by the State Institutes of Education Technology (SIET) during the financial year 2001-2002 have been miserably
less than video programmes which are 789 in number. Unfortunately this situation prevails in spite of the fact that TVs
have still not penetrated as deep as radios in India.  Further the Committee has also taken a serious note of the fact that
the Department spent Rs. 34.8357 crore on 3509 audio/video programme and Rs. 13.0326 crore on procuring 29781
RCCPs and 8826 CTVs in schools during the Ninth Plan. All this expenditure amounting to Rs. 47.8683 crore works out
to 61.6% of the total allocation i.e. 77.70 crores.
Action Taken
9.6       During the 10
th Plan, a revised Scheme of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in Schools is
being introduced to ensure increase in the number of programmes both audio and video.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee desires that there is a need toincrease the number of audio programmes since radio is still more popular 
in rural and remote areas as compared to television. The Committee appreciates the introduction of a revised Scheme of
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in schools but it really didn’t censure the existing programme.  The
Committee believes that more audio programmes could have been produced even within the existing  programme. What
was required was not the revision of the scheme but infusion of spirit to produce programme for the medium which
apparently does not look glamorous.
 
            Further, the Committee is dismayed to note that the Department has also failed to share the Committee’s concern
over the non-utilization of the fund. The Committee desires that the Department should take necessary steps to check
such tendency at the earliest.
Recommendation/Observation
9.8       The Committee is constrained to observe that the funds under audio programmes under Educational Technology
remained unutilized.
Action Taken
9.8       During the 10
th Plan, a revised Scheme of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in Schools is
being introduced to ensure increase in the number of programmes both audio and video.

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee finds the reply of the Department to be out of context to the Committee’s concern. The Committee fails
to appreciate the significance of revised scheme of ICT in checking the tendency of non-utilization of funds since the
existingscheme also never hindered the production of audio as well as video programmes and it were the SIETs which
failed in optimal production of the same.
Recommendation/Observation
9.10     The Committee has also been given to understand that some schools, particularly, the aided schools in the capital
have been charging Rs. 100/- per month or even higher for computers. The total amount thus collected from students
comes to much more than might have been invested in the purchase of computers. Schools should not be allowed to
make profit out of such schemes and what is more bulk of time is spent on imparting theoretical lessons and students are
not allowed a free hand on computers. The Department must look into this and take up the matter with the Directorates
of Education.
Action Taken
9.10     The matter has been taken up with UT of Delhi.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee desires that the Department take up the matter with all the States/UTs' Directorates of Education on an
urgent basis and come up with a set of guidelines to regulate the state of affairs.
X         UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
Recommendation/Observation
10.18   The Committee is also of the view that UGC should encourage genuine research activity and develop a
mechanism for encouragement of only genuine research so that nation can make use of such research both commercially
and academically.  In fact, R&D sector of our nation continues to be under developed.  The Committee feels concerned
over the position and desires that it must change for the better.  The universities should have inter-disciplinary approach
in its research activities which should commence from undergraduate stage.
Action Taken
10.18   The UGC continuously encourages general research activities in the universities.  To uplift the research activities
of the universities, the UGC has schemes at three levels (i) at institutional level (ii) at departmental level and (iii)
individual level.
            At institutional level, UGC has schemes like ‘Universities with potential for excellence’ under which universities
are identified based on their merit and accorded the status of University with potential for excellence and enhanced 
level of funding to these universities is given to further upgrade their research and academic activities. 
            At departmental level, UGC has schemes like Special Assistance Programme and ASIST under which the
departments of the universities receive special funding.  In the ASIST programme, funding is given for strengthening of
infrastructure in science & technology for acquiring highly sophisticated and expensive equipment to enable them to
become internationally competitive in the key areas of PG teaching and research.  Under Special Assistance Programme
(SAP), the assistance is provided at three levels (a) Departmental Research Support (b) Department of Special
Assistance (c) Centre of Advance Studies.  The assistance is provided to the departments to achieve excellence in 3-4
identified thrust areas and also to improve the quality of teaching and research in the department.
            At individual level, the UGC gives major & minor research projects to the university and college teachers to
enable them to take up high level work in specified area.  Apart from this, the UGC has Junior Research Fellowship
(JRF) to enable young students to avail fellowship for pursuing PhD. Degree programme.
 
            As far as Inter-disciplinary approach is concerned, the UGC is encouraging the universities to start more & more
courses in inter-disciplinary areas.  In fact, this has been kept one of the parameter to evaluate the performance of the
universities through development radars, which would determine the performance related grant of the university.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee feels that despite the institutional mechanism for carrying out research activities, there are very few
research projects, which have created waves in their areas of study. The Committee desires that UGC should push the
matter with vigour and zeal and should also come up with a system which can tap existing potential instead of confining
itself to a system which only allows patronage and recommendation.  
Further, the Committee believes that UGC should help the universities to market their research findings which in turn
would help them financially and also fuel their
research activities on full swing.
XI        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF RURAL INSTITUTES (NCRI)

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
Recommendation/Observation
11.1     NCRI was set up by the Central Govt. in October, 1995 at Hyderabad to promote rural higher education on the
lines of Mahatma Gandhi’s revolutionary ideas on education and to consolidate, network and develop institutions
engaged in programmes of Gandhian Basic Education and Nai Talim.
11.2     The Committee has been informed that though NCRI was established in October 1995, yet it is in a formative
stage. It has been functioning without a regular Chairman, a regular member Secretary and without any regular staff.
The proposal for creation of post of a regular Chairman has been sent to the Cabinet Secretariat for seeking approval
from the Cabinet. A proposal is being processed in the Ministry of HRD for obtaining approval of Expenditure Finance
Committee for the continuation of NCRI in 10
th Plan. It, inter-alia, involves creation of 31 posts which are considered
the barest minimum for undertaking activities of NCRI.
11.3     The Committee views with concern the indifferent approach adopted to this episode and recommends that this be
brought to the notice of the Minister and ensure that this unhappy state of affairs is brought to an end.
Action Taken
(11.1 to 11.3) After the NCRI was set up by the Central Govt. in October, 1995 at Hyderabad to promote rural higher
education on the lines of Mahatma Gandhi revolutionary ideas on education and to consolidate, network and develop
institutions engaged to programmes of Gandhian Basic education and Nai Talim, its progress has remained slow
primarily due to functioning with the help of temporary Advisors/consultants and officials for short period of time. The
Council has an honorary Chairman and part-time Member Secretary (Deputy Secretary/Director, M/o. HRD was given
additional charge of MS, NCRI).
            The Ministry of HRD had sent a proposal for creation of post of a regular Chairman to the Cabinet Secretariat
for seeking the approval of Cabinet. The proposal was considered by the Cabinet in its meeting held on 18.03.03 and has
deferred its decision. Further a proposal to create 15 regular posts, which are considered the barest minimum for the
functioning of NCRI has been mooted as a part of EFC Memorandum and has been circulated among concerned
Ministries for their concurrence/comments. The matter is also being brought to the notice of Hon’ble HRM. After EFC
approves the continuance of NCRI and creation of post is obtained, the Council could be made fully functional.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department for making the NCRI functional but given the fact that
this issue has been hanging in air for some time, it is desired that the Department should make vigorous efforts to obtain
necessary approvals from concerned ministries to make the NCRI fully functional.
 
XII       COMMUNITY POLYTECHNICS
Recommendation/Observation
12.8     The Committee appreciates the rural/ community development activities undertaken by Community
Polytechnics.  The Committee, appreciate the role of Community Polytechnic with a view to impart specialized skills to
rural populace. The Committee notes with concern that the number of community polytechnics in the eastern region is
far less as compared to other regions.  Given the poverty and backwardness of the region, the Committee feels that there
should be an increase in the number of such polytechnics there.
Action Taken
12.8     Scheme of Community Polytechnic is implemented only through AICTE approved Diploma Level Institutions
(Polytechnics) which are under the Administrative Control of State Governments.  There are less number of polytechnic
level institutions in the Eastern Region compared to other regions. As per the information received from the State
Directorates of Technical Education, all the Govt./Govt. Aided Polytechnics of the States of Eastern Region have been
covered under the scheme.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee acknowledges the prevailing situation in the eastern region and recommends that the Department take
up the matter with the State Governments of the eastern region for opening more AICTE-approved polytechnics so that
the idea of community polytechnics can spread far and wide in eastern region which iscomparatively poor and
backward.
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
N I L
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
1.         INTRODUCTION
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the flexibility and range of subject being offered by the National Institute of Open
Schooling at Secondary as well as senior Secondary level. However, similar position does not exist for those enrolled
for regular courses. Further, the Department should endeavour to introduce rational and scientifically developed
curricula which is comprehensible to the children for whom they are prepared.   The Committee also believes that the
Department should take measures to make Secondary education more relevant, practical and career-oriented. (Para 1)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates that vocational courses are being promoted at various levels and it desires that all out efforts
be made so that vocational education gets a real push.  The Committee notes that the revised programme of vocational
education at different levels still remain to be implemented. (Para 1.4)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is concerned at the future of students from this category. Experience has shown that their employability
in very poor.  The Committee sincerely believes that unless there is a supporting plan to gainfully employ them, the
solution might prove to be worse than the problem.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should
immediately implement the idea through a holistic/integrated scheme or programme. If need be, the private sector be
roped in and aids, both external and internal, be arranged for the purpose. (Para 1.6)
II          BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee feels that the contribution of the Government to the Bharat Shiksha Kosh should definitely have been
more than Rs. 1.00 crore considering the mammoth task of funding from the Kosh. (Para 2.2)
III        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that NCERT has initiated programmes/activities in relation to improvement of   Vocational
Courses, but it is concerned about the long time taken for completion of different programmes.  Most of them are still in
the process  of finalization. The Committee desires that the process of finalisation be expedited. (Para 3.3)
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the existing scheme of internship for students of vocational courses during their summer
vacations. However, the Committee feels that  similar schemes for students of non-vocational courses, if provided  can
enable them  to spend their vacation learning something constructive while being gainfully employed in projects of
national importance.  This would also help them identify themselves with national activities and take pride in them.
Further, the Committee also desires that Department should step up its efforts to persuade more States to provide
opportunities of On-the-Job Training to students of all vocational courses.  Also, in cases where students are coming
from the industrially backward States, they should be provided training opportunities in other States, which are
industrialized.   (Para 3.5)
IV        NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OPEN SCHOOLING
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that only 11  lakh children had been on the rolls of NIOS till March 2003, out of about 6.5 crores
children in the age group of 14-18, who are out of school. We have thus miles to go in this regard. The Committee also
notes that the programmes such as Education for Girls, Rural Community Workshop, Apprenticeship Service for 
Vocational Education and framework of Education for Disabled  are only in conceptual stage only. The Committee is
not aware when are these going to be put in place for operationatisation. The Department should give a concrete shape
to these schemes without further delay.  (Para 4.1 & 4.2)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is particularly concerned about the recognition and acceptability of the certificates and Diplomas of
Vocational Courses awarded by NIOS for employment purposes in both public and private sector. The Committee is of
the view that the Department should take steps to ensure that industry recognizes the certificates and Diplomas awarded

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
by NIOS so that more and more people from backward and remote areas would be able to stand on their feet after
acquiring vocational skills  from NIOS at a cost effective price. (Para 4.3)
VI        NAVODAYA VIDYALAYA SAMITI
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee feels that the Department should make sincere efforts for getting temporary accommodation on a
priority basis from the concerned State Governments.  Side by side efforts be continued for permanent construction at
the earliest.   The Committee is dismayed to see that  extra-academic reasons like medical condition of the students,
transfer of parents, unwillingness of the children to move on migration as per NVS policy were behind the drop-outs.
The Committee is of the opinion that the targets of student enrollment, though not very high, have not been achieved. 
The Committee desires that NVS should bring suitable amendments to its policy to ensure that there are no drop-outs on
extra-academic grounds without affecting the quality of education it intends to impart.  (Para 6.2)
 
VII       VOCATIONALISATION OF EDUCATION
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates that the Department propose to conduct surveys for manpower requirement in order to make
the scheme of vocational education more practical and relevant. However, the Committee has recommended that data
bank on employment and self employment status of students, who have undergone vocational courses, be prepared by
the Department so that the programme can be measured in terms of its delivery capacity in the direction of gainful
employment and its relevance. (Para 7.4)
VIII      ACCESS WITH EQUITY
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the items of the revised scheme but it feels that the Department has not taken enough
initiatives to encourage more NGOs to come forward as a responsible partner in the scheme. The Committee
recommends that the Department should frame a set of standard guidelines for NGOs so that they can do their
homework before they submit their proposals for the implementation of the scheme and thereby avoid the
inconvenience of rejection and consequent delay. This would also ensure better utilization of funds which remained
non-utilised in the absence of good proposals. (Para 8.4 & 8.5)
IX        INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY IN SCHOOLS
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee desires that there is a need toincrease the number of audio programmes since radio is still more popular 
in rural and remote areas as compared to television. The Committee appreciates the introduction of a revised Scheme of
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in schools but it really didn’t censure the existing programme.  The
Committee believes that more audio  programmes could have been produced even within the existing  programme.
What was required was not the revision of the scheme but infusion of spirit to produce programme for the medium
which apparently does not look glamorous.
Further, the Committee is dismayed to note that the Department has also failed to share the Committee’s concern over
the non-utilization of the fund. The Committee desires that the Department should take necessary steps to check such
tendency at the earliest. (Para 9.6)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee finds the reply of the Department to be out of context to the Committee’s concern. The Committee fails
to appreciate the significance of revised scheme of ICT in checking the tendency of non-utilization of funds since the
existingscheme also never hindered the production of audio as well as video programmes and it were the SIETs which
failed in optimal production of the same. (Para 9.6)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee desires that the Department take up the matter with all the States/UTs' Directorates of Education on an
urgent basis and come up with a set of guidelines to regulate the state of affairs. (Para 9.10)
X         UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee feels that despite the institutional mechanism for carrying out research activities, there are very few
research projects, which have created waves in their areas of study. The Committee desires that UGC should push the
matter with vigour and zeal and should also come up with a system which can tap existing potential instead of confining
itself to a system which only allows patronage and recommendation.  
Further, the Committee believes that UGC should help the universities to market their research findings which in turn

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
would help them financially and also fuel their
research activities on full swing. (Para 10.18)
XI        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF RURAL INSTITUTES (NCRI)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department for making the NCRI functional but given the fact that
this issue has been hanging in air for some time, it is desired that the Department should make vigorous efforts to obtain
necessary approvals from concerned ministries to make the NCRI fully functional. (Para 11.1 & 11.3)
XII       COMMUNITY POLYTECHNICS
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee acknowledges the prevailing situation in the eastern region and recommends that the Department take
up the matter with the State Governments of the eastern region for opening more AICTE-approved polytechnics so that
the idea of community polytechnics can spread far and wide in eastern region, which iscomparatively poor and
backward. (Para 12.8)
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARYSTANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
XXIII
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 9
th December, 2003 in Committee Room No. 63 First Floor,
Parliament House , New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
 
Shri Arjun Singh                       Chairman
 
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Smt. Vanga Geetha
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
Shri Lalhmingliana
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Shri Dara Singh 
 
            LOK SABHA
 
Shri Kanti Lal Bhuria
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri R.L. Jalappa
Shri A. F. Golam Osmani
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
Shri Ramsheth Thakur
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
               
2.           The Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee, specially the new member Shri Dara Singh, MP,
Rajya Sabha who attended the meeting for the first time.
 
3.         The Committee then took up for consideration  the Action Taken Reports (142
nd to 147th ) on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Reports of the Committee on Demand-for-grants(2003-04) relating to
the Departments of Family Welfare; Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy; Elementary Education and
Literacy; Secondary and Higher Education; Women and Child Development; and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports.
The Committee adopted these reports and decided to present them reports to the Houses of Parliament on the12
th
December, 2003.
 
4.          Thereafter, some members raised the issue of taking the ISM&H for a special study. The Committee was
informed that a Background Note on the subject had been received from the Department. It was decided that the same
could be circulated to the members before a meeting with the officials of the Department of the ISM&H could be held at
an appropriate time.
 
5.         The Chairman informed the Committee that Action Taken Report of the Department of Health could not be
prepared as the Department had not sent action taken notes so far, despite several reminders, written and verbal.  He also
informed that many other references made by the Committee were pending with the Department for the past several
months. They do not even acknowledge our letters, not to speak of sending replies.  The Committee viewed it seriously
and decided to summon Secretary, Department of Health to ascertain reasons for not being able to send
information/papers to the Committee.      
 
6.         The Committee also decided to visit Bangalore to hear the representatives of some banks / financial institutions
tentatively from 13
th to 15th  January, 2004 on the subject of Gender Budget Analysis – Micro Credit to Women Self
Help Groups.  The Committee authorised the Chairman of the Committee for seeking permission of the Chairman Rajya
Sabha for the said visit.
 
7.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 4.30 p.m.
Annexure-I
INFORMATION REGARDING LETTERS WRITTEN TO STATES AND OTHER SPONSORING 
AGENCIES FOR PROVIDING LAND TO KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN/NAVODAYA
VIDYALYA SAMITI
 
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN
 
Secretary (S&HE) wrote to Chief Secretaries of States of Uttar Pradesh, Assam and Himachal Pradesh for providing
land to Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan(17
th January, 2003).
 
Secretary (S&HE) wrote to Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development for considering to provide link Roads to the NVS
Schools (25th November, 2002).
 
 
NAVODAYA VIDYALAYA SIMITI
 
Secretary(S&HE) wrote to Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development for considering to provide link Roads to the NVS
Schools (25th November, 2002).
 
                                                                                                Annexure-II
 

145th Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/145threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:22]
Service Sector Technical Vocational Education & Training (TVE&T) Courses in which sizeable jobs have been created
and a good potential exists for the next 5 years.
 
 
House wiring and motor winding
Auto mechanic/Diesel mechanic
TV/Radio/Transistor/Tape Recorder Repair
Garment making/Embroidery and Needle Work
Leather goods/footwear manufacturing
Carpentry  and Wood Work
Refrigeration  and Air-conditioning
Welding  and Fabrication
Repair of Electrical/Electronics Gadgets
Hand Pump and Plumber
Computer Maintenance/Computer Operator
Construction (including masonry, plumbing, carpentry, biogas, low coast latrines, soak pit and smokeless chulha,
ferrocement)
Tractor and Farm Equipment Repair & Maintenance
Food Processing and Preservation
Handloom and Handicraft (weaving, Carpet, Dari making, Bag making, Shawl making, Tilla work, sozni and
crewelwork, Tat Patti making. Soft Toys making, Handicraft items making, basket making, mat making)
Water and Soil Testing, Safe Water Drinking Device Mechanic
Solar Appliances Mechanic
Maintenance of Information systems and Modern Office Equipment
Hotel/Tourism and Advertising