  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
328 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
Plans for Bridging the Learning Gap caused due to School 
Lockdown as well as Review of online and offline Instructions 
and Examinations and Plans for re-opening of Schools 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2021) 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
Plans for Bridging the Learning Gap caused due to School 
Lockdown as well as Review of online and offline Instructions and 
Examinations and Plans for re-opening of Schools 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021/Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 


C O N T E N T S 
 
  PAGES 
1 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i)-(ii) 
2 PREFACE 
 
(iii)-(v) 
3 ABBREVIATIONS* 
 
 
4 REPORT 
 
1-26 
5 RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
27-36 
6 MINUTES* 
 
37-70 
   
 *will be appended later  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13thSeptember, 2020) 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
6. ** Vacant 
7. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
8. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
10. Shri G.K. Vasan 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. * Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
17. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21 Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
29. Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
___________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f. 30.12.2020. 
** Vacant w.e.f.7.7.2021 
(i) 
 
 
 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor 
Shri K. Sudhakaran , Director 
Ms. Chitra G., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
Shri   K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director 
Shri  Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present this Three Hundred and Twenty Eighth 
Report of the Committee on the Subject "Plans for Bridging the Learning Gap 
caused due to School Lockdown as well as Review of online and offline 
Instructions and Examinations and Plans for re-opening of Schools". 
2. The Committee held meeting with the Department of School Education 
and Literacy and Department of Higher Education  on 10 th August, 2020.  The 
Committee held a meeting with the Department  of School Education and 
Literacy, Ministry of Education along with the representatives of the State 
Governments of Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar-Pradesh, and UT of Jammu and 
Kashmir on 12 th January, 2021 . The Committee also heard the views of 
representatives of BISAG-N, Prasar Bharati , along with the Department of 
School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Education on 21 st June, 2021. T he 
Committee in its meeting held on 2 nd July, 2021 had discussion with State 
Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra, Telangana  and Uttar 
Pradesh along with representatives of Department of School Education and 
Literacy, ISRO  and BISAG -N. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of 
UNICEF INDIA in its meeting held on 23rd July, 2021. 
3. While draftin g the Report the Committee reli ed on the following 
documents along with the oral submissions made before the Committee: 
(i) Background note and replies to the questionnaire submitted by the   
Department of School Education and Literacy and Department of Higher  
Education; 
(ii) Background note and documents submitted by Ministry of Information   
and Broadcasting, Prasar Bharati, ISRO, and BISAG-N; 
(iii) Documents furnished by the S tate Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Telangana, Uttar 
Pradesh and UT of Jammu and Kashmir; and 
(iv) Documents furnished by UNICEF, INDIA.  
(iii) 
 

4. The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the 
representatives of the Ministries/Departments for furnishing necessary 
information/documents and rendering valuable assistance to the Committee in 
its deliberations. The Committee also wishes to  express its gratitude to all the 
distinguished persons who ap peared before the Committee and  placed their 
valuable views on the Subject and furnished written notes and information in 
connection with the examination of the Subject. The Committee especially  
acknowledged the contributions made by the Officials/individuals concerned 
despite the prevailing pandemic situation arisen due to COVID -19 and 
following all due protocols during the meeting.  
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observat ions and 
recommendations of the Committee have been presented in bold letters in the 
body of the Report. 
6. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its 
meeting held on the 5th August, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
NEW DELHI 
5th August, 2021                                                                                                               
Sravana,1943 (Saka )  
 
 Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
Chairman 
       Department-related 
Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on  Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1. Emerging pandemics and natural calamities  throw a challenge to 
humanity and emphasizes  the need for Governments, societies, organisations 
and individuals to be better prepared and equipped to deal with such situations.  
The outbreak of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Corona Virus, better 
known as COVID -19, was reported towards the fag  end of the year 2019 in a 
few places, but with its rapid spread across several countries of the world within 
a short span, the World Health Organisation (WHO), under the International 
Health Regulations, declared this outbreak as a “Public Health Emergenc y of 
International Concern” (PHEIC) on 30 th January, 2020.  Subsequently, WHO 
declared COVID -19 as a pandemic on 11 th March, 2020.  The pandemic has 
forced the world to grasp a new normal, with restrictive measures like self 
isolation, wearing of facial ma sks, social/physical distancing, lockdown, case 
detection, contact tracing, quarantine of exposed persons, containment zones 
where large number of persons were infected etc. being put in place across the 
world to contain the spread of this highly infectiou s virus.  The Government of 
India along with the State Governments also adopted inter -sectoral proactive, 
pre-emptive and graded response/policies and priorities by adopting various 
strategies including the above -mentioned steps as well as national and sta te-
wise lockdown and contingent plans during various lockdown and unlock 
phases to combat and contain the spread of COVID -19.  The pandemic has thus 
affected all spheres of our normal activities and set new normal/standards in the 
way we live, work, study and play.  The education sector was drastically 
affected by this sudden onslaught of the pandemic and had to make swift 
adjustments to adapt to the situation.  
 
2. In the year 2020, COVID -19 pandemic affected educational systems 
world-wide leading to closu re of schools, colleges and Universities. Indian 
education system also saw the largest disruption in history affecting nearly 32 
Crore students population enrolled in various schools/colleges and Universities.  
The sudden closure left very little time for the system to prepare a strategy and 
transition to distance learning.  The crisis exacerbated pre -existing education 
disparities by reducing the opportunities for many of the most vulnerable 
children, youth and adults. It also posed challenges for 
schools/colleges/Universities to shift to digital mode of teaching  with 
technological tools due to interruption of face to face (one-on-one) conventional 
teaching mode.  Neither the teachers nor the students got enough time to prepare 
themselves for the new online education system, which had to be adopted 
hastily in this unique situation to continue the stream of education unabated.  
Despite of a few initial teething problems, the Ministry of Education and other 
organizations in the field rose to the occasion and to ok various steps/measures 
to broaden the outreach of online/digital education and remote learning and 

2 
 
ensure its accessibility to all students in all strata of society.  Still, this method is 
in the initial evolving phase in the country.       
3. Priortising education recovery is crucial to avoid generational 
catastrophe. Children learning has suffered immensely and because education 
sector also provides help, nutrition and psychological services, the overall 
welfare of the children has declined substantial ly. Accordingly, with a view to 
assess the preparedness of the education sector during the pandemic, the ground 
realities and to assess whether any learning loss has been caused due to school 
lockdown and discontinuation of physical (face to face) classes as well as to 
suggest a way forward to be better equipped and prepared to deal with such 
situations in future, the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports decided to examine in detail 
the Subject “Plans to Bridge the Learning Gap caused due to School 
Lockdown as well as Review of Online and Offline instructions and 
examinations and plans for re-opening of Schools.” 
 
4. Preparedness of Schools, Higher and Technical Education 
Sectors during COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
4.1 The Committee initially reviewed the impact of the pandemic on the 
entire education system in the country including preparedness and initiatives 
taken to ensure continued education in all fields. In this respect during the 
course of its delib erations on the subject, the Committee heard the views of the 
Secretary, Department of Higher Education ; Secretary, Department of School 
Education and Literacy ; representatives of the University Grants Commission 
(UGC), All India Council of Technical Educa tion (AICTE), the Central Board 
of Secondary Education (CBSE) and the National Council of Educational 
Research and Training (NCERT).  In order to assess the impact of the Covid -19 
pandemic at the ground level and the response of the States/UTs to the situation, 
the Committee also heard the representatives of the Departments of Education 
of the States of Assam, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh along with the 
representative of the Department of Education of the Union Territory of Jammu 
& Kashmir. 
 
4.2 The Secretary, Department of Higher Education during his oral evidence 
before the Committee on 10 th August, 2020 on the subject briefed the 
Committee about the problems faced by the entire higher/technical education 
system in the country and the remedial steps  taken by the Department and other 
bodies to overcome those problems. These problems included making course 
contents available in digital form, digital divide, psychological impact on the 
students, issue of maximum courses in higher/technical education bei ng in 
English, issue of conducting examinations, challenges being faced by the 
teachers/faculties in conducting online classes, research and faculty 

3 
 
training/development etc. The Secretary aprised that before the pandemic, UGC 
was making available 20 per cent course content in digital form, which has been 
enhanced to 40 per cent during the pandemic.   He submitted that digital divide, 
i.e., students not having internet facilities, electronic devices such as 
smartphones, desktop computers or laptops was a big problem besides mental 
stress and psychological problems of the students. Among the remedial steps, he 
cited the launch of Yukti and Manodarpan helplines. To address the digital 
divide, course contents were made available on TV through Swayam Prabha  
channels.  It was stated that 34 educational channels were broadcasting the 
contents for the benefit of the students. IITs on their part have  digitized 21 
engineering courses. Another problem encountered by the department was 
related to the language/medium of instruction.  In higher and technical 
education, there were 1619 courses in total and most of them were in English. 
An effort was made to make them multi-lingual. It was informed that process to 
make available subjects of Social Sciences and History in eight Indian 
languages has been started through Broadcasting Engineering Consultants of 
India Ltd. ( BECIL). Concerning examinations, the Sec retary, submitted that 
assessment and physical examination were two different things.  The emerging 
viewpoint was that assessment of the students through assignment paper or 
online open book examination must be done before awarding them the final 
degree. The Secretary apprised the Committee that other countries were either 
postponing examinations or conducting them online. UGC was also in favour of 
conducting examinations. He mentioned that facult y were being encouraged to 
teach in online mode and an elabor ate research and faculty development 
exercise has been undertaken. 
 
4.3   The Chairman, AICTE briefed the Committee on the issue of training to 
faculty. During lockdown, AICTE conducted 85 virtual programmes using the 
platforms of Microsoft, Webex, Zoom an d Google. Eighteen thousand facult y 
were trained in emerging technologies. AICTE also conducted 22 programmes 
on universal human values. It also initiated online process to conduct 
inspections and testing for giving approval to colleges. 
 
4.4   The Chairman, UGC informed the Committee that two Inter -University 
Centres of UGC, i.e., Consortium for Educational Communication (CEC) and 
Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) worked pro-actively to link all 
the Universities and colleges to the digital conten t platform.  It was informed 
that for higher education, 86 e -courses were made available by UGC at Post -
Graduate level and 204 e -courses at the Under -Graduate level. Further, the 
initiatives taken by UGC for all Universities included SWAYAM online courses 
UG/PG/NOOCs, e -PG Pathshala, e -content courseware in Under -Graduate 
subjects and Shodhganga. UGC also issued advisories to colleges and 
universities to form panels for continuous interaction with the students. Besides 

4 
 
this, a toll free helpline Manodarpan was launched as a psychological support 
system for all students, teachers and families and to address queries of students. 
 
4.5 The Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy in her 
deposition before the Committee on 10 th August, 2020 submitted  that the total 
closure of educational institutions during the COVID -19 pandemic has affected 
roughly 24 Crore school children, out of which 12 Crore children are from 
Classes 1 to 5 and 6  Crore each from Classes 6 to 8 and 9 to 12.  This caused 
huge instructional loss and jolted the routine lives of students.  The last minute 
postponement of examinations coupled with the news appearing in newspapers 
and media about the pandemic has affected the mental and physical wellbeing 
of the children. Among the remed ial steps, the Secretary cited structuring of 
DIKSHA platform for uploading content and bringing the States on board, 
launching of Manodarpan web-page with content for students, parents and 
teachers, National Toll -Free helpline(8448440632) with a Working G roup of 
Experts from the fields of education, mental health and psychology to monitor 
and support mental health issues of students through online counseling services, 
launch of a national tele -counseling center in NCERT, uploading of videos, 
podcasts and c ontinuation of Mid -day meal scheme during this period. For 
online classes, teacher capacity building programmes, like NISHTHA (National 
Initiative for School Heads and Teachers’ Holistic Development) were 
undertaken by the Department with the involvement o f CBSE and NCERT to 
impart ICT -content-pedagogy integration, related teaching -learning strategies 
including remote assessment of learning outcomes of children, development of 
e-content, handling hardware, software etc. For e -education, the Secretary, 
apprised that NCERT textbooks had been energized with the incorporation of 
QR code in every chapter containing audio/video contents which students can 
access through barcode reader or by downloading DIKSHA App.  A 
comprehensive initiative called PM e -VIDYA was also launched unifying all 
efforts related to digital/online/on -air education to enable multi -mode access to 
education. Their other initiatives included one class one channel, extensive use 
of radio, community radio and CBSE Podcast Shiksha Vani. The Depar tment 
also issued several guidelines, i.e.,Pragyata for digital online education, 
guidelines for admission of children of migrant labourers and guidelines on 
cyber security, cyber bullying and mental health etc. to cite a few. The 
Committee was apprised th at the process for providing content for visually -
impaired and hearing impaired children was also undertaken. The Committee 
was also given to understand that a survey was being undertaken in Kendriya 
Vidyalayas (KVs), Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNVs), CB SE and other 
government schools regarding students' access to online education. 
 
4.6   The Chairman, CBSE emphasized that it followed the procedures and 
guidelines issued by the Ministry of Education. A new initiative on their part 
was giving affiliation t o schools through the process of virtual inspection. He 

5 
 
apprised the Committee that by the year 2025, 60 per cent questions in 10 th and 
12th boards would be competency based. The Chairman, NCERT informed that 
they have developed an alternate academic calendar which was being used by 
most of the States/UTs. Live interactions with students through Swayam Prabha 
channel was another of their initi atives. He emphasized that the focus of 
NCERT was to promote core competency in the students. 
 
4.7 School education which lays the very basic foundation for all future 
learning was the most affected as it relied heavily on physical classes and face -
to-face teaching/learning, particularly at pre -primary and primary levels. 
Moreover, small children need constant support/guidance of parents or elders in 
the use of digital/electronic devices and in comprehending and assimilating the 
lessons/content as well as t o monitor their learning process due to 
comparatively short attention spans and the inability to self -learn. Being in 
school, in a class, in a learning oriented environment with requisite 
infrastructure, learning amongst peers not only addresses the academ ic needs of 
the children but also aids in developing their social abilities, communication 
skills etc. As these aspects are more  pronounced in the school education sector 
as compared to the higher education sector,  the Committee decided to focus its 
attention on the impact of the pandemic on school education and the remedial 
action required, so that the basic foundation of learning is not compromised and 
our future generations are not adversely affected due to the learning loss/gap.   
 
4.8 The Secretary, De partment of School Education and Literacy during her 
deposition before the Committee on 12 th January, 2021 apprised the Committee 
of the various measures taken by the Department to minimize learning loss and 
to overcome the difficulties faced in imparting online education.  The 
Committee was informed that it would take considerable time to compensate for 
this learning loss, but the Department has been preparing bridge courses to 
make up for the learning loss.  She also informed that NCERT has framed 
Alternative Learning Calendar to help overcome learning loss, which has been 
adopted by the States with due adaptations to suit their specific needs.  Content 
for Children with Special Needs were uploaded on the DIKSHA platform and 
Project Coherence has been started to overcome non-availability of internet and 
gadgets, wherein high quality content available on DIKSHA platform will be 
made available via television and radio for the students.  States are also joining 
in the Project by making use of the content by tr anslating it in their regional 
languages and making use of one -class-one-T.V. channel initiative (class -wise 
content developed by NCERT) of the Department. The Department is also 
utilizing radio, podcast and community radio for transmitting the course cont ent 
to the students.  PRAGYATA guidelines were issued detailing the screen time, 
online content and method of assessment among other things.  The Department 
of School Education and Literacy also issued guidelines, such as Learning 
Enhancement Guidelines, S chool Reopening Guidelines, Learning with social 

6 
 
distancing guidelines, Guidelines for out of school children etc.  Besides, 
training was conducted for KV and NVS teachers for handling online classes.  
The Secretary informed that as per a survey conducted by CBSE, 85% children 
are studying online and the remaining students are being reached personally.  
She also stated that National Achievement Survey will be done in November, 
2021, which will give an estimate of the learning loss of the students and the 
kind of interventions required.  The Committee was also apprised that a Joint 
Committee of Ministry of Education, Department of Telecommunications and 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology had also been constituted, 
in which it was decided that whenever Bharatnet reaches a Gram Panchayat, all 
the schools in that Gram Panchayat will be covered by optic fibre to provide 
Wi-Fi connectivity to that school. 
 
4.9 The representative of the State of Assam in his deposition before the 
Committee on 12 th January, 2021 informed the Committee that in the initial 
stage of pandemic the need for digital education was first felt. They first used 
Whatsapp for digital education but realized its limitations in the case of students 
from economically weaker background and backward and remote areas. 
Thereafter, the State used local TV channels, AIR, Doordarshan, community 
radio and telephone operators for digital education. They also opened a call 
centre for doubt clearing. To assess the outcome of its initiatives, a sur vey was 
also conducted in Assam which indicated that the level of children’s 
concentration and understanding on digital media was not sufficient. Thereafter, 
schools were opened from Class I onwards with reduced timings and social 
distancing in Assam when the case load of the pandemic decreased in the State.   
It was informed that Assam was one of the best managed States in terms of 
COVID and around 30 to 35 per cent students attended schools after phase -1 of 
the Pandemic . The State also utilized the pandemi c time to bring in digital 
initiatives, complete civil works etc. 
 
4.10 The representative of the State of Madhya Pradesh in his deposition 
before the Committee on 12 th January, 2021 stated that initially they started 
Whatsapp based digital learning enhanc ement programme, Digilab, containing 
curated study material per day for Classes 1 -12. They used Doordarshan to 
broadcast class wise content for Classes 9 -12. The State popularized Swayam 
Prabha channel also. The schools w ere opened in the State for Classes  9-12 
only in the end of December, 2020 and around 60 -70 per cent children attended 
schools. The representative apprised that pandemic time was utilized for 
capacity building of teachers for both digital training and regular classroom 
handling. Among the difficulties faced, the representative cited large number of 
children having no digital connection and migrant children. As for opening of 
schools from Class 1 -8, a decision will be taken after 31 st March, 2021.  
However, children of these cl asses would not be given general promotions and 
would be assessed on project based assignments. The State Education 

7 
 
Department also prepared a lot of bridge material to help children to cover up 
for the loss of the academic year. 
 
4.11 The representative of the State of Uttar Pradesh in his deposition before 
the Committee on 12 th January, 2021 briefed the Committee about their digital 
initiatives and outreach programmes for Classes 1 to 8. These included 700+ 
teaching videos; class -wise, grade wise and subject -wise classe s on 
Doordarshan; Whatsapp classes covering all 1.59 lakh schools, constant 
communication between teachers and others, e - pathshala phase 2 etc. To make 
up for the loss of academic time, the State had designed a separate module 
called "Samruddh" for accelerated and remedial learning. For Classes 9-12, first 
Whatsapp was used. Teachers created videos on specific subjects which were 
telecast on channels. However, realizing that the reach of smart phones is 
limited, Uttar Pradesh started using DD -UP for Classe s 10 and 12. For other 
classes, e-vidya channels were used. Among other measures, Whatsapp based 
assessment, curriculum reduction and project work were cited.  Since October 
2020, schools were opened for Classes 9 to12 with all the safety protocols in 
place and it was informed that about 40 per cent students were attending 
schools.  
 
4.12   The representative of the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir in his 
deposition before the Committee on 12 th January, 2021 emphasized that there 
has been substantial learning loss and an endeavour would be made to 
compensate for that through bridge courses. Elaborating on the digital platform, 
the representative apprised the Committee that in Kashmir digital cla sses were 
fewer as the area lacked connectivity and, therefore, community classes were 
held. In Jammu, as 4G connectivity was available, digital classes were more 
extensively conducted. The UT of Jammu & Kashmir also made an assessment 
of learning. The UT also did well in teachers training programmes, i.e., 
NISHTHA and Impact NCERT with participation of around 86,000 teachers. 
4.13 The above deliberations of the Committee with the stakeholders brought 
out some critical aspects of the impact of COVID -19 pand emic on the entire 
education sector of the country, which has been dealt with in the following 
paragraphs.  
 
5. Concerns/ Problem Areas and Continuous Learning devised 
by Centre/States/UTs 
 
5.1 The Committee was given to understand that the concern areas identified 
by the Department which needs to be addressed for enhancing the quality, 
outreach and effectiveness of digital/online education in the country are solution 
for students having access and no access to any digital device for learning, 
process to be followed by the State to reach out to students who do not have any 

8 
 
digital device and remedial action, the process of assessment of students during 
pandemic, problems faced by the children of migrant labourers, ensuring safety 
of students on re -opening of schools, concising the syllabus during pandemic, 
psychosocial problems faced by the students during pandemic, preventing drop 
outs, locating out of school children and mainstreaming them, tracking children 
and their learning levels, mitigating learning lo ss- by developing effective 
home-learning programme and tracking learning and teacher capacity building 
during pandemic. The Department apprised the Committee of the various types 
of student resources have been made available to ensure continued and active  
learning during the pandemic, as given below:- 
 
(i) PM e-Vidya with components such as DIKSHA - One nation, one 
digital education platform ; Swayam Prabha  -One Class one TV 
channel, E-content for Open School , Extensive use of Radio, 
Community Radio and podcast and E-content for visually and 
hearing- impaired students. 
(ii) Energised (QR coded) Textbooks for students and teachers - so far 
4147 textbooks of States and NCERT have been QR coded and 
tagged with approximately 1,78,368 pieces of e -content including 
357 textbooks of NCERT.  
(iii) E-Textbooks and E -Contents on National Repository of Open 
Educational Resources (NROER), an open storehouse of e -content 
by NCERT - Nearly 19,277 pieces of e-content are available for all 
grades for various school subjects. These i nclude 700 collections, 
5935 documents, 1453 interactives, 2885 audios, 6421 videos and 
2583 images. All the NCERT textbooks on NROER are QR coded 
and are mapped to various e -resources for a holistic teaching 
learning experience. 
5.2 The Department also ap prised the Committee that resilient Continuous 
Learning Plans (CLP) to meet the unique requirement of each child, each grade 
and each school had to be evolved to bridge the learning gap due to various 
factor and ensure equitable and sustainable access to l earning to each and every 
child. As directed by the Department, most of the States/UTs prepared school -
based CLP for each and every learner. Child -wise mapping of full access, 
limited access or no access to any form of digital device for continued learning ; 
preparation of learning plans based thereon to reach last learner; tracking and 
monitoring learning progress separately for those with access and no access to 
digital devices; special planning for children of migrant workers; CWSN and 
children in schools  in Aspirational districts and innovative interventions for 
mental and physical health and well being of children were the main parameters 
for devising CLPs and most of the States/UTs took appropriate action 

9 
 
accordingly.  Many States/ UTs have implemented creative solutions with low -
tech forms of teaching -learning not requiring internet connections or digital 
devices. The Committee also took note of the innovative ways adopted by the 
States and UTs to access students without access to internet and digital d evices, 
some of them being Bultuke Bol app – Live classes on normal feature phone, 
Motor Cycle iskool and Loudspeaker school in Chhattisgarh, Masti ki Pathshala 
and Khoob Padho campaign in Madhya Pradesh, Project Mashal in Punjab for 
psychological counseli ng, AaoGhar Par Seekhen - books and workbooks 
delivered at home in Rajasthan, Vidyavahini Bihar – a mobile app containing 
textbooks of Bihar Board for Classes 1 to 12, Odisha Shiksha Sanjog – a digital 
learning programme through WhatsApp groups, distribution of notes to students 
in Himachal Pradesh, etc. 
 
6. Learning Loss 
 
6.1 Covid-19 pandemic has caused an unprecedented global education crisis. 
The most immediate impact of Covid-19 outbreak was the temporary stalling of 
classroom activities and postponemen t of all examinations in schools, colleges 
and Universities including the entrance tests for tertiary education sector. This 
left the students in complete disarray. Around 320 million children in India have 
not stepped into a classroom for more than a year  and have lost a tenth of their 
entire schooling already. There was no clarity as to how long the cessation of 
classroom activities will continue. With passing time and continued cessation of 
classes, especially at school level, learning loss was widening and acquiring 
critical dimensions. The Indian Education System being dominated by 
classroom study, the sudden shift to digital/virtual education induced by the 
pandemic brought in its wake certain inherent problems like non -availability of 
digital devices and technical infrastructure with students, teachers and schools, 
irregular interrupted internet connectivity, power outages, limited awareness, 
lack of preparedness of schools, particularly government schools in rural areas 
and remote corners, lack of ada ptation either because of inaccessibility of 
technology or the educational backgrounds of their parents to guide them 
through tech -savvy applications etc. contributed towards learning loss among 
students of all classes and regions.  
 
6.2 The Committee note d that it was not only the learning loss but also the 
loss of social contact and socialization routine that were part of the daily 
experience of a student's life in schools and educational institutions. Further, 
loss of learning opportunities always have a dverse impact on the most 
vulnerable sections of the society like students from economically weaker 
sections, rural and tribal areas  and marginalized sections of society and girls. 
Past evidence suggests that short -term disruptions in schooling often lead to 
permanent dropouts amongst these categories. The pandemic induced lockdown 

10 
 
might have reduced the earning capacity of many households resulting in 
children being pushed to the labour market and young girls being pushed into 
marriage instead of education. 
 
6.3 The Committee further noted  that the learning loss of more than one 
whole academic year would necessarily have weakened the foundational 
knowledge of the students especially in the subjects of mathematics, sciences 
and languages at school level. This learning loss is a big deficit an d is likely to 
impair the cognitive capabilities of students. This might have a debilitating 
effect on vulnerable sections of the society like poor and rural students, 
marginalized sections of society and young women who might have been 
unable to connect t o any form of digital education during the pandemic. This 
needs to be addressed and immediate remedial steps required to be taken.  
 
6.4 A study undertaken by the Research Group of Azim Premji University in 
44 districts across 5 States , namely, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan and Uttarakhand covering 16067 children in Classes 2 to 6 in 1137 
schools in January 2021 indicates that 92% children lost at least one specific 
language ability and 82% lost at least one specific mathematical ability from the 
previous year across all classes . Thus, school closures have resulted in loss of 
not only curricular learning but given rise to a widespread phenomenon of 
regression (forgetting) by students of learning from the previous class. This 
includes loss of foundational learning abilities such as reading with 
understanding and performing addition and multiplication which they had learnt 
earlier and had become proficient in. This regression in curricular learning will 
impact learning of not only more comp lex abilities but also conceptual 
understanding across subjects leading to a cumulative loss over the years 
impacting academic performance in school years and their future learning in 
college.  
 
6.5 Studies conducted by UNICEF and UNESCO globally also reve al the 
extent of impact of the pandemic on the educational sector and its adverse 
effects on the physical, emotional and learning aspects of children.  In the 
meeting held on 23 rd July, 2021 the representatives of UNICEF, India briefed 
the Committee about the studies conducted by them on the effect of the 
COVID-19 pandemic on school education across the globe.  UNICEF informed 
the Committee of some significant findings of the study conducted by them, as 
follows: 
a. 1.5 million schools / 1.37 million AWC closed disrupting education 
of over 286 million students; 
b. only 24% households have access to the internet  and only 
61.8% households own a smartphone;  
c. 40% of students had not accessed any remote learning;  

11 
 
d. Rural students were 10%less likely to have accessed remo te 
learning than their urban peers; and   
e. children faced  psychosocial challenges  due to school  closures 
which affecting learning. 
 
6.6 They also informed  that School closures have put children’s learning, 
nutrition, mental health, and overall development at risk and some students, 
particularly girls, are at risk of never returning to school. In fact long closure of 
schools will lead to children not returni ng to schools and potential for children 
getting engaged in labour and early marriage. Therefore, the immediate need is 
to bring children back to school. For this UNICEF India suggested the 
following steps: 
i. preparation for safe reopening of schools-convergence with other 
departments; 
 
ii. mapping and identifying children out of school with special focus 
on children from vulnerable groups and ensuring  that all children 
safely return to schools; 
 
iii. raise awareness about returning to school for children and parents; 
 
iv. tracking of children and develop an early warning system so they 
remain in school; 
v. ensure child-friendly learning environment in school - psychosocial 
and well-being of children; and 
 
vi. establish a system of monitoring of school reopening/closure. 
 
6.7 The Committee was also briefed about certain best practices adopted by 
different countries which may be adopted with suitable modifications like for 
example:   
 
A. Proactive planning; clear protocols for re-closings; flexibility in 
local decision making 
 
 Somalia: MoE tracking system to monitor returns and identify at -
risk students  
 Poland: principals given authority to suspend classes due to 
outbreaks 
 
B. Simplifying curriculum; adapting academic calendar  

12 
 
 
 Many countries: smaller in -person classes, staggered school 
days/weeks/breaks, classes in shifts, blended learning 
 Zambia: adjusted calendar by shortening vacation periods for 
examination classes 
 China: Helping teachers adapt to online teachings - training 
rural teachers on online teaching  methodologies and information 
and communication technology skills. 
C. Supporting teachers, principals, & school staff on remediation 
and to manage new psychosocial needs 
 
 Jordan: ‘Learning Bridges’ - series of weekly activities on core 
curriculum for Grades 4 to 9  
 Turkey: training teachers on phone-based psychosocial support  
 Nicaragua: recreation kits to develop socio -emotional skills 
through play 
 
D. Cancelled and modified examinations  
 
 Albania: cancelled primary and lower secondary exams; adjusted 
content of upper secondary exam  
 Egypt: replaced exams in Grades 3 -9 with research projects; 
Grades 10 and 11 exams held online 
6.8  The Committee thereafter took into consideration the publication COVID-
19 and School Closures: One year of education disruption 1 brought out by 
UNICEF in March, 2021 . The Committee took note of the following aspects 
covered in the publication: 
Key findings: 
 
a. In the period between March 11, 2020 and February 2, 2021, schools  
have been fully closed for an average of 95 instruction days globally, 
which represents approximately half the time intended for classroom 
instruction. 
b. Countries in the Latin America and the Caribbean region were the most 
affected with 158 days of full sc hool closures on average, followed by 
                                                           
1COVID-19 and School Closures: One year of education disruption - UNICEF DATA 

13 
 
countries in South Asia with 146 days. Countries in the Eastern and 
Southern Africa region were the third most affected with an average of 
101 days.  
c. Among the top 20 countries with the longest full school closures dur ing 
this period, more than half are situated in the Latin America and the 
Caribbean region.  
d. Globally, 214 million students from pre -primary to upper secondary 
education in 23 countries have missed at least three-quarters of classroom 
instruction time at t he pre-primary to upper secondary level since March 
2020. 
e. Of these 214 million students, 168 million in 14 countries missed almost 
all classroom instruction time due to school closures. 
f. Countries with the longest durations of school closures tend to have a low 
prevalence of school -age children with a fixed internet connection at 
home.  
g. While the majority of countries have fully opened schools (53 per cent) 
and almost a quarter of the world’s countries have partially opened 
schools, 196 million students in 2 7 countries (13 per cent globally) have 
schools that were fully  
h. closed as of February 2, 2021, the most recent date for which data is 
available.  
i. On average, in countries where schools were still closed as of February 2, 
2021, nearly 80 per cent of classr oom instruction has been missed in the 
eleven-month period since March 2020. 
  

14 
 
The magnitude of school closures: A regional perspective 
 
The duration of school closures indicates the number of days students did 
not receive inperson classroom instruction. Different regions were affected 
disproportionally in terms of the magnitude of school closures (Figure below). 
The highest average number of days when classroom instruction was disrupted 
was seen in the Latin America and the Caribbean region, followed by t he South 
Asia, and Eastern and Southern Africa regions. In contrast, in North America 
region schools closed partially. Globally, schools were closed for an average of 
95 (roughly 50 per cent) instruction days, which represents a high proportion of 
intended classroom instruction time. 
 
 
 
 
 
Countries with the greatest number of days of full school closures 
 
 Some countries closed all schools initially but then eventually reopened 
schools. Others have had full school closures for almost the entire year since the 
onset of the COVID -19 pandemic. The Figure below summarizes the 20 
countries with the highest numbe r of days of full school closures since March 
11, 2020, in descending order. The data reveal that more than half of the top 20 
countries are concentrated in the Latin America and the Caribbean region, and 


15 
 
the number of days of full school closure ranges from 148 days in Jordan to 211 
days in Panama. It is important to note that the total days of instruction differ  
among countries and therefore the highest number of days of full closures may 
not translate to that largest share of instruction days missed. 
 
 
 
The number of students affected globally by school closure 
 
Globally, 214 million pre -primary to upper secondary education students 
in 23 countries missed at least three -quarters of classroom instruction time. 
Primary school students constitute the majority of the world’s schoolchildren, 
so they are also the majority among those who missed at least three -quarters of 
classroom instruction (105 million), followed by lower secondary 
schoolstudents (53 million). 
 
Call for Action: the way ahead 
 


16 
 
Concluding UNICEF states that despite overwhelming evidence of the 
impact of school closures on children, and despite increasing evidence that 
schools are not drivers of the pandemic, too many countries have opted to keep 
schools closed, some for nearly a year. It needs to be understood that schools 
are essential for children’s learning, health, safety and well -being. For the most 
vulnerable children, school closures have deprived them of their one nutritious 
meal a day; children living in violent or dysfunctional f amily settings who rely 
on school to provide a safe, nurturing environment have also been cut off from 
this safety net (Borkowski et al, 2020; WHO, 2020). 
 
 In many countries, schools also play essential role in immunization and 
health support. As schools reopen, governments must nurture the development 
and well -being of every student when they return to the classroom, with 
comprehensive services including remedial learning, health and nutrition, and 
mental health and protection measures. Authorities must also ensure all children 
return to school when classrooms reopen. 
 
7.Digital Education and its efficacy 
 
7.1 The Committee noted that the Covid-19 pandemic had disrupted students' 
lives immensely. Classes and examinations had to be postponed/stalled across 
the country. To ensure that the students did not miss out on studies, higher 
educational institutions and sc hools moved to online classes in place of face to 
face teaching. While it must have worked to a certain extent in the higher 
education sector, it surely pushed school students to sit before the screen to 
attend classes, do assignments and get themselves ev aluated online. It is 
however, debatable whether the screen time helped students learn or it actually 
impeded their progress, including their social and emotional well being. The 
Committee is of the view that online education is not a real education becaus e it 
is only a transmission of contents and the student is deprived of real learning 
and understanding of concepts.  Both teachers and students faced many hurdles 
during online education. Lack of basic facilities, external distraction and family 
interruption during teaching , i.e., lack of classroom like ambience were major 
issues in home learning. Therefore, it cannot be a substitute for face to face 
learning in a physical class. It is believed that students learn more with face to 
face teaching, while enga ging with fellow students in collective tasks. In 
online/digital education, students just stare at the screen, they do not think, 
question, argue or discuss.  It is mostly a one -way communication channel with 
no scope of interaction and engagement. Additio nally, online/digital classes 
have burdened parents, forced them to sit with their children, especially those 
belonging to primary classes, for online/digital classes. The Committee is of the 
view that IT enabled online/digital education cannot be the sole  provider of 
education and a substitute for teachers who provide personalized coaching 

17 
 
customized to suit the needs of each student as per his/her capability and 
learning capacity. 
 
7.2   The Department of School Education and Literacy's own sample survey of 
experience of online education in KVs itself is self revealing. Only 33.8% 
students, 29.6% teachers and 27.2% parents found it joyful , whereas 26.4% 
students, 15.7% teachers and 25% parents found it difficult. In terms of 
identifying difficulties in var ious subjects, mathematics, sciences and social 
sciences were the subjects of concern. In terms of use of devices, mobiles were 
being used by the students in highest percentage, i.e., 84 per cent followed by 
laptops (19.4%), television (5.5%) and radio (0. 6%). This survey was in respect 
of KVs which are better equipped with infrastructural facilities including the 
availability of computers and computer labs. However, Indian education system 
is such that maximum students, i.e., around 70% go to Government sc hools 
which lack even the basic infrastructural facilities and to assume that they 
would have digital infrastructural facilities would be unrealistic.  On a query by 
the Committee, the Department furnished the data regarding number of ICT 
Labs per 1000 students across the country, a perusal of which indicates that UT 
of Puducherry tops the list with 35% availability followed by Tripura with 
4.9%, UT of Ladakh with 4.1% and Gujarat with 4%.  The rest of the 
States/UTs lag far behind with percentage availabili ty ranging from 2.9% to 
0.2%.  This highlights the lack of technological infrastructural facilities in 
schools across the country.  It was also found that only 11.58% schools across 
the country has internet facilities.  Even some of the higher educational 
institutions both government and private may not be equipped with required 
infrastructural facilities for imparting digital education. In such a scenario, to 
assume that digital/online education was being imparted at all levels 
successfully may not be true.  
 
7.3 Though the total shift to online education was sudden in our country, it is 
slowly becoming the new normal and the pandemic has highlighted that the 
partnership between technology and education is going to stay forever. The 
positive impact of digita l education on Indian Education System enhanced 
development of soft copies of learning materials, digital content, enhanced 
digital literacy, improved use of electronic media for sharing information, rise 
in virtual meetings, teleconferencing, webinars etc . facilitating remote learning, 
better time management and opportunity to self -learn from diverse resources 
and customize learning as per needs. Therefore, the Committee is of the view 
that educational institutions should adopt both conventional and online  teaching 
methodologies as this will help in inculcating technology into classrooms, 
increase digital literacy among teachers and students and their exposure and 
learning thus making them more employable for the digital world.   
 
8.Digital Divide 

18 
 
 
8.1 The Committee noted that the Department of Higher Education had made 
available course content digitally up to 40 per cent for the benefit of students. It 
was also noted that as per the Department of School Education & Literacy, 
around 85 per cent students were  connected with the online classes and the 
remaining students were being approached with other modes. The States and 
Union Territory heard by the Committee also stated that they switched to online 
mode of education and reported that a good percentage of st udents were taking 
online classes. This envisaged availability of internet connectivity and smart 
phones which made digital education accessible to students.  
 
8.2   The Committee, however, observes that the ground reality is completely 
different. All part s of the country are not equipped to make digital education 
reach to all corners and cover all groups of the people. In higher education 
sector, one can understand student's access to e -modes, but in school education 
availability of digital platforms and t heir access to students is debatable. The 
Secretary, Department of School Education & Literacy during her deposition 
before the Committee herself admitted that connectivity was a major issue. An 
effort has been made by the Department in coordination with t he Department of 
Telecommunications and Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
to connect one lakh Gram Panchayats with Bharatnet.  In reply to the 
Questionnaire provided, the Department informed that the CSC e -Governance 
Services of India Ltd (CSC-SPV) of Meity has been assigned the task of 
providing Fibre to the Home (FTTH) connectivity to the Government 
Institutions, including schools. This project is for providing Internet connection 
to the Government schools in respective Gram Panchayats. T he School 
Education Departments of the respective State Governments have appointed 
State/Districts-wise Nodal Officers for the project for effective implementation 
and as of May 2021, 46,750 active connections have been provided of the 
identified 63,063 sc hools at various levels. The States and UT heard by the 
Committee also submitted that connectivity and access to gadgets were major 
issues affecting the outreach of the digital education in a big way.  However, the 
Secretary, Department of School Education  and Literacy informed the 
Committee in response to a query that it is likely to take another two years to 
achieve the target of the Department to cover 2.5 lakh gram panchayats. 
 
8.3   The Committee feels that two interconnected issues are involved in the  
matter, i.e., internet connectivity and its speed across the country and access to 
gadgets, i.e., availability of smart phones, tablets, computers, laptops etc. The 
Committee is well aware that these facilities are available more in metro and big 
cities. Most of rural, remote areas lack these facilities indicating a huge digital 
divide. In other words, about 70 per cent of the country does not have access to 
internet connectivity and available quality of connectivity is poor . M any 
households, especially belonging to the lower income groups, do not have smart 

19 
 
phones, tablets, desktop computers/laptops even television and radio to connect 
digitally/electronically. This effectively means that poor and marginal people in 
rural areas, labourers, migrant workers and women have been deprived of the 
benefits of digital education. The Committee also noted that an effort was made 
to reach out to students through television and radio  and to supply digital 
devices to students belonging to ec onomically weaker sections in some States . 
However, the Ministry's own sample survey in respect of KVs showed that only 
5 and 0.5 per cent students used television and radio for online education.   The 
increased drop-out rates at the Secondary level (17% Bo ys and 15.1% Girls) in 
the UDISE Report, 2019 -20 is also indicative of the adverse impact of school 
closure and digital divide on children, especially those belonging to remote 
areas and marginalized sections of society.  
 
9. Children with Special Needs, O ut-of-School children, 
Children of Migrant Workers 
 
9.1 In response to queries of the Committee, the Department informed that in 
order to mitigate the impact of challenges thrown by the COVID -19 pandemic 
for migrant children and preventing drop -outs, lower  enrolments and loss of 
learning, guidelines were issued by the Ministry of Education for identification, 
smooth admission process and continued education of migrant children on 13 th 
July, 2020. This was done despite the fact that education falls under the  
Concurrent List of the Constitution and majority of the schools come under the 
purview of the respective State and UT Governments. The Department also 
requested the States to identify and enroll all children of migrant workers in 
nearby government schools  without the requirement of submitting any 
document except an Identity Card and maintain a database of migrant children 
admitted.  Guidelines were also issued to provide the residential school students 
with temporary admission in schools nearby their homes , as they may not go 
back to their residential schools during COVID -19. The Department further 
informed that guidelines issued on 7 th January, 2021 include identification of 
out of school children from age 6 -18 years, enrolment drives and awareness 
generation, student support while schools are closed, continued education for 
children with special needs (CWSN), student support on school reopening and 
Teacher capacity building. Under the centrally sponsored scheme of Samagra 
Shiksha, financial assistance has been provided to the States and UTs for 
undertaking various activities to reduce number of out of school children 
including drop-outs. 
 
9.2 The Department further informed that a new online system to capture the 
Out of School Children (missing children) on  PRABANDH portal of the 
Department was launched through which a unique id will be generated to track 
the child until they are mainstreamed to regular school.  As regards Children 

20 
 
with Special Needs (CWSN), digital version of Barkha reading Series including  
a set of 40 story booklets were developed to promote reading for all in inclusive 
settings.  More than 120 audio books, 91 videos in Sign Language for CWSN, 
20 videos for CWSN from CIET etc. have been uploaded on DIKSHA portal 
and Read Aloud Textbooks are  also available on E -Pathshala platform.  The 
Department also apprised the Committee that study material has been developed 
in Digitally Accessible Information System (DAISY), a technical standard for 
digital audio books, periodicals and computerized text and that 25 NCERT 
textbooks have been converted into DAISY format in English and Hindi 
language.   
 
 
10. Curriculum Remodelling 
 
10.1  The Committee was given to understand by the stakeholders that since 
COVID-19 blended approach towards education would be the norm, different 
modes of conveying knowledge and technological tools would be used to impart 
knowledge in the entire education system . This in essence would require 
curriculum remodeling. The Committee also noted that to combat COVID -19 
situation, Ministry of Education reduced syllabus by 30 per cent. Most of the 
States/UTs also reduced the syllabus by 30 per cent to help students to cover the 
syllabus. The Committee is of the view that a class -wise, subject-wise question 
bank of 100 questions should be prepared so that the students are aware of the 
topics to be covered in an academic year.  
 
11. Capacity Building of Teachers 
 
11.1   Although the focus was placed on the impact on students, teachers also 
suffered significantly at work and professionally. The most evident impact of 
Covid-19 on teachers was the expectation to shift to virtual mode of teaching, 
especially when no formal train ing was provided to them. The ability of each 
teacher to continue teaching largely depended on their experience in this regard. 
Further, lack of virtual campus and virtual classroom for each subject also 
placed serious difficulties in delivering lectures, particularly in those subjects 
which included the development of professional competencies through practice, 
for e.g.  engineering, science and those heavily dependent on practical 
workshops, laboratory work or institutional practices. 
 
11.2   Further, in many institutions, there were the issues of part -time faculties 
appointed under contract basis and absence of subject -teachers especially in 
rural, remote areas. The Committee was given to understand that extensive 
teacher training programmes were conducted  by the Department and various 
States to make teachers digital friendly.  
 

21 
 
12. Use of Satellite TV for telecasting Educational content - a cost 
effective and viable solution  
 
12.1 The Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy in the 
deliberations held on 21 st June, 2021 informed the Committee about the steps 
taken by the Department in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Telecommunications and CSC E -Governance Ltd. for ensuring internet 
connectivity through Bharatnet in 2.5 lakh village s and the schools therein; and 
funding for ICT, such as, smart rooms, virtual studios, digital devices like 
preloaded tablets etc.  
 
12.2 CEO, Prasar Bharati informed the Committee that they had issued 
guidelines on Educational Broadcast/Telecast on 22 nd April, 2020 first for three 
months and later extended it for another nine months. It was informed that 
Educational telecast was done on 25 Doordarshan State Networks and 8 State 
Networks i.e. DD UP, DD Bihar, DD Girnar, DD Odia, DD Punjabi, DD 
Sahayadri, DD Kashir, DD Port Blair were still continuing educational telecast. 
Likewise educational broadcast in All India Radio was done by 12 States with 
an average daily broadcast in 2020 -21 been 16.10 hours and 5 AIR Stations i.e. 
Chennai, Guwahati, Jammu, Srinagar and were still continuing with it. 
 
12.3 Director-General, Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space 
Applications & Geo -Informatics (BISAG -N), Ministry of Electronics & 
Information Technology in his deliberations stated that telecast of educational 
content through satellite TV on DTH channels of Doordarshan is the most cost 
effective technology to ensure wider outreach in all States.  He also informed 
that this system could be developed further across the country to provide not 
only education, but teach er training, entertainment and public awareness 
programmes.    
 
12.4 The Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy in her 
deliberations in a meeting held on 2nd July, 2021 informed the Committee about 
the efforts made by the Department in ensuring continued education through 
television network.  It was informed that after a discussion with BISAG, a letter 
had been issued on 13 th September, 2017 to all States regarding the possibility 
of expanding the channels for the purpose of education along with guidelines on 
the utilization of DTH TV channels, which were prepared in consultation with 
BISAG’s team.  Seven States, namely, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra, 
Madhya Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and Tripura had sought time on 
Swayam P rabha, a satellite channel with four hours relay time , which was 
approved and after the pandemic struck, the Department started follow -up with 
the States as to the measures taken by them for TV broadcast.  She informed 
that many States have dedicated Doord arshan channels, like, Vidya Varadhi in 
Andhra Pradesh, which broadcasts for classes 1 to 10 daily; Arun Prabha  in 

22 
 
Arunachal Pradesh on which there is a 40 minute relay on 6 days a week for 
classes 6 to 8; Mera Doordarshan Mera Vidyalay in Bihar, with 5 hour slots for 
classes 1 to 12; Vande Gujarat and DD Girnar which broadcasts lessons for all 
classes and Gyanshala programme in Himachal Pradesh.  Thus, most of the 
States have taken slots on Doordarshan on a daily basis, class -wise and 'One 
Class, One TV Ch annel', which is also on Swayam Prabha with one dedicated 
channel for all classes.  Most of these lessons are being prepared in the studios 
of NCERT, both in its Regional Institutes of education and in the Headquarters.   
 
12.5 CEO, Prasar Bharati further informed the Committee that several States 
had approached them to reactivate broadcast of educational classes on account 
of the fairly large value base of DD Free Dish DTH with 51 channels of BISAG 
and Doordarshan channels along with some private DTH operators, all available 
on one single DTH platform.  The only investment is a regular DTH set top box, 
regular DTH dish antennae and TV sets.  He also informed that Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands is the only region not reachable in the country at present, due to  
non-extension of GSAT footprints there and the only issue being faced by them 
is transponder capacity regarding which ISRO has assured them that by the year 
2022, they are planning to launch another satellite in the same orbital slot which 
will assure more satellite capacity.  He further apprised the Committee that the 
number of TV households in the country is about 20 Crore, which is a fairly 
large base and this platform was being utilized in view of its potential reach to 
many households.  He also stated  that Prasar Bharati has been working with 
CDAC and IIT Kanpur to bring in technology with automated way of content 
delivery for visually and hearing impaired.   
 
12.6 The Committee was also apprised by the representatives of the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh on  the 
steps taken by them to ensure continued education of the students in their States 
and for utilize satellite TV as a cost effective and viable mechanism to ensure 
reach of online education to the re motest corners of their States and thus to 
bridge the digital divide. 
 
12.7 The Committee in its deliberations  also took note of the fact that the cost 
of utilization of DTH TV channels for the purpose of broadcasting educational 
content was very reasonable and a very nominal investment had to be made at 
the ground level to avail its services. Further, the country already had the 
example of the States of Gujarat and Odisha which had invested in it even 
before the pandemic and thereby could make effective utilization of its services 
in the pandemic phase. 
 
13. Review of Examinations and Assessments 
 

23 
 
13.1 The prolonged school closures have not only impacted curricular learning 
but also have major implications on examinations, assessments and credentials.  
Examinations offer a proper yardstick to measure a students’ learning progress 
in a particular class, the learning gap/loss and aids in determining whether the 
student is actually ready for the next class/next level of learning.  To promote a 
student to the next higher grade without actual assessment of his/her learning 
level in the lower grade would not only impede his/her future learn ing leading 
to increased drop -out rates due to the inability of cope with the learning 
standards, but also result in the creation of a future generation lacking the 
requisite foundational strength in core concepts of each subjects, which will 
have a cascad ing effect on their future employment prospects as well.  The 
interruption of examinations is thus likely to have a negative impact on 
students’ progression in terms of their actual learning outcomes, their future 
learning avenues, university admissions an d employment requirements.  This is 
more pronounced in the case of vocational and technical education sectors.  The 
Committee was of the view that this is a matter of grave concern for all the 
stakeholders including students, teachers, parents and even emp loyers and 
therefore needs to be duly considered. 
 
13.2 The Committee was given to understand that the Department along with 
CBSE rose to the occasion and came out with a set of guidelines for internal 
assessment of students in Classes 10 and 12 in the abs ence of board 
examinations.This, however, was a stop -gap arrangement which had to be 
devised within no time to deal with the situation on hand and avoid loss of 
academic year of students. Some Members pointed out the apprehension 
amongst students and paren ts regarding this arrangement and the moderation 
policy of fair distribution of marks and whether it would actually be able to 
assess the learning progress of each student.  They suggested that a more 
transparent, fair and credible system should be develop ed to deal with such 
emergent situations in future. 
 
14. Budget for the Digital/Online education 
 
14.1. On a query by the Committee regarding the financial support/aid 
requested from the Ministry of Education by the States and UTs during the 
pandemic phase, the Ministry informed that during the current financial year 
2021-22, it had released ₹.5228 Crore in ad -hoc grants to the States under the 
Samagra Shiksha Scheme and an additional ₹. 2500 Crore will also be released 
to ensure continuity of various educational initiatives by the States and UTs 
during the pandemic and for the major identified initiatives like identifying and 
mainstreaming of Out of School Children and ensuring sustained enrolment, 
retention and transition, academic learning and cognitive development of 
students, capacity building with specific focus on blended and home -based 
learning including student assessments and data use, nutritional and socio -

24 
 
economical support, digital education and monitoring, tracking and remedial 
measures etc.  The Ministry also informed that ₹.224.49 Crore has been 
approved for smart classrooms in 12026 schools under project innovation and  
₹.763.04 Crore has been approved for 4049 schools under ICT and Digital 
Initiatives.  On another query regarding the funds earmarked in BE 2021-22 for 
providing digital/online education, the Department informed that a budget of     
₹.1181.31 Crore was allotted to 25 States, whose Project Appraisal Board 
(PAB) for the year 2021 -22 had taken place in April -May,2021 and 
approximately ₹. 500 Crore will be considered by the PAB  for proposals of the 
remaining 11 States .  In the year 2020 -21, the Ministry, under the pandemic 
situation, had approved ₹.1081.68 Crore to 36 States/UTs, out of which 
₹.808.79 Crore was utilized by the States/ UTs. 
 
 
15. School re -opening guidelines during the COVID -19 
Pandemic 
 
15.1 It is an undisputed fact that that online e ducation can only be a stop gap 
alternative for face to face physical classes in the ongoing pandemic phase . It 
has also been noticed that there is no value addition in online schooling and 
parents are even ready to skip a year.  Face to face physical classes are therefore 
essential as they are more effective way of teaching especially for children of 
primary classes where the children not only imbibe the teaching but also learn 
other valuable social skills and life skills. Learning happens only  when the 
teacher is present along with the children. All efforts should be made to bring 
teachers and students together.  Children attending online classes with handheld 
devices need constant parental support and supervision. Further, as per reports 
only 23% of the students had access to devices to attend online classes so the 
remaining 77% of the students were deprived of the attending online classes. It 
was also noted that education of the students belonging to remote and marginal 
areas of the country was  the worst affected by the pandemic.   The impact of 
long term school closures on the mental and psychological well being and their 
social behaviour also needs to be taken into account.   
 
15.2 The Committee took note of the fact that 90% of the countries r e-opened 
schools in some capacity during the pandemic phase. The Committee further 
noted that for the overall growth and well being of the students the schools need 
to be re -opened in a phased manner.  It was also pointed out that some of the 
States had re-opened their schools in October and November, 2020 in piecemeal 
manner. However, with the onslaught of the second wave in April -May, 2021, 
schools were again closed. Now that the situation has started improving for 
better, many States have opened up school s exclusively for class IX onwards 
upto class XII.   

25 
 
 
16. Blended (Hybrid) mode of education for the future 
 
16.1. The COVID-19 pandemic has severely a ffected the education system not 
only in India but also in countries across the world due to closure of schools. 
This also lead to a situation where the Centre, States and educational institutions 
had to adopt online technologies at a very rapid pace to ensure continued 
education of the students. The efforts and i nitiatives taken to harness ICT to 
ensure that education reaches even the remotest parts of the country has helped 
create a infrastructure which has a lot of scope and possibilities for the future.  
The Committee was apprised of the various initiatives tak en by the Department 
in this direction, some of the novel ones being (i) Vidyadaan – a national 
content contribution program that leverages DIKSHA platform to seek and 
allow contribution/donation of e -learning resources for school education by 
educational bodies, private bodies and individual experts , (ii) Chat Bot – 
Technology Aided Responses and Answers (TARA), National Digital 
Education Architecture (NDEAR) – a technological framework which aims to 
enable existing systems to upgrade and become interoper able, while making 
available the building blocks for the creation of new tools and solutions and 
thus to energize and catalyse the digital education ecosystem. 
 
16.2 The Committee took note of the fact that though a number of issues like 
insufficient bandwidth and connectivity issues, lack of devices for the students 
and teachers, training of teachers for online mode among other concerns are 
very relevant but still online education will eventually become an integral 
component of school education. Thereby in  the near future a Blended (Hybrid) 
mode of education needs to be developed based on the experiences during the 
COVID-19 pandemic so as to meet any such situations in future. 
 
17. Case Study- Visit to Leh and Srinagar 
 
17.1 The Committee visited a number of schools and also interacted on the 
issue of continued education through various modes during COVID -19 
pandemic period with the U.T. administration of Ladakh and UT of J&K during 
its study-visit to Leh and Srinagar from 5th to 8th July, 2021. 
 
17.2 The C ommittee was briefed about the steps taken to ensure continued 
education through various modes during COVID-19 pandemic period such as: 
 
i. broadcast of lectures as prescribed by JK Board through National DD; 
ii. broadcast of lectures through AIR Leh/Kargil to reach out to students 
that do not have internet access; 

26 
 
iii. arrangement of community classes in open spaces by community 
teachers and volunteers; and  
iv. distribution of pre -loaded educational tablets ‘Youngtab’ for students 
of class 6th to 12th. 
17.3 The Committ ee appreciated the steps taken by the UT administration . 
However, certain infrastructural bottlenecks needed to be addressed on an 
urgent basis like e nsuring internet connectivity in the remote and inaccessible 
areas of the UT and also electricity network needs to be developed so that the 
electronic devices can operate.  
 
  

27 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
After a study of the documents submitted and depositions made before 
the Committee, the Committee accordingly recommends the following: 
 
18.1  Learning Loss 
 
(a) Intensive bridge courses and accelerated learning programmes 
should be developed in consultation with experts in the field to 
make up for the learning loss and bring students to the level of 
learning of each class. 
(b) Learning Outcomes, subject -wise, during the pandemic period 
should be assessed by regularly conducting tests with multiple -
choice questions or quizzes and remedial measures taken 
through intense customized personal remedial classes  to 
address the problem areas of each student.   
 
(c) Extra classes, curtailment of vacations, assigning expert 
teachers for personalized coaching, parental engagement, peer-
group and collaborative learning may be explored to help 
students, who are lagging behind and provide them 
personalized and dedicated attention to bridge the learning 
gap. Senior class students should be advised to take up up the 
role of mentors and take classes of the junior students and it 
should be taken as a criteria of assessment in more structured 
manner.  
(d) Specific instructional materials and worksheets, workbooks 
may be created to address the specific learning requirements of 
students thus enabling them to bridge the learning gap/loss. 
 (e) Mandatory Helpline Centers for every subject to clear the 
doubts of the students should be made operational to clear the 
doubts of students in each subject.  Phone -in programmes may 
also be aired through TV and on community radio with subject 
experts to elaborate on topics  and explain d ifficult concepts to 
students. Whatsapp Groups comprising teachers/subject 
experts may be created for each class in schools to aid students 
in their learning, clarification of doubts/concepts etc.  
(f) The best formative assessments, like ChatBot Assessment, may 
be encouraged  to map students learning processes/outcomes 
and identify those who require specific attention and the 
subjects in which targeted instruction is needed. 

28 
 
 
18.2  Need for proper documentation and data collection 
 
The Committee recommends that a comprehensive assessment to collect 
data of the post COVID situation leading to the learning loss due to school 
lockdown may be under taken by the Department of School Education & 
Literacy to cover the following areas of concern: 
a) learning loss assessment immediately acr oss the country covering 
each and every student, with specific emphasis on students 
belonging to rural and backward areas as well as economically 
weaker and marginalized sections of the society and also Children 
with Special Needs.  The findings/results of  the survey should be 
compared with the figures for the pre -COVID period and the 
groups of students and areas/subjects which require immediate 
remedial action should be identified; 
b) the basic reading, writing and arithmetical skills  of students of 
various c lasses and  compare them with the results during pre -
COVID period. Thereafter, remedial programmes/evidence based 
multi-pronged strategies may be devised to make up for the 
learning loss so that future learning and employment prospects 
are not adversely affected; 
c) out-of-school children, particularly girls, during the pandemic and 
concerted action taken to bring them back to school and 
mainstream education by giving them incentives in the form of 
study material, digital devices, wholesome nutritional food etc; 
d) impact of online/digital/distant education during the pandemic to 
create data sets based on demography, socio -economic status, 
student’s learning habits, including hours of online study, students 
perception of their self -learning, occupational aspirations, 
psychological effect etc. for a comparative study/analysis and for 
augmenting policy makers’ awareness and aid them in 
formulating policies for ensuring better preparedness and for 
planning for future scenarios; 
e) availability of digital devices  and their usage , with special 
emphasis on rural, tribal and backward areas of the country and 
the economically weaker and marginalized sections of society and 
remedial action taken based on the findings thereof; 

29 
 
f) performance assessment of teachers, especia lly in coordination 
with the States and UTs , to ascertain their potential in handling 
audio-visual tools and imparting digital education; 
g) the minimum requirements of technological infrastructur e for 
improving digital education in schools across the country , 
particularly in rural, tribal, hilly and backward areas as well as in 
Aspirational Districts, and chalk out a roadmap for development 
of such facilities with increased investment to meet any suc h 
emergent situations in future; and   
 
h) weekly assessment of digital learning outcomes to regularly assess 
learning progress of students to enable them to course correct in 
case requisite targets are not achieved. 
18.3 Steps to ensure Continued Learning  
I. Budget for the Digital/Online education 
The Committee noted with concern the under utilization of the 
allotted funds by some States and recommends that the 
Department should urge the States/UTs to fully utilize the budget 
grants made to them during the financial year 2021-22 to augment 
digital/online education and create necessary infrastructural and 
technological facilities required therefor. The Committee  also 
recommends that since the digital/online mode of education is 
going to be the new normal even after the pandemic subsides,  
efforts to technologically empower every school and students 
across the country may be aggressively  pursued and additional 
funds allocated for the purpose, as per requirement. 
II. Use of Satellite TV for telecasting Educational content - a cost 
effective and viable solution 
a) Telecast of educational programmes through satellite TV, on the 
model of Gujarat and Odisha, for a cost -effective mode of online 
education with wide outreach should be developed in all other 
States/UTs in collaborating with BISAG-N. 
 
b) Wide publicity may be given to the educational programmes being 
aired on Doordarshan and on satellite TV to create awareness 
amongst general public.  The educational channels of the Department 
may be clubbed and placed along with entertainment or news 
channels having high TRPs for enhanced visibility and attract higher 

30 
 
viewership, instead of placing them at the end of the spectrum of 
available channels as being done at present. 
 
c) The presentation of educational programmes on Doordarshan may 
be re-designed to make it more lively and engagi ng for the students.  
Theatre/Cine artists, Cartoonists may be roped in for creating 
interesting and engaging educational content.  
 
d) ISRO may provide increased transponder capacity for enhanced 
content delivery through satellite TV; 
 
e) Increased bandwidth ma y be provided for community radios to air 
educational content and wide publicity may be given to such 
programmes.  
 
f) States should be encouraged to use available time slots on DD 
regional TV channels to air educational content by utilizing existing 
resources and satellite capacity optimally. 
 
g) The Department should take proactive measures along with Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting and Department of 
Telecommunication to upgrade and revive tele-education networks in 
different States under Edusat Progra mme by upgrading networks, 
replacing obsolete equipment with latest gadgets. 
 
h) All schools, community halls in villages, small towns etc. should be 
equipped with Doordarshan Free Dish, so that students can watch 
educational channels and learn there from. 
 
18.4. Digital Education and its efficacy 
 
a) Recorded online courses/Massive Open Online Courses may be 
developed in all regional languages for each class where students can 
customize learning speeds and timings. 
 
b) An Integrated Learning Management System, a software application 
for overall administration may be created for availability, tracking, 
reporting and delivery of all educational content created across the 
country in multiple languages on a single platform as well as for 
training-learning and developm ent/capacity building programmes 
for both students and teachers. 
 

31 
 
c) Artificial Intelligence-based education tools which can collect data on 
a student’s level of understanding and learning progress,  analyze it 
and accordingly determine or customize the digital content/course to 
augment comprehension and spur learning progress.   
 
d) Augmented and Virtual Reality Education solutions may be 
developed for enabling interactive learning and understanding cor e 
concepts.  The Department may enter into collaboration with the 
Indian Institutes of Technology and other leading engineering 
colleges to develop low cost technologies for the same. 
 
e) Virtual labs with simulation exercises for practical classes should be 
developed for extensive use in all classes across schools. 
 
f) Regular feedback/control mechanism for e -content should be made 
mandatory as the course designer needs to be aware of the needs of 
the ‘end users’ i.e, students and teachers and tailor/customize content 
and delivery to suit their needs/requirement. 
 
g) Technical courses may be incorporated in the curriculum to equip 
students for technological and digital advancements and enhance 
their digital literacy. 
18.5 Digital Divide 
 
a) The Department should make concerted efforts in coordination with 
Ministries/Departments concerned to make available high -speed 
internet connectivity and at least one TV Set, one Desktop Computer, 
large screens with projectors etc. in all schools across the country to 
bridge the digital divide.  The problem of power outages in various 
parts of the country may be tackled by leveraging non -conventional 
energy sources like solar power, wind power etc. in schools and make 
them self-sufficient educational hubs.  
 
b) The step taken by UT of Ladakh to distribute pre -loaded Tablets 
may be replicated in other parts of the country to distribute pre -
loaded Tablets customized for each class fo r students in middle 
school and re -furbished laptops with pre -loaded educational 
programmes for students of secondary and senior secondary classes 
may be distributed instead of providing free textbooks. Efforts may 

32 
 
also be made to manufacture such tablets/laptops indigenously at low 
cost through public -private partnership and by involving IITs, IT 
Industry, business houses etc.  
 
c) A Digital Library with tablets, laptops, educational videos and other 
digital devices may be set up in each school, wherefrom stu dents may 
borrow such devices for their educational needs for a specified time 
period. 
 
d) Leverage private sector expertise and resources through effective 
collaboration to provide digital devices to students belonging to 
economically weaker and marginalized  sections of society.  The 
Department should make concerted efforts to utilise CSR funds for 
this purpose.  
 
 
e) Classes with physical distancing in community halls, auditorium etc. 
in villages and small towns, mobile classes etc. may be explored as 
innovative strategies for students who cannot afford digital devices. 
Large Screens with projectors may be set up in playgrounds or open 
areas for such students to avail online classes. 
 
f) The Department should moot a proposal with Meit Y and Ministry of 
Communications for provision of internet packs at concessional rates 
to students particularly from economically backward and 
marginalized sections of society as well as high speed internet 
connectivity to all schools.  
 
g) The best practices adopted by teachers/s chools in various States/UTs 
to ensure continued education during the pandemic, bridge the 
digital divide and minimize learning loss may be collated and issued 
by the Department in the form of guidelines/practices to be adapted 
by other States/UTs to suit their specific requirements.  
18.6. Children with Special Needs, Out -of-School children, 
Children of Migrant Workers 
The Committee, while appreciating the efforts made by the Department to 
provide inclusive and equitable learning to all by enhancing and 
integrating learning with technology, recommends that:- 
a) the Department should give wide publicity to the various ste ps 
and measures taken by it to impart inclusive and equitable 
education to all sections of students, including CWSN, OoSC, 

33 
 
children of migrant workers etc., so that the beneficiaries are 
aware of the facilities available for them; 
b) the Department should urge the States/UTs for better and 
stricter implementation of the various guidelines issued in this 
regard, so that the benefits actuall y percolate to the ground 
level; 
c) concerted efforts may be made to develop textbooks in DAISY 
format in regional languages also; and 
d) special audio/video content and in Indian Sign Language may 
be created to cater to the curricular learning requirements of 
physically challenged children/children with special needs. 
18.7 Capacity Building of Teachers 
 
a) The Department should encourage States/UTs to augment existing 
digital/technological infrastructure and create more such facilities for 
optimal utilization of the same by teachers/students for efficient and 
effective delivery of content via online mode. 
 
b) Teachers may be trained in a strategic manner so as to enable them 
to create captivating content for digital education and engage 
students in online mode through active interaction and crea tion of a 
school like ambience. 
 
c) Teachers, particularly in rural, tr ibal and backward areas may be 
given intensive training in use of digital devices and Information 
Technology in collaboration with IITs, NITs, private sector etc. 
 
d) Provision of incentives in the form of digital devices, internet 
connectivity, data packs et c. at home to teachers, particularly those 
in rural, remote or backward areas, in order to encourage them to 
shift to digital education and explore new strategies/innovations 
therein; and 
 
e) Specialised training programmes may also be developed for teaching 
children with special needs, physically challenged children and 
children with learning disabilities , particularly for imparting 
online/distance education. 
18.8. Review of Examinations and Assessments 
a) A credible, fair and transparent system of continuous as sessment 
throughout the year may be developed and put in place even when 

34 
 
normal functioning of schools re-commences, so as to meet any future 
emergent scenarios.  This system should be over and above the final 
board examinations and would aid in helping st udents and teachers 
get a correct perspective of their learning curve and course correct 
wherever required. 
 
b) Guidelines for Internal Assessment, Practicals, Project Work, 
particularly for classes 10 and 12, be formulated and circulated for 
strict implement ation in every school at the Centre and in 
States/UTs, be it Government, Government-aided or private, in order 
to ensure objective and uniform standard of assessment across the 
country.    
 
c)  Workbooks be designed to test and assess the understanding of core 
concepts and their practical application in each subject and teachers 
may assign topic -wise exercises from these workbooks to regularly 
assess their students’ learning progress by assignin g marks thereto 
and tabulating them for final assessment. 
 
d) Experiential learning may be encouraged and teachers may be given 
extensive training to adopt new and innovative teaching 
methodologies to impart such learning and progressively assess 
students’ learning abilities and difficulties.  Research Projects based 
on the experiential learning and understanding of core concepts in 
each subject and Presentations by students of their own projects 
before a panel of subject experts for objective evaluation thereof may 
also be considered as an alternative assessment method.  
18.9  School re -opening guidelines during the COVID -19 
Pandemic 
The closure of schools for over a year has had a deep impact on the well -
being of students, especially their mental health. The hazards of not 
opening the schools are too serious to be ignored. The confinement of 
young children within the four walls of the house, being unable to attend 
school, has altered the relationship between the parent and the children 
adversely. The closure o f schools has impacted the social fabric of the 
family in negative manner leading to early/child marriage and increased 
involvement of children in household chores. The present situation has 
exacerbated the learning crisis that existed even before the pand emic with 
the marginal and vulnerable children getting adversely affected. Keeping 
this situation in mind, it becomes all the more imperative to open schools. 

35 
 
The seriousness of the matter should not be overlooked and a well balanced 
reasoned view may be t aken for opening up of the schools. The Committee 
accordingly recommends the following: 
a) Accentuated vaccine programmes for all students, teachers and allied 
staff so that schools may start functioning normally at the earliest. 
b) Classes may be held on alternate days or in two shifts to thin out 
students along with observance of physical distancing and 
compulsory wearing of face masks at all times, frequent hand 
sanitization etc. 
 
 
c) Regular thermal screening at the time of attendance and random RT-
PCR tes ts may be conducted to identify and isolate any infected 
student/teacher/staff immediately.  A sick -room with essential 
facilities/medicines may be set up in each school for facilitating 
observation, immediate isolation and for providing basic medical kit 
in case of emergency. 
 
d) Zero tolerance towards laxity in maintaining Covid protocols and 
appropriate behavior by all the stake holders, namely, school 
management/authorities, teachers, students, allied staff, parents, 
visitors, school and private transporter  and any other person(s) 
connected with school management and functioning. 
 
e) Each school should have at least two Oxygen concentrators with 
trained personnel to address any eventuality and provide first aid till 
availability of outside medical help. 
 
f) Students belonging to economically weaker and marginalized 
sections of society may be supplied hand sanitizer/facemask at 
regular intervals. 
 
g) Frequent/surprise inspection of schools may be done by health 
inspectors/health workers to ensure strict adherence to hygiene and 
COVID protocols. 
 
h) Best practices being followed in different countries for opening of 
schools may be taken into consideration for taking an informed 
decision   
18.10  Blended (Hybrid) mode of education for the future 
a) The Department may ensure that the investment made by the Centre 
and States for developing digital/online education during the 

36 
 
pandemic period are systematically integrated into the education 
system, so that the gains achieved are not lost once normal 
functioning of schools recommence. 
 
b) The Department may chalk out a long term strategy to sort out the 
impediments in this field and ensure access to good quality and 
equitable digital education at economical rates to students in each 
and every part of the country.  
 
c) Conscious efforts may be made by the Department to remodel 
curricular learning at all levels to incorporate both conventional 
pedagogy and digital/online education in equal measure, so that 
Blended learning becomes a norm rather than a concept in the near 
future.    
 
d)  A study of the methods adopted by other countries in the field of 
blended education may be conducted and best practices may be 
collated and adapted to suit the educational requirements of our 
country. 
 
e) The Department should set up at least one school on the complete 
hybrid model of teaching in every district and tehsil of the country. 
These schools should become operational by October and all the 
necessary infrastructure should be made available to them.  These 
schools will be a case study for setting up more such schools in the 
future and will help inspire other schools.  
  

37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

38 
 
XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.00 p.m. on 
Monday, the 10 th August, 2020 in Main Committee Room, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
3. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
6. Shri G.K. Vasan 
7. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
8. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
10. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
11. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
12. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
13. Shri Balak Nath 
14. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
15. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
16. Shri Dharmbir Singh 
17. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor 
2. Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
3. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
5. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
6. Smt. Meera Nair, Assistant Research Officer 
 
WITNESSES 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION  
1. Shri. Amit Khare, Secretary (HE) 

39 
 
2. Shri Rakesh Ranjan, Additional Secretary 
3. Ms. Kamini Chauhan Ratan, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Madhu Ranjan Kumar, Joint Secretary 
5. Prof. D. P. Singh, Chairman, UGC 
6. Dr. Rajnish Jain, Secretary, UGC 
7. Dr. Anil D. Sahasrabuddhe, Chairman, AICTE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & LITERACY 
1. Ms. Anita Karwal, Secretary 
2. Shri. Santosh Kumar Yadav, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Maneesh Garg, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri R. C. Meena, Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. L.S. Changsan, Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Vipin Kumar, Joint Secretary 
7. Shri Manoj Ahuja, Chairman, CBSE 
8. Shri H.K. Senapati, Director, NCERT 
 
2. At the outset, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor of the Secretariat 
welcomed the new Chairman and briefed the Committee about his background. 
3. ***. 
4. ***. 
5. The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary of the Department of Higher 
Education, Chairman, University Grants Commission (UGC), Chairman, All 
India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and other officials of the 
Ministry and briefly informed them about th e agenda of the meeting and asked 
them to make their submissions regarding the preparedness of the Ministry in 
the Covid-19 situation. 
6. The Secretary, Department of Higher Education informed the Committee 
about the major steps taken by the Ministry to ad dress the challenges to the 
higher education sector in view of the pandemic and roadmap ahead which 
included (i) Fight Corona IDEAthon, organized by AICTE (ii) making 
arrangements for the digital content of 40 percent of courses (iii) constitution of 
Committee of Universities to communicate with the universities (iv) Google and 

40 
 
Facebook accounts to reach out to students (v) imparting courses through 
SWAYAM PRABHA TV channels (viii) digitalisation of engineering courses 
by IITs (ix) launching ‘MANODARPAN’ fo r providing psychosocial support 
for Mental Health & Well being of the students during the COVID outbreak and 
beyond etc. 
7. Chairman AICTE, informed that they had conducted online 
HACKATHON with 10,000 students at 40 virtual centres, conducted 85 Faculty 
Training Programmes with the help of Webex, Zoom and Google platforms 
where 18 thousand faculties had been trained. 
8. Chairman, UGC, informed that they had made arrangements of e -content 
and online resources via INFLIBNET in collaboration with various universities. 
He also mentioned about the Guru -Dakshta Programme for Faculty 
Development and SATAT developed by UGC, eVIDYA programme launched 
under ‘Aatma Nirbhar Bharat’ to meet the Pandemic crisis. 
9. Thereafter the Members sought clarifications regarding (i) Practical 
Classes (ii) availability of online material and digital resources in remote / rural 
areas (iii) Mid -day Meal Scheme (iv) Post -Matric Scholarships (v) shortage of 
faculties (vi) learning assessment and outcome measurement (vi) Teacher 
Education etc. The Secretary, Department of Higher Education along with the 
Chairmen UGC and AICTE briefly replied to the Members queries. 
(The Witnesses then withdrew) 
10. Thereafter the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of School 
Education and Literac y, Chairman, Central Board of Secondary Education 
(CBSE) and Director, National Council of Educational Research and Training 
(NCERT) along with other officers of the Department and briefly informed 
them about the agenda of the meeting and asked them to app rise the Committee 
about the preparedness of the Department in the Covid-19 situation. 

41 
 
11. The Secretary then informed the Committee about the major steps taken 
by the Department to address the challenges to the school education sector in 
view of the pandemic and roadmap ahead which included  (i) opening of online 
education through DIKSHA platform (ii) MANODARPAN for the mental well -
being of the children (iii) National Tele -Counselling Centre (iv) Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT) of Mid -day Meal (v) energi sing of textbooks etc. Further, 
Director NCERT mentioned about their initiatives namely NROER, ePathshala, 
DIKSHA, Swayam Prabha Channel, SAHYOG etc. 
12. The Members thereafter raised some queries viz. (i)  virtual laboratories 
and online classes (ii) regul ating the private coaching centres (iii) universal 
access to school education at pre -school and at secondary school level (iv) 
digital resources to poor students (v) facilities available to students of weaker 
sections (vi) availability of study materials etc. 
13. The Secretary and the Chairman, CBSE and Director NCERT briefly 
replied to the Members queries. 
14. The Chairman then congratulated both the Departments for their efforts to 
maintain the continuity of education despite the unprecedented situation c reated 
due to the pandemic and requested them to send written replies on the 
unanswered issues raised by the Members and concluded the proceedings of the 
Committee. 
15. The meeting then adjourned at 5.11 p.m. 
 
 
  

42 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
      The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports  met 
at 2.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 12 th January, 2021 in Committee Room 'A', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
         MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
6. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
7. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 
 LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Rajendra Agarwal 
9. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
10. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
11. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
12. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
13. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
14. Shri Balak Nath 
15. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
16. Shri T. N. Prathapan 
17. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
18. Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
    Dr.   Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
  Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director   

43 
 
Shri   Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
  Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
   
    Witnesses 
     Ministry of Education, Department of School Education and  
               Literacy 
 
 1. Ms. Anita Karwal, Secretary 
 2. Ms. L.S. Changsan, Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri R.C. Meena, Joint Secretary 
 4. Shri Maneesh Garg, Joint Secretary 
 5. Shri Santosh Kumar Yadav, Joint Secretary 
 6. Shri Vipin Kumar, Joint Secretary 
 7. Shri Manoj Ahuja, Chairman, CBSE  
 8. Prof. Sridhar Srivastava, Director, NCERT 
 9. Ms. Nidhi Pandey, Commissioner, KVS 
 10. Shri Vinayak Garg, Commissioner, NVS 
 11. Shri B. Kalayan Chakravorthy, Principal Secretary, Department of 
  Education, State of Assam 
 12. Ms. Rashmi Arun Shamii, Principal Secretary, Department of  
  Education, State of Madhya Pradesh 
 13. Shri Lokesh Jatav, Rajya Shiksha Kendra, Department of  
  Education, State of Madhya Pradesh 
 14. Shri Vijay Kiran Anand, State Project Director, Department of  
  Education, State of Uttar Pradesh 
 15. Ms. Aryaka Akhoury, Special Secretary, Secondary Education,  
  Department of Education, State of Uttar Pradesh 
 16. Shri B.K. Singh, Education Secretary, Department of Education,   
            Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members present in the sitting 
and apprised them that Reports of the Committee on action taken on its 

44 
 
recommendations contained in its Reports on Demand for Grants (2020 -21) of 
the Ministry of Education and Ministry  of Women and Child Development are 
under preparation would be placed before the Committee for its consideration 
and adoption in its sitting to be held on 21 st January, 2021. He also informed 
that the Parliament Diary Page under Facebook and Twitter handle  have been 
created to give wide publicity to the Subjects/Bills under consideration of the 
Committee for soliciting suggestions from stakeholders and Civil Society 
Organizations. Referring to agenda of the sitting he mentioned that Secretary, 
School Education and Literacy along with senior officers from CBSE, NCERT, 
KVS and NVS has been invited to brief the Committee about steps and 
measures taken to bridge the learning gap caused due to COVID induced 
lockdown and plan for reopening schools and assessment o f online and offline 
education offered to the students during lockdown period. The Education 
Secretaries of States of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Assam and Union 
Territory of Jammu and Kashmir have also been invited to share their 
experience of reope ning of schools in their respective States and Union 
Territory.   
3. Commencing her deposition, the Secretary, Department of School 
Education and Literacy informed the Committee that several 
guidelines/advisories including those relating to learning enhanc ement, 
reopening of schools have been issued to States and UTs. A few States/UTs, 
namely, Assam and UT of Lakshadweep and Jammu and Kashmir have 
reopened all Classes from Grade 1 to 12 in staggered manner with proper 
COVID protocol. She added that her Depa rtment has been in constant touch 
with other States about reopening of schools, however, it largely depends on the 
situation at local level. Thereafter, she referred to alternative academic calendar 
developed by NCERT to maintain continuity of learning of students during 
lockdown period; in that context she also mentioned about  Digital 
Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing (DIKSHA) platform for online education; 

45 
 
PRAGYATA guidelines on digital education, Swayam Prabha TV Channel, 
Podcast, Community Radio, di gital content for visually and hearing impaired 
students developed with co -ordination of NIOS, NCERT and Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting to complement the learning gap, etc. Teachers 
have also been provided requisite training to adapt the online t eaching 
methodology by making shift from traditional chalk and board method. The 
next National Achievement Survey (NAS) would be conducted in November, 
2021 in order to assess the learning gap occasioned due to COVID induced 
lockdown and bridge course as l earning enhancement would also be developed 
to compensate the learning loss among the students.  
4. The Chairman, CBSE while supplementing the Secretary, mentioned that 
the CBSE has reduced syllabus in 24,000 odd CBSE affiliated schools by 30 
percent and s ome of the States have also reduced syllabus to the extent of 40 
percent as a measure to adjust the learning loss caused due to shut down.  
5. Several queries on the issues relating to the estimation of extent of 
learning loss; adaptation of teachers to di gital training; limited outreach of 
educational TV Channels and community radios due to lack of awareness; stress 
on eyes and minds of children caused by digital learning; shortage of teachers 
particularly in the subjects of Mathematics, English and Scienc e in schools; 
increased incidence of child labour and child marriage due to closure of schools; 
delay in availability of dry ration under Mid -day Meal to students; increased 
drop-out rates; convening offline pre -board examination for Classes 10 and 12; 
taking back NVS and KVS schools used as quarantine centers form the district 
administration for the purpose of reopening of those schools; lack of digital 
infrastructure and lack of access to internet in rural areas; digital education 
widening digital divide, etc. were posed during the sitting.  
6. The Secretary, while responding to some of those queries submitted that 
assessment of learning loss could be ascertained after upcoming National 

46 
 
Achievement Survey to be conducted in November, 2021 or after reopenin g of 
schools once pandemic situation reaches new normal.  The Secretary added that 
bridge course has been under preparation to compensate the learning loss 
caused during pandemic. About bridging digital divide and lack of internet 
connectivity, she submitt ed that Wi -Fi connectivity at panchayat level under 
Bharat Net Project has been under implementation by Department of Tele -
communication which would take a couple of years to reach to all Panchayats. 
The Joint Secretary concerned apprised the Committee tha t Direct Money 
Transfer of the cooking cost of the Midday Meal was made to the passbook of 
the students during the pandemic  
   (Officers except Secretary of the Department of School Education and 
Literacy withdrew). 
 
7. Thereafter, Education Secretary of States of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Assam and Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir shared their 
experiences about reopening of schools in those States. The Secretary, 
Department of Education of State of Assam apprise d the Committee that 
schools from primary to secondary levels in the State of Assam have been 
reopened with proper COVID protocol. During lockdown period local TV 
Channels and Whatsapp were used to disseminate contents of learning to ensure 
continuity in l earning amongst the students. Thereafter, Education Secretary, 
State of Madhya Pradesh apprised the Committee that many teachers held 
Mohalla Classes; some of the teachers even took blackboard on their 
motorcycle to the villages to teach students where dig ital learning was not 
possible due to weak connectivity; even loudspeakers from the office of 
Panchayat and Mandir were also used for dissemination of instructions by the 
teachers to the students in the villages. She referred to digital teacher training 
programme (CM-RISE Programme) along with NISHTHA Module of NCERT 
used to build capacities of their teachers. In Madhya Pradesh schools from 

47 
 
Classes 1 to 8 were closed till March, 2021 with general promotion to everyone 
whereas Classes 9 to 12 have been reope ned with COVID protocol. In Uttar 
Pradesh schools from Classes 9 to 12 have been reopened. They apprised the 
Committee that subject -specific videos and modules on teacher professional 
development prepared by private bodies was also shared with latter's 
partnership. They referred to initiatives of digital learning interventions taken 
during lock down period including shiksha chaupals, E -vidya channel, etc. for 
continuity of education during lockdown and students have been encouraged 
from Class 9 to 12 to com e to school for clearing their doubts with the consent 
of the guardians. The migrant children were also enrolled in the schools under 
the programme for out of school children enrolment. The percentage of 
attendance has been increased from 17 % in September , 2020 to 40 % in 
January, 2021. The representatives of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
then informed that schools have been reopened and board examinations have 
already been held and the result of that exam would be available by 15 th 
February, 2021 w hich would indicate the extent of learning loss. He also 
submitted that in addition to digital learning, community classes were held in 
open grounds of schools for dissemination of knowledge. Special enrollment 
drive in Kashmir Zone was conducted by the ad ministration of Jammu and 
Kashmir has witnessed positive outcome. Queries relating to incidence of 
COVID cases amongst the students after reopening was posed and responded to.  
8. The verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9. The meeting adjourned at 4.41 P.M. 
 
   
 
 
 
 

48 
 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
      The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports  met 
at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 21 st June, 2021 in Committee Room No. 4, 
Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
       MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
 
 LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7. Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
8. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
9. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
10 Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
11. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13. Shri Balak Nath 
14. Shri T.N. Prathapan 
15. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
16. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
17. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
18. Shri Dharambir Singh 
19.Shri S. Venkatesan         
 
SECRETARIAT 
        Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
      Ms. Chitra. G, Deputy Secretary 
      Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director (LARRDIS) 
      Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer(in-situ) 
   
       

49 
 
 
Witnesses 
        Department of School Education and Literacy  
 
1. Ms. Anita Karwal, Secretary 
2. Ms. L.S. Changsan, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.C. Meena, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Maneesh Garg, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Santosh Kumar Yadav, Joint Secretary 
 
National Council for Educational Research and Training 
(NCERT)  
6. Prof. Sridhar Srivastava, Director 
 
National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE)  
7. Shri Santosh Kumar Sarangi, Additional Secretary  
 
Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) 
8. Shri Manoj Ahuja, Chairperson 
 
Prasar Bharati 
9.  Shri S.S. Vempati, CEO 
 
Doordarshan 
10.  Shri Mayank Kumar Agrawal, Director-General 
 
All India Radio 
11.  Shri N. Venudhar Reddy, Director-General, NSD 
Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications & Geo -
Informatics (BISAG -N), Ministry of Electronics & Information 
Technology 
12.  Shri T.P. Singh, Director-General 
 
Public Policy Research Centre, New Delhi 
 13. Dr. Chandni Sengupta 
 14. Ms. Deepa Kaushik 

50 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting of the 
Committee and informed them about the sad and untimely demise of Shri 
Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Director of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat, who had served 
the Committee for a brief period.  The Commi ttee also observed silence for a 
minute as a mark of respect to the departed soul.   The Chairman briefed the 
Committee about the agenda for the day’s meeting, namely, examination of the 
subjects “Reforms in the Contents and Design of School Textbooks” in the 
forenoon Session and “Plans for bridging the learning gap caused due to school 
lockdown due to COVID -19 pandemic as well as Review of online and offline 
instructions and examination and plans for reopening schools” in the afternoon 
Session.   
3. *** 
4. ***   
5. ***           
6. ***         
7. In the afternoon Session, the Committee took up the subject “Plans for 
bridging the learning gap caused due to school lockdown due to COVID -19 
pandemic as well as Review of online and offline instructions and exami nation 
and plans for reopening schools” for consideration.  The Chairman welcomed 
the Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy along with team of 
officers; Director, NCERT; Chairman, CBSE; CEO, Prasar Bharati;  
representatives of Doordarshan and All India Radio and Director -General, 
BISAG-N to the meeting.  He informed that in the wake of the second wave of 
the pandemic, schools could not be reopened as expected and the Committee is 
concerned especially about the functioning of the Government schools and the 
vast majority of under privileged students who do not have access or have 
limited access to the digital platforms and would like to be updated on the 
various steps and measures taken by the Department to address the various 

51 
 
challenges and b y the Prasar Bharati to provide educational coverage to the 
students, particularly in the remotest and inaccessible parts of the country with 
limited or no internet connectivity.  
8. Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy apprised the 
Committee of the online and offline strategies adopted by the Department and 
the States to ensure continued education of children through online classes, 
teacher/volunteer visits, mohalla/motorcycle classes, worksheets etc. and stated 
that a survey has also been conducted on various parameters like, availability of 
digital devices, out -of-school children, drop -out rates, requirements of special 
need children and girl children, teacher capac ity building etc.  Thereafter, Joint 
Secretary of the Department gave a presentation.  The Chairman raised some 
queries, such as, whether any impact assessment study of the various initiatives 
taken by the Department and States has been conducted and if so , the results 
thereof, especially the methods/initiatives that are actually delivering and 
helping in achieving the objective of overcoming the learning loss; whether any 
guidelines had been issued to parents to monitor the screen time, sitting posture 
etc. of children during online study; and whether any risk assessment study was 
conducted in schools which re -opened after the first wave of the pandemic and 
whether any documentation has been made about the best practices and creative 
and innovative methods adopted by schools, teachers etc., particularly in tribal 
and rural areas, to ensure continued education during the pandemic, which 
could be adopted by others as well.  Members also raised several queries and 
suggestions regarding the awareness, impact in terms of practical application 
and effectiveness of the guidelines issued by the Department on schools in 
urban and rural areas; whether admissions and upkeep of COVID orphans is 
being considered through Kendriya Vidyalayas, Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas 
or through Central Government Institutions; creation of a centralized search 
platform on an algorithm with ability to draw from the vast e -resources of 
educational content; whether surveys have been conducted on the reach of 

52 
 
digital devices, radio, TV etc.; drop-out rates; impact of inaccessibility of digital 
devices on students and teachers; learning gap assessment and outcomes; 
reopening of schools and vaccination of all students; conduct of future 
examinations; provision of digital devices to students belonging to marginalized 
and economically weaker section of society; mental well -being of students 
through online participatory arts/music/dance/theatre workshops; and network 
connectivity issues, especially in rural areas etc. 
9. Secretary, Department of Scho ol Education and Literacy while 
responding to some of the queries raised, agreed that there has been learning 
loss due to the pandemic and that a National Achievement Survey will be 
undertaken district -wise in all schools to assess it accurately.  Amongst best 
practices and initiatives, she highlighted the Online Students Registry in 
Gujarat, which conducts tests for students weekly or fortnightly, analyses the 
marks and then recommends remediation, which the Department has 
recommended in other States as we ll; the Diksha Platform, a one -stop-source 
for all e -learning content, available in 32 languages, including all languages in 
the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution and some local languages like 
Bundelkhandi, Chhattisgarhi etc.;  Joint Committee of the Dep artment with 
Ministry of Telecommunications and CSC E-Governance Ltd. to ensure internet 
connectivity through Bharatnet in 2.5 lakh villages and the schools there; 
funding for ICT, such as, smart rooms, virtual studios, digital devices like pre -
loaded tabl ets; survey of out -of-school children and their integration into 
mainstream etc. 
10. CEO, Prasar Bharati then gave a presentation on the measures and 
initiatives taken by them to ensure continued education during the pandemic.  
Chairman and Members raised some points and gave suggestions on impact 
assessment study of the usage of Doordarshan, community radio etc. on 
education and its cost-effectiveness; availability of State-wise viewership details 
of various programmes of Swayam Prabha; use of EDUSAT (sate llite) 

53 
 
technology for telecast of educational programmes in areas with no internet 
connectivity and also in view of the higher outreach of Doordarshan vis -à-vis 
Cable TV and lower expenditure involved on account of Doordarshan being 
free-to-air etc. Direct or-General, BISAG explained that telecast of educational 
content through satellite TV on DTH channels of Doordarshan is the most cost 
effective technology to ensure wider outreach in all States.  He also informed 
the Committee that this system could be dev eloped further across the country to 
provide not only education, but teacher training, entertainment and public 
awareness programmes.  The Committee decided to explore the possibility and 
feasibility of satellite TV for educational purpose and to have an i nteraction 
with Prasar Bharati, ISRO, some States and BISAG in its next meeting for 
collating further inputs thereon. 
11.  The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee 
was kept. 
12. The meeting adjourned at 05.08 P.M. 
  

54 
 
 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
      The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports  met 
at 02.10 P.M. on Friday, the 2 nd July, 2021 in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
       MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
3.  Dr. Sasmit Patra 
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
6. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
7. Ms. Arpita Ghosh 
 
 LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
9. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
10. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
11.Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
12. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
13. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad  
14. Shri T.N. Prathapan 
15. Shri Dharambir Singh 
16. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
17. Shri S. Venkatesan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
        Ms. Chitra. G, Deputy Secretary 
       Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director (LARRDIS) 
       Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
   

55 
 
        Witnesses 
        Department of School Education and Literacy  
 
1. Ms. Anita Karwal, Secretary 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Sarangi, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri R.C. Meena, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Maneesh Garg, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Santosh Kumar Yadav, Joint Secretary 
 
National Council for Educational Research and Training 
(NCERT)  
6. Prof. Sridhar Srivastava, Director 
 
National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) 
7. Prof. Saroj Sharma, Chairperson 
 
National Bal Bhavan (NBB) 
8. Shri Mahesh Gupta, Deputy Director 
 
Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) 
9. Shri Manoj Ahuja, Chairperson 
 
Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications & Geo -
Informatics (BISAG -N), Ministry of Electronics & Information 
Technology 
10.  Shri T.P. Singh, Director-General 
 
Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) 
11. Shri Hanumantharayappa, Associate Director 
 
Prasar Bharati 
12.  Shri S.S. Vempati, CEO 
13. Shri Sunil, Additional Director-General 
14. Ms. Anuradha Agarwal, Additional Director-General 
 
Doordarshan 
15.  Shri Mayank Kumar Agrawal, Director-General 

56 
 
 
All India Radio 
16.  Shri N. Venudhar Reddy, Director-General 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
17.  Shri Sanjiv Shankar, Joint Secretary (Broadcasting) 
 
Education Department, Government of Arunachal Pradesh 
18.  Shri Sachin Rana, Special Secretary 
 
Education Department, Government of Bihar 
19.  Shri Asangba Chuba Ao, Secretary 
 
Education Department, Government of Maharashtra 
20.  Shri Vikas Garad, Joint Director 
 
Education Department, Government of Telangana 
21.  Shrimati A. Devasena, Director 
Education Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh 
22.  Shri Vijay Kiran Anand, Project Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting of the 
Committee and apprised them of the arrangements made for the study visit of 
the Committee to Leh and Srinagar from 5 th to 8 th July, 2021.  He then drew 
attention of the Members to the prev ious meetings held by the Committee on 
the subject "Plans for bridging the learning gap caused by COVID -19 pandemic 
as well as review of online and offline instructions and examinations and plans 
for re -opening of schools" wherein the Committee had held de tailed 
consultations with the Department of School Education & Literacy, 
representatives of the Education Departments of some States, namely, Assam, 
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and the U.T. of Jammu & Kashmir as well as of 
NCERT and CBSE.  He also referred to the recently published Unified District 
Information System for Education Plus (UDISE+) Report regarding the learning 

57 
 
loss which occurred during the COVID pandemic period, wherein it has been 
stated that only 23% students had access to smart phones, which highlighted the 
digital divide in the country.  He stated that this gap in the reach of online 
education could be covered by the use of satellite television, since Doordarshan 
has outreach in each and every corner of the country including the far -flung 
areas.  He apprised the Members that already a presentation on the effective use 
of satellite TV for telecast of educational channels was done by BISAG -N, a 
public sector organization under the Minist ry of Electronics & Information 
Technology, whose services have been utilized in an effective manner by the 
Governments of Gujarat and Odisha and could be utilized by other States for the 
benefit of the students.  He also informed the Members that represen tatives 
from the Education Departments of six States have also been invited to the 
meeting for hearing their views on the learning loss in their States due to the 
pandemic and the various steps and measures taken by them in ensuring 
continued education dur ing the period and to impress upon their State 
Governments to utilize satellite TV as a cost effective and viable mechanism to 
ensure reach of online education to the remotest corners of their States and thus 
to bridge the digital divide.  Thereafter, the Chairman, welcomed Shri T.P. 
Singh, Director -General, BISAG -N, Secretary of the Department of School 
Education & Literacy along with her team, representatives of the Indian Space 
Research Organisation, Prasar Bharati, Doordarshan, All India Radio and the 
Education Departments of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra, 
Telangana and Uttar Pradesh to the meeting.  He also informed the Committee 
that though representatives of the Education Department of the State of Gujarat 
had also been called fo r the meeting, the Secretary had sought exemption in 
writing due to pressing COVID management duties assigned to him.  
3. The Secretary, Department of School Education & Literacy apprised the 
Committee of the efforts made by the Department in ensuring cont inued 
education through television network.  She informed that after a discussion with 

58 
 
BISAG, a letter had been issued on 13 th September, 2017 to all States regarding 
the possibility of expanding the channels for the purpose of education along 
with guidelines on the utilization of DTH TV channels, which were prepared in 
consultation with BISAG’s team.  Seven States, namely, Tamil Nadu, 
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and 
Tripura had sought time on Swayam Prabha , a satelli te channel with 4 hours 
relay time which was approved and after the pandemic struck, the Department 
started follow -up with the States as to the measures taken by them for TV 
broadcast.  She informed that many States have dedicated Doordarshan 
channels, like, Vidya Varadhi in Andhra Pradesh, which broadcasts for classes 1 
to 10 daily; Arun Prabha in Arunachal Pradesh on which there is a 40 minute 
relay on 6 days a week for classes 6 to 8; Mera Doordarshan Mera Vidyalay in 
Bihar, with 5 hour slots for classes  1 to 12; Vande Gujarat  and DD Girnar 
which broadcasts lessons for all classes and Gyanshala programme in Himachal 
Pradesh.  Thus, most of the States have taken slots on Doordarshan on a daily 
basis, class-wise and 'One Class, One TV Channel', which is als o on Swayam 
Prabha with one dedicated channel for all classes.  Most of these lessons are 
being prepared in the studios of NCERT, both in its Regional Institutes of 
education and in the Headquarters.  On a query of the Chairman as to whether 
satellite TV i s more economical, the Secretary explained that it would be 
economically viable in North -East and in hilly and remote areas like 
Uttarakhand and Coorg side with low connectivity, whereas it might not be so 
in the plains with the possibility of service thro ugh telecom.  Already, 4 Crore 
families have free dish, which is the antenna required for Swayam Prabha 
channels, which is quite a good outreach.   
4. Thereafter, Director -General, BISAG did a presentation on the 
"Universalization of Quality Education thro ugh DTH TV", after which 
Members raised certain queries, as follows:- 

59 
 
(i) whether any impact assessment study regarding the viewership and 
outreach of satellite TV and the number of beneficiaries has been 
conducted;  
(ii) data of drop -out children during the pandemic and the measures 
taken to bring them back to the mainstream of education, 
particularly in Bihar;  
(iii) how to create school like ambience at home and ensure learning 
outcomes of students, particularly those wi th low IQs and slow 
grasping power and retention through the system of online 
education;  
(iv) steps for continuing physical education and sports training;  
(v) the digital divide between rural and urban areas;  
(v) whether need based assessment in terms o f technological 
efficiency, access, reach and affordability of telecom -enabled 
education vis-à-vis satellite-enabled education as well as 
comparative study of the cost-effectiveness of both modes has been 
conducted and if so, the details thereof; and 
(vi) the deployment of technology in case of satellite-enabled education 
as well as its cost component - both one time and recurring, 
including purchase and repair costs of TV sets. 
Members also voiced their concerns regarding the continuous learning loss for 
more than 2 academic years caused due to the pandemic and their adverse 
effects on the future generation of the country; the effectiveness of online 
education versus offline education in terms of general lack of interest, 
concentration and sincerity on the part of both students and teachers, where 
students lack the facility of direct and immediate interaction with the teachers 
and its impact on the understanding levels and learning outcomes; non -
availability of television sets in many economically backward h ouseholds in 

60 
 
villages combined with the problem of load shedding which is likely to deprive 
students of the benefits of education through television channels; and 
contradictory situation engendered to shutting down of infrastructure such as the 
State Institutes of Educational Technology vis-a-vis development of content and 
studios for online education.  The majority of the Members were of the view 
that online education is no substitute to offline education and that it is a grim 
fact that despite various mea sures to ensure continued education, learning loss 
and gap has occurred in the past few years.  Some Members gave certain 
suggestions, such as, calling students shift -wise to schools with observance of 
physical distancing for taking online classes through TV channels under the 
inspection and guidance of teachers; provision of android smart phones to 
students with the examination fees collected from them in view of non -conduct 
of examinations for classes 10 and 12; need for developing community radio as 
an effective tool for school education and to ensure its outreach to socially and 
economically weaker sections of society by enhancing its frequency; perfection 
of the evaluation system/assessment criteria developed by CBSE in view of 
non-conduct of examinations to classes 10th and 12th on account of the pandemic 
by removing dualities to ensure overall satisfaction of students, parents and 
teachers; and opening of schools for conduct of physical classes with adequate 
safety precautions and with observance of CO VID protocol for limited hours 
with shift system and in small batches, so as to minimize further learning loss.  
Members also suggested that the Committee should recommend to the 
Government to make arrangements for the vaccination of children below the 
age of 18 years on priority basis, so that offline education can be recommenced 
at the earliest and that the system of both offline and online classes should be 
balanced and continued along with creation of a value system, so as to be well 
prepared for situations like the pandemic in future. 
5. The Special Secretary, Education Department, Government of Arunachal 
Pradesh briefed the Committee about the various initiatives taken by them for 

61 
 
ensuring continued education during the pandemic, such as, Radio School daily 
for students of primary classes 1 to 5; classes for students of 6 th to 8th standard 
on Arun Prabha, the local Doordarshan channel; Swayam Prabha for classes 9 
to 12; use of 'Edusat' and creation of one e -learning studio; arrangement of 
district-wise extra classes; worksheet distribution; recorded lectures on 
Youtube; creation of  WhatsApp groups for interaction; personal interaction of 
teachers with students etc.  He apprised the Committee that Arunachal Pradesh 
being a hilly terrain and a tribal State with 26 major multi -lingual tribes and 2 
lakh students from classes 1 to 12, physical connectivity and digital connectivity 
both are problem areas compounded with non -availability of TV sets, satellite 
dishes and power.  A survey by District Education Officers, through the 
medium of Google form indicated that students of primary clas ses and of 
classes 6 to 8 are the most affected due to the pandemic on account of lack of 
resources.  He also highlighted that they are planning to install TV sets in 
schools through VSAT communication technology provided by a company 
named Valuable Edutai nment, which enables the students to interact and clear 
doubts during live classes and the teachers to observe each student and maintain 
discipline as during physical/offline class.  He further informed the Committee 
that it has been decided to commence ph ysical classes on alternate days for 9 th 
to 12 th standard from 16 th July, 2021 onwards, in view of the fall in COVID 
cases.  However, for classes 1 to 8 online classes will continue. 
6. The Secretary, Education Department, Government of Bihar apprised the 
Committee of the interventions done by them, namely, creation of online portal 
"e-LOTS (e -Library of Teachers and Students)" with teaching -learning tools 
and other resources, which is downloadable on android phones through Google 
Play; broadcast of "Mera D oordarshan, Mera Vidyalay"  programme through 
DD Bihar daily for 5 hours; 'Mobile Learning Center', a mobile van with TV, 
video games, videos, illustrated posters, toys etc. to bridge the digital divide in 
rural areas and to reach out to the most socially a nd economically backward 

62 
 
areas of the State; Catch up Course designed to bridge the learning gap/loss due 
to first wave of COVID in which extensive training was provided to teachers on 
a State and district -wise level; special enrolment drive named 'Pravesh  Utsav" 
etc.  He also informed that examinations had already been conducted for classes 
10 and 12 in Bihar and students of classes 9 and 11, were promoted without 
examination and assessment.  He further informed that the Government is 
planning to open scho ols from mid -July in a phase -wise manner with proper 
precautionary measures, as done in January after the first wave.  On a query by 
the Chairman, the Secretary informed that though they have not considered 
using satellite-based education as educational pr ogrammes are being broadcast 
through Doordarshan, the same would be examined to assess its feasibility. 
7. The Joint Director, Education Department, Government of Maharashtra 
commenced his briefing with a mention of the teacher training course launched 
via satellite in that State which had benefitted almost 4 lakh teachers and stated 
that Maharashtra had carried out almost 26 initiatives, out of which some 
prominent ones are daily study campaign on DIKSHA portal through which live 
classes are conducted via online, TV programmes on DD Sahyadri, daily classes 
for 6 hours on Swayam Prabha channel for classes 1 to 12, bridge course for the 
previous academic year to bridge the learning gap, Shalebaherchi Shala related 
to Art and Craft learning and WhatsApp Chat B ot weekly assessment in which 
82 lakh students, out of the total 2.15 Crore students in the State participated.  
He also informed that for generating educational content for TV, they have 4 
recording studios each in Mumbai Corporation and Pune and 2 being 
constructed in Gadchiroli and Nandurbar.      
8. Director, Education Department, Government of Telangana apprised the 
Committee that they had first done an e-resource mapping to find out the access 
of each child in the State and it was found that at least 95% students had access 
to at least one or the other digital device and the most accessible was TV.  She 
also stated that the State has its own TSAT channel with studios and recording 

63 
 
facilities, which relays content daily for 7 hours in addition to 3 hour  classes for 
1st to 10th standards on Doordarshan in 3 languages, namely, Urdu, Telugu and 
English. The content is generated by their own SIET, which has been 
strengthened with the induction of more funds and have generated around 1500 
videos for all class es in their own recording facilities with the available teacher 
resources. Other initiatives includes the TSAT App launched for use of teachers 
and students; Read Along App and videos for smaller children; preparatory 
webinars and video conferences for sta keholders, namely, teachers, parents, 
children and officials, District level Education Monitoring Committee headed 
by the Collector to address issues of telecast schedules, power cuts etc; live 
phone-in programmes for clearing doubts of students; publishin g of numbers of 
groups of teachers and subject experts; and WhatsApp Chat Bot assessment. 
9. The Project Director, Education Department, Government of Uttar 
Pradesh briefed the Committee that continued education was ensured through e-
pathshala, slots on Do ordarshan, Swayam Prabha channels, Diksha Portal and 
App.  He stated that Swayam Prabha being a DTH channel was cost intensive, 
as it required set top box, dish antenna and TV set.  Another initiative was 
WhatsApp groups wherein each syllabus was mapped, b ased on which SCERT 
created good content, which was forwarded on a weekly basis for personalized 
learning.  In order to ensure community participation, mohalla classes and 
volunteers to promote peer learning were organized.  Bridge courses to make up 
for learning loss/gap, home visits and interactions with teachers and efforts to 
track 5½ lakh out -of-school children identified are also ongoing.  He further 
informed the Committee that Doordarshan is the main online educational tool as 
radio is not very cost effective. 
10. CEO, Prasar Bharati informed the Committee that several States had 
approached them to reactivate broadcast of educational classes on account of 
the fairly large value base of DD Free Dish DTH with 51 channels of BISAG 
and Doordarshan channels along with some private DTH operators, all available 

64 
 
on one single DTH platform.  The only investment is a regular DTH set top box, 
regular DTH dish antennae and TV sets.  He also informed that Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands is the only region not reachable in the country at present, due to 
non-extension of GSAT footprints there and the only issue being faced them is 
transponder capacity regarding which ISRO has assured them that by the year 
2022, they are planning to launch another satellite in the same orbital slot which 
will assure more satellite capacity.  He further apprised the Committee that the 
number of TV households in the country is about 20 Crore, which is a fairly 
large base and this platform was being utilized in view of its potential reach to 
many households.  He also stated that Prasar Bharati has been working with 
CDAC and IIT Kanpur to bring in technology with automated way of content 
delivery for visually and hearing impaired.  He further informed that 19 cities 
have digital terrestrial usin g roof -top based antenna assisted technology, in 
which 6 channels are available to be utilized for educational purpose.   
11. Thereafter, Associate Director, ISRO made a presentation on the 
"Technological support for the universalization of education throu gh 
satellite/DTH platforms". The Chairman appreciated the existing arrangements 
and new initiatives being made by Doordarshan and ISRO for the propagation 
of education.  The Chairman then raised some queries as to what the Ministry is 
doing to ensure conti nued education to Divyang children, especially the deaf 
and dumb in this situation as well as for children with low IQ and slow learners.  
He also asked the Ministry to clarify whether satellite technology can be utilized 
to impart education in all Kendriy a Vidyalayas, Navodaya Vidyalayas and 
Kasturba Gandhi Vidyalayas through a dedicated channel and whether a 
permanent system can be devised wherein a big TV or screen can be set up in an 
open area in each village of the country to conduct classes and run sc hools in 
such situations like the ongoing pandemic, natural disasters etc. with the 
available technology and resources.  The Chairman also asked the Secretary, 
Department of School Education and Literacy whether the available satellite 

65 
 
technology and Doord arshan is being officially used under the initiative of the 
Department for ensuring continued education in a mission mode throughout the 
country and whether all State Governments are using it to the maximum extent 
possible.   
12. In response thereto, the Secretary, Department of School Education and 
Literacy informed the Committee that guidelines had been issued for Divyang 
children and Children with Special Needs which includes children with low IQ, 
slow learners and children with learning disabilities.  She also informed that the 
States had come up with interesting innovative ideas, like home -based learning 
in Andhra Pradesh with special educators, who were imparted online training as 
to how to reach out to the children and studen ts and aid in their learning and 
outreach programmes, special educators and special kits in other States.  She 
also stated that the 12 Swayam Prabha channels, which are BISAG channels, 
airing NCERT content in both Hindi and English are directly applicable and are 
already being used by CBSE, KVS and JNV schools.  She further clarified that 
the Department in consultation with the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology had issued a letter to the States to utilize the TV sets in community 
halls of v illages, Panchayat halls as well as the TV and computer available in 
every village under the CSC e -governance scheme for common viewing and 
educational purposes once broadcast starts. Panchayats themselves have offered 
their TV sets for the said purpose.  The Secretary apprised the Committee that 
the Department is planning to conduct a district -wise National Achievement 
Survey to assess the learning outcomes of students (girls, boys and children 
with learning disabilities) in classes 3, 5, 8 and 10 in Priva te, Government and 
Government-aided schools in the second week of November, 2021, the results 
of which will be released within 4 to 4½ weeks in the month of March, 2022.  
Nipun Bharat Mission on the foundational literacy and numeracy skill will also 
be lau nched on 5 th of July, 2021 which would focus on the targets to be 
achieved by children in pre-school, first, second and third classes, the training to 

66 
 
be given to teachers, the role of States, DIET, SCERT and the responsibilities of 
parents, community and local self-government.  In response to a query of the 
Chairman, the Secretary informed that the cost of running BISAG channels 
24x7 would be 1.5 Crores, whereas the cost of running programmes daily for 4 
hours for 25 days in a month would be approximately 1.5 Crores.  Keeping in 
view the very large reach of BISAG, the Ministry has preferred it in comparison 
to other channels and therefore, the Ministry is looking into the possibility and 
feasibility of expanding this in consultation with the States.  On ano ther query 
of the Chairman as to what would be the fate of examinations in 2022 in case of 
third or fourth wave of the pandemic as predicted and whether the Department 
has made any preparations for dealing with such situations, the Secretary 
highlighted that some system is being chalked out with lot of consultations on 
how to conduct internal assessments with objectivity and how CBSE would 
intervene for the midterm examinations so that in case it is impossible to 
conduct final examinations, they will be able to extrapolate those marks and that 
the same would be announced by the end of July.  
13. The Chairman directed Prasar Bharati to give due publicity to the 
Swayam Prabha and other educational channels being telecast by Doordarshan 
and create awareness amongst general public to the existence of a cost effective 
online system of education so as to increase the number of beneficiaries.      
14.  The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee 
was kept. 
15. The meeting adjourned at 04.26 P.M. 
 
 
  

67 
 
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
      The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports  met 
at 03.00 P.M. on Friday, the 23 rd July, 2021 in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
       MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
3. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
4. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
5. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
6. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
7. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
8. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
9. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
10. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
11. Shri Balak Nath 
12. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
13.Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
14. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
15. Shri Dharambir Singh 
16. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
   
     SECRETARIAT 
      Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
     Shri K. Sudhakaran, Director 
    Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
    Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary  

68 
 
    Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director (LARRDIS) 
    Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
    Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
   
Witnesses 
 (I) SAMVIT RESEARCH FOUNDATION, BANGALORE 
   1.   Shri Gajanan Londhe, Executive Director 
   2.   Dr. V. Ramanathan 
(II)    1.  Prof. Nachiketa Tiwari, Indian Institute of Technology,  
Kanpur 
  2.  Dr. Prerna Malhotra 
 (III) UNICEF INDIA 
  1. Mr. Terry Durnnian, Chief of Education 
  2. Ms. Sunisha Ahuja, Education Specialist 
  3. Ms. Zafrin Chowdhury, Chief of Communication, Advocacy   
                               and Partnerships 
  4. Ms. Amrita Singh, Communication Officer 
  (IV)       Shri  Hukmdev Narayan Yadav, Ex-MP, Lok Sabha 
(V) DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION AND 
LITERACY 
  1. Shri Santosh Kumar Sarangi, Additional Secretary 
  2.  Smt. L.S. Changsan, Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri Santosh Kumar Yadav, Joint Secretary 
  4.  Prof. Sridhar Srivastava, Director, NCERT 
  5.  Shri Pankaj Tripathi, Secretary, CBSE 
 
  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and 
congratulated the Committee for the having the maximum attendance in its 
meetings and also for the longest average duration of its meetings. He further 
informed that this was graciously acknowledged by the Hon'ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha in his opening remarks on the first day of the Monsoon Session, 
2021. 
2. ***  
3. *** 
4. *** 

69 
 
5. *** 
6. *** 
7. *** 
8. *** 
9. *** 
(the witnesses then withdrew) 
10. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of UNICEF, India to 
the meeting and informed the Committee about the pioneering  work done by 
UNICEF in India and other countries so that a more balanced view can be taken 
on the effect of COVID-19 pandemic and school education. 
11. The representatives of UNICEF, India briefed the Committee about the 
studies conducted by them on the effect of the COVID -19 pandemic on school 
education. It was  informed that as per the study conducted by UNICEF, 1.5 
million schools / 1.37 million Anganwadi Centres closed, disrupting education 
of over 286 million students; only 24% households have access to the internet; 
61.8% households own a  smartphone; 40% of students had  not accessed any 
remote learning; rural students were 10%less likely to have accessed remote 
learning than urban peers; and  children faced  psychosocial challenges  due to 
school closures which is affecting learning. 
12. It was further informed  that school closures have put children’s learning, 
nutrition, mental health, and overall development at risk and some students, 
particularly girls, are at risk of never returning to school. In fact, long closure of 
schools will lead to children not return ing to schools and has the potential for 
children getting engaged in labour and early marriage. Therefore, the immediate 
need is to bring children back to school.  
13. The Committee was also briefed about certain best practices adopted by 
different countries which may be adopted in India with suitable modifications 
like proactive planning; clear protocols for re-opening and closing; flexibility in 

70 
 
local decision making simplifying curriculum; adapting academic calendar, and 
supporting teachers, principals, & school staff on remediation and to manage 
new psychosocial needs. 
14. Concluding the meeting, the Chairman thanked the Members and the 
participants for their contribution and expressed the hope that the reports on the 
subjects would be drafted at the ear liest for the consideration of the Committee 
in its next meeting. 
15.  The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee 
was kept. 
16. The meeting adjourned at 05.50 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 