PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FORTY-FOURTH REPORT

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1996-97 (DEMAND NO. 41) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY WELFARE
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30.8.96)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30.8.96)

aaa जयते

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August 1996/Bhadra 1918 (Saka)


boa ee od

4.

CONTENTS

Composition of the Committee
PREFACE
REPORT
(i) Lack of Monitoring Mechanism
(ii) Accuracy and Authenticity of Data
(iii) Rural Family Welfare Centres
(iv) Rural Sub-Centres
(v) Urban Family Welfare Centres/Health Posts
(vi) Information, Education and Communication
(vii) Dais Training
(viii) Research and Evaluation
(ix) Village Health Guide Scheme
(x) Sterilisation Beds Scheme
(xi) Area Projects
(xii) Involvement of Voluntary Organisations
(xiii) Special School Health Scheme for Primary Schools
(xiv) Pulse Polio Immunization
(xv) National Population Policy
(xvi) Technology Mission :
(xvii) Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse)
Act, 1994
(xviii) Free Distribution of Conventional Contraceptives
(xix) Child Survival & Safe Motherhood Project
(xx) New Strategy
(xxi) Social Marketing of Nirodh
Minutes


1,

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

Shri-S.B. Chavan — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo

Dr. B.B. Dutta
Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar

. Shri Raj Nath Singh

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr. Mohan Babu

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

16.
17.
. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shri Jai Prakash

. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Shrimati Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

. Dr. C. Silvera

. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda

. Shri Dutta Meghe

. Shri 1.0. Sanadi

. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose

. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy

. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Pawan Diwan

. Shri Krishna

. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi

. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri 5.16. Karvendhan

. Shri Mukhtar Anees

. Dr. M. Jagannath

Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

@


(ii)

42. Dr. Bali Ram

43. Shri Ranen Barman
44, Shri Surender Singh
45. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Forty-fourth Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 41) of the Department of Family Welfare, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare for the year 1996-97.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Familly Welfare and also heard
the Secretary and other officials of that Department on the said Demands for Grants in its
meeting held on 9th August, 1996.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 24.8.1996.

New De.n; S. 8. CHAVAN
August 24th, 1996 Chairman,
iS ioe Department-related Parliamentary
Bhadra 2, 1918 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.

(iii)


0९९ 6४४ ३७७७७ A,
किक हर लक

101 (६ ४७४३8



REPORT

1, The most pressing problem faced to-day by the country is the rapid growth of
population. The Population of India has risen from 342 million in 1947 to 846.3 million in
1991 and to an estimated 950 million by the end of 1995. The rapid increase in population
has serious implications on the over all socio-economic development of the country.
Visualising this fact the Government of India was the first national Government in the world
to adopt Family Planning Programme on a national basis in 1951. The objective was to
reduce the birth rate and to stabilise the population at a level consistent with the
requirements of the development of the nation.

1.1 While making the presentation, about the activities and achievements of the
Department, the Secretary informed the Committee that from the year 1986, witu the
introduction of universal Immunisation programme, the component of mother and child
health has became very prominent. The Secretary also stated that now the overall
programme is not only on population stabilisation but also on mother and child health.

1.2 The Secretary also informed the Committee that from Ist April, 1996 the approach
towards Family Welfare Programme has been decentralised. Based on this approach, the
health centres in the country have been asked to identify the needs of the population and to
make an assessment of the population residing in the primary health centre areas. The
Secretary further elaborated that while identifying the needs of the population these
instructions will not be carried out in the first year. For the instructions to be carried out
effectively consultations have to be made with the Gram Pardhans, Primary School teachers,
Non-Governmental Organisations who are working in the field level, he added.

1.3 The Secretary also informed the Committee that there should be a convergence of
the field workers of the adult education, a movement of the primary school teachers, the
Anganwadi workers who are in charge of I.C.D.S projects and Auxiliary Nurse Midwives
(ANM) both male and female, so that the programme can be carried out in a better way.

1.4 The Committee agrees that there should be a convergence of the field workers of
the adult education, a movement of the primary school teacl.ers, Anganwadi workers and
auxiliary mid-wife both male and female, so as to ensure the success of the Family Welfare
Programme. The Committee is also of the view that there is a close co-relation between girl
education and small family. The Committee has also noted that the main reason for the
success of Family Welfare Programme in Kerala is mainly due to high literacy rate among
women. The Committee, therefore, also feels that besides, taking steps for terminal Spacing
Methods and Sterilisation methods. Efforts should also be taken for improving girls
education and for this purpose the convergence of some of the programmes in the
Department of Education and Woman and Child Education may be done.

1.5 Further elaborating on the Programme, the Secretary informed the Committee that the
health of mother and the health of child should become the focal point of the whole
programme. He further stated that if women are empowered to take decisions, then
automatically every family would be having a small family.

1


2

Achievements of the Family Welfare Programme

Parameter 1951-61 1981
Birth Rate 41.7 314 28.7 (SRS 94)
Death Rate 22.8 15.0 9.3 (SRS 94)
Total Fertility Rate 5.9 4.5 3.5 (SRS 93)
Infant Mortality Rate 146.0 110.0 74 (SRS 94)
(Per 1000 live births)
Couple Projection Rate 10.4 22.8 45.8(31.3.95)
(Percent) (1970-71) (31.3.95)
Cumulative Number of Births 0.04 44.19 182.76
Averted (in Million) (1956-60) (31.3.81) (61,5.95*)
“Provisional

oe

1.6 The Total 8th Plan Outlay for the department is Rs. 6500 crores. The outlay in first
year of the 8th Plan period i.e. 1992-93 was Rs. 900 crores while the actual expenditure was
Rs. 1090.40 crores. In 1993-94 the outlay was Rs. 1060 crores while the actual expenditure
amounted to Rs. 1312.62 crores. In 1994-95 the outlay was Rs. 1280 crores while the actual
expenditure was Rs. 1521.85 crores. In the fourth year of the plan period i.e. 1995-96 the
outlay was Rs. 1440 crores, the anticipated expenditure on the programme is likely to be
around Rs. 1768.67 crores, the Committee noted.

1.7 The Committee notes that the allocation to the department, has been reduced from
Rs. 1593.51 crores in B.E. 1995-96 to Rs. 1550 crores during the current year. Out of
Rs. 1550 crores, Rs. 1535 crores, forms plan component and Rs. 15 crores as non-plan
component.

1.8 Commenting about the allocation to the Family Welfare Programme, the Secretary
informed the Committee that the allocation from the Central Governemnt is not to the
extent desired, if we have to maintain the momentum of the whole programme. The
Secretary also informed that the Family Welfare Programme are centrally sponsored
programmes whereas the implementation of it lies with the States.

1.9 Pleading for more funds, the Secretary informed the Committee that a new
Programme named Reproductive Child Health Programme (RCH) which is the new buzz
word for family planning is being started with the assistance from World Bank to the tune of
300 million dollars and it is a client oriented programme and it is likely to be initiated by the
end of this year or in the beginning of next year. He further informed that the European
Commission has also offered 200 million dollars for the programme due to the change of
policy and change of strategy in implementing the programme.

1.10 The department further stated that the Family Welfare Programme is constantly
underfunded over the years which has led to accumulation of arrears payable to the state
Governemts. For the year 1996-97, an Annual Plan of Rs. 2400.63 crores was proposed to
the Planning Commission. However, after Annual Plan discussions, an allocation of Rs.
1700.00 crores was approved for the Programme. The Committee is concerned to note that
this amount has further been reduced to Rs. 1535.00 crores with the condition that this
allocation will absorb external assistance to the level of Rs. 350.00 crores.

1.11 The Committee is constrained to note that the government instead of providing the


3

amount that should have been allocated by the Government of India is replacing it by the
foreign aid component. The Committee feels that this should not happen. The foreign aid
component should be over and above the amount i.e. suppose to have been-provided by the
Government of India. The Committee is of the view that the department does not take any
steps for starting the fresh phase of a programme well in advance before the completion of
the earlier phase. The department should take care of this aspect.

1.12 With this allocation, the department stated that it will not be able to provide funds
to the State Governments even at the level of 1995-96. The department also stated that there
will be additional financial burden on the State Governments/UTs, as arrears due to them
from the Central Governments, are already in backlog.

1.13 The Committee desire that the Planning Commission should take a realistic view of
the Family Welfare Programme keeping in view the alarming growth of population. The
Plan outlay for the department may be raised adequately at the R.E. stage.

1.14 The Committee recommended last year for setting aside at least 3% of the total
public sector outlay for family welfare plans. The department stated that the Planning
Commission has constituted three working groups including a Working Group on Population
Dynamics and Population Stabilisation for the formulation of Ninth Plan. One of the terms
of reference to the working Group is to project the financial requirement for implementation
of Family Welfare Programmes during the Ninth Plan period both plan and non-plan
requirements and Centre-State participation for the funding, the department added. The
Committee hopes that adequate funds would be made available for Family Welfare
Programme in the Ninth Plan.

LACK OF MONITORING MECHANISM

1.15 The Committee regrets to note that the schemes funded by the Central
Government are not properly and effectively implemented by the State Governments. Many
States do not take the Schemes seriously. There is no proper monitoring mechanism either
by the Central Government or by the States for the implementation. The Committee desires
that the Department should take necessary steps to plug the loopholes and to strengthen the
monitoring mechanism for effective implementation of the schemes.

1.16 The Committee feels that in view of the failure of the State in effectively
implementing the various schemes, the Centre besides strengthening the monitoring
mechanism, should also ensure its regular control over them. Too much of decentralisation is
not yielding the desired results.

ACCURACY AND AUTHENTICITY OF DATA

1.17 The Committee was informed by the Secretary that while the rate of growth of
population in the decade of 60s was 2.2 per cent and it was 2.14 in 70s, it has come down to
the level of 1.9 per cent. The. Committee is however, of the view that the system of
evaluation and data collection are very outdated and not foolproof. Different systems are
followed in different states for registering births and deaths. The Committee feels that a
uniform system of evaluating the rate of growth of population should be adopted to arrive at
reliable authentic and accurate figures. .

RURAL FAMILY WELFARE CENTRES

2. Rural Family Welfare Centres are entrusted with the responsibility of implementing
the Family Welfare Programme i.e Planning, mobilization, monitoring, administration and


4

supervision in rural areas. 5435 such centres are working at all block level PHCs and the
number has been stagnant at the same level since 1.4.1980.

2.1 The budget allocation made to these centres in 1996-97 is Rs. 160 crores which is at
the same level as compared to that of last year. The Committee is concerned to note that
the allocation made is not sufficient even to maintain the existing centres and there is no
scope for further expansion of these centres.

2.2 The Rural Family Welfare Centres which are serving the rural poor, should not
starve for funds. The Committee desires that the allocation as required may be made at RE
stage.

2.3 The Rural Family Welfare Centres used to function independently at block level in
the initial stages Later on it was merged with the Primary Health Centres. To a question, as
to why the RFWCs were merged with that of PHCs, the Secretary informed the Committee
that the Rural Family Welfare Centres were sanctioned by the Government of India during
1950's, 1960’s and 1970’s and there used to be one Family Welfare Centre for each Block.
That used to be located at the Block headquarters. After 1980, a decision was taken at the
Central level. The Planning Commission decided that instead of having one Primary Health
Centre for one lakh population, there should be one Primary Health Centre for 30,000
population. The States were asked to implement this. The Secretary further stated that while
doing so, the States felt that the Primary Health Centre would cater to only 30,000
population and each Primary Health Centre can cover all the family planning needs.
Therefore, instead of having two doctors at the block level, one for the Rural Family
Welfare Centre and the other for the Primary Health Centre, both the centres were merged
together. Instead of having one Block Health Centre, the States oxeated four or five PHCs.
In the process, the role of the primary Health Centre got merged into the network, he
added.

2.4 The Committee is constrained to note that the Primary Health Centres located all
over the country are in a very deplorable condition. There are neither doctors nor medicines
in the PHCs. Very old, out dated, equipments are available with the PHCs. In such a
situation it is bound to affect the implementation of Family Welfare Programme. The
Committee, therefore, feels that unless PHCs are strengthened, the future of Family Welfare
Programme will be jeopardised.

RURAL SUB-CENTRES

3. Rural Sub-Centres are the peripheral Health institutions available to the rural
population for the delivery of Health and Family Welfare Services. These centres have been
opened for every 5000 rural population in plain areas and 3000 population in the tribal and
hilly areas. There are at present, 1.31,900 sub-centres functioning in the country out of
which 97757, subcentres are funded by Government of India as per approved pattern and
the rest are funded under Minimum Needs Programme.

3.1 The outlay made for these centre is Rs. 190 crores in the current financial year. The
department stated that the provision is not enough to maintain even the existing sub-centres,
not to talk of further expansion.

3.2 On the question of expansion of the Centres the Secretary informed the Committee
that the most effective person in the system is the auxiliary midwife and there is a need for
having more than one auxiliary midwife in the sub-centre. The Secretary also stated that
there is a need for comprehensive programme for taking care of the mother and the child in
addition to population stabilisation, he further added that if a major programme is taken up
for increasing the number of ANMs there would be more employment for women. He also


stated their approach to the Planning Commission is to build new centres so that more
ANMs can be coopted into the programme to make the programme more successful.

3.3 As the 9th plan is under formulation, the Committee desires that the Department
should: impress upon the Planning Commission to make a substantial allocation for sub-
centres so that more centres could be opened as these centres are peripheral health
institution and they serve the people of rural and tribal area and more number of ANMs
(especially women) could be given employment which in turn will give better results.

3.4 The Committee feels that the staff strength in position in the sub-centres is way
below the actual requirements, which ultimately affects the functioning of the sub-centres.
Moreover, the staff working in the sub-centres are not provided sufficient training to enable
them to provide an efficient service. The Committee desire that the number of Para-Medical
Staff should also be increased and the training should be regularly provided to them.

URBAN FAMILY, WELFARE CENTRES/HEALTH POSTS

4. Urban Family Welfare Centres provide Family Welfare and Maternity Child Health
services in urban areas. At present 1499 centres are functioning of which 208 are run by the
Central Sector. i.e. Ministry of Railways, Defence, Labour, etc.

4.1 An allocation of Rs. 33 crores has been provided for the current financial year and
according to the department expansion will not be possible with this allocation. Therefore,
the department propose to reorganise the existing centres only.

4.2 The Committee is deeply anguished to note that state Governments are not showing
much interest in monitoring the urban family welfare centres. On this the department stated
that the states are monitoring the Urban Family Welfare Cerires with effect from 1.4.1995
and reports have been furnished by the states of Haryana, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Tamil
Nadu, Gujarat, Orissa, Rajasthan and Chandigarh and the rest of the states have not
furnished the reports inspite of repeated reminders. The Committee desires that the
Department should take up the matter at political level.

4.3 Urban revamping scheme introduced to provide imporved service delivery, out reach
services of Primary Health Care, Family Welfare Maternity Services in Urban slum areas
could not be expanded during the last year due to resource crunch.

4.4 The department stated that during 1996-97, an amount of Rs. 32.46 crores was
proposed which included Rs. 4.6 crores for expansion of urban revamping scheme. But only
an amount of Rs. 18 crores has been allocated. The department therefore stated that the
expansion of the scheme is not possible even during the current year.

4.5 The Committee is of the opinion that these centres serve the poorer sections of
society in the urban areas, and the department should initiate steps to expand the scheme
and adequate allocation may be earmarked in future.

INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION (IEC)

5. To provide full and integrated support to the community oriented services for mother
and child health and to encourage adoption of small family norm, IEC activities were re-
oriented during the 8th Plan by carrying the family welfare programme towards the
community.

5.1 The allocation to IEC activities has been raised from Rs. 34.46 crores in 8.8. 1995-
96 to Rs. 44.05 crores this year. Justifying the increase, the department stated that during
the year 1995-96, a plan allocation of Rs. 33.50 crores was provided for IEC activities. Due


RESEARCH AND EVALUATION

to launching of some new schemes such as Swasthya Mela at PHC level, Primary School
Health Check-up Scheme and Target Free Approach and Pulse Polio Programme, the’
Budget Division was requested to enhance the Budget in the RE 1995-96. Consequently, BE
1995-96 was increased from Rs. 33.50 crores to Rs. 34.15 crores in RE 1995-96.

5.2 The Committee is constrained to note that inspite of the introduction of new
schemes only Rs. 43.00 crores has been provided on the plan side even though the
Department proposed Rs. 71.30 crores. In fact, there is no budget outlay on account of four
new schemes as compared to the normal TEC. Budget provision.

5.3 The Committee is surprised to note that without any adequate Budget Provision
under IEC four new important schemes have been launched. In order to effectively
popularise the Family Welfare Programime and also to give added impetus to the new
schemes, the provision to IEC must be adequately raised. The Committee also feels that
specific steps should be taken by the department to popularise the family welfare programme
among the poor and illiterate people.

5.4 The Committee is of the view that IEC activities should be strengthened. For this
purpose, the services of school teachers can be utilised particularly during vacations.

5,5 The Committee feels that the Planning Commission has not taken a realistic view of
the programme and the need for popularising it. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the allocation as required may be provided at R.E. stage.

DAIS TRAINING '

6. The allocation to this important programme remains at the same level as that of last
year ie. Rs. 12.50 crores. The Committee, in its 8th and 20th Report had strongly
recommended for increase in the allocation to this programme, but the Committee notes
with concern that the allocation has been’ pegged at the same level.

6.1 The National Health policy aims at ensuring 100% deliveries conducted by trained
dais, by 2000 AD. The Department stated that a proposal for a specific dais training
programme has been formulated and approved for implementation and it proposes to train 6
lakh dais during the current year under the programme. The Programme consists of training
one Dai per village in all the districts of the country in a phased manner over 3 period of
three years. | fee

6.2 The programme is being reviewed: from time to time and States whose performance
are not satisfactory are being looked into by deputing officers from the Ministry for problem
sorting and for on the spot analysis, the, Department added.

6.3 The Committee feels that the ‘allocation made for Dais training is not sufficient to
achieve 100% deliveries, through trained hands by the year 2000 A.D. as stated in National
Health Policy and also to train atleast one Dai per 1000 population. There is, therefore, a
need for enhancing the allocation sufficiently.

6.4 Explaining the objective of the Dais Training Programme the Secretary. informed the
Committee that the programme aims at strengthening the various aspects of maternal and
newborn care by improving the knowledge and skill of dais.

6.5 Since the ‘Dais’ are an integral part of rural community and most of them are
involved in the task of delivery, the. Committee feels:that they should be properly trained.
Merely distributing the kits to the dais is a waste of money unless they are properly trained.

-


PB

SPECIAL SCHOOL HEALTH SCHEME FOR PRIMARY SCHOOLS

7. A sum of Rs. 19.50 crores have been allocated for reseaich and evalustien which
includes a provision of Rs. 8 crore to [CMR this year. Explaining the reason for increase in
allocation to ICMR by Rs. 50 lakhs as compared to that of last year, the Department stated
that the family welfare programme is moving towards a paradigm shift and there is a reed
for completing clinical trials and for carrying out basic research on newer contraceptives.

7.1 The Committee is of the view the research activities in the family welfare sector
should be intensified. For carrying out research activities, especially Intra-mural and extra
mural research and for conducting clinical trials to develop newer contraceptives, there is a
need for more funds. The Committee, therefore feels that a suitable increase in the
Provision to Research and Evaluation be made at a later stage.

VILLAGE HEALTH GUIDE SCHEME

8. Village Health Guide Scheme was launched with the objective of training a person
selected by the community for Primary Health Care. It is a 100% centrally sponsored
scheme.

8.1 A provision of Rs. 10 crores has been made in 8.8. 1996-97, which was the same
last year also. The Committee is constrained to note that majority of the States were not in
favour of the continuance of the Scheme: Only the States of Punjab, Maharashtra, West
Bengal, Mizoram and Tripura were in favour of its continuance

8.2 The Department stated that the scheme is not functioning satisfactorily in the
majority of the States and an expert Group was set up to consider the steps for improving
and reviewing the scheme which felt that scheme was not serving any useful purpose and
therefore needed to be scrapped. However, the Department of Health is of the opinion that
the service of the VHGs can be effectively utilised for the delivery of health care for the
rural people and the matter was discussed in the meeting of the Central Council for Health
and Family Welfare in Oct., 1995 and a decision was taken not to introduce the new Village
Health Guide Scheme and in so far as the existing Village Health Guide Scheme is
concerned, it is left to the State Governments to take a decision

8.3 The Department further stated that in pursuance of the above decision and also
keeping in view the recommendations of the expert committee formed for reviewing the
scheme, an amount of Rs. 1.00 crore has been made for the PANCHAYAT SWASTHYA
SEVA SCHEME and the details of the scheme are being worked out by the Department of
Health. Meanwhile, the VHG scheme is continuing in its present form.

8.4 The Department also stated that the Pilot Project being considered under
Department of Health called PANCHAYAT SWASTHYA SEVA SCHEME if extended to
the whole country will cost approximately Rs. 300.00 crores and is as such, untenable. The
exercise of evaluation of school health check-up and the leading role played by primary
school teachers in this is going on and it is possible that using school teachers, may, in fact
become a viable alternative to VHG Scheme.

8.5 The Committee hopes that the recommendations made by the expert Committee
would be taken into consideration while formulating an alternative to the scheme. The
Committee, however, desires that an early decision may be taken in this regard.
STERILISATION BEDS SCHEME

9. For providing facility for tubectomy operations in hospitals run by Goyernment, local
bodies and Voluntary Organisations where such cases could not be admitted due to non-
availability of beds, a maintenance grant of Rs. 3000 per bed per annum is paid to each


8

institution subject to the condition that a minimum 75/60 tubectomy operations per bed are
achieved. The grant has been revised to Rs. 4500 per bed now. At present, 2679 beds are
functioning. An allocation of Rs. two crore has been made this year.

9.1 Commenting on the ptoposal of the United Nations Family Planning Association
(UNFPA) assisted no Scalpel Vasectomy Project and on the steps taken to popularise it the
Department stated that it has been approved by the Project Implementation Committee on
13.6.1996 with a total outlay of Rs. 4.27 crores. Out of this a component of Rs. 1.61 crore
will be spent for publicity campaign and IEC activity which includes advertisement in
national and regional language dailies/through electronic media and also towards production
of IEC material at the central level. The department also stated that other methods on
regional basis will be adopted towards popularising the new method and the perception
knowledge and attitude of the acceptors as also the impact of the method will be assessed
through. an appropriate operational research technique.

9.2 The Committee feels that the Départment should take effective steps to popularise
it among the people in rural, backward and tribal areas by preparing IEC material based on
their requirements. To ensure the family planning programme, a huge success, the
Committee feels the target should be more on men and not women because the women have
no control over their bodies and it is the husband who controls his wife body and decides the
number of children. Therefore, the Committee feels that more money and effort should be
spent on performing vasectomy operations rather than tubectomy.

AREA PROJECTS

10. The Committee is. very deeply anguished to note that the allocation has gone down
considerably from Rs. 250 crores in 1995-96 to Rs. 195 crores in 1996-97. Explaining the
reasons for reduction in allocation, the Secretary stated that it was mainly due to the expiry
of a number of on-going projects and due to the time required for finalising new projects
after negotiations with donor agencies.

10.1 About the new projects proposed to be taken up during the current year the
department stated that Phase-III DANIDA assisted project in Tamil Nadu and ODA
assisted project in Orissa are being taken up and the proposed Reproductive and Child
Health Project could be started only in Jan-Feb., 1997, the Department added. Accordingly,
only nominal provisions are proposed for 1996-97 as expenditure for remaining part of the
year. These projects are being finalised in consultation with the donor agencies and could be
started only in the later part of 1996-97, the Department added.

10.2 The Committee feels that the Department should finalise the Area Projects with
the donor agencies at the earliest and the projects should be extended to the rest of the
State especially in urban slums.

INVOLVEMENT OF VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS

11. A provision of Rs. 13.70 crores has been made this year, for voluntary
organisations. Keeping in view the nature and magnitude of population control programme,
the Committee feels that the involvement of NGOs is very essential. The allocation made is
less and there is a need for increase in allocation.

11.1 It has also come to the notice of the Committee that there are a number of fake
NGOs working in this field, therefore, before giving any assistance, the Committee feels that
the track record of NGO’s in the field should be verified, and NGO’s with proven track
record alone should be assisted. -


9

SPECIAL SCHOOL HEALTH SCHEME FOR PRIMARY SCHOOLS

12. With the collaboration of Department of Education a new Scheme for medical check
up of children in Primary Schools for ailments like anaemia, eye problems, night blindness,
oral hygiene and skin problems etc., has been launched. The two major fall out of this
scheme are: (1) Extensive build up of awareness among children and consequently to parents
about various health needs; (2) Basic health check up for children in primary school and
setting up of an effective referral system for cases requiring further treatment.

12.1 A sum of Rs.45 crores has been provided this year for the scheme. Asked about
the response to the new scheme, the Department claimed that Reports from 221 districts out
of about 385 districts in 27 States and UTs have been received upto 8th August, 1996 and
the coverage response has been quite encouraging.

12.2 The Committee was also informed by the Department that five States namely
Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra could not take up
the scheme, the Committee feels that the Department should impress upon these five States
also to implement the scheme at the earliest.

PULSE POLIO IMMUNIZATION (PPI)

13. In order to achieve the National Health Policy goal of eradication of Poliomylitis by
the year 2000 AD a new initiative of Pulse Polio Immunization (PPI) was started in 1995-96.
Under this scheme every child below 3 years of age have been given two doses of OPV
vaccine on two specified days i.e. 9th December, 1995 and 20th January, 1996 irrespective of
the status of previous Immunization. The Department claims that the PPI campaign during
1995-96 yielded notable achievements and during the Campaign over 80 million children
were immunised on each, day. This strategy required an unprecedented logistics and social
mobilisation efforts and from the current year, it has been decided to enhance the age group
of below 5 years instead of below 3 years taken during 1995-96. The strategy will be
continued for further 3-4 years, the Department added

13.1 The Department also informed the Committee that it has been decided to
implement the 2nd phase of Pulse Polio Immunization on two days i.e. on 7th December, 96
and 18th January, 1997.

13.2 The Committee was informed that cent percent target was achieved in State/UTs
of Arunchal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, Manipur,
Mizoram, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi,
Dadar and Nagar Haveli and Pondicherry. The Committee also notes that coverage in urban
areas was in general lower than in rural areas.

13.3 The Committee feels that the Department should take steps for achievement of
target of 100% in the rest of the States also. The Committee also feels that effective steps
should be taken by the Department to increase the coverage level in urban areas also.
NATIONAL POPULATION POLICY

14. The Draft National Population Policy prepared by the Swaminathan Committee, was
presented to the Parliament in June, 1994. However the final document has not yet been
finalised. The Department stated that consultation with State Governments, UTs and various
organisations on draft was complete and it is being discussed at senior levels of the
Department.

14.1 The Committee desires that the discussions should be completed at the earliest.
The Committee also desires that the Department should try to give the draft a final shape at
an early date, in view of the rapid explosion in the population.

TECHOLOGY MISSION
15. The Committee in its 8th Report suggested creation of a Technology Mission for


10

Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan which account for 40% of the
country’s population and where the progress of family welfare programme is very slow. The
Committee again in its 20th Report urged the Department with the cooperation of the
concerned State Governments to operationalise the Mission by July, 1995. However the
Department could not operationalise it due to resource constraint. The Department further
stated that it propose to implement the Mission through externally assisted project.

15.1 The Secretary informed the Committee that substantial and detailed preliminary
work on it has been done by the Department. On account of constraint of resources, the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) adivsed the Department to implement the measures
envisaged under the project through externally assisted projects.

15.2 In view of the country’s rising population and 40% of the population being
accounted for by these States, the Committee feels there is a urgent need to implement this
mission at an early date by the Department and it should also make all out efforts to
mobilise the resources from the external agencies at the earliest.

PRE-NATAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES (REGULATION AND PREVENTION OF
MISUSE) ACT, 1994

16. On the question of the status of enforcement of the pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques
(Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1994, the Department stated that the Act came
into force with effect from 1st January, 1996 and the rules under the Act have been notified
on the same day.

16.1 The Committtee recommends that the provisions of the Act should be
implemented in its true spirits to check the instances of termination of female foeticides,
which is a very serious concern.

FREE DISTRIBUTION OF CONVENTIONAL CONTRACEPTIVES

17. The Plan allocation for Free Distribution of Conventional Contraceptives has been
slashed from Rs. 109 crores in 1995-96 to Rs. 99 crores in 1996-97. Justifying the reasons for
reduction to such an important programme, the Department stated that the plan allocation
for grant-in-aid to States/UTs for materials and supplies under the scheme has been reduced
by Rs.10 crores and also due to the fact that the targets for Family Planning methods have
been removed with effect from April, 1996 throughout the country.

17.1 The Committee has noted that IUDs and Copper Ts are freely distributed. The
Committee was given to understand that by using them women get infection. When the
Committee sought to know as to whether any survey was made on this, the Secretary
informed that no such survey was conducted. The Committee desires that a survey should be
conducted in this regard.

CHILD SURVIVAL & SAFE MOTHERHOOD PROJECT (CSSM)

18. This programme cgnsists of two components, namely child survival component and
safe motherhood component. Under the child survival component all districts are proposed
to be convered in a phased manner. The Districts covered are supplied with Drug Kit-A.
The Committee is constrained to note that very few districts have been covered under the
programme. Further, wherever the kits are sent, they reach the end users very late. The
Department should look into these issues and ensure that the programme is covered in all
the districts of the country. The Kits should also reach the end users in time.

NEW STRATEGY

19. The goal of the country is “Health for All by 2000 AD”. While certain components
of this goal are reasonably making good progress, others such as population control have not
achieved the desired success. We are far from the Net Reproductive Rate of Unity (NRR-1)


11

and the population keeps on mounting Even though this is the last year of the Eighth Plan
and the Ninth Plan is about to.commence, still, we do not seem to be really making a dent
on the issue of solving the problem. The Committee strongly feels that a well thought
strategy should be adopted and the National Population Policy should be the first attempt in
this direction.

SOCIAL MARKETING OF NIRODH

20. With a view to promote use of Nirodh for spacing, a social Marketing Programme is
being implemented. At present there are three varieties of Nirodh available under the
programme viz, New Lubricated, Deluxe and super Deluxe. A budget provision of Rs. 35
crores has been provided this year. The Secretary informed the Committee that steps are
being taken to involve Public Distribution system for selling Nirodh in order to increase its
outreach to the far flung areas of the country.

20.1 Asked about the poor quality of condoms, being supplied and the sources of
procurement of condoms and about the quality control measures that are being taken, the
Department stated that condoms required by the Department are presently procured from
the following domesitc manufacturers:

1. M/s Hindustan Latex Ltd., Thiruvananthapuram (a Central PSU)
2. M/s London Rubber Co., Madras (Pvt. Sector)

3. M/s TTK Biomed, Bombay (Pvt. Sector)

4. M/s J.K. Chemicals, Bombay (Pvt. Sector)

5. M/s Polar Latex Ltd., Calcutta (Pvt. Sector)

6. M/s Frontline Latex, Bangalore (Pvt. Sector)

20.2 The Department further stated that random samples from lots offered for sale by
manufacturers are drawn by the inspecting Officers designed by the Department and are
tested at laboratories authorised for this purpose to ensure that condoms conform to the
specifications contained in the Schedule ‘R’ of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. It also
stated that two laboratories under the Ministry of Defence located in Thiruvananthapuram
and Madras and one laboratory in the private sector located in Hyderabad are presently
authorised to test condom samples on behalf of the Department. The condoms are accepted
by the Deptt. only after getting satisfactory test reports from these laboratories.

20.3 The Committee feels that the testing mechanism should be further strengthened
and there should be regular monitoring on this. The Committee, has, however, taken note
of the reports appeared in the Newspapers stating about sub-standard quality of condoms.


MINUTES


i
First Meeting

The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. and again at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 9th August
1996 in Committee Room No. ‘63’ First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri $.B. Chavan — Chairman
MEMBERS

RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Dr. M. Aram .
4. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik
5. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
7. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
8. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
9. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

LOK SABHA
10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
11. Shri Sartaj Singh
12. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
13. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
14, Chaudhary Paragi Lal
15. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
16. Shri 1.0, Sanadi
17. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
18. Shri Samik Lahiri
19. Shri S.K. Karvendhan
20. Shri Mukhtar Anees
21. Dr. M. Jagannath
22. Dr. Bali Ram
23. Shri Ranen Barman
24. Shri Surender Singh

WITNESSES
L, ° . *
Il. a is *

III. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Family Welfare
1. Shri J.C. Pant, Secretary
2. Shrimati Adarsh Mishra, Joint Secretary

***Relate to other matters.

15


16

3. Shri S. Sugathan, Joint Secretary

4. Shri G.C. Bhandari, Joint Secretary (FA)
5. Dr. Badri Saxena, Senior D.D.G. (ICMR)
6. Shrimati S. Kaila, C.C.A.

7. Shri Narasimhan, Director

8. Shri Alok Perti, Director

9. Shri Indrajeet Pal, Director

10. Dr. Simon, Director (NIHFW)

11. Dr. R.S. Gulati, D.D.G. (RHS)

12. Shri Desh Deepak, Dy. Secretary (AP)
13. Dr. K. Lamba,: Dy. Commissioner

14. Dr. Ashok Kumar, Dy. Commissioner
15. Dr. V.B. Gupta, Dy. Commissioner

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

2. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary

3. Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the
Department of Health, Family Welfare and Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy
in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants for the year 1996-97.

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.35 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on 10th
August, 1996.


हर
“FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 24th August, 1996 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.B. Chavan — Chairman
MemBERS

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
Dr. B.B. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

9. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

13. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

14, Dr. M. Jagannath

15. Dr. Bali Ram

SECRETARIAT
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Demands for Grants for 1996-97
of the Departments of Health (Demand No. 39), Culture (Demand No. 49), Family Welfare
(Demand No. 41) and Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoepathy (Demand No. 40). The
Committee, after some discussions, adopted the same with some modifications.

9० 3 9५ (७ + ० ७

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Dr. (Smt.) Bharati Ray
and Dr. M. Aram to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
and in his absence Shri S.K. Karvendhan to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha. The
Committee decided that the reports may be laid/ presented on 29.8.96 or on a subsequent
day subject to availability of Hindi version.

4° है *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 p.m.

*Minutes of IInd, गाव & IVth Meetings relate to matters not included in this Report.
***Relates to matters not included in this Report.

17


25806) ati 10
1202 susibnbud (1604 be

peel? 8901939 eating
idntinys wi tad

HOGA vids ni bobuitont- son शर्त a} व0 दावे