PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1997-98 (DEMAND NO. 51)
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)
(Laid onthe Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)

ae जपते

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 1997/Chaitra 1919 (Saka)


) OR. Bay Aa
ida Av

46 TV
MH WO Yarreiaaly

Sah oot baditoasi"l)
3098: 98:10 81831) .

we ieee बोस ओके?


CONTENTS

1. ComposiTION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. PREFACE
3. REPORT

4. MinuTEs

PAGES
(i)-Gi)
(iii)
1—10

11-35


eruarned
aot —
00७0: ‘es
eee ey ! 4 : कर हो

1! 4 हि THOMA .E

asia वा AO WOR Oe MED ५.1

; टैप 7 - दबा आहार! ++



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(1996-97)

. Shri $.B. Chavan —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo

Dr. B.B. Dutta
Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Shri Raj Nath Singh

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr. Mohan Babu

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Shri Sartaj Singh

: Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shri Jai Prakash

. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Shrimati Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

Dr. C. Silvera

. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
. Shri Dutta Meghe

. Shri 1.0. Sanadi

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Pawan Diwan

. Shri Krishna

. Shri Shivanand H. Kovujalgi
. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

. Shri Mukhtar Anees

. Dr. M. Jagannath

. Dr. Bali Ram

@


(ii)

43. Shri Ranen Barman
*44. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego
45. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 26th February, 1997.


PREFACE

I, The Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty-Ninth Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 51) of the Department of Women and Child
Development, Ministry of Human Resource Development for the year 1997-98.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Women and Child Development, Ministry of Human Resource
Development and also heard the Secretary and other officials of that Department on the said
Demands for Grants in its meeting held on ३15 March, 1997.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 19th April,
1997.

New DELHI; S.B. CHAVAN
19th April, 1997 Chairman,
——_———————_ Department-related Parliamentary
Chaitra 29, 1919(Saka) Standing Committee on

Human Resource Development.

(iii)


ie i SORTAS
10070 20071703 - ee waited bot fSuauonsiegot! out 10 आहार
odd Insee1g 6) 5 ae 8, beeisolitng 1 ghived. ine cigolavec! ७
od 0, ae 4 हा 11% आंत yc 1]

om 7 to ९४ oO baste) 6
8९-२९] sega: a0} आशभाप०३४७९ 39008७॥ nsruit’ to yue 96 !
We tence aa ot 4 ae POMVIOS /56080 ot borobieaus oe iinet) - :1
991704 lo d Cad Rev BAY bre 1०0 to 15500: (861 es
b wat to «15 30019 615 (४४३19 ot biperidein bas ji cor svaQ

: ie 1 dove Male 10 0शाौ था 139॥ वो ai ensior yor
आवक Hes 70: ३0880 beigobs 176 17973 New आप 8५1301200 ५०३00.

- WAWAHO .8६ ५ ; ; एज

५ coud tis 5
ra Same or cane S
be 3 91४४७ज६ ्‌ (४४४: a ous

IHsmigolead ७७९४७६११ loot



REPORT

I. INTRODUCTION

1.1 The Department of Women and Child Development is engaged in the Welfare and
Development of Women and Child Development. The Department is responsible for
safeguarding certain provisions of Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy
with reference to Women and Children.

1.2 The Department, in its nodal capacity, formulates plans, policies and programmes;
enacts/amends legislations; guides and coordinates the efforts of both Governmental and non-
Governmental organisations, working in the field of Women and Child Development. For a
holistic child development, the Department implements the Integrated Child Development
Services (ICDS). The ICDS provides on integrated package of services comprising
supplementary nutrition, immunisation, health check-up and pre-school dnd non-formal
education and health and nutrition education for women.

1.3 The other major schemes implemented by the Department includes funding of Hostels
for working women, Support, Training and Employment Programme, scheme of Training-cum-
Employment-cum . Production Centres (NORAD), Socio-Economic Programme, the
Programme of Condensed Courses of Education and Vocational Training etc. Most of the
programmes of the Department are run through non-Governmental organisations.

Il. EIGHTH FIVE YEAR PLAN

2.1 The total approved outlay of the Department for 8th Plan is Rs. 2010.00 crores. As
against this, the Plan allocations made during all the annual plans in BE from 1992-93 to 1996-97
was Rs. 3260.16 crores. The actual expenditure made, however, was far ahead of this i.e.
Rs. 3377.91 crores, showing a quantum jump from original plan outlay and allocations made in
BEs. Similarly on non-Plan side also the actual expenditure has exceeded the Budget Estimates
in all the annual plans during the 8th Plan period excepting the year 1995-96 during which year
there was a slight shortfall of Rs. 69 crores.

2.2 The Committee has noted that there was a short fall in the achievement of physical
targets in some of the schemes. In the scheme of (i) Training of Anganwari Workers,
(ii) Rashtriya Mahila Kosh, (iii) Mahila Smariddhi Yojana, (iv) Socio-economic Programmes,
the achievement of physical targets set for 8th Plan was far below. In fact in Mahila Samriddhi
Yojana, the number of accounts opened were only 36.7 per cent of the targets fixed. Reviewing
the performance of the Deptt. and various schemes under the Deptt. the Approach Paper to the
9th Five Year Plan observed that there has been a significant shift in the approach towards the
well-being of women and children from “Welfare during 50s’ to ‘Development during 70s’ and
‘Empowerment during 90s’. It was also felt that human resource development, being one of the
major thrust areas in the 8th Plan, all the developmental efforts were directed to empower both
women and children besides mainstreaming them into the national development on equal
footing alongwith their counterparts. The approach paper also observed that while the main
thrust in respect of children was to ensure their survival, protection and development, with a
special focus on the girl child and adolescent girl, the emphasis in respect of women was to make
them economically independent and self-reliant. The Committee, however, feels that there is a
longway to go to feel that the goals of welfare, development and empowerment of women are
fully achieved. The Government should not be complacent with whatever that has been done/is
being done. The Committee is also constrained to note that the Performance Budget of the
Department does not give the actual picture of the achievements of targets fixed. The
Department should therefore take note of this and given full details in Performance Budget in
future.


Ill. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS

3. The Department’s annual plan outlay for 1996-97 was Rs. 847.07 crores. The RE was
also kept at the same level. The Committee was informed that the minimum requirement of
the Deptt. was 936.98 crores leaving a backlog of ‘over Rs. 90 crores for 1997-98. For
1997-98, the Department has been allocated Rs. 900 crores on Plan side and on non-Plan
side Rs. 48.10 crores When the Committee sought to know the views of the Deptt. on the
actual projections made by it for the year 1997-98, it was stated that taking into account the
new initiatives undertaken during the 8th Plan period, the pace of expenditure under various
schemes as also the realistic requirements of funds, the Deptt. had projected the
requirement of funds for 1997-98 at Rs. 3718.74 crores. However, the Deptt. has been
allocated only Rs. 900 crores. it was further stated that the requirement of funds for the
Deptt. just to continue the programmes worked out to be Rs. 1820.52 crores for 1997-98 as
against the absolute minimum requirement of Rs. 936.98 crores during 1996-97. The actual
allocation. however has been pegged at only Rs. 900 crores. The’ Secretary, therefore,
informed the Committee that in the backdrop of the original projection of Rs. 3718.74 crores
this drastic reduction is apprehended to adversely affect almost all the schemes and
programmes of the Department. Even though the projections made by the Department
appear to be a bit exaggerated there is no doubt that the allocation made is far below than
the minimum requirement. The Committee was also given to understand that the committed
liability has not been taken care of resulting in a big handicap for the Department. The
Committee dealt with the committeed liability later in detail. For here, the Committee only
recommends that the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance should make a
realistic assessment of the requirements of the Department and meet the minimum
requirements of the Department.

IV. OBJECTIVES AND APPROACH OF THE 9th PLAN

4.1 The Approach Paper felt that large disparities exist in various social groups
particularly women and children. It was also observed that women and children are the
vulnerable group and for them planned State intervention is required in order to provide
them with adequate opportunities for education and in an attempt to involve them
productively in the development process. With this view the Approach Paper to 9th Plan
made empowerment of women as one of the objectives of the 9th Plan. The Approach Paper
felt that in pursuance of this Objective the plan will ensure to create an enabling
environment with requisite policies and programmes legislative support, exclusive
institutional mechanisms at various levels and adequate financial and’ man power resources
to achieve this objective, according to the Approach Paper to the 9th plan.

4.2 The Approach Paper to 9th Five Year Plan while laying emphasis on empowering
women, under-scored harmonization of various efforts on different fronts i.e. social
economic, legal and political. The Approach Paper also emphasises the need to make
reservation of seats for women in the Parliament and State Legislatures, to fulfil the goal of
education for women equality, to adopt a life cycle approach to women’s health. As regards
child development is concerned, the Approach Paper proposes to take the convention of
child’s rights ratified in 1992 as the guiding principle and would like to review the national
policy for children. In order to promote a community based approach action will be initiated
to decentralise women and child programme involving Panchayati Raj Institutions and local
women’s self-help groups. The Committee feels that the objectives are laudable. However,
unless dedicated efforts are made to achieve these objectives, they will remain mere
objectives only. The Committee hopes that efforts would be made in the right perspective
for better delivery of services to the target groups.


3

V. INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES

5.1 The allocation made for ICDS during 1996-97 was Rs. 681.90 crores and in 1997-98
it is Rs. 733.90. crores. Out of 733.90 crores being provided for 1997-98, 180 crores is.the
externally aided component for ICDS training and ICDS World Bank Projects. The
budgetary suport is only Rs. 553.90 crores.

5.2 The funds for ICDS General including IMY are only Rs. 479.40 crores. The
Secretary stated that for ICDS General the actual projection made for 1997-98 was Rs. 2919
crores against which the allocation made was 467.90 crores excluding for IMY. The
Committee, however, recommends that the budgetary support should be over and above the
external aid component agreed, The Department havé stated that the budget provision
approved for ICDS for 1997-98 is grossly inadequate to sustain the on-going ICDS projects
and the ICDS project in different stages of operationalisation. The Committee was informed
that 505 new ICDS projects became operational during 1996-97 and 1668 projects would start
in 1997-98. This would require an outlay of Rs. 1316.94 crores for ICDS General as against
Rs. 467.90 crores actually provided. When the Committee sought to know the basic
minimum requirement for 1997-98, it was stated that the absic minimum requirement for
ICDS for 1997-98 is Rs. 940 crores.

.5.3 The Committee agrees with the resource constraint being faced by the ICDS. Many
proejcts are required to be operationalised. The Planning Commission should take a realistic
view of the basic requirements of the scheme and make necessary allocations accordingly.

5.4 On the recommendation made by the Committee earlier, the Department
redesigned the plan of introduction of services and the maximum time limit has been
reduced from 18 months to 12 months for the States to operationalise newly sanctioned
ICDS projects. When the Committee sought to know as to whether this is strictly being
adhered to. It was submitted that during February-March, 1996, 1668 new ICDS projects
were sanctioned as per ‘redesigned plan of introduction of services. According to the
Department, all the projects should become operational by March 31, 1997. It was, however,
stated that the process of operationalisation has suffered a set back in view of non-release of
required funds to some of the States because of inadequate provision during last year. The
Committee has already recommended above for increasing the allocation for ICDS. The
Committee, however, recommends that the monitoring mechanism should be strengthened
to ensure operationalisation as per the schedule. The schedule also should be strictly
adhered to.

5.5 The concurrent evaluation of ICDS was piloted by National Council of Applied
Economic Research in 5 States covering 10 blocks of Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, U.P.
West Bengal and Gujarat during August, 1996. The study was completed and the reports
were to be submitted soon. The Committee desires that as soon as the reports are received,
the Department should chalk out the programme of action and initiate action as early as
possible. The Committee desires that the evaluation reports should be examined and similar
concurrent evaluation should be done throughout the country. The Department have also
informed the Committee that they propose to initiate nationwide evaluation of ICDS from
April, 1997 through NCAER. The Committee strongly feels an urgent necessity of this
evaluation so that a clear picture of the impact of ICDS in all the States can be had. The
Department should, therefore, not delay the evaluation and start it as proposed
immediately.

5.6 In regard to filling up the vacant posts of Supervisors for training ICDS

functionaries, the Department have submitted that all the States have requested to fill up the
“vacant posts on priority basis. It was included in the agenda item for discussions in the


4

scheduled’ meeting of the State Secretaries/State Ministers. The Committee is of the view
that training of ICDS functionaries is a basic requirement for efficient functioning of the
ICDS projects. For this purpose, supervisors are required but there are a large number of
vacancies in almost all the States for quite sometime and the States have not been taking
necessary steps in this direction. The Committee strongly recommends that the Department
should initiate action at political level to ensure immediate filling up of the vacant posts.

5.7 Last year, the Committee recommended for enhancing the honorarium of
Anganwadi workers. On this the Department have stated that the proposal was sent to PM’s
office for enhancing the honorarium. Initially the proposal was not acceded to. Thereafter
the Minister for Human Resource Development wrote a letter to the Prime Minister on
February 7, 1997 and to the Finance Minister of February 13, 1997 for reconsideration of the
decision. A formal response from the PMO and the Finance Ministry is awaited, the
Department added. The Committee desires that the Department may pursue the matter
vigorously for an early clearance. As regards the achievement of physical targets under
ICDS projects is concerned, the training of Anganwadi workers has lagged behind. The
Eighth Plan target fixed was 2 lakhs whereas the actual achievement is 1 lakh 69 thousands.
Therefore, the physical target achievement was only 84.5% with a shortfall of 15.5%. This is
required to be corrected.

5.8 As regards the performance of ICDS is concerned, the Secretary informed the
Committee that the impact has been good on girl children attendance in schools. There is a
very significant improvement on ICDS. Immunisation has taken place extremely. well and the
infant mortality rate has gone down wherever ICDS projects are functioning. The
Committee is, however, constrained to note that the impact of ICDS is not satisfactory. The
Secretary herself agreed that more work needs to be done. The Committee feels that
nutrition aspect has to be very well taken care of. Specific target groups should be worked
out and the concentration should be laid on them. The Committee has taken note of
horrifying reports in tribal areas. A large number of children are dying because of the total
resistance power that they have lost. The Committee last year recommended to explore the
possibility to mobilise funds from tribal development authorities for providing supplementary
nutrition to children in vulnerable tribal areas. The Department has stated that the Ministry
of Welfare has responded by stating that there exists no provision in the Ministry’s budget
for providing supplementary nutrition to ICDS beneficiaries. The Committee in fact made
the above recommendation last year to ensure supplementary nutrition to tribal children
with the specific idea that the additional funds that could be provided by the tribal
authorities would be beneficial to cover those areas which are not covered under ICDS. The
Committee, therefore, does not agree with the reply given by Ministry of Welfare. If there is
no scheme now in their Ministry, they should start such a scheme. The Committee also
desires that the monitoring mechanism on the programmes implemented in tribal areas
should be strengthened.

VI. CRECHES AND DAY-CARE CENTRES

6. The. Committee last year recommended that the Department may prepare a
perspective plan showing the requirement of creches and make projection of the 9th Plan for
consideration of the Planning Commission. On this, the Department have stated that they
have estimated that 8 lakh creches are required throughout the country. Against this, the
Department has been able to provide about 14,000 creches only. The Department,
therefore, sent a proposal to the Planning Commission to augment the corpus of the national
creche fund to Rs. 2,000 crores. Accordingly, the Department had proposed for creche fund
of an amount of Rs. 154 crores for 1997-98. Against this the Department was allocated


5

only Rs. 94 lakhs. The Committee is of the view that either the projection made by the
Department is too exaggerated or the allocation made is too paltry. The Committee,
however, keeping in view the requirement of creches to be opened for being used,
particularly by the working section of the society, recommends that the Planning
Commission should make a realistic assessment of the requirement of fund and make
necessary allocation at RE stage.

Vil. BALWADI NUTRITION PROGRAMME AND EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION
PROGRAMME

7. The allocation for both the schemes are the same in 1997-98 as that in BE in 1996-97.
When the Department was asked to explain this, it was stated that the schemes are non-
expanding and the benefits available under them are also available under the scheme of
ICDS. It was further stated that as advised by the Planning Commission, both the schemes
are to be phased out as ICDS has been universalised. A decision has been taken to phase
out w.e.f. 1.4,1998. The Committee only expresses its hope that the activities being
undertaken by these programmes would be adequately taken care of by ICDS in all the
projects.

VIII. WORKING WOMEN HOSTELS

8. Allocations for working women hostels for 1997-98 has been kept at the same level as
that of Rs. 7.75 crores in BE 1996-97. The Committee had been recommending for opening
more working women hostels. During 1996-97, 60 hostels were to be sanctioned with
Rs. 7.75 crores. The Department have stated that about 16 hostels to accommodate 1420
women were sanctioned with an expenditure of Rs. 5.54 crores. The Department anticipated
that the target would be achieved. The Committee, however, is not in a position to believe
that 16 hostels were sanctioned with Rs. 5.5 crores and 44 hostels would be sanctioned with
Rs. 2.21 crores. The Committee desires that proper monitoring should be kept on the
utilisation of the amount and to meet to targets as well. The Department has proposed to
sanction 40 hostels with the same amount mentioned above for 1997-98. The Department
should try to achieve the target. The Committee also desires that whenever there are.
vacancies in the hostels, girl students and non-working women also should be considered.

IX. MAHILA SAMRIDHI YOJNA

9. The allocations for Mahila Samridhi Yojna was reduced from 60 crores in BE 1996-97
to 40 crores for BE in 1997-98. The Department have stated that while finalising annual plan
of the Department in 1997-98, the Planning Commission suggested complete review of the
scheme during 1997-98. According to the Department, this was based on the fact that the
operational cost of implementing the scheme was increasing considerably every year. At the
same time as per the trends in number of accounts opened and number of accounts closed, it
appears that the scheme has reached the saturation point, it was added. Therefore, the
provisional allocation of Rs. 40 crores has been made, it was added, when the exact
operational cost of the implementation of the scheme has been finalised with the
Department of Post, the issue that who should bear the operational costs is still pending, the
Department added. It was further stated that Planning Commission had earlier suggested
that the modalities of the appropriation of operational cost of implementing the scheme
should be sorted out amongst the Ministry of Finance, Department of Women and Child
Development and Department of Posts. The Committee desires that this problem may be
sorted out at the earliest. Similarly, the physical targets fixed for the scheme should also be
achieved and monitoring mechanism should be strengthened in the Department. The Mahila
Samridhi Yojna is facing a severe shortfall on account of achieving physical targets. 6 crores


6

accounts were supposed to have been opened and only 2.2 crores were opened resulting in a
shortfall of 63.3.% of target unachieved. This need to be seriously considered and the
Department should take necessary steps.

X. INDIRA MAHILA YOJNA

10. The Indira Mahila Yojna was expected to be extended to additional 200 blocks
during 1996-97. When the Committee sought to know the progress made in this, the
Department submitted that during 1996-97 the scheme could not be extended to the
additional blocks because Planning Commission had given approval only for implementing
IMY in 200 blocks in 1995-96 on a pilot basis. Planning Commission decided that a view on

' expansion of IMY to additional blocks could be taken after reviewing the programmes in the
pilot block by a joint team of Planning Commission and the Department. The Committee is,
however, constrained to note that the review team has not yet been appointed and the
Department has only made a request to the Planning Commission to suggest the names, As
the scheme has become very popular, the Committee desires that necessary and expeditious
steps should be taken by both Planning Commission and the Department for an early review
of the pilot blocks and for starting of additional blocks immediately. The Department has
also informed the Committee of the following areas of concern for this programme:—

(a) Although an amount of Rs. 6.10 lakhs has been released for every block, there are
many blocks which have not yet received these funds. As a result of this, the blocks societies
are not able to work properly;

(b) Many IMBSs have not been registered;

(c) The State level Steering Committees and District level Coordination Committees
have not met in majority of the States districts. As a result of this; the progress could not be
reviewed/guided and activities like convergence have not taken off anywhere;

(d) It was expected that the IMY blocks will be able to access funds from the existing
sources for the purpose of training and capacity building. So far, this has not happened;

(e) In the absence of a proper protocol for group formation, quality of groups formed
so far are not upto the mark and it is not clear as to how many groups will really sustain on
a long-term basis;

(f) Instructions were issued to expand IMY in the World Bank-ICDS blocks and normal
ICDS blocks. These instructions have not been followed;

(g) The Department of Women and Child Development, GOI has decided to cover the
IMBSs under the on-going schemes of Rashtriya Mahila Kosh, STEP, NORAD and CSWB.
The IMBSs were asked to send the required proposals for assistance under these schemes.
The response from IMBSs has not been encouraging;

h) Besides above, IMY is presently facing following structural probelms:
8 8 9
(i) Proper training methodology for the IMY fuctionaries is not available;

(ii) Proper capacity building under IMY will require substantial trained
manpower at the Anganwadi and block levels. So far, such a manpower could not
be identified properly.

(iii) There are no funds under IMY for the purposes mentioned at (i) and (ii)
above without which the capacity building of implementors and fields level
functionaries cannot be created. This is also likely to affect the sustainability of the
whole process.


10.1 The Committee is of the considered view that all the issues may be properly looked
into and appropriate action may be initiated at the earliest.

XI. RASHTRIYA MAHILA KOSH

11. Rashtriya Mahila Kosh is facing a lot of shortfall in the achievement of physical
targets under Eighth Plan. The target fixed for Eighth Plan period was 2 lakh women
beneficiaries whereas the achievement made was 1.48 lakhs leaving 26% shortfall on the
achievement. This is not a good sign on the part of the scheme. The Department have stated
that the Rashtriya Mahila Kosh mainly is functioning for facilitation of poor women. For this
purpose it is using the NGOs as it is catalising and channelising agencies. However, the
NGOs have to meet certain eligibility criteria since it is not possible to entrust them with
loans without a firm information regarding their infrastructure and capabilities for receiving
the money from RMK and arranging the identification of the women namely those living
below the poverty line and for disbursing RMK’s money to them through their functionaries.
The Department have, however, also stated that the Indira Mahila Centres to be set up
under Indira Mahila Yojna will fill up a gap between RMK and its borrowers. The
Department, therefore, submitted that a large number of Indira Mahila Kendras would be
able to bridge the gap and ultimately ensure to achieve the targets then. The Committee
desires that the Department should go in for more Indira Mahila Kendras through which it
would be easier to reach out to women.

XII. SHORT STAY HOMES

12. Allocation for short stay homes has been reduced from Rs. 4.82 crores in BE 1996-
97 to 4.75 crores for 1997-98. When the Department was asked to explain the reasons it was
stated that an EFC Memo for revising the financial norms for the short stay homes is already
at the final stage of consideration. Normally, 30 short stay homes are sanctioned every year.
As such it would be difficult to implement the scheme in the manner it has been
implemented so far with the reduced allocations, the Department added. The plan allocation
has been kept at the same level, i.e. 2.75 crores but the non-plan allocation has been
reduced from 2.07 crores to Rs. 2 crores. The Department have stated that actual projection
made was Rs. 30.82 crores for the annual plan for 1997-98 as against which Rs. 2.75 crores
has been allocated. Even though the Planning Commission may not be able to allocate the
projected amount but the amount atleast could have been slightly increased keeping in view
the cost escalation. The Committee desires that Planning Commission should reconsider the
allocation at RE stage.

XIII. WOMEN DEVELOPMENT CORPORATIONS

13. The Department started the revamping of the scheme of Women Development
Corporations to give assistance to States for setting up of State Women Development
corporations in the States. The Committee was given to understand that 18 States/Union
Territory Administrations have set up Women Development Corporations (WDCs). The
Committee desires that the Department may take up with the remaining states also for
setting up WDCs. The Committee is impressed by the activities that are to be taken up by
the WDCs. The Committee trusts that the Corporations would succeed in all their
endeavours which ultimately lead to achieve the goal of empowering women and to provide
them equal status.

XIV. SOCIO-ECONOMIC PROGRAMME

14. Under Socio-economic programme, the actual plan outlay was 25 crores and BE
allocations in all the annual plan periods comes to Rs. 27.75 crores and the actual


8

expenditure made was Rs.38.32 crores. The programme has, ape done very well in
achieving the financial targets. Even though the expenditure is far ahead of the outlay and
allocation, yet the achievement of physical targets is lagging behind. In regard to number of
units, the achievement was only 63.6% and as regards the number of beneficiaries, the
achievement was 84.7%. This discrepancy between overutilisation of funds and the shortfall
in physical targets achievement should be gone into and necessary action should be taken. It
appears that the monitoring of the scheme has not properly been done. The Department
should therefore, take necessary action in this regard.

XV. AWARENESS GENERATION PROGRAMME

“15, The Department informed the Committee that there is a need to review the scheme
and the procedure for implementation. The task of awareness generation is one of the most
important programmes of the Central Social Welfare Board and it is necessary to tone up
the implementation of the scheme. The Committee recommends that the reviewing of the
scheme may be done at the earliest to ensure modifications for better implementation.

XVI. NUTRITION EDUCATION

16.1 The overall allocation for nutrition education has been reduced from Rs. 6.06
crores to Rs. 6.01 crores in the current year as compared to last year. The Department have
stated that the reduction of Rs. 5 lakhs in overall allocation should not effect the schemes
being run. The Department however, informed the Committee that the projection made by
it before the Planning Commission on plan side for the current year for Nutrition Education
was Rs. 10.25 crores as against which the allocation made was Rs. 2.31 crores. The
Committee is of the view that all the schemes under the Nutrition Education are very
smaller ones and there is necessity of marging the schemes into one or two for an efficient
functioning. The Department may examine this aspect and take necessary decision in the
matter. The Committee is, however, happy to note that some of the schemes such as
integrated education under nutrition, mass media communication and strengthening of
community food and nutrition expansion units have been amalgamated under nutrition
education in the 9th Five Year Plan starting with the current year. The Department, as
recommended by the Committee above, may make a review of the remaining schemes as
well.

XVII. GENERAL

17.1 CONVERGENCE: The Committee had earlier recommended convergence of
various related schemes under different Departments/Ministries. On this, the Department
informed the Committee that three meetings have so far been held to identify areas of
convergence, particularly those relating to ICDS. Health and Family Welfare functionaries
and women groups existing under sectorial programmes. The Chief Secretaries of the States
have been addressed jointly by the Secretaries of Family Welfare, Women and Child
Development, Rural Development, Education and Health. The Committee was further
informed that the Department was in the process of collecting State-wise information in
respect of identified areas which shall be used to evolve a comprehensive convergent plan.
The Committee is at least happy that an initiative has been made in the direction of
converging the various schemes. But the efforts of all the Departments and the States should
be ultimately in the direction of bringing various related schemes under one single umbrella
for an efficient functioning and implementation and to ensure delivery of better services to
the beneficiaries. The Committee desires that this process should be completed as early as
possible.

17.2 The Committee has noted that the resources have been spread very thinly on a


के

number of schemes just to show that they have covered the entire area. That is one of the
reasons as to why the physical targets are not being achieved. The Committee does not
attach great importance to universalisation part and such other things. Besides this,
concentration should be laid on the targeted groups where the problem is in its gravest form
and then compare as to how best the results are being achieved.

17.3 Monitoring Mechanism: The approach paper to the Ninth Five Year Plan felt that
more practical approach to the programme formulation, particularly for social sector
programmes was to put the lessons learnt from the experience to the implementation. The
approach papers also felt that inspite of the existence of an elaborate monitoring and
evaluation system, the findings made by the monitoring and evaluation system are not put to
use. The Committee takes a very serious note on this aspect and strongly recommends to the
Department to first strengthen the monitoring mechanism on various schemes and ensure
strict implementation of the findings made by the monitoring agencies. The Committee also
observes with concern that the schemes being taken up by the Central Government are not
properly monitored by the State Governments. Merely handing over the money and getting
report from the State Governments is not going to serve any purpose. The Committee is of
the definite view that the State Governments, where the financial position is bad, divert the
funds, given by the Central Government for a particular scheme to other purposes such as
for giving salaries to the employees of the State Governments, etc. The Committee,
therefore, desires that the Centre should impress upon the States about the need to develop
a mechanism to find out whether the money being given to the States for implementation of
various programmes is utilised for the purpose specified and fix responsibility in case the
purpose is defeated.

17.3 NGOs: There are certain areas where the Adivasis are the worst affected lot. The
Committee is constrained to note that not many NGOs are present in tribal areas. One will
find them mostly in areas where the atmosphere and the living conditions are very good.
They would not like to leave big and smaller cities and go into rural areas. The Adivasis are
mostly located in far-flung areas. The Committee, therefore, desires that NGOs which are
working in adivasi areas should be given encouragement.

17.5 There is no doubt that there are committed and devoted NGOs in the field, but at
the same time, one cannot rule out the possibility of mushroom growth of NGOs which are
merely interested in getting assistance from the Government of India. The Department
should, therefore, strengthen its monitoring mechanism to see whether they are working
properly or not and only those NGOs which have proven track record should be given
assistance.

17.6 Committed Liability: The Committee has noted that the committed liability of the
plan schemes has not been reflected in the budgetary allocations for 1997-98 which is the
first year of the Ninth Plan. The Committed expenditure which is accounted in the
subsequent plan at the termination of the previous plan is taken out from the plan and
becomes a separate committed expenditure. If this is not done, the Departments will be
handicapped by this amount of plan expenditure. The exercise of identifying committed
liability has not been done by any of the Departments for 1997-98. Committee in this
connection has considered the report of the Tenth Finance Commission. The Tenth Finance
Commission have observed in this regard as under:

“Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in
deciding the out-off date for transfer of committed liability on account_of plan scheme,
the incremental liabilities that would arise in 1997-98 on account of 8th Plan Scheme
completed in the next two financial years would have to be provided for. The


10

Commission are, therefore, of the view that the Planning Commission may consider
providing for the maintenance of such schemes till 1999-2000 in the Plan itself as was
done for the schemes of the two Annual Plans of 1990-91 and 1991-92”.

17.7 The Committee was also given to understand that the Planning Commission issued
circular to all the Departments dated November 5, 1996 sending therewith guidelines for
classification of expenditure. The Ministries were also requested to make necessary provision
as committed non-plan expenditure for the upkeep of existing assets etc. Accordingly, all the
MinistrieyDepartments were asked to adopt the guidelines while submitting the plan
proposals for Ninth Five Year Plan and annual plan 1997-98. However, the Departments
have not done this exercise. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Department may complete the exercise at the earliest so that they may not be handicapped
on account of this.

17.8 The Committee is also constrained to note that many Departments have not done
the exercise of identifying committed expenditure and to get it earmarked separately for
several plan periods. Accordingly, committed expenditure on the plan schemes completed in
7th Plan or earlier and the assets created and staff employed in plan schemes has been
continuing on plan side resulting in severe resource crunch for the Departments. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Departments should make a thorough review of
the schemes and identify the committed liability. The Committee is very much surprised that
the guidelines given earlier by the Planning Commission were not followed at all. For this,
responsibility should be fixed.


MINUTES



XI
“ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Monday, the 31st March, 1997 in. Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1, Shri S.B. Chavan —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Dr. B.B. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Shri Vishriu Kant Shashtri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

LOK SABHA

10. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

11. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

12. Shri Sartaj Singh

13. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
14, Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

15, Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda

16. Shri Dutta Meghe

17. Shri 1.0, Sanadi

18. Shrimati Krishna Bose

19. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
20. Shri Krishna

21. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigli
22. Shri Samik Lahiri

23. Dr. M. Jagannath

24, Dr, Bali Ram

25. Shri Ranen Barman

26. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

WITNESSES

Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Women and Child
Development

1. Dr. (Shrimati) Sarala Gopalan, Secretary
2. Shrimati Asha Das, Secretary

3. Shrimati B. Sen, Joint Secretary

4. Shri A.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary

5. Shrimati Chandra lyenger, Joint Secretary

१० 9० :3 9 ७ ++ (०७ ७

*Minutes of the 15 to 10th Meetings relate to other matters.

te)


‘14
6. Shri Ravi Saxena, Financial Adviser
qs Shrimati_ C.R. Chibber, Director
SECRETARIAT
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary

Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
Shri A.K."Gandhi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the
Department of Women and Child Development in connection with the Examination of
Demands for Grants for the year 1997-98.

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on
18 April, 1997.


xv
“FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 19th April, 1997 in Committee
Room 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B..Chavan——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra $. Deo
Dr. B.B. Dutta

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha’

. Dr. Mohan Babu

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

10. Dr. C. Silvera

11. Shri Dutta Meghe

12. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

13. Shri Samik Lahiri

14. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

15. Dr. M. Jagannath

16. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

"Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Demands for Grants for 1997-98
of the Department of*** Women and Child. Development (Demand No. 51)."** The
Committee, after some discussions, adopted the same with some modifications.

SPA 9 (० # ० 0७

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati
Ray and Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri
Sartaj Singh and Shri Dau Dayal Joshi to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha. The Committee
decided that the reports may be laid/presented on 22nd April, 1997.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 p.m.

*Minutes of the 12th, 13th and 14th Meetings relate to other matters.
***Relates to other matters.

15



shtgaht : [pit +
कक Kits Mahe

worl icy:

४3 soe
iia रा

जद तर ॥

Be uty ay
aks

Pe

‘Ps ini,
ca

Mt “B35 ५ ०