PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

—

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON

HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SSeS ८. 2 <सपयन्‍्नललकामपप८क- <>शलकर

THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
THE MAULANA AZAD NATIONAL URDU UNIVERSITY BILL, 1995

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15.12.1995)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11.12.1995)

“RATYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

ee 1995/Agrahayana, 1917 (Saka)


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON

HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
THE MAULANA AZAD NATIONAL URDU UNIVERSITY BILL, 1995

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15.12.1995)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11.12.1995)

सत्यमेब जयते

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 1995/Agrahayana, 1917 (Saka)


CON TENTS

m

ComposiTION OF THE COMMITTEE.

Ill.
TV.



02१४४

Heiney



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri O.P. Kohli
6.
i

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

. Shri ५. Hanumantha Rao

8. Shri Md. Salim

9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

+ 10. Prof. 1.6. Sanadi

11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi | a
17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran ig
18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan

19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar \
21. Vacant

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta ,Raghobaji Meghe

26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Vacant

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

38. Shri Rambadan

39. ‘Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome



(i)

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

Shri Om Datta Sharma, Under Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

Sy et



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, present this Thirty-
second Report of the Committee on the Maulana Azad National Urdu University Bill, 1995.

2. The.Maulana Azad National Urdu University Bill, which was introduced in the Rajya
Sabha on the 24th August, 1995, seeks to establish and incorporate a University at the
national level mainly to promote and develop Urdu language and to impart vocational and
technical education in Urdu medium through conventional teaching and distance education
system and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

3. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill to the Committee for examination
and report.

4. A Press Communique inviting suggestionsViews from individuals, organisations and
institutions interested in the subject matter of the Bill was issued on the 4th September,
1995. Several memoranda containing viewspinions in response thereto were received by the
Committee.

5. The Committee considered the Bill in four sittings and heard the oral evidence of
some of the members of the Expert Committee which recommended to set up an Urdu
University.

6. The Committee, in its meeting held on December 8, 1995, considered the draft report
on the Bill and adopted the same for presentation/laying in both the Houses of Parliament.

New De ui, 2. UPENDRA
December 8, 1995 Chairman,

17 Agrahayana, 1917 (Saka) Committee on Human Resource Development.

(iii)



REPORT

The National Policy on Education (NPE) emphasises that the minority groups, which
are educationally backward, need greater attention in regard to educational facilities, in the
interest of equality and social justice. The NPE also reiterates the recommendation of the
Kothari Commission that University education should be imparted in the regional languages.
In order to implement various postulates of the NPE, 22 Task Forces on different subject
areas were constituted by the Department of Education in the Ministry of Human Resource
Development to develop Programme of Action (POA), which was presented to Parliament.
The Task Force on Minority Education, headed by Shri Aziz Qureshi, recommended the
setting up of an Urdu University. To give effect to this recommendation, the Government
constituted * an Expert Committee which was, again, headed by
Shri Aziz Qureshi to examine and recommend the form and content of such a University.
The Committee submitted its report to the Government in June, 1993. The Bill, under the
consideration of the Committee, has been drafted in the wake of the Qureshi Committee's
report.

2. Urdu is one of the richest and most powerful languages, born in India as a result of
the constant interaction between the Persian language and a variety of Indian languages. It
has, in fact, remained one of the commonly spoken languages in India for centuries
together, the lingua franca of not only the North Indian and Dakkhani Muslims but of many
from other communities too. Indeed, Urdu was being used as a medium of instruction for
engineering and medical courses even in the nineteenth century. But, regrettably, with the
passage of time, Urdu has got relegated to the background in India’s educational and
cultural scene, in spite of the fact that Urdu is the mother tongue of a large number of
Indians. The root cause for this appears to be the special position Urdu occupies in the
linguistic map of India. For although Urdu-speaking people are distributed all ovet the
country, Urdu is not the primary language in any one or more States of the Union. In such a
situation, the responsibility for the promotion and development of the Urdu language falls
on the Central Government, as confirmed by the Department of Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development. Hence, the need for an Urdu University at the national
level.

3. The Committee has been informed that the proposed University would concentrate
on higher education through the medium of Urdu. It would also impart education and
training in vocational and technical subjects to develop skills, particularly of women, who are
not able to prosecute their studies in the conventional institutions adequately due to social
reasons. That is why the mode of distance education had been suggested by the Qureshi
Committee for this University. It has been decided that the Urdu University will use the
material and facilities of the Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), as far as
possible, and will avoid creating parallel arrangements for the production of material and
audio-visual programmes. These decisions have been welcomed by the Committee.

4. The Department of Education has stated that the Expert Committee, set up for the
purpose, had envisaged a very large brief for the University, including powers of affiliation.
The Department thought that one institution would not be able to solve all the problems;
rather, it should concern itself with matters or subjects it can handle efficiently. Otherwise, it
might prove to be counter-productive. In this perspective, it was felt by the Department that
in the main campus the Urdu University should concentrate on vocational/Janguage
education. In other disciplines, it should reach out to the rest of the country, and if
necessary abroad, through distance education. The proposed University would be a single
campus University with no provision for affiliation. It would offer an opportunity to Urdu-

1



2

knowing people to prosecute higher education in that language and use Urdu as a vehicle
of science and technology, commerce and social sciences. These clarifications were
welcomed by the Committee.

5. Currently, Urdu is being taught in 43 Universities, but in no University it is a
medium of instruction, except in courses in Unani medicine and certain classical
languages. Besides imparting education and training in vocational and technical subjects
through the Urdu medium, the University would also provide wider access to people
willing to pursue higher education and training in the Urdu medium. The proposed
University would, therefore, teach other general subjects also and make appropriate
arrangements to adopt enough study material in Urdu language for technical subjects.

6. During the course of evidence, members of the Expert Committee, which
recommended setting up of the Urdu University, protested that some of their main
recommendations did not find place in the Bill, ‘‘perhaps because”, as they put it ‘the
report of the Committee was examined in the UGC and the Ministry of Human
Resource Development by the people who were not very conversant with the position of
Urdu and the objectives of establishing an Urdu University”. As any amendments at this
stage would take a long time, they suggested that the Bill might be passed so that the
process of setting up the University was not further delayed. The Committee trusts that
the Governing Body of the University would bear in mind all relevant suggestions of the
Expert Committee while finalising the courses in the new University.

7. Members of the Standing Committee on HRD appreciated the laudable objectives
sought to be achieved by setting up of an Urdu University. It was generally agreed that
this long delayed measure would prove fully effective only if it was conceived as a part
of a larger endeavour to restore Urdu to its due place in society by expansion of Urdu
education at the school level, specially for elementary education, and the provision of
adequate employment opportunities for graduates passing out in the Urdu medium.

8. Some members felt that if the said objectives could be achieved by strengthening
and developing the Urdu departments in the existing Universities or by creating a
separate wing for teaching in Urdu medium in the Indira Gandhi National Open
University or by setting up an institutecentre without giving it the form of a University.
They also argued that instead of spending a huge amount of money on establishing a
separate University for Urdu, the same could be distributed to various Universities and
institutions so as to enable them to achieve the objectives contained in the Urdu
University Bill. This would, they felt, facilitate decentralisation of infrastructure to
different corners of the country, instead of concentrated at one place. Other Members
were of the view that for improving the facilities for teaching the Urdu language need to
be improved. The establishment of such a University would be an important step towards
evolving an integrated strategy for the restoration of Urdu to its deserved place in
contemporary India

9. As regards developing Urdu through the existing departments/institutions in
certain Universities, rather than setting up a University exclusively for this purpose, it
was clarified by the Ministry of HRD that the Departments of Urdu ‘in the existing
Universities were mainly concentrating on literature and the emphasis, by and large, was
confined mainly to writingteaching literary critics, fiction, poetry, etc. Besides, almost all
the existing Universities and Colleges provide teaching in media other than Urdu. There
is a sizeable section of Urdu-speaking people whose needs require to be met through a
University like the proposed one. With the distance education mode, the reach-out of the



3

University would be at the all India level, which would give opportunity to Urdu-speaking
people, particularly women, to pursue higherVocational education and training through the
medium of Urdu.

10. Regarding the suggestion for a separate wing for Urdu in IGNOU, the
representative of the Department of Education submitted before the Committee that
IGNOU had not been able to fulfil, so far, its mandate in English and Hindi. It has to fulfil
mandate first before it can take up another language.

11. Some Members of the Committee expressed their apprehension about the ‘job
prospects of students, trained particularly in technical and vocational subjects through the
medium of Urdu. Other Members stressed the importance of integrating University level
education with job opportunities in different sectors and that incentives should be provided
for availing of the new educational opportunities offered by the Urdu University. It was
contended by the Department that students coming out of this University would have no
problem in the job market as a majority of them were expected to be absorbed in self-
employment. It was argued that keeping in view the advantages of prosecuting higher studies
in regional languages, students would acquire greater proficiency in subjects they study in

, Urdu medium thereby improving their prospects for employment.

12. About the financial requirement, the Department stated that a sum of Rs. 6.00
crores (Approx.) will be required in the first three years till such time as land becomes
available and the construction programme begins in a regular manner and sizeable
recruitment of the faculty is made and courses are started. This amount does not include
provision for equipment etc. After three years, the University would require about Rs. 3-5
crores per year for non-recurring items and an equal amount for recurring expenditure.

13. When asked whether the UGC has got any assurance from the Department of
Education for additional resources, the Chairman, UGC, said that they had been assured
that these would be made available by the Government. The Committee recommends that
additional resources should be made available for this University.

14. As regards watering down the recommendations of the Qureshi Committee in the
Bill, the representative of the Department of Education, accepted that the Bill was “not the
exact reproduction of all the recommendations made by that Committee”. The Bill, in fact,
was drafted after taking those recommendations into serious consideration.

He stated:

“this is a small but an important gesture towards the legitimate demand of a sizeable
number of people. This may not meet all their hopes and aspirations; but it, no doubt, is a
significant step towards that end.”

15. In view of the nature of the distribution of the Urdu-speaking people in the country
and the Central Government’s commitment to help educationally backward minority groups
and also keeping in mind the long-standing demand for teaching technical subjects through
Urdu medium in an open University system, the Committee recommends that the Bill be
adopted, subject to the observations made by it in the preceding paragraphs. The Committee
also hopes, that the new University would be brought into existance by the time the nai’ था
celebrates the 500 anniversary of its independence.



PRESS RELEASE

The Maulana Azad National Urdu University Bill, 1995, was introduced in the Rajya
Sabha on the 24th August, 1995. This Bilf has been referred to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development, headed by Shri P. Upendra, M.P., for
examination and report.

2. The Maulana Azad National Urdu University Bill, 1995, seeks to set up an Urdu
University at Hyderabad with the object of affording an opportunity to Urdu knowing
population to prosecute higher education in that language. The University shall impart
education in various disciplines including vocational and technical subjects in Urdu medium
through conventional and distance education modes with particular emphasis on women
education.

3. Since the proposed Bill is of utmost public importance, the Committee invites views /
suggestions of the individuals / organisations / institutions, etc. on the subject matter. The
views / suggestions may be sent to Shri N.K. Singh, Depity Director, Rajya Sabha
Secretariat, Room No. 534, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 110001, latest by 22nd
September, 1995.

4. Copy of the Bill can be obtained on requisition.



MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

Xv
*Fifteenth Meeting

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Monday, the 11th September, 1995 in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House; New Delhi.

PRESENT
1, Shri P. Upendra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4. Prof. I.G. Sanadi

5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

6. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
‘7. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

8. Shri Inder Jit

9. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

12. Shri Anna Joshi

13. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
14. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
15. Shri Suraj Mandal

WITNESSES

1. Shri S.V. Giri, Secretary (Education)

2. Shri Y.N. Chaturvedi, Additional Secretary

3. Prof. (Ms.) Armaity $. ‘Desai, Chairman, U.G.C.
4. Shri Inderjit Khanna, Secretary, U.G.C.

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the views of the above witnesses on the provisions of the
Maulana Azad National Urdu University Bill, 1995 and the Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya
Hindi University Bill, 1995.

“Minutes of I to XIV meetings of the Committee relate to matters not included in the Report.

5



6

2.1 A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

3.6. * .
4. * + *
prey * *
(ig * *
/ 0 + *
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.

***Relates to some other matter.



xvi
*Seventeenth Meeting

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. and again at 2.30 p.m. on Monday, the 9th October,
1995 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1 Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Shri Md. Salim

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. 1.6. Sanadi

Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

LOK SABHA

8. Dr. ५. Rajeshwaran
-9. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
‘10. Dr. Vasant Pawar
11. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
12. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
13. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
14. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
15. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
16. Shri Anna Joshi
17. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya :
18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy }
19. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh |
20. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh, M.P., Special Invitee

WITNESSES

. Dr. Ram Lal Parikh, Vice-Chancellor, Gujarat Vidya Peeth

. Prof. Shiv Kumar Mishra, Sardar Patel Vishwa Vidyalaya

Prof. Ram Singh Tomar, Shantiniketan

Prof. S.P. Dikshit, Hindi Department, Lucknow University

Prof. Ramchandra Dev, Hindi Department, Cochin University

Dr. Nagendra

Shri Mahavir Saran Jain, Director, Central Hindi Institute, Agra
Prof. Rakesh Khurana, Pro. V.C. IGNOU, New Delhi

. Shri Mahmooder Rehman, V.C. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh

729 ४ # ० ०

०००:०० ७ AONE

*Minutes of the XVI meeting of the Committee relates to matters not included in the Report.
sf


8

10. Prof. Yash Pal, Former Chairman, U.G.C.

11. Shri Syed Hamid, Former Vice-Chancellor, Aligrah Muslim University

12. Shri A.J. Kidwai, Former Vice-Chancellor, Aligarh Muslim University

13. Shri Aziz Qureshi, Ex-M.P.

14. Shri P.R. Dasgupta, O.S.D. Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development

15. Shri Naved Masood, bee

16. Prof. (Ms.) Armaity S. Desai, |

17. Prof. N.C. Mathur, Vice-Chairman University Grants Commission
18. Shri Inderjit Khanna, Secretary
SECRETARIAT

1, Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

2. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

3. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer.

2. The Committee heard. oral evidence of the above-mentioned witnesses on the
Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Bill, 1995 and the Maulana Azad
National Urdu University Bill, 1995

3, * * *

4. The Committee appointed a drafting Committee on the Mahatma Gandhi Antarrash-
triya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Bill, 1995 and the Maulana Azad National Urdu University Bill,
1995 with Dr. M. Aram as Convenor and Shri O.P. Kohli, Prof. I.G. Sanadi, Prof. (Mrs.)
Savithiri Lakshmanan and Prof. Malini Bhattacharya as its members.

4.1. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m.

***Relates to some other matter.



XX
*Twentieth Meeting

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. and again at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 14th
November, 1995 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.

PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Dr. M. Aram
Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
Shri 0.7. Kohli
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
6. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
10. Prof. (Smt.) Savithiri Lakshmanan
11. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
12. Dr. Vasant Pawar
13. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
14. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
15. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
16. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
17. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
18. Shri Anna Joshi
19. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
SECRETARIAT

Shri N. K. Singh, Deputy Director.

2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Maulana Azad National Urdu
University Bill, 1995 and the Mahatma Gandhi Antharrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Bill,
1995 prepared by the Drafting Committee.

Wi Wr

a]

* *

>

* *

‘i
बदल
6.

. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m.

“Minutes of XVIII and XIX meetings of the Committee relate to matters not included in the Report.

***Relates to some other matter.

लक



XXII
*Twenty-Second Meeting

The Cotimittee met at 9.30 a.m. on Friday, the 8th December, 1995 in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

Shri O.P. Kohli

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
. Shri Md. Salim

. Prof. 1.0. Sanadi

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

9: Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

LOK SABHA

10. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

11. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

12. Shri K.T. Vandayar

13. Shri Inder Jit

14. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
15, Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

16. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

2. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

3. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

9० 53 9 (७ + ०

2. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Maulana Azad National Urdu
University Bill, 1995. After some modifications, the Committee adopted the same.

3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram and
Prof. 1.G. Sanadi to present the report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Inder Jit and in his
absence Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy to lay the report on the Table of Lok Sabha.

4. The Cominittee then adjourned at 11.00 a.m. to meet again on Monday the 11th
December, 1995.

“Minutes of XXI meeting of the Committee relates to matter not included in the Report,

wm