PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT

DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

{Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Human: Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02.06.95)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 02.06.95)

naka aaa

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

June, 1995/Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)


ComposITION OF THE COMMITTEE .

INTRODUCTION...
Cuapter-I

Cuapter-IL

Cuapter-IIl

CuaptTer-IV

CHaAPTER-V

MINUTES........+6+

CONTENTS

Report.
Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government :

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies ......

Recommendations/Observations in sespect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
COMB Ces. ०७०० ३०००८+०० कर ५०5०२०२२+०+१००० को >9% ५५३५० “५०००4 किकेर

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..................------

2७685
(i)-Gi)
(iii)
1-3
4-11

12—14

15-16

17
18


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)
.
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri O.P. Kohli

6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

8. Shri Md. Salim

9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. I.G. Sanadi

11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

21. Prof. P.J. Kurien

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

= Shri Z.M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
३3, Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

@

४ «


Gi)

38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on
its behalf, present this Twenty Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its 10th Report on “Demands for Grants” (1994-95) of
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Culture).

2. The Tenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 22nd April, 1994 and laid
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 1994. Replies of Government on all the
recommendations contained in the report, received from the Department of Culture were
considered by the Committee and this report was adopted at its sitting held on 31st May,
1995.

New DELHI; P. UPENDRA
31st May, 1995 Chairman,

Committee on Human Resource Development
10 Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)

(iii)



CHAPTER-I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken 09-06 Government on the
recommendations contained in its Tenth Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development (Department of Culture) for the year 1994-95 which was
presented to Rajya Sabha on 22.4.94 and the Lok Sabha on 22.4.94.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained: in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
para 5, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 21, 22, 25, 26, 28, 29, 32, 40, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48,
UR ss Fae -

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government's replies: para 6, 14, 19, 20, 33, 35, 41, 50, 54.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: para 4, 26, 36, 42.

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Govern-
ment are still awaited: nil.

3. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of
its recommendations.

PLAN ALLOCATIONS
Recommendation (Para No. 4)

While making general recommendations, the Committee strongly urged upon the
Government to pay due attention and make adequate allocations to the Department of
Culture.

Reply of the Government

“The recommendations of Committee were conveyed to the Planning Commission and
an enhanced outlay of Rs. 206.32 crores for 1995-96 was proposed. The Planning
Commission have made available Rs. 122 crores for the Deptt., an increase of six per cent
over the last year’s outlay.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee notes, with concern, that inspite of the recommendations of the
Committee, made in its’ 10th Report, the allocations to various wings of the Department
have not been increased. The allocation made to the Department is far less than what was
asked for by the Department. The Committee feels that it is an indication of inability of the
Planning Commission to recognise the need for promotion and preservation of our cultural
heritage and art forms through adequate financial allocation.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
Recommendation (Para No. 12)

The Committee recommends that staff strength of the ASI engaged for protection and
preservation of monuments be adequately increased and all other necessary measures be
taken to check the increasing menace of pilferage. Some amount from the proposed National
Cultural Fund may also be utilised for the purpose.

1


- The Committee is also of the view that, as envisaged in the Eighth Plan document
_ felating to the Deptt. of Culture, voluntary organisations should be encouraged to take up
the task of preservation and protection of monuments.

Reply. of the Government

“Taking due note of the recommendations of the Committee, a proposal has been sent
to Finance to increase the number of staff in the ASI. As soon as the National Cultural
Fund | starts functioning, the recommendation of the Committee will be implemented.
Similgrly, adequate encouragement will be given to voluntary organisations as soon as the
National Cultural Fund is established.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee, in its 10th Report, recommended increase in the staff strength of the
ASI for augmenting protection and preservation of monuments. The Department’s reply that
a proposal had been sent to the Ministry of Finance to increase the number of staff in the
ASI is a welcome step. The Committee trusts that the Department would pursue the matter
with the Ministry of Finance for the sanction of additional staff strength which is urgently
needed for protecting our ancient monuments. As soon as the National Cultural Fund comes
into being, a plan of action may be prepared and implemented.

ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
Recommendation (Para No. 15)

Out of the propdsed 13 volumes of the prestigious ‘people of India’—three under
National and two under State Series have so far been published. The Committee
recommends that the remaining work should be expedited.

Reply of the Government ‘

e
“So far, six numbers of national volumes and nine numbers of State volumes have been
brought out. The Anthropological Survey of India has also been instructed to expedite the
publications so that all the reports are available before the end of 1996.”

‘Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels that progress in this regard has been rather slow and steps should
be taken to complete the work by the end of 1996.

DELHI PUBLIC LIBRARY
Recommendation (Para No. 26)

The Committee recommends that-Government should take adequate steps to spread the
network of libraries and reading rooms under Delhi Public Library in the slum and
underdeveloped areas of the national capital. More and more mobile library vans should also
be made available. The Committee recommends that the budget allocation for Delhi Public
Library be enhanced appropriately.

Reply of the Government

“The budget allocation of Delhi Public Library for the year 1994-95 is Rs. 252.20 lakhs
and the proposed outlay for 1995-96 is Rs. 293.20 lakhs. The mobile library has been moved
to many of the localities, especiallythe slums. However, establishment of reading rooms will
have to be phased during the 9th Five year Plan.”


Comments of the Committee

The Committee is of the view that no efforts have been made to spread the network of
Delhi Public Library. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that network
of DPL be spread in the slum and underdeveloped areas and steps be taken to provide more
reading rooms at the earliest.

NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
Recommendation (Para No. 36)

The National School of Drama proposes to set up regional centres, which is a welcome
step, and the Committee desires that these regional centres should enjoy due autonomy in
their functioning and not made branches of the National School of Drama, New Delhi.

Reply of the Government

“A regional centre has been established in Bangalore and once the network of regional
centre is properly planned, the other recommendations of the Committee will be taken due
note of for implementation.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee understands that no new centre was established during the year. The
Committee feels that the network of Regional Centres of National School of Drama should
be planned at the earliest. The Committee further understands that Regional Centres are
proposed to be opened in the East and the West and desires that these be opened at an
early date. The Committee also wishes that a separate North-Eastern Centres should be
opened in view of the fact that the region has distinctive cultural traits and traditions which
need to be nurtured and strengthened.

ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES
Recommendation (Para No. 42)

The Committee feels such delays should be avoided so that funds are utilised in time.
The Committee recommends that speedy progress be made in setting up Shilpgrams for the
remaining six zonal cultural centres, particulary, the one being set up at Thanjavur. The
Committee also feels that centerwise allocation should also be reflected in the documents of
the department.

Reply of the Government

“Setting up of Shilpgram by South Zone Cultural Centre at Hyderabad is in progress.
The land has been given by the State Government of Andhra Pradesh and work in this
regard has been started. Regarding reflecting the centrewise allocation, it is submitted that
no funds are allotted to ZCCs directly. The allocation is for operating the centrally
administered schemes, like the National Cultural Exchange Programme, Republic Day Folk
Dance Festivals, etc. However, from the year 1995-96 onwards, a separate account will be
made available as to the actual amount given to each Centre.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires to know the progress so far made in setting up of the remaining
Shilpgrams proposed in other States. There should not be any further delay and work should
be expedited.


CHAPTER-II

OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

Para
No. 5

Para
No. 9

Para
No. 10

Para
No. 12

The Committee recommends that a
National Cultural Fund be set up for
the preservation & protection of
ancient monuments. If neéded,
money from this fund may also be
appropriated to other schemes
starved of funds.

The Committee-urges upon the Govt.
to make all-out efforts to contain
cultural invasion and to restore our
cultural ethos, ideas and values.

The Committee recommends that the
programmes and resources of the
Deptt. be considerably decentralised
and taken to the backward rural and
underdeveloped urban areas where
Ancient Cultural Heritage still holds
appeal and requires to be
Galvanished by the centre.

The Committee recommends that
staff strength of the ASI engaged for
protection and preservation of
monuments be adequately increased
and all other necessary measures be
taken to check the increasing menace
of pilferage. Some amount from the
proposed National Cultural Fund may
also be utilised for the purpose.

COMMENTS: As per the
recommendation of the Committee
the modalities for setting up of
National Cultural Fund have been
finalised. After completion of the
procedure in this regard, the actual
setting up of the Fund is proposed by
June, 1995.

COMMENTS: Taking note of the
recommendation of the Committee, a
Group has been constituted to go
into these areas and to make effort to
contain such invasion. The
Committee is headed by the
Secretary (I&B) with Secretary,
Culture, Secretary, Tourism and a
senior offcer each of the Deptt. of
Culture and I&B as Members.

COMMENTS; The recommendation
of the Committee has been taken due
note of and the Department is
working in tandum with the State
Governments to receive applications
from rural and semi-urban areas.
Efforts will be made in 1995-96 to
broad-base this grant as much as
possible to ensure adequate grants to
rural and semi-urban areas in this
regard.

COMMENTS: Taking due note of
the recommendations of the
Committee a proposal has been sent
to Finance to increase the number of
staff in the ASI. Similarly, as soon as
the National Cultural Fund starts
functioning the recommendation of
the Committee will be implemented.
Similarly, adequate encouragement
will be given to. voluntary
organisations as soon as the National
Cultural Fund is established.

(Committee’s Comments on this may be seen in Chapter-I)



Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

Para
No. 13

Para
No. 15

Para |
No. 16

Para
No. 17

The Committee is also of the view
that as envisaged in the Eighth Plan
document related to the Deptt. of
Culture, Voluntary Organisations
should be attracted and encouraged
to take up the task of preservation
and protection of monuments.

The Committee recommends that the
network of ASI should have been
extensively expanded and enlarged. It
should also be well equipped. The
scheme of village to village survey
should also be undertaken and ex-
panded.

Out of the proposed 43 volumes of
the presitigious people of
India—Three under. National and two
under State series have so far been
published. The semaining work
should be expedited.

(Committee’s Comments on this may

In such a situation, the Committee

wonders how the scheme contem-
plated for the 8th Plan could be
implemented within the time frame
with this insignificant budget alloca-
tion. As the 8th Five Year Plan is left
with only two financial years. The
Committee strongly recommends en-
hancement of financial allocation to
speed up the implementation of the
scheme.

The implementation of the scheme
has made very little progress and
should be speeded up. Therefore, the

COMMENTS: The recommendation
of the Committee will be im-
plemented as soon as the staff com-
ponent are properly reorganised and
adequate funding made available to
the ASI. A blue-print for such an
action is being worked out and will
be taken up for implementation dur-
ing 1995-96.

COMMENTS: So far, six number of
National volumes and nine number of
State volumes have been brought out.
The An. Survey of India have also
been instructed to expedite the publi-
cations so that all the reports are
available before the end of 1996.

be seen in Chapter-I)

COMMENTS: Even though only Rs.
10 lakhs for the year 1993-94 and
1994-95 was provided during the year
1993-94, by reappropriation, the De-
partment spent Rs. 88 lakhs under
this scheme. During the current fi-
nancial year, namely, 1994-95 the ex-
penditure is expected to be in the
order of Rs. 90 lakhs by reappropria-
tion. For the year 1995-96, an alloca-
tion of Rs. 1 crore has been provided
in consultation with the Planning
Commission.

COMMENTS: During the year 1993-
94, an additional grant of Rs. 50
lakhs was given to the National



Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

Para
No. 21

Para
No. 22

Para
No. 25

Committee recommends that
Additional Grant be given for this
scheme to increase Scientific Temper
among the people.

The Committee while expressing its
satisfaction over the encouragement
given to these Institutes feels that
they should be allowed to pursue
their academic interest without any
extraneous influences.

The Committee feels that due
attention is not being paid in these
institutes. to promotion &
development of Pali, one of ancient
Languages of India and therefore
recommends suitable steps in this
regard.

The tendency of Centralisation is
perceptible in the scheme of libraries
also.. The Committee feels that
suitable schemes be devised to spread
the network of libraries with
Computer Network. It will facilitate
the Research Scholars and other
persons desiring any information
sitting in one. library together
Additional Information from all the
concerned libraries.

Council of Science Museums.
Similarly, during the current year viz.
1994-95 an additionality of Rs. 2
crores is being released to this
Council. In addition, a supplementary
grant for Rs. 15 crores was mooted
for this Council which, however,
could not be accepted by the Ministry
of Finance. However, this
additionality is proposed to be
covered by Supplementaries during
the year 1995-96.

COMMENTS: The recommendations
of the Committee have been noted
and these institutions have been given
complete autonomy in pursuing their
policies as per the academic interest
chalked out by them. In so far as [16
recommendation for promotion and
development of Pali, the Department
of Culture have taken over the Nav
Nalanda Mahavihara and during the
year 1995-96 adequate funding and
other infrastructural facilities are
being provided to carry out the
recommendations of the Committee.

COMMENTS: The recommendation
of the Committee has been taken

note of. It is proposed to have
discussions with the State
Governments to work out a

methodology during the year 1995-96
to spread the network of libraries in
small towns. The Inter-linking of
major libraries through computer
network has already commenced and
before the end of the Plan period it is
proposed to complete the
programme.



Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

Para
No. 28

Para
No. 29

Para
No. 32

Para
No. 40

Some irregularities in the functioning
of the library have come to the notice
of the Committee. Guidelines on
book purchasing are not being
adhered to and books are allegedly
being purchased at higher rates than
the market rates. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that these
matters be looked into.

The Committee also recommends
that the modalities for the
implementation of this scheme be
worked out as early as possible so
that the scheme implemented in right
interest.

The Committee expresses its concern
over the fact that a Premier Literary
Institution like the Sahitya Akademi
is made to curtail its activities due to
lack of funds. Therefore, the
Committee recommends strongly that
more resources be made available to
the Sahitya Akademi and the arrear
payments, if any, should also be
released forthwith. The Akademi
should bestow more attention on the
development of Regional Languages,
in Addition to Hindi.

The Committee is of the view that it
is not practically feasible to cover
whole country by the one and only
centre in New Delhi and hence feels
the need to decentralise the activities
of the centre by opening Sub-centres
in various Zones and Regions.

COMMENTS: A_ Committee is
proposed to be constituted to look
into the matter. Based on _ its
recommendations, necessary remedial
measures will be taken.

COMMENTS: The modalities for the
implementation of the scheme for
setting up Rural Libraries have been
worked out and 24 number of State
Governments have already
responded, During the current year,
it proposed to release the grant to
them.

COMMENTS: The. allocation for
Sahitya Akademi for the year 1994-95
is Rs. 289.00 lakhs. In addition
during the year 1993-94, an additional
grant of Rs. 25 lakhs was released to
the Akademi taking into account the
recommendation of the Committee.
Similarly, during the year 1994-95, an
additional grant of Rs. 10 lakhs has
already been released and a further
grant of Rs. 15 lakhs will be relased
to them. It may kindly be seen that
for the year 1995-96 the allocation

has been enhanced to Rs. 340.00
lakhs.
COMMENTS: As per the

recommendation of the Committee, a
regional ‘centre at Hyderabad is being
set up and land for this purpose has
already been allotted by the State
Government.



Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

Para
No. 43-

Para
No. 44

Para
No. .45

But the work being done in. this
regard cannot be said to be
satisfactory. There is no indication as
to how much money each zonal
cultural centre spends on _ the
propagation of the living folk art
forms at the grassroot level in villages
where they are actually performed.
Therefore, the Committee is of the
view that due emphasis of the zonal
cultural centres should be on folk arts
and necessary financial assistance
should also be provided for the same.

The Committee is constrained to note
that the hopes generated at the time
of establishment of Zonal Cultural
Centres have not been fulfilled and
realised. Because these centres are
not pursuing the programmes and
Schemes for which they were set up,
therefore, the Committee
recommends that the time has come
for a High Powered Committee to be
constituted to look into the working
of the Zonal Cultural Centres.

The Committee recommends that the
progressive establishment ‘of a
network of Organisations to ensure
that folk artists in villages are
enabled to derive full advantage of
the scheme meant for them.
Assistance should also be given for
opening performance centres or
auditoria at the village and block
level so that artistes could perform
and interact with each other to
improve their particular art forms.

COMMENTS: A Review Committee
has already been appointed to look
into the working of the Zonal
Cultural Centres.’ After the report is
given, the working methodology of
the Zonal Cultural Centres will be
revised.

COMMENTS: The recommendation
of the Committee has been accepted.
A scheme for setting up of
performance centres will be worked
out and the Planning Commission
approached for this purpose. In so far
as establishment of a network of
organisations, it is proposed to work
out a methodology for this purpose
during the year 1995-96.



Para No. Recommendation Reply

Para The Committee is not happy with the COMMENTS: The Deptt. has set up

No. 47 progress made in the scheme and a Committee with the leading
express its serious concern over the architect Shri Charles Correa to visit
fact that almost two. financial years the various regions who have asked
have elapsed and the projects have for the multi-purpose centres to
not been finalised yet. The suggest cost-effective method of
Committee is also not happy with the construction so as to utilise optimally
idea of creating more and more the available funds. It is true that the
cultural infrastructure in big cities implementation of the scheme has
and towns at the cost of rural areas been slow and tardy but it is expected
however, the Committee is satisfied to take off from 1995-96 in a full-
to note that multi-purpose complexes fledged manner. In so far as
are being set up in smaller towns, recommendations of the Committee
rural and backward areas and regarding the setting up of the
recommends that other schemes National Cultural Complex is
being formulated by the Deptt. concerned, the Govt. is reviewing this
should also be located in such areas. with a fresh mind and will report
The Committee also recommends back to the Committee during 1995-
that the National Cultural Complex 96.
(Parisar), proposed to be set up in
Delhi, be established in the Trans-
Yamuna or Outer Delhi Areas.

Para The Committee is also of the view COMMENTS: The recommendation

No. 48 that instead of concentrating only on of the Committee has been accepted

huge Cultural Complexes, Govt.
should set up smaller units where the
deprived, under-privileged and
unprivileged may have access to all
forms of culture as well as to practice

and promote their arts. The
Committee also holds that the
department may construct multi-

purpose stadia in smaller towns and
cities which could be utilised for
sports during the day and for cultural
purposes: in the evening and night.

by the Govt. in principle. However, a
new scheme is being worked out and
will be forwarded to the Planning
Commission during the year 1995-96
for their support.



Para No.

10

Recommendation

Reply

Para
No. 51

Para
No. 52

Para
No. 53

No Financial Assistance has been
provided to the Asiatic Society,
Bombay during the 8th Five Year
Plan. The reason behind this is stated
to be that the Planning has
earmarked a provision of Rs. 200
lakhs to be given to the Society as
Corpus Fund. But this fund also has
not reached the Society so far as it is
pending approval from the Ministry
of Finance. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that Govt.
should expedite the matter and
release the amount without any
further delay.

There has been only marginal
increase in allocations for these
schemes and the Committee

recommends that they should be.

enhanced adequately.

This centre,- proposed to be set up. in
the wake of the centenary celebration
of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, is still
not complete. The Committee is
surprised to note that this year
budget provision of the Centre has
been reduced by Rs. 5 lakhs, for the
reasons not acceptable to the
Committee. The Committee
recommends that there should be no
further delay in the setting up of this
Centre.

COMMENTS: An amount of Rs. 2
crores has been released during
March, 1994 to Asiatic Society,
Bombay.

COMMENTS: During the year 1994-
95 Rs. 2192.19 lakhs has been spent
on the schemes. For the year 1995-
96, the allocations are Rs. 2303.70
lakhs.

COMMENTS: The Centre with its
base in Calcutta has been set up.
During the year 1994-95 an additional
amount of Rs. 10 lakhs is proposed
to be released by re-appropriation for
the financial year 1995-96, budgetary
provision of Rs. 25 lakhs has been
made for the Institute and the same
will be considered for revision at RE
stage.


11

Para No.

Para
No. 55

Recommendation

Reply

The Committee recommends that the
budget provision for celebration of
the 125th birth anniversary of
Mahatma Gandhi be increased and
adequate funds be allocated for’ the
observance of the 75th anniversary of
Jallianwala Bagh Massacre.

COMMENTS: In so far as_ the
celebration of the 125th birth
anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, four
sub-Committees have recommended
various activities to be carried out |
during the celebration year. The
detailed budget will have to be
approved by the National Committee.
Thereafter, adequate funds will be
made available for this purpose. In so
far as observance of 75th anniversary
of Jallianwala Bagh Massacre is
concerned, it has been proposed to
give a corpus of Rs. 2 crores for this
purpose..



CHAPTER-III

OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVT.’S REPLIES

Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

Para
No. 6

Para
No. 14

Para
No. 19

Para
No. 20

The Committee Recommends that
instead of surrendering the unutilised
funds. The Deptt. should reallocate
them for the needy schemes in time.

The Committee urges upon the Govt.
to pursue vigorously those objectives.

Hence the Committee recommends
that the provision should be
increased.

The Committee recommends that the
allocation for National Museum be
increased appropriately.

The Committee recommends that
sufficient grant should be provided to
the Museum so that these schemes
are completed.

COMMENTS: The recommendation
of the Committee has been taken
note of during the year 1993-94. The
Department did not surrender any
fund except for Rs. 1 crore taken a
supplementary for Festival of India
whose actual expenditure was booked
only for the year 1994-95. However,
the original allocation of the Deptt.
was fully utilised.

COMMENTS: The recommendations
of the Committee has been forwarded
to the An. Survey who are taking
necessary initiative to pursue the
necessary objectives vigorously. The
outlay for 1995-96 for the An. Survey
of India has been increased from Rs.
440 lakhs to Rs. 473 lakhs.

COMMENTS: The allocation for the
National Museum during the year
1994-95 is Rs. 550.00 lakhs. An
outlay of Rs. 605.00 lakhs is
proposed in 1995-96.

COMMENTS: The allocation for
Indian Museum during the year 1994-
95 is Rs. 284.05 lakhs. It has also
been proposed to allot Rs. 319.05
lakhs during the year 1995-96.

12


Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

Para
No. 33

Para
No. 35

Para
No. 41

The Committee of the view that the
outlay for the Akademi may be ap-
propriately increased.

The Allocation for the Akademi this
year has come down from Rs. 2.85
crores (RE) of the year 1993-94 to
Rs. 2.40 crores. The Committee
urges upon the Govt. to-increase the
allocation appropriately.

The provisions made for the centre
are not in consonance with the mul-
tifarious activities of the Centre. A
comparative analysis of the allocation
suggests that there has been a meagre
increase of Rs. 20 lakhs in plan and
Rs. 0.65 lakhs in non-plan expendi-
ture. As against the REs of the last
year. Since this is the only institution

which is taking culture: down to the

general masses, students and
teachers. The Committee recom-
mends that more sources should be
allocated to the Centre particularly
keeping in view the Committee’s re-
commendation .for opening Sub-Cen-
tres at various places.

COMMENTS: The allocation for
Sangeet Natak Akademi during the
year 1994-95 is Rs. 424 lakhs and
1995-96 is Rs. 456 lakhs. During the
year . 1993-94, in addition to their
original allocation taking into account
the recommendation of the Commit-
tee, an additional amount of Rs. 25
lakhs is being released. For the year
1995-96, the outlay has been in-
creased. Similarly, for the Lalit Kala
Akademi during the year 1994-95,
Rs. 240 lakhs has been allocated. For
the year 1995-96, an outlay of Rs.
265 lakhs has been proposed.

COMMENTS: The outlay for the
Centre’ for Cultural Resources &
Training has been increased by a
release of additionality of Rs. 10
lakhs during 1993-94. During 1994-95,
Rs. 342 lakhs has been allotted. In
addition, a sum of Rs. 34 lakhs is
being released as additionality: For
the year 1995-96, it has been prop-
osed to provide an outlay of Rs. 392
lakhs.


14

“Para No.- > Recommendation = = — Reply

eply

Para
No. 50

Para No. 54 The

The Committee is surprised to note
that a drastic cut has been resorted to
in this year’s budget allocation for the
Society. The plan provision has been
reduced from Rs. 341.00 lakhs (RE)
during the year 1993-94 tc Rs. 200
lakhs for the year 1994-95. The
provision is understood to have been
reduced in view of the opening of the
Asiatic Society, Bombay. The
Committee desires that the activities
of the Asiatic Society, Calcutta
should not suffer pending opening of
Asiatic Society, Bombay. _

Committee feels that steps
should be taken to utilise the funds
fully and speedly so as to achieve the
desired objectives.

COMMENTS: Society has been
provided during the year 1994-95 Rs.
295 lakhs. For the year 1995-96 also,
it has been provided Rs. 320 lakhs.

COMMENTS: activities of the
Centre have commenced and _ is
expected to progress as per the
programme chalked out by the
Executive Board of the Centre.



CHAPTER-IV

OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Para No. Recommendation © Reply
Para The Committee strongly urges upon COMMENTS: The recommendations
No. 4 the Govt. to pay due attention and of Committee were conveyed to the
grant adequate allocations to the Planning Commission and an
Deptt. of culture. enhanced outlay of Rs. 206.32 crores
for 1995-96 were proposed. The
Planning Commission have made
available Rs. 122 crores for the
Deptt. an increase of six per cent
over the last years outlay.
(Committee’s Comments on this may be seen in Chapter-I)
Para The Committee recommend that COMMENTS: The budget allocation
No. 26 Govt. should take adequate steps to of Delhi Public Library for the year
spread its network of libraries and 1994-95 is Rs. 252.20 lakhs and the
reading rooms in the slum and under- proposed outlay for 1995-96 is Rs.
developed areas of the National 293.20 lakhs. The mobile library has
Capital. More & more mobile library been moved to many of the localities
vans should also be made available. especially the slums. However,
In view of all these, the Committee establishment of reading rooms will
recommends that the budget have to be phased during the year
allocation for Delhi Public Library be 1995-96 and 1996-97 dnd major
enhanced appropriately. network may be proposed during the
8th Five Year Plan.
(Committee’s Comnients on this may be seen in Chapter-I)
Para The National School of Drama COMMENTS: A regional centre has
No. 36 proposes to set up regional centres, been established in Bangalore and

which is a welcome step and the
Committee desires that. These
regional centres should enjoy due
autonomy in their functioning and
not made branches of the National
School of Drama, New Delhi.

once the network of regional centres
are properly planned the other
recommendations of the Committee
will be taken due. note of for -
implementation.

(Committee’s Comments on this may be seen in Chapter-I)

15


Para No.

16

Recommendation

Para
No. .42

The Committee feels that such delays
should be avoided so that funds are
utilised in time. The Committee
recommends that speedy progress be
made in setting up shilpgrams at the
remaining six zonal cultural centres,
particularly, the one being set up at
Thanjavur. The Committee also feels
that Centre-wise allocation should
also be reflected in the documents of
the department.

Reply

COMMENTS: Setting up of
Shilpgram by South Zone Cultural
Centre at Hyderabad is in progress.
The land has been given by the State
Govt. of Andhra Pradesh and work
in this regard has been started.
Regarding reflecting the Centre-wise
allocation, it is submitted that no
funds are allotted to ZCCs directly.
The allocation is for administering
the centrally administered schemes,
like National Cultural Exchange
Programme Republic Day Folk
Dance Festivals etc. However, from
the year 1995-96 onwards, a separate
account will be made available as to
the. actual amount given to each
Centre.

(Committee’s Comments on this may be seen in Chapter-I)



CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED

Para No. Recommendation Reply

NIL

16॥


MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON- HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

शा
“EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 31st May, 1995 in Committee
Room No. 67, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Prof. 1.0. Sanadi

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

ANALwWn

LOK SABHA

7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

8. Dr. Vasant Pawar

9. Shri Inder Jit

10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11. Dr. K.K. Jeswani

12, Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
13. Shri Braja Kisore Tripathy
14. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
15. Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Twenty-Fifth and Twenty-Seventh Reports on the
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations made by the Committee in its
Tenth and Seventh Reports on the Demands for Grants, 1994-95 of the Departments of
Culture’ and Women and Child Development. After making some modifications, the
Committee adopted the same.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 p.m. to meet again णा 15 June, 1995.

*Minutes of Ist to VIIth Meeting relate to matters not included in the Report.

18