 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CH
  Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
    August
THREE
 
Action Taken Note on 31
Standing Committee on HRD on 
(Presented to the 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020)
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred Fifty Eighth Report on 
“Research based Education and Anusandhan scenario in 
Science
(Presented to the
(Laid on the Table of Lo
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
Report 
367 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
HUNDRED AND SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred Fifty Eighth Report on 
Research based Education and Anusandhan scenario in 
Sciences and related fields”  
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  12th August, 2025) 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12th August, 2025) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ORTS 
Report No. 
367  
Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
SEVENTH REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred Fifty Eighth Report on 
Research based Education and Anusandhan scenario in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in 
  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN,
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred 
based Education and Anusandhan scenario in Science
(Presented 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
 August,
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND 
 
HUNDRED AND SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred Fifty Eighth Report on 
based Education and Anusandhan scenario in Sciences 
fields”  
 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12th August, 2025) 
he Table of Lok Sabha on 12th August, 2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka)  
 
 
  
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
Report on “Research 
 and related 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.....................................................................................................     (iii)-(xi) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................ 1-41  
Chapter -I  -   Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government .................................................................... 2-11 
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...........  12-26 
Chapter-III -  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee.... 27-36 
 Chapter -IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited…..  37-41     
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE.. ................... 42-43 
6. *MINUTES  
 
 
 
* 
To be annexed later 
 
 
 
  

 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th   September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Digvijaya Singh   Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev  
4. Dr. Sikander Kumar 
5. Shrimati Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
6. Shrimati Rekha Sharma* 
7. Dr.Bhim Singh 
8. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati SangeetaYadav 
LOK SABHA 
11.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
12 Dr.Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
13. Shrimati Rachna Banerjee 
14. Shrimati Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
15. Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary 
16. Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
17. Prof.Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
18. Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
19. Dr.Hemang Joshi 
20. Shri Amar Sharadrao Kale 
21. Shri Kalipada Saren Kherwal 
22. Adv Dean Kuriakose 
23. Dr.Sambit Patra 
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
25. Dr. D. Purandeswari 
26. Shri Rajeev Rai 
27. Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
28. Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
29. Ms.Bansuri Swaraj 
30. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
31. Dr. T Sumathy alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shri J. K. Mallick, Director  
Shri Devashish Sen, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Dilip Kumar, Assistant Committee Officer  
_______________________________ *Nominated w.e.f. 23.01.2025 
 
(i) 

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Sixty Seventh Report of the 
Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Three Hundred and Fifty Eighth Report on “Research based Education and Anusandhan scenario 
in Sciences and related fields” which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2023. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned 
Report were received from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education vide their 
communication dated 21st January, 2025 respectively.  
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
5th August, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 5th August, 2025                                                                                                   
Sravana,14, 1947 (Saka)  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Shri Digvijaya Singh 
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary  
              Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ABICs Agri-Business Incubation Centres 
ACIHR Advanced Centre for Integrative Health Research 
AcSIR Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research 
ADRIN Advanced Data Processing Research Institute 
AI Artificial Intelligence  
AIC Atal Incubation Centre 
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AMC Annual Maintenance Contracts 
AMRIT Arsenic and Metal Removal by Indian Technology 
ANRF Anusandhan National Research Foundation 
ANVIKA Antariksh Vigyan Karyashala 
ARIS Advanced Retarding Potential Analyser for Ionospheric Studies 
ASPIRE A Special Call for Research Grants for Women Scientists 
ASRG Advanced Space Research Group 
BIRAC Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council 
BARC Bhabha Atomic Research Centre  
BDTD Biomedical Device and Technology Development 
BTech Bachelor of Technology 
BUILDER Boost to University Interdisciplinary Life Science Departments for Education 
and Research Programme  
CAFT Centres of Advanced Faculty Training 
CAUs Central Agricultural Universities 
CAS Career Advancement Scheme  
(iii) 
  

 
 
CBRI Central Building Research Institute 
CDSCO Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
CeRA Consortium for e-Resources in Agriculture 
CHASM Comprehending aquifer Heterogeneities and hydrodynamics for Sustainable 
groundwater Management 
CoE Centres of Excellence 
CSR Corporate Social responsibility 
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
CTEP Conference, Trave Exhibition and Popular Lectures 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
DEPwD Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 
DHR Department of Health and Research 
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid 
DRDO Defence Research and Development Organization 
DSA Defense Space Agency 
DSIR Department for Scientific and Industrial Research 
DST Department of Science and Technology 
DTCP Directorate of Town and Country Planning  
EDM Electric propulsion Diagnostic module 
EiR Entrepreneur-In-Residence 
FMR Faculty of Medical Research 
GAIL Gas Authority Of India Ltd. 
GATE Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering 
GI Gastrointestinal 
(iv) 
  

 
 
GII Global Innovation Index 
GoI Government of India 
GPAT Graduate Pharmacy Aptitude Test 
GSRS Ground Station and Remote Sensing  
HEFA Higher Education Financing Agency 
HEIs Higher Educational Institutions 
HRD Human Resources Development 
HRDCs Human Resource Development Centre 
HSFC Human Space Flight Centre 
HTSR Health Technology and Services Research 
IDP Institutional Development Plan 
IAP India's Arctic Policy 
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IDE Innovation Design and Entrepreneurship 
IDEA Idea Development, Evaluation & Application 
I&E Innovation & Engineering 
IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 
IHBT Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology 
IICs Institution’s Innovation Councils 
IICE Innovation and Incubation Centre for Entrepreneurship 
ILO International Labour Organization 
INFLIBNET Information and Library Network 
INI Institutions of National Importance 
(v) 
 

 
 
IP Intellectual Property 
IPR Intellectual Property Rights 
IRC Industry Relations Cell 
IIMs Indian Institutes of Management 
IISc Indian Institute of Science 
IISER Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research 
IIST Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology 
IISU ISRO Inertial Systems Unit 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IKS Indian Knowledge System 
IKS&H Indie Knowledge Systems and Heritage 
IoT Internet of Things 
IP Intellectual Property 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
ISTEM Indian Science, Technology and Engineering facilities Map 
ISTRAC ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and Command Network 
iTBIs Inclusive Technology Business Incubators 
IUC Inter-University Centre 
JRF Junior Research Fellowship 
KAPILA Kalam Program for IP Literacy and Awareness 
KFD Kyasanur Forest Disease 
LEAP-TD Launching Expeditions for Aspiring Payloads - Technology Demonstrator 
LEOS Laboratory for Electro-Optics Systems 
L&T Larsen & Toubro 
(vi) 
 

 
 
LI-SAT LAPAN-IPB Satellite 
LPS Low-pressure Systems 
LPSC Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre 
MCEME Military College of Electronics and Mechanical Engineering 
MMTTCs Malaviya Mission Teacher Training Centre 
MoA Memorandum of Agreement 
MoE Ministry of Education 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
MoHUA Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
MoMA Ministry of Minority Affairs 
MOOCs Massive Open Online Courses 
MoSJE Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
MoTA Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
MoUs Memorandum of Understanding  
MRP Major-Minor Research Projects 
MTech Master of Technology 
NAFLD Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease 
NAIF National Agriculture Innovation Fund 
NARES National Agricultural Research and Education System 
NEP National Education Policy 
NET National Eligibility Test 
NHM National Health Mission 
NIDHI National Initiative for Development and Harnessing Innovations 
NIIST National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology 
(vii) 
 

 
 
NIOH National Institute of Occupational Health 
NIRF National Institutional Ranking Framework 
NIScPR National Institute of Science Communication and Policy Research 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NITM National Institute of Traditional Medicine 
NRF National Research Foundation 
NSTMIS National Science and Technology Management Information System 
NTU Nanyang Technological University 
NUIS National Urban Information System 
NuMATS Nurturing Mathematical Talents in Schools 
OCR Optical Character Recognition  
ONOS One Nation One Subscription 
OSA Optical Society of America 
PAHs Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
PDFs Post-Doctoral Fellowships 
PDS Plagiarism Detection Software 
PG Post-Graduate 
PILOT PsIv-ln-orbitaL Obc and Thermals 
PMRF Prime Minister's Research Fellowship 
Ph.D. Doctor of Philosophy 
PoP Professors of Practice 
POU Point of use 
PRAYAS Promotion and Acceleration of Young and Aspiring Innovators and Startups 
(viii) 
 

 
 
PRAYASEEs Promoting Regular Assisted Youth And Skilled Emigrants Excellence 
Enchancement 
PSA Principal Scientific Adviser 
PSLV Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle 
QS Quacquarelli Symonds  
RA Research Associateship 
RAWE Rural Awareness Work Experience 
RCTs Resource Conservation Technologies 
R&D Research and Development 
RD&D Research Development and Deployment 
RDC Research and Development Cell 
READY Rural and Entrepreneurship Awareness Development Yojana 
RO Reverse Osmosis 
RPS Research Promotion Scheme 
SAC Space Applications Centre 
SAHAJ Scientific Infrastructure Access for Harnessing Academia University Research 
Joint Collaboration 
SAR Specific Absorption Rate 
SATHI Sophisticated Analytical & Technical Help Institutes 
SATYAM Science and Technology for Yoga and Meditation 
SAUs State Agricultural Universities 
SDG Sustainable Development Goals 
SEED Society for Entrepreneurship in Education and Development 
SEESS School of Earth, Environment and Sustainability Sciences 
SERB Science and Engineering Research Board 
(ix) 
 

 
 
SHRI Science and Heritage Research Initiative 
SPA School of Planning and Architecture 
SPIE Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers 
SRA Senior Research Associateship 
SRF Senior Research Fellowships 
S&T Science and Technology  
ST Scheduled Tribes 
STEM Science, Technology Engineering, and Mathematics 
STIIC Space Technology Innovation and Incubation Centre 
STI Science, Technology, and Innovation 
STIP Science Technology and Innovation Policy 
SUPREME Support for Upgradation Preventive Repair and Maintenance of Equipment 
SVASTIK Scientifically Validated Societal Traditional Knowledge 
SWAYAM Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young Aspiring Minds 
TBIs Technology Business Incubators 
TEC Technology Enabling Centres 
TKDL Traditional Knowledge Digital Library 
TKS Traditional Knowledge Systems 
TRL Technology Readiness Level  
TVM Thiruvananthapuram 
VAIBHAV Vaishvik Bharatiya Vaigyanik 
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
UG Under Graduate 
UGC University Grants Commission 
(x) 
 

 
 
URC University Relations Cell 
URSC U R Rao Satellite Centre 
USA United States of America 
UT Union Territory 
VAJRA Visiting Advanced Joint Research Faculty 
ULBs Urban Local Bodies 
VLSI Very Large Scale Integration 
VSSC Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre 
WMT Waste Management Technologies 
WTI Water Technology Initiative 
WWTPs Wastewater Treatment plants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(xi) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in its 358th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee (DRPSC) on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports on ‘Research based 
Education and Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and related fields’, which was presented to the Rajya 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2023. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations/Observations contained in the above 
mentioned Report were received from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education vide 
their communication dated 21st January, 2025. These have been categorized as follows:  
 
Chapter I: Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:  
Paras – 6.4, 6.11, 6.12, 6.15  
Total – 04 
 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of Government's 
replies: 
Paras – 6.1, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, 6.16, 6.17, 6.18, 6.19  
Total – 08 
 
Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee:  
Paras – 6.2, 6.3, 6.8, 6.9, 6.10, 6.14 
Total –  06 
 
Chapter-IV:  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Paras – 6.13, 6.20, 6.21, 6.22 
Total –  04 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee has observed the contamination of arsenic, fluoride and the presence of other 
heavy metals in ground and drinking water across multiple states. This contamination is contributing to 
severe health issues such as cancer, skin diseases, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes among the 
inhabitants in affected regions and States. Additionally, the Committee notes that substantial research 
dedicated to eradicating arsenic, fluoride, and other heavy metals from ground and drinking water in these 
affected areas is urgently needed to address the issue. Taking note of the magnitude of the issue, the 
Committee strongly recommends that the Department of Science and Technology, Department of Health 
Research, and Department of Higher Education, including various esteemed institutions like IITs should 
prioritize and fund comprehensive research initiatives aimed at eliminating arsenic, fluoride, and other 
heavy metals detrimental to health from ground and drinking water within the affected regions and states 
upon a mapping of such territories. This proactive step will not only address the immediate health hazards 
but also pave the way for sustainable, innovative solutions towards effective waste water management 
and saline water treatment practices. 
(Para 6.4 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
I.  Noted. UGC has been advising HEIs from time to time regarding sustainability practices. UGC 
has brought out the Guidelines on Institutional Development Plan (IDP). The IDP aims to guide Higher 
Education Institutions to chalk developmental plans that are specific to their institution.  The plan 
identifies various interconnected enabler parameters representing a vertical to reflect an integrated 
approach including the ‘Research, and Intellectual Property Enablers’ and ‘Networking and Collaborating 
Enablers' as parameters for excellence.  The guidelines provide guidance to HEIs to achieve excellence in 
their identified areas. Further, these lay down a framework for steering the HEIs towards self-
sustainability. 
II.  The recommendations of the committee have been noted. Necessary instructions have been issued 
to IITs in this regard. 
III.  SPAs (School of Planning and Architecture) have taken up research in the fields of Architecture, 
Planning including Landscape Architecture, Environmental Planning etc. SPAs are working on protection 
of water bodies by undertaking extensive research. The Institutes have Landscape Architecture, 
Environmental planning departments etc. working in this line. 
Department of Science & Technology 
Water Technology Initiative (WTI) of DST is a demand oriented user centric initiative which 
promotes developmental research in laboratories as well as application led research in the field. WTI 

3 
 
works through periodic thematic calls. The program has supported and nurtured approximately 55 
national & bilateral Research Development and Deployment (RD&D) activities in the area of Arsenic, 
Flouride and heavy metals monitoring and remediation technologies for Applied Research, Technology 
Development & Assessment and for providing customized Convergent Solutions. Some of the successful 
interventions which resulted in technology development and deployment in real conditions are listed in 
Arsenic Compendium published and developed by DST (attached). 
This programme also promotes and facilitates entire technology chain from technology 
development to commercialization. Two Arsenic treatment and mitigation technologies developed and 
commercialized through DST’s intervention are listed below: 
1. Laterite based Arsenic filter which uses naturally abundant raw laterite modified by suitable 
chemical treatment. The technology requires no power for functioning. It removes Arsenic, Iron and 
Bacteriological contamination. The Technology has already been transferred to West Bengal based start 
up, IIT Kharagpur. 
2. AMRIT is an affordable solution for providing clean drinking water in arsenic affected areas. It is 
a gravity- fed water purification unit in which arsenic and iron containing water is passed through a 
composite filter unit to obtain water, conforming to international standards. The AMRIT Technology has 
already been transferred to a Chennai based start up through DST funded Business Incubator housed at 
IIT Madras. 
Department of Health Research  
Elimination of heavy metals from groundwater is not within the purview of ICMR. This may be 
taken up by DST. 
Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 
Department has noted the observation of the committee and submits that CSIR, an autonomous 
organization with Department of Scientific & Industrial Research, through its constituent laboratories is 
working for development of techno-economically feasible solutions for removal of arsenic, fluoride and 
other contaminants from ground/drinking water. Some of the technologies, namely Nalgonda and Solar 
Electrolytic Defluoridation Techniques for fluoride removal, Terafil and Ceramic filters for Arsenic and 
Iron removal, have been already deployed and several plants are running in the field. 
Further, CSIR is also funding/ executing various research projects for the effective addressing of this 
issue. Some of the CSIR research projects which are running/ successfully completed are given below:    
i. Comprehending aquifer Heterogeneities and hydrodynamics for Sustainable groundwater 
Management (CHASM); 
ii. Production of High-Quality Mineralized Water in Arid Regions using Indigenous Membrane 
Integrated Atmospheric Water Generator Systems Powered by Solar Energy; 
iii. Nanotechnology intervention for water purification and treatment;  
iv. Design and development of indigenous Membrane Distillation unit for treating RO reject (high 
saline water) and producing potable water;  

4 
 
v. Development of gravity operated domestic water filter for Removal of Arsenic from portable 
water under Indian Scenario;  
vi. Point of use (POU) filters for Arsenic Remediation in Drinking water; and   
vii. Design, development and optimization of cost effective advanced sensor for detection of 
contaminants (Arsenic and Fluoride) in different source of water 
In order to develop and scale-up, end-to-end solutions including sludge management for removal of 
fluoride, arsenic, iron and other geo-genic contaminants, CSIR is in process of consolidating the various 
water treatment technologies developed across CSIR constituent laboratories, at different TRL for the 
management of geo-genic contaminants in water, for the possible collaboration with different Central and 
State government agencies as well as with established corporates, to facilitate widespread application in 
the field for the benefit of the society. 
Recommendation  
2. The Committee appreciates the cutting-edge characterization and fabrication facilities, such as 
SATHI and Nano research facilities, within some Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). These facilities 
serve as central research hubs, open to researchers, students, and industry professionals nationwide. 
However, the operational expenses for these facilities, including Annual Maintenance Contracts (AMC), 
support technicians' salaries, and consumables, pose a significant financial burden. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends for having a structured support scheme specifically for catering to maintenance 
and operational costs. This scheme can operate on a model that accounts for the number of external users 
accessing these facilities. It is also felt that sustained accessibility to vital research infrastructure would 
get ensured, fostering a more equitable and enabling environment for cutting-edge research and 
innovation in the country by implementing such a scheme. 
(Para 6.11 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
SPAs (School of Planning and Architecture) are continuously improving research facilities. D/o 
Higher Education has duly noted the recommendation. 
Department of Science & Technology 
In pursuance of the above observations/recommendations by the Hon’ble Committee, 
Sophisticated, Analytical and Technical Help Institute (SATHI) program has already established SATHI 
Centre at few of the organizations through a Section-8 company to manage it professionally, for 
intensifying the base of S&T Infrastructure and human resources development, S&T led innovation and 
startups, development of technologies and futuristic areas of S&T. SATHI is functional with efficiency, 
accessibility and transparency of highest order under one roof to cater services to the demands of 
researchers, scientists, students, start-ups, manufacturing units, industries and R&D Labs. The usage of 
these SATHI facilities is envisaged to be guided by the basic principle of maximum and effective 
utilization and accessibility to all. 
Moreover, for repair/ upgradation/ maintenance/ retrofitting or acquiring additional attachment to 
increase functional capabilities of existing analytical instruments facilities, DST has initiated a new 

5 
 
program namely “Support for Upgradation, Preventive Repair and Maintenance of Equipment” 
(SUPREME) for the revival of major facilities, established through the public-funded research projects. 
Through SUPREME, the financial support is provided for catering to repair/ upgradation/ maintenance/ 
retrofitting or acquiring additional attachment along with AMC and operational costs to increase the 
functional capabilities of existing analytical instruments facilities in various institutions/ laboratories/ 
academic institutions. 
Department of Biotechnology 
This recommendation has been ‘NOTED’. As mentioned under Point No. 6.10 above, the 
Department of Biotechnology supports creation of research infrastructure in academic and research 
institutions across the country, through specific programs such as DBT-BUILDER and DBT-SAHAJ. 
Recommendation  
3. The Committee appreciates the concerted efforts by the Government, involving various 
Departments and agencies like the Department of Higher Education, Department of Science and 
Technology, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Department of Biotechnology, Department 
of Health Research/ICMR, Department of Agricultural Research/ICAR, and others in various areas of 
research and recommends for a coordinated, collaborative approach to actively foster private partnerships 
in scientific research and related fields. The Committee is of the view that strategic collaboration with 
private entities is essential to alleviate the burden on Government funding and ensure adequate financial 
support for research endeavours in science and allied disciplines. It is also felt that by proactively 
engaging in partnerships with the private sector, the Government can facilitate a more sustainable and 
diversified funding ecosystem for scientific research as these collaborative efforts will not only reduce the 
Government's financial burden but also it will harness the expertise and resources of the private sector to 
drive innovation and scientific advancement. Encouraging and nurturing such partnerships will create a 
conducive environment for ground-breaking research and will ensure a more balanced distribution of 
funding responsibilities between the public and private sectors. 
(Para 6.12 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
I.  UGC acknowledges the crucial need for strong connections between universities and industries to 
promote innovation, enhance employability, and drive economic growth. Accordingly, the UGC 
introduced the Guidelines on Sustainable and Vibrant University-Industry Linkage System for 
Indian Universities which aim to encourage collaboration between academia and industry, fostering a 
dynamic ecosystem for research, innovation, and knowledge transfer. 
Further, the UGC Guidelines on Institutional Development Plans for Higher Education Institutions 
(HEIs) encourage the establishment of Industry Relations Cell (IRC) at university/college level. While 
defining the responsibilities of the Industry Relations Cell (IRC), mention the following- 
a.  Liaisoning with local industry and enabling the realization of the proposed R&D culture involving 
own Universities/Institutes/Colleges and the industry.  

6 
 
b.  Identifying research topics of interest, including those that have local/regional relevance and 
dissemination of the same among the stakeholders.  
c.  Identification of potential problems for collaboration, creation of links between the concerned 
group of an industry and the concerned faculty group of the University/ Institute/ College and creation of 
relationships with signed MoUs as an enabler.  
e.  Explore sources of funding for the cell.  
f.  Drive the actions related to supporting student internships and apprenticeship with the help of the 
Curriculum development cell of the institute. 
II.  Activities such as Hackathon, Innovation challenges are organized by the Innovation Cell and 
AICTE in collaboration with the other organizations, industry partners etc. 
III.  Research parks at IITs are playing a crucial role in driving innovation, fostering industry-
academia collaboration, and supporting entrepreneurship. They are pivotal in bridging the gap between 
academic research and industrial applications and contributing to the country's growth in various areas. 
Research Parks are set-up at IIT Kharagpur, IIT Bombay, IIT Delhi, IIT Kanpur, IIT Hyderabad, IIT 
Madras, IIT Gandhinagar, IIT Guwahati & IISc Bangalore. 2nd Generation IITs are in process for 
availing HEFA loan for construction of Research Parks. Five 3rd Generation IITs have included Research 
Park in Phase-B of construction of their Permanent Campus. 
IV.  Policies like ISTEM can definitely provide impetus to Research, especially to individuals and 
Institutes that do not have sufficient resources. 
Department of Space 
1) Dhruva Space, Hyderabad, a pioneer among space startups in India developed a payload called 
LEAP-TD and was launched in PSLV C58 on 1st Jan 2024. It was accommodated in the POEM platform 
that was orbiting in a 350 km orbit. IIST’s ground station facility is jointly operated by IIST and Dhruva 
Space teams; the first beacon and telemetry from LEAP-TD was received on January 2nd and till date the 
payload is being tracked by the IIST ground station periodically. Telecommand from IIST ground station 
and reception of the telemetry from the payload are carried out periodically. 
2) With this IIST has entered into the domain of services for reliable ground station tracking systems 
and small satellites providing opportunities for universities and space startups to exploit these facilities on 
a mutually agreeable basis. In today's world of rapidly advancing space technologies and aligning with 
the country’s goal IIST has started collaborating with Universities and Industries in building small 
satellites and payloads using innovative technologies for miniaturizing systems, improving performance, 
reducing cost and rapid deployment of space assets in space. 
3) In the context of new space reforms, IIST has initiated measures to engage with private industries. 
An MOU signed with L&T is aimed at developing newer technologies associated with satellite and 
launch vehicle systems. One such fruitful engagement with L&T resulted in the launch of a 3D-printed 
pilot module payload in the 4th stage of PSLV in April 2023. 
4) Also, the technology transfer related to Atomic layer deposition with Quazer Tech Pvt Ltd. was 
successfully completed. In addition to the aforementioned areas, the institute is aggressively trying to 

7 
 
engage with more and more industries to jointly develop product and technology-oriented solutions for 
the industry and societal applications. 
5) LI-SAT (L&T-IIST) and PsIv-ln-orbitaL Obc and Thermals (PILOT) payload are jointly being 
developed by L&T and IIST. PILOT is a unique mission from IIST where an industry is partnered in the 
early stages of the development. The L&T developed the Structures for the PILOT using additive 
manufacturing. 3D-printed structures were flown in space for the first time. The payload was successfully 
launched by PSLV C55. LI-SAT satellite is proposed to be launched in the first industrial PSLV. 
6) IIST has established an advanced space research group (ASRG-cell) that works as a catalyst for 
initiating joint projects between ISRO centers and academia. 
D/o Health Research  
 1.  ICMR is working towards a mechanism for attracting CSR funds from PSUs and Private 
Companies for certain biomedical research activities. A detailed guideline for management of CSR funds 
has been developed at ICMR.  CSR funds have been received and utilized for the development of KFD 
Vaccine.  
2.  ICMR-NIOH has actively participated in collaborative research projects with private 
organizations in the field of occupational and environmental health with a thrust on the following areas: 
a. Studies in the mining industry that focused primarily on dust, noise, vibration, and illumination. 
Evaluation of silicosis in lines with ILO classification was also carried out. 
b. Measurement of lead exposure in battery manufacturing industry and smelting plants. 
c. Examination of dust and fluoride levels, along with medical examinations was done with the 
fertilizer industry. 
Department of Biotechnology 
This recommendation has been ‘NOTED’. Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council 
(BIRAC), the industry-academia interface agency of DBT is involved in strengthening the biotech 
translation ecosystem and empowering the biotech enterprise, addressing nationally relevant product 
development needs. Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee’s recognition for the concerted 
efforts towards promotion of R&D in various sectors in the country.   
Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 
DSIR will follow the recommendations of the committee and it is humbly submitted that CSIR is 
actively involved in undertaking / exploring collaborative research with the private sector and other 
Ministries/ Departments 
● CSIR Labs have been engaged in attracting funds from other available sources including efforts 
for obtaining contributions under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) from eligible Indian 
Corporates/ Industries for undertaking R&D projects for promotion of SDGs; 

8 
 
 CSIR Labs have been interacting with stakeholder Ministries such as MoEF&CC etc. to make 
them aware of capabilities of CSIR while undertaking projects in areas of mutual interest. CSIR 
Labs are also engaged with Industries and undertaking R&D projects of global 
competitiveness/national relevance; and CSIR Labs have been interacting with many Industries 
from India and abroad to promote CSIR knowledge base. Many such industries are financially 
supporting CSIR R&D projects for development of technologies/ products of their interest. 
 
Recommendation  
4. The Committee is of the view that research on India's traditional knowledge systems not only 
enriches the country's heritage but also offers viable solutions to contemporary challenges in healthcare, 
agriculture, and sustainability and this holistic approach towards development is imperative for India's 
progress and cultural preservation. In view of this, the Committee recommends prioritizing research in 
India's traditional knowledge systems due to their immense significance on multiple fronts such as Vedic 
mathematics, heritage preservation as it plays a pivotal role in preserving and documenting the ancient 
wisdom and practices inherent in traditional knowledge systems, validating the efficacy of traditional 
medical systems like Ayurveda and Yoga, sustainable practices in respect of agricultural methods, 
ecological wisdom, and natural resource management. 
(Para 6.15 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
I.  NEP 2020 envisages the promotion of Bharatiya Jnana Parampara (Indian Knowledge Systems). 
To facilitate a seamless integration of Bharatiya Paramparagat Jnana with modern stream, UGC has come 
up with ‘Guidelines for incorporation Indian Knowledge System (IKS) in Higher Education 
Curricula’. Further, UGC has also come up with ‘Guidelines for Training of Faculty on IKS’ for its 
integration in curriculum at all levels of education which will inspire the faculty in higher education 
institutions of the country to generate a positive attitude, explore and undertake quality research on IKS, 
and herald a new era in higher education ecosystem of the country in the light of NEP 2020. This 
guideline will also be a part of the training module under ‘Malaviya Mission’, and will be considered 
under CAS scheme as per the UGC regulations. 
In addition, Training in Bharatiya Jnana Parampara (Indian Knowledge Systems) is being 
undertaken. 
i. Six-days’ Basic Training Programme in Indian Knowledge Systems was organized at 06 
HRDCs/MMTTCs for above 1000 faculty from various HEIs across the country. The training 
program was based on three points: parampara (tradition), dristhi (perspective) and laukika 
prayojana (modern relevance) of Traditional Indian Knowledge Systems. 
ii. Further, among the faculty who underwent Six-days’ Basic Training Programme in Indian 
Knowledge Systems, through all India basis examination, 200 faculty are selected for Six-days’ 
Masters’ Training in IKS to meet the need of trained-faculty in IKS for training nearly 10,000 
faculty from HEIs across the country. The training is primarily aimed at the knowledge domains, 
sources, vocabulary, philosophical foundations and methods of IKS. 

9 
 
iii. In addition, finally for the Master Trainers’, a ‘Discipline Specific Training Programme’ based on 
the discourses and case studies in foundational aspects of Ayurveda, Mathematics, Arthashastra, 
Chemistry, Linguistics, Botany, Temple Architecture, Civil Engineering and Yoga is going to be 
organized by UGC in collaboration with IKS Division of Ministry of Education, Govt. of India.  
For encouraging research in Indian Knowledge Systems, UGC has also added IKS as a 
subject in the UGC NET Examination. 
II.  Ministry of Education under its central sector scheme “Indian Knowledge Systems (IKS)” is 
actively involved in research initiatives across India, covering 14 key themes, many of which align with 
the areas highlighted in the Committee's recommendations. The Research Projects are allotted based on 
the themes as mentioned below: 
1. Mathematics and Astronomy 
2. Metallurgy, Material Science, and Technology 
3. Chemical Science and Technology 
4. Health, Wellness, and Consciousness Studies 
5. Political and Economic Thought, Economics, and Foreign Policy 
6. Arts and Culture 
7. IKS Approaches for Management of Water Resources 
8. Architectural Engineering, Vaastu, and Shilpa Shastra 
9. New Universal Sociological Models Based on Emic Perspectives 
10. IKS Approaches for Psychology, Cognition, Linguistics, Phonetics, Epistemology 
11. Science, Engineering, and Technology 
12. Pashuayurveda-Based Approaches 
13. Sustainable Agriculture and Food Preservation 
14. Evidence-Based Music and Dance Interventions and Their Relevance in the Contemporary World 
 
A total of 88 research projects under the IKS scheme have been funded across India, with the 
complete list at Annexure –I.  
III.  At SPA (School of Planning and Architecture) Bhopal, a center for IKS (Indian Knowledge 
System) has been established that works in related areas. 
Department of Space 
Starting from the 2023-2024 academic year, IIST has introduced a new institute elective on Indian 
Knowledge Systems (IKS) for all its undergraduate students, a three-credit course designed to align with 
the vision of National Education Policy 2020. The course aims to introduce ancient India's achievements 
in diverse fields of science, technology, and value systems, emphasizing the harmony between skills and 
values demonstrated by ancient Indian thinkers. It broadly covers the development of mathematics and 
astronomy, their applications in allied fields, the scientific principles underlying Indian musical 
instruments, and offers insights into human aspirations through the wisdom of ancient Indian thinkers. 
1) With the rollout of the new National Education Policy, India Knowledge Systems and Heritage 
(IKS&H) are becoming increasingly prominent in academic curricula. Consequently, several scholarly 
books introducing this subject have been published, providing well-curated information on various 
IKS&H disciplines. However, it is often overlooked that Indie Heritage disciplines have core first 
principles that can generate a wide range of thoughts, ideas, systems, rules, and preferences. One of the 
faculty at IIST has co-authored a book titled "Elements of Indie Knowledge Systems & Heritage," 

10 
 
published by HTSR Institute, Bangalore. The book focuses on the fundamental principles to create a 
comprehensive understanding of IKS&H. This approach is deemed essential for modern scientific inquiry 
and for understanding various fields from the perspective of Indie Knowledge Systems and Heritage. 
2) Research based on Finite element analysis of the membrane is currently being carried out to 
analyze the tones produced from an Indian Percussion Instrument- Mridang. 
 
Department of Science & Technology 
In order to strengthen India's traditional knowledge systems, DST established a Dedicated Science 
and Heritage Research Initiative (SHRI) Cell in August 2022 to build capacity of human resource and 
encourage new researchers to work in the area of Heritage Science. DST is promoting R&D activities for 
preservation, conservation and propagation of tangible and intangible Heritage in India. DST has been 
supporting research projects on documentation and validation of traditional practices, material 
deterioration and restoration, new materials, preservation, diagnostic technologies, exploring new state-
of-art technologies to preserve heritage and artworks from ancient times, evolution and growth of human 
civilization, and promoting application of advanced knowledge of archaeometry science. 
The following four dedicated Centres for R&D on specialized areas have also been supported 
under SHRI Cell: 
•       "Takshashila Centre for Multidisciplinary Heritage Science" at IIT Hyderabad. The Centre has 
launched India’s first interdisciplinary Master's and Doctoral degree programs in Heritage Science and 
Technology to develop human resource in this niche area. Apart from generating human resource this 
Centre is also fostering innovative technologies like semi-automated OCR post-processing method to 
enhance text alignment, quality, and readability in complex document scenarios, including multi-language 
and multi-column texts. 
•      “Centre for Traditional, Complementary foods of Western Himalayas” at CSIR-IHBT Palampur” 
was established for documentation and characterization of traditional complementary foods from the 
Western Himalayan region and processing technologies. A compendium of 75 traditional recipes of 
Himachal Pradesh has already been published and this Centre is currently working on process 
standardization of traditional recipes of Himachal Pradesh. 
• “Centre for Conservation of Heritage Structures” at CSIR-CBRI, Roorkee - to conserve heritage 
structure and conducting research on several important aspects viz. non-destructive evaluation, material 
development, testing of heritage structure, data base development, health monitoring technologies, repair 
and restoration methodologies. 
•  “Indian Heritage in Digital Space- Immersive Digital Visualization of Ajanta, Ellora and 
Dwaraka” at Pravartak Technologies Foundation, IIT Madras. DST is further supporting scientific 
validation of yoga and meditation through its dedicated programme Science and Technology for Yoga 
and Meditation (SATYAM). 
Department of Health Research   
1. ICMR in collaboration with Ministry of Ayush has launched 5 Ayush-ICMR Advanced Centre for 
Integrative Health Research (AI-ACIHR) at 4 AIIMS in order to conduct Integrative research on 
Indian traditional systems of medicine in the areas of cancer, GI-disease, geriatric and women’s 
health. 
2. A community-based three arm multi-centric randomized controlled trial has been initiated to 
evaluate “Efficacy and safety of Punarnavadi Mandura alone and in combination with 
Drakshavaleha compared to iron folic acid in the treatment of moderate iron deficiency anemia 
among non-pregnant women of reproductive age group. 

11 
 
3. ICMR-NITM, Belagavi is currently undertaking scientific validation of selected non-codified 
traditional practices. Clinical validation has been done for three traditional practices for 
osteoarthritis, wound healing and cholera. The Institute has also taken up clinical validation of 
Ayurveda drugs for Dengue and NAFLD. 
Department of Agriculture Research & Education (ICAR) 
ICAR is working on the traditional knowledge which encompasses the cultural traditions, values, 
beliefs, and understanding of local people in various aspects.  Studies revealed that the economic 
prosperity and sustainability of tribes across India basically depends on their traditional wisdom to 
manage land and crop resources and farming practices. Among these, land use, biodiversity, conservation 
tillage, organic waste recycling, green leaf manuring from live fences and growing leguminous cover 
crops in plantations are very important tribal practices. Scientific evaluation of these indigenous soil and 
crop management techniques maintains the soil fertility without much degradation of soil and sustains the 
agricultural productivity and its diversity. 
Department of Biotechnology 
The recommendation of the Committee regarding promotion, documentation and preservation of 
the traditional knowledge system has been ‘NOTED’.  
Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 
Department duly acknowledges the observation of the committee and submits that CSIR vide its 
constituent unit CSIR-TKDL has been documenting traditional knowledge information related to the 
traditional systems of medicine including Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Ripga and Yoga. Steps have 
also been initiated towards documenting traditional agriculture and related practices in the TKDL.  
Further, CSIR vide its constituent laboratory, CSIR-National Institute of Science Communication 
and Policy Research (NIScPR) is actively implementing national initiative namely SVASTIK 
(Scientifically Validated Societal Traditional Knowledge) to communicate and disseminate India’s 
scientifically validated traditional knowledge to the society. The main aim of this initiative is creating 
awareness and sharing evidence-based Indian traditional practices/knowledge among the public to instill a 
sense of pride and confidence in the knowledge that we have inherited. 
This initiative is being run on various social media platforms (@NIScPR_SVASTIK) and also 
through print media. As a part of this initiative, simplified creative content on Indian traditional 
knowledge is being disseminated through digital platforms in English and different Indian languages. 
Until now 61 such contents have been disseminated in 08 traditional knowledge domains in English and 
17 Indian languages. More than 370 content posted since the start of this initiative including infographics, 
reels, and short videos on different social media platforms.  
SVASTIK also aims to encourage faculties and young researchers to pursue active R&D in 
various areas of traditional knowledge systems (TKS) in order to offer viable solutions to contemporary 
challenges in healthcare, agriculture, sustainability, ecology, climate change, natural resource 
management, etc. 

12 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee appreciates the formation of Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF), 
which will ensure that scientific research will be conducted and funded equitably with greater 
participation from private sector. The Committee also appreciates that Anusandhan National Research 
Foundation (ANRF) will not only fund in natural sciences but also in humanities, social sciences, 
environmental sciences and agricultural sector. It also aims to involve the colleges, universities, higher 
institutes in scientific research which are worthy of appreciation. 
(Para 6.1 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The Department of Science & Technology submitted that Anusandhan National Research 
Foundation (ANRF) serves as the apex body to provide high-level strategic direction for research, 
innovation and entrepreneurship in the fields of natural sciences including mathematical sciences, 
engineering and technology, environmental and earth sciences, health and agriculture and scientific and 
technological interfaces of humanities and social sciences. 
The provisions of the ANRF Act have been brought into force with effect from February 5, 2024. 
The recommendation has been noted by D/o Higher Education and D/o Biotechnology. 
Recommendation  
2. The Committee takes notes of remarkable growth registered in Scientific Publications in past 10 
years, growing 2.5 times from 60555 publications in 2010 to 1,49,213 in 2020 with a growth rate of 9.4% 
compared to world average of 4.3%. India ranked 3rd in Scientific Publication Output surpassing many 
developed and developing countries. In 2021-22 India saw 66,440 patent applications and India ranks 7th 
in Resident Patent Filing Activity worldwide which is worthy of appreciation. 
(Para 6.5 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
The Committee appreciates the work of the Universities and Department of Higher Education. All INIs 
and Centrally funded Universities are continuously striving to achieve a steady growth rate in publication. 
The observation has been noted by D/o Higher Education & D/o Biotechnology. 
Recommendation  
3. The Committee strongly recommends for a symbiotic relationship between established institutions 
and newly formed ones to foster knowledge sharing and advancement. To this end, the Committee 

13 
 
recommends that older IITs should take an active role in mentoring, guiding, and supporting the newer 
IITs/NITs/IISERs within their respective regions. This mentorship will facilitate the transfer of valuable 
expertise, best practices, and institutional wisdom, empowering the newer institutions to flourish and 
maintain high standards of excellence in their academic and research pursuits. Similarly, the Committee 
stresses upon the importance of reputed and well-established Central Universities engaged in cutting-edge 
research in scientific and related fields to extend their guidance and support to newly established Central/ 
State Universities. Such mentorship initiatives will help to create a collaborative ecosystem, nurturing the 
growth of quality research in sciences and related disciplines across these institutions. The Committee is 
of the view that such knowledge exchange, resource sharing, and collaborative projects, will be beneficial 
in elevating the research capabilities and academic standards of the newly formed universities, enriching 
the entire academic landscape of the country. 
(Para 6.6 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education  
I.   Universities are encouraged to share best practices and ideas for innovation and excellence. In 
addition to this, UGC has been supporting Central universities and HEIs in creating infrastructural 
facilities and resources as a part of bringing about qualitative improvement in research and development 
activities. In this regard, UGC has issued Guidelines on Optimal Utilization of Resources Available in 
Central Universities/Higher Education Institutions. Under these guidelines, HEIs are encouraged to allow 
their resources, like libraries, laboratories, equipment etc., to be shared/used during free time by students 
and researchers of other HEIs. This will benefit the UG/PG students and researchers. 
II.  The recommendations of the committee have been noted. Necessary instructions have been issued 
to IITs in this regard. 
III.  SPAs (School of Planning and Architecture) are open to join hands with other 
Institutions/Agencies and Body Incorporated. The Institutes time and again are signing Memorandum of 
Understanding with various bodies of national/international repute to bring this into effect. 
Department of Space 
a) IIST is Mentoring Jammu Central University for conducting the BTech Electronics and 
Communications Engineering (Avionics) 4-year undergraduate program. Every semester, the students are 
deputed to IIST under the mentorship of faculty members in IIST to train them in their respective areas. 
b) IIST has initiated a summer intern program where students from across the country were provided 
hands-on training in various areas of science and engineering. Further, many students from different 
institutions are doing their final year project under various faculty. The facilities developed at IIST are 
accessible and available to researchers within the country at no cost 
c) IIST was established in the year 2007 and in its 16 years of journey the institute aims to handhold 
many such similar institutes and also desires to have very strong collaboration with premiere institutions 
and national labs of the country, but not limited to IISc, IITs, DRDO, NIIST, BARC to carry out cutting-

14 
 
edge research to meet the futuristic scientific needs of the nation in particular in space science and space 
technology frontiers. 
d) IIST conducted a 6-day workshop from 28th August to 02nd September 2023 on “Space 
Operations and Spatial Technology” course for the tri-services (Army, Navy and Airforce) at IIST. The 
course's main aim was to create awareness and provide in depth knowledge in the area of space 
technology and its utilization. The faculty members at IIST, Thiruvananthapuram and NIAS, Bangalore 
and experts from various ISRO centers were chosen to deliver the talks. IIST also organized the visits of 
the candidates to various ISRO centers including VSSC, URSC, ISTRAC, ADRIN and SAC. 
e) Department of Avionics had offered a course on Satellite communication to Military College of 
Electronics and Mechanical Engineering (MCEME) Hyderabad for two consecutive years. 
f) Based on the request from Defense Space Agency (DSA), IIST conducted a 13-day workshop 
from 11th June to 26th June 2024 on “Space Operations and Spatial Technology” course for the tri-
services (Army, Navy and Airforce) at IIST. Around 35 candidates from all the tri-services participated in 
the training workshop. The course's main aim was to provide a good exposure in the area of space 
technology and its utilization. The experts were chosen from academia and industry. The faculty members 
at IIST, Thiruvananthapuram and experts from various ISRO centers including ISTRAC, URSC and 
VSSC were chosen to deliver the talks. IIST also organized the visits of the candidates to various ISRO 
centers including VSSC Thiruvananthapuram, URSC Bangalore, ISTRAC Bangalore, ADRIN 
Hyderabad, SAC Ahmedabad and InSpace Ahmedabad. The course covered the orbital mechanics, launch 
vehicles, navigation guidance & control, spacecraft mission design and spacecraft subsystems in depth. 
g) IIST will be training eighty candidates annually from tri-services based on recommendations from 
the defense space agencies on space operation and space technology from 2024 until further notice. 
Department of Biotechnology 
The Department of Biotechnology along with its institutes are creating, promoting, and nurturing 
the innovative and collaborative biotech ecosystem across the country. The Committee appreciates the 
work done by the Departments of Higher Education, Space and Biotechnology. 
Recommendation  
4. The Committee acknowledges the significant milestone achieved with the establishment of a large 
number of Incubation Centers and Start-ups across various Indian Institutes of Technologies (IITs), 
dedicated for fostering research initiatives. The concerted efforts undertaken by the Departments and 
multiple IITs in not just setting up but also effectively operating these Incubation Centers and Start-ups in 
diverse scientific and related fields are commendable. The Committee appreciates the successful 
execution of these centers, recognizing their pivotal role in providing a fertile ground for nurturing 
cutting-edge ideas, facilitating technology transfer and incubating start-ups that drive advancements in 
various scientific domains. Furthermore, the Committee recommends for continued support and 
enhancement of these incubation ecosystems to further fuel research and innovation as it is felt that such 
sustained efforts in leveraging these platforms shall accelerate breakthroughs, promote entrepreneurship 
and strengthen India's position as a hub for pioneering research and technological innovation in the global 
landscape. 
(Para 6.7 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 

15 
 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education  
I.  ACITE is already implementing various measures for encouraging research and technological 
innovation in Technical Institutions. Some of these measures are as following:- 
(i)  The Innovation Design and Entrepreneurship (IDE) Boot camp is an intensive training program 
designed to nurture and develop entrepreneurial skills among young individuals. It aims to create a robust 
ecosystem for innovation and entrepreneurship in the country. 
(ii)  KAPILA (Kalam Program for IP Literacy and Awareness) is an initiative aimed at enhancing 
intellectual property (IP) awareness among students and faculty in higher education institutions (HEIs). It 
seeks to establish a robust IP filing ecosystem, promoting the protection of new ideas and innovations. 
II.  SPAs (School of Planning and Architecture) are open to join hands with other 
Institutions/Agencies and Body Incorporated. The Institutes time and again are signing Memorandum of 
Understanding with various bodies of national/international repute to bring this into effect.  
The Committee appreciates the work done by the Departments of Higher Education, Space, 
Science and Technology, Health Research, Agricultural Research and Education and Biotechnology. 
The recommendation has been noted by UGC and IITs. 
Department of Space 
a) Space Technology Innovation and Incubation Centre (STIIC) in IIST is aimed at hand-holding 
both space-based and non-space-based startups to develop their products/solutions through close 
interaction with the faculty members of the institute. STIIC supports diverse activities including product. 
b) Innovations and development, simulation and prototyping, pilot experimentation, product software 
testing, training, and other technology related work, in which there is considerable overlap with the 
Institute’s mandate. All the efforts are oriented towards accelerating our nation’s ability to innovate and 
lead a knowledge-driven economy for the larger benefit of humanity. 
c) Currently, there are five startups that are incubated, and many are in the pre-incubation stage. 
Also, IIST is working on policies to foster multi-disciplinary research work that involves the participation 
of multiple centers. Currently, there are many joint activities between ISRO centers and IIST faculty in 
the area of space science and space technologies. The collaborative activities with ISRO centres are 
streamlined and periodically reviewed by the Advanced Space Research Group (ASRG). 
d) IIST has established an ecosystem that motivates the students/scholars to focus on developing a 
successful engineering-based product through teamwork and system engineering approach, and by the 
active engagement of these students with the startups in the institute. The institute's IPR Cell encourages 
its students, faculty, staff and startup community to protect its intangible assets and provide guidance for 
effective commercial utilization of intellectual property generated at the Institute in the interests of all 
concerned. 

16 
 
e) IIST has incubated startup companies in the areas such as satellite propulsion, inspection and 
measurement instruments, robotics and machine development, additive manufacturing, laser-based optical 
sensor systems for aerospace and combustion research, and developing innovative solutions in satellite 
image and geo-spatial data processing. 
Department of Science & Technology 
To expand the innovation and incubation ecosystem in the country for the translation of 
technology and innovation for technology-driven socioeconomic development, the Department of Science 
and Technology (DST) has established Centres of Excellence (CoEs), Technology Business Incubators 
(TBIs), and Inclusive Technology Business Incubators (ITBIs) under the National Initiative for 
Development and Harnessing Innovations (NIDHI) scheme since 2016. Seeing the potential and 
capabilities that country’s academic setups (both public and private) possess, DST has supported various 
programs to enhance innovation, incubation and technology translation ecosystems in the country through 
these institutions. These initiatives have enhanced R&D commercialization capabilities, provided 
mentorships, funding opportunities, and built robust networks that connect entrepreneurs with industry 
experts and academia. The NIDHI CoE on Innovation and Entrepreneurship aims to offer world- class 
facilities to help startups aim for global markets. DST has supported 8 NIDHI-CoEs at premier 
institutions. The NIDHI PRAYAS (Promotion and Acceleration of Young and Aspiring Innovators and 
Startups) program focuses on addressing the idea-to-prototype funding gaps. It aims to foster 
indigenously developed innovations and products in alignment with the nation’s “AtmaNirbhar Bharat 
Mission”. The program is implemented through PRAYAS Centres (startup incubators) across the country. 
DST provides support to PRAYASEEs (innovators) with a prototype grant of up to Rs. 10 lakhs. DST 
supports setting up PRAYAS Shala (Fab Labs) to facilitate mechanical and digital fabrication, technical 
guidance, and business mentorship to the PRAYASEEs. So far, more than 1000 innovators/startups have 
been supported, resulting in the launch of hundreds of products in the market. Through the NIDHI 
Entrepreneur-In-Residence (EIR) Program, DST provides a monthly fellowship of up to Rs. 30,000 to 
aspiring entrepreneurs to start their entrepreneurial journey and offset high paying job opportunities. 
Understanding the invaluable potential of esteemed Institutions of Excellence, including IITs, 
IISc, IISERs, and Central Universities, DST through its NIDHI Technology Business Incubators (TBIs) 
program has supported establishment of Startup Incubation centres in these academic institutions. Since 
2016, 39 TBIs have been established, including institutes of national importance such as IITs, NITs, and 
IIMs. The program has incubated over 4,000 ventures (including more than 300 by women entrepreneurs) 
and generated more than 20,000 jobs. 
To further enhance the incubation ecosystem in Tier II & Tier III cities, DST has supported setting 
up of 30 Inclusive Technology Business Incubators (I-TBI). These ITBIs focus on inclusiveness in terms 
of geographies, gender, and persons with special abilities. 
With the goal of encouraging a culture of innovation geared towards marketable research outputs, 
DST also supports various programs for the translation of research & technology development to 
prototypes & technology transfers via programs such as Biomedical Device and Technology 
Development (BDTD), Technology Enabling Centres (TEC), Waste Management Technologies (WMT), 
Advanced Manufacturing Technologies and Novel Device Development. 

17 
 
These programs collectively aim to bridge the gap between research and practical application, 
driving technological advancements and fostering innovation across various sectors. The NIDHI-TBI 
component has been pivotal in converting innovations into startup ventures, nurturing a vibrant startup 
ecosystem. These efforts align with DST's broader goal of technology-driven socioeconomic 
development. 
Department of Health Research 
1. Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government 
of India, has established a network of Centres of excellence (CoE) across the country at IITs in 
collaboration with medical Institutes which is supporting multidisciplinary research, development 
and indigenous manufacturing of cost-effective medical devices and diagnostic technologies in 
synergy with National Health Mission (NHM), Ayushman Bharat, Health and Wellness centres.  
2. In alignment with the vision set forth by NITI Aayog; Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) 
in collaboration with the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) has launched the 
‘MedTech Mitra” platform. This initiative aims to empower healthcare innovators across India by 
providing them with comprehensive support. The core objective of MedTech Mitra is to extend 
assistance to innovators in development of prototypes, navigating regulatory processes, facilitating 
clinical evaluations, and fostering the adoption of novel healthcare products. 
3. ICMR has also established an institutional network for supporting Pre-Clinical/Clinical validation 
studies for ensuring safety and efficacy of Medical Devices/Diagnostic Technologies at par with the 
global standards. 
Department of Agriculture Research & Education (ICAR) 
To establish a vibrant Start-up Ecosystem in Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), a 
non-scheme with the name of   National Agriculture Innovation Fund (NAIF) was launched to promotes 
the innovation and incubation activities wherein Council has established 50 Agri-Business Incubation 
Centres (ABICs) in its subject specific institutes  viz. Animal Science (7), Crop Science (13), Agricultural 
Engineering (5), Agricultural Education (2), Horticulture Science (12), Fisheries Science (4), and Natural  
Resource Management (7) which are spread in 20 states of the country. These centers are involved in 
providing the technology and skill up-gradation support to start-up/entrepreneurs which leads to 
promotion of viable enterprises and sustainable start-up business operations. Due to these efforts in the 
last five years (2019-20 to 2023-24) 794 Entrepreneur/ Start-ups initiated their business. 
Department of Biotechnology 
This recommendation has been ‘NOTED’. It is submitted that BIRAC, a Public Sector 
Undertaking of the Department of Biotechnology, is supporting the incubation ecosystem in the biotech 
Sector, thereby, supporting Bio incubation Centers and Startups, through its various Schemes and 
programs. 
 
Recommendation  
5. The Committee notes that to fully harness India's demographic dividend and position as a global 
powerhouse for Science and Technology (S&T) talent, a multitude of coordinated steps like educational 

18 
 
reforms that harmonize the quality of S&T education across States, investment in cutting-edge skill 
development programmes aligned with industry demands, enhancement of India's image as an appealing 
career destination for budding S&T professionals, creating a conducive environment and implement of 
measures to retain and attract talent, both domestic and abroad, facilitating easier access for foreign 
scientists interested in contributing to India's scientific landscape etc would be required. The Committee 
recommends that a holistic approach should be adopted and all the stakeholder Departments should 
collaborate with each other for formulation of such a comprehensive and holistic policy to unlock India's 
vast potential as a global leader in S&T by creating commonly agreed platforms as far as possible. 
(Para 6.16 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
I.  In order to enable HEIs to engage industry experts and professionals in HEIs to share the wealth 
of knowledge gained over their long careers with students, the UGC has developed Guidelines for 
engaging Professors of Practice (PoP) in universities and colleges. UGC has also launched a dedicated 
portal as a one-stop solution for universities and interested candidates to post and find suitable openings 
for them. 
NEP 2020 envisions India’s vast potential as a global leader. The UGC Guidelines for 
Internationalisation of Higher Education also envisages the establishment of Alumni Connect to 
encourage Indian HEIs to engage with Alumni (of foreign origin and Indians living abroad) in order to 
maintain a continuous engagement with the alumni. 
To give international dimensions to higher education, UGC has issued the “Setting up and 
Operation of Campuses of Foreign Higher Educational Institutions in India Regulations” 2023. These 
may enable Indian students to obtain foreign qualifications at affordable cost and make India an attractive 
global study destination. UGC has also issued Regulations on Academic Collaboration between Indian 
and Foreign HEIs to offer Twinning, Joint Degree, and Dual Degree Programmes to promote active 
linkage between Indian and Foreign Higher Education Institutions, research/teaching collaborations, 
faculty/student exchanges. 
In order to facilitate the internationalization of Indian HEIs, UGC has framed guidelines for 
admission and creation of supernumerary seats for international students in undergraduate and 
postgraduate programmes in HEIS in India. 
As per the guidelines, HEIs may create up to 25% supernumerary seats for international students, 
over and above of their total sanctioned enrolment for UG and PG programmes.  
II.  AICTE has published Model Curricula for nine new emerging technologies such as Artificial 
Intelligence, Data Science etc. The curriculum has been drafted in consultation with the industry, 
Academic and Research experts.  

19 
 
New B. Tech. Programmes in VLSI Design Tech, Advanced Communication, Logistic & Supply 
Chain management, Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, and Diploma in IC Manufacturing launched 
to meet the growing manpower requirement in these areas have been started. 
AICTE has instituted provisions for employed persons to upgrade their academic 
qualification/skill sets at diploma/degree/ postgraduate level through flexible mode of teaching-learning. 
III.  SPAs (School of Planning and Architecture) are promoting both National and International 
collaboration in Academics, in the related fields. 
Department of Science & Technology 
In this regard, DST has been making sincere efforts to enhance the R&D expenditure and create 
adequate opportunities for the researchers that include implementation of competitive extramural funding 
schemes and mission mode programmes in emerging areas. The government has taken several steps to 
increase opportunities for pursuing Ph.D. and Post-Doctoral Fellowships (PDFs) for pursuing research 
career in the country. The erstwhile Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) took a decision to 
increase the number of PDFs from 300 annually to 1000. In addition, the VAIBHAV fellowships, SERB-
Ramanujan Fellowship, SERB-Ramalingaswami re-entry Fellowship and SERB-Visiting Advanced Joint 
Research Faculty (VAJRA) scheme, etc. have been devised to attract bright researchers of Indian origin to 
work and contribute to STI ecosystem in India. 
Department of Health Research   
a. The different capacity building components of ICMR and DHR have been rationalized and merged 
as one Human Resources Development (HRD) scheme w.e.f. 2024-25. Different kinds of fellowship 
and funding support for trainings and research grants are provided under this HRD scheme. 
b. ICMR collaborated and signed MoA with AcSIR, for establishment of ICMR- Faculty of Medical 
Research (FMR) for granting PhD degree in the field of Medical Research. This will also encourage 
trans-disciplinary collaborations between ICMR and CSIR. 
c. The collaboration with other ministries/department is also being explored by DHR-ICMR. 
Department of Agriculture Research & Education (ICAR) 
The Under Graduate degree in agriculture and allied areas aims to empower students by offering 
necessary skills and training to enhance opportunities for getting industry related skills along with hands-
on-training to become Job providers instead of Job seekers.  This also boosts an individual's productivity 
and knowledge. The initiative of Student READY was launched in the year 2015-16 conceptualized to 
reorient graduates for greater employability and to develop entrepreneurs in the field of agriculture and 
allied areas. The term READY refers to “Rural and Entrepreneurship Awareness Development Yojana”.  
To reorient graduates for ensuring and assuring employability and develop entrepreneurs for emerging 
knowledge intensive agriculture. 
The Student READY programme consists of five components. 
- Experiential Learning – Business Mode 
- Experiential Learning – Hands-on-Training (Skill Development Mode) 
- Rural Awareness Work Experience (RAWE) 
- In Plant Training/Industrial attachment/ Internship 
- Students Projects 

20 
 
ICAR has supported 495 Experiential Learning Modules in various profitable areas across 76 
agricultural universities. 
Department of Biotechnology 
The recommendation of the Committee to harness India's demographic dividend and position as a 
global powerhouse for Science and Technology (S&T) has been ‘NOTED’. 
The Committee appreciates the work of the Department of Higher Education, Science & 
Technology, Health Research, Agriculture Research & Education and Biotechnology. 
 
Recommendation 
6. The Committee appreciates the commendable research efforts taken by DBT, DST, Institutions of 
Excellence, IITs, IISc, IISERs, CSIR, ICMR, and reputed Central Universities in various scientific 
domains. The Committee suggests that for more substantial research initiatives in specific areas, crucial 
for India's welfare, like curbing the excessive use of harmful chemicals and pesticides detrimental to 
human health, as well as addressing issues of air and water pollution alongside health-specific research in 
both human and cattle diseases, the Committee also recommends for a strategic shift to address these 
critical gaps with the research entities pivoting towards an India-centric, utility- driven approach in their 
scientific endeavors, especially in fields of agriculture, healthcare, and environmental sectors. 
(Para 6.17 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
I.  Currently, 46 Central Universities are fully funded by the UGC. Financial assistance also includes 
support for research. The Universities have been engaged in research in diverse areas. 
II.  IISERs understand the importance of reducing the use of harmful chemicals and pesticides, 
addressing air and water pollution, and focusing on health-related research for both humans and cattle. 
These areas are indeed crucial for the well-being of our nation and align with our ongoing commitment to 
impactful research. In this regard, IISER’s endeavor is to enhance research programs aligned with 
addressing these critical issues and work closely with policymakers and educate the public & stakeholders 
about sustainable practices and the importance of addressing environmental and health-related challenges. 
The research areas being taught at IISER Pune create new knowledge in various domains of the natural 
sciences. IISER Bhopal’s department of Earth and Environment Science, Chemical Engineering are 
involved in conducting research focused on improving the national healthcare, environment and 
agriculture sector. For example, faculty members are conducting research on cancer, polio eradication, 
DNA fingerprint of agriculture crops, plant health and crop residue burning. IISER Mohali have 
generated significant impact in translation research through generation of IP in biogas generation, 
wastewater treatment. The Monsoon and Low-pressure Systems (LPS) at School of Earth, Environment 
and Sustainability Sciences (SEESS), IISER TVM addresses the environmental impacts of monsoon 
variability on the Indian Subcontinent. IISER Tirupati have collaborative programs in Agriculture and 
Environment that are of local and regional importance. Further, IISER Berhampur is engaged with 
research areas of societal impact like Geological aspects of Eastern Ghats, mineral resources in Odisha, 
Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand and Genomics of local flora like Pandanus odorifer (Kewda) plant. 

21 
 
Department of Science & Technology 
DST-WTI is consistently promoting Research Development and Deployment (RD&D) to improve 
water quality by providing a better understanding of the sources and fate of different Emerging pollutants, 
development of sensor technology and supporting the development of management strategies and 
technologies to reduce pollution levels in water. DST has also supported 20 applied research and 
Technology assessment across sectoral projects exploring the important nexus and correlation of Water 
with health. 
Department of Health Research 
The ICMR-NIOH, Ahmadabad is currently involved in studies measuring dioxins and furans in air 
as a part of ongoing studies. Past and ongoing studies also evaluated health risks associated with exposure 
to these harmful chemicals. 
Department of Agriculture Research & Education (ICAR) 
The ICAR is recommending soil test based balanced and integrated nutrient management through 
conjunctive use of both inorganic and organic sources (manure, bio-fertilizers etc.) of plant nutrients to 
ensure judicious use of chemical fertilizers preventing deterioration of soil health and contamination of 
groundwater.  In addition, split application and placement of fertilizers, use of slow releasing N-fertilizers 
and nitrification inhibitors, growing leguminous crops and use of Resource Conservation Technologies 
(RCTs) are also advocated.  However, imbalanced use of chemical fertilizers coupled with low addition 
of organic matter over years may cause multi-nutrient deficiencies vis-à-vis decline in soil health. 
Long term studies conducted by ICAR indicated that bio fertilizers can improve crop yields by 10-
25% and supplement costly chemical fertilizers (N, P) by nearly 20-25% in most of the cases when used 
along with chemical fertilizers. When biofertilizers are applied along with compost @ 5t/ha or 
vermicompost @ 2 tonne/ha, fertilizer saving is almost 50%.  Further, ICAR has developed improved and 
efficient strains of biofertilizers specific to different crops and soil types under Network project on Soil 
Biodiversity-Biofertilizers. Liquid Biofertilizer technology with higher shelf-life has also been developed. 
Besides, the Council has developed technology to prepare bio-enriched compost using various organic 
wastes (Bio gas slurry can also be used) fortified with biofertilizers.  The ICAR also imparts training, 
organizes front-line demonstrations etc. to educate farmers on all these aspects. 
Department of Biotechnology 
The recommendation of the Committee regarding carrying out research which is India-centric and 
utility-driven, especially in fields of agriculture, healthcare and environment has been ‘NOTED’.  
Department of Scientific & Industrial Research  
Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee’s recognition and appreciation towards CSIR 
commendable research works in various scientific domain. CSIR is actively funding/ executing research 
projects related to wastewater treatment. Some of the CSIR research projects which are running or have 
been successfully completed are as below: 
● Bio-electrocatalytic Device to Enhance Chemical Wastewater Treatment Efficiency;  
● Field testing and validation of a modular onsite wastewater treatment & resource recovery unit; 

22 
 
● Development of Compact Vehicle integrated mechanized septic tank cleaning machine for fecal 
sludge and wastewater management; 
● Batch scale production of high quality activated carbon from biomass wastes for waste water 
treatment - An initiative towards waste to wealth;  
● Advanced Water Treatment System of Anti-Fouling Hollow Fibre and Nano Filtration 
Membranes;  
● Pilot scale demonstration of coal mine water usage for commercial algal production for food-
fertilizer in hybrid photo-bioreactor for combating malnutrition; 
● Multiscale modelling and computational design of high-performance materials for remediation of 
polluted water;  
● Ecological processes and prediction of coastal pollution in Mumbai waters;  
● Technology development for removal of API pollutants and industrial waste water treatment; 
● Natural Biopolymer based novel Electrospun and Ceramic composite membranes for treatment of 
wastewater; 
● Occurrence, Toxicity and Microbial Remediation of PAHs in Indian Wastewater Treatment plants 
(WWTPs) sludge; 
● Development of a process for Secondary Sludge minimization in aerobic waste water treatment 
system; and  
● Process for recycling of tea factory wastewater 
 
The Committee appreciates the work done by Department of Higher Education, Science & 
Technology, Health Research, Agriculture Research & Education, Biotechnology, Scientific & Industrial 
Research. 
Recommendation 
7. The Committee notes that for a developing country like India, investing in space science research 
not only drives technological advancements but also addresses crucial socio-economic and developmental 
challenges, through better monitoring of natural resources, including water resources, forest cover, and 
agricultural productivity. Also, Space-based technologies offer critical data for predicting natural disasters 
such as floods, cyclones, and droughts helping in early warning systems, evacuation planning, and 
efficient disaster response and thereby reducing the impact on lives and infrastructure. Taking note of 
this, the Committee recommends for introducing specialized courses in space science, astronomy, 
astrophysics, and related fields within departments of science and establishing collaborations between 
Universities and space research organizations like ISRO (Indian Space Research Organisation) to provide 
students with research opportunities. Further, internships, joint projects, and mentorship programs which 
can foster practical skills and knowledge and organize seminars, workshops, and outreach programs 
should also be encouraged to generate interest in space science among the public and attract more 
students to pursue careers in this field. 
(Para 6.18 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
I.  To create research and internship opportunities that engage students across diverse fields, 
equipping them with in-depth knowledge and preparing them for success in the industry UGC has 
launched Guidelines for Internship/Research Internship for Undergraduate Students to help 
various aspects of Internship & Research Internships for undergraduate students. These aim at 

23 
 
integration of workshop with workplace, understanding of the world of work, develop research aptitude, 
provide exposure in emerging technologies, enhance entrepreneurial capabilities, stimulate collaborative 
influence and help enhance professional competency among learners. The Guidelines create two 
categories of internships- one for enhancing employability and one for research.  
In addition, UGC constantly disseminates information to sensitize HEIs for active participation in 
programmes related to space science, astronomy, astrophysics, and related fields as and when such 
advisories are received from the Govt. of India / space research organizations like ISRO (Indian Space 
Research Organisation). 
II.  In order to provide for industry ready workforce in space sector, AICTE has recently provided for 
a minor degree in space technology. The curriculum structure encompasses a comprehensive range of 
subjects, from the basics of launch vehicle systems to advanced space data products and services. 
III.  Affordable housing has been an area of the Institutes' Research. Moreover, SPA (School of 
Planning and Architecture) Vijayawada and the National Remote Sensing Centre, ISRO, Department of 
Space, GoI, Hyderabad had entered into a Memorandum of Understand in 2014. The MoU was for 
"Bhuvan-NUIS: Geospatial Support Framework for Master Plan formulation by ULBs and other statutory 
authorities" There were a few training programmes and technical sessions organised at SPA Vijayawada 
involving working various staff of DTCP, ULBs, and faculty from SPA Vijayawada. Besides, a few 
knowledge exchanges and lectures were organised involving the academia and staff from ISRO, 
Hyderabad. 
Department of Space  
1) IIST offers a standalone master program, Master of Science in Astronomy and two MTech 
programs in Geoinformatics and Earth System Science. 
2) The students graduating with a Dual Degree in B. Tech Engineering Physics also have the option 
to specialize in Astronomy and Astrophysics and also in Earth System Sciences. In addition, the students 
from other disciplines also have the option to study different courses related to Astronomy and 
Astrophysics as electives. 
3) As a centrally funded institute under DOS, IIST desires to expand outreach activities to promote 
awareness about space science and technology education to the younger generation. The institute 
conducts an annual social program for socially and economically backwards sections of the community 
such as NIRMAAN. Moreover, other social outreach programs such as IIST@schools, ANVIKA, 
NUMATS and Unnat Bharat Abhiyan social are also conducted to inspire young minds to take up STEM 
as their choice of higher studies. 
4) In the institute we follow the product life cycle from ideation to the final product. Initially the idea 
is conceived in collaboration with UG/PG/PHD students and after extensive research work the findings 
are published in a reputed peer reviewed journal. Subsequently many of these ideas are worked upon to 
create a useful product for various applications. 
5) Some of them include products like, Electric propulsion Diagnostic module (EDM), surface 
discharge spark plugs, high efficient burners, laser based rocket ignition system, and sensors for 
biomedical applications. 
6) Similarly, the institute is engaged in generating human resources through our UG, PG, and PhD 
programs in emerging areas but not limited to AI-ML, Multi-Frequency SAR, Quantum Communication 
and Cryptography, Space Healthcare and Wellness, etc. 

24 
 
7) Within the institute the UG/PG/PhD students have established 16 clubs to inculcate their hobbies 
and amalgamate the same with their education. Some of the popular 
clubs are Photography club, Computer club, Robotics club, Aero club, Music and Performing Arts club, 
Quiz club, Yoga club and Astronomy club to name a few. The institute plans to encourage more clubs to 
enhance the various activities in the institute. There are several student branch chapters of various 
societies in IIST, such as IEEE, IEEE-GSRS, SPIE-USA, and student chapter in OSA. The students 
engaged in these clubs and student chapters take part in wide range of activities that help them to develop 
their practical skills in addition. 
8) 5G user case lab was awarded to IIST in the Digital India Conclave on 27th Oct 2023. IIST will 
be focusing on developing 5G and 6 G-based solutions that will benefit the society and will also venture 
into lOT-based solutions to the development of blockchain, Industry 4.0, etc. 
9) In line with NEP-2020 and Amrutkal-2047 the institute is planning to engage in various domains, 
including quantum technology, additive manufacturing, intelligent robotics and humanoid, Artificial 
Intelligence applied to space science and technology, 6G and IOT, human physiology associated with 
space exploration, sensor development and similar areas. 
10) In the year 2012 the students designed, developed, realized and launched a sounding rocket, 
VYOM under the mentorship of faculty members and ISRO scientists. The students and faculty have also 
developed payloads like ARIS for ionosphere measurements. The students under the mentorship of 
faculty established a ground station that was made operational in Jan 2021. An international collaborative 
effort between IIST, NTU Singapore, University of Colorado, USA, and National University of Taiwan 
resulted in the design, development and launch of a small satellite, lnspireSat-1 through PSLV in Feb 
2022. 
11) IIST’s Ground station, developed by the students and faculty members for telecommunication and 
data transfer with any satellite in space, is accessible for other institutes, startups and private industries for 
their required utilization. 
12) In IIST, many students carry out their projects and research work in various ISRO Centres that 
have programmatic linkages with Gaganyaan, Electric Propulsion, Scramjet Propulsion, different aspects 
of space economy, etc. This makes them Industry-ready, and they have hands-on experience in building 
small satellites, payloads, ground stations, various systems of sounding rockets, creating space 
applications and data-based solutions. 
13) The institute is planning to conduct multiple workshops on topics such as generative Al and its 
applications, IOT and block chain, and other areas to promote AI-ML research. 
14)       IIST is planning to engage with Industries in the Space Sector proactively and in other domains 
that will specifically focus on translational research aimed at developing products and solutions relevant 
to the industry and society. As on date, the Advanced Space Research Group (ASRG) at IIST is 
continuously engaging with various ISRO centers, developing space-based solutions. The establishment 
of a similar framework to engage with private industries is currently under consideration. As of now 27 
projects with seven ISRO centers such as VSSC, LPSC, HSFC, SAC, ISTRAC, LEOS, and IISU are 
being carried out. These projects are broadly in the area of but not limited to electric propulsion 
diagnostic, space biology under microgravity, gas sensors for crew module, human body 
thermoregulation for Gaganyan mission, Deep learning for weather nowcasting, and development of 
newer material for advancing battery technology. 
 
 

25 
 
Department of Biotechnology 
The recommendation of the Committee has been ‘NOTED’. The Department of Biotechnology is 
actively engaging with the Department of Space on various aspects of biotech related activities. 
The Committee appreciates the work done by the Departments of Higher Education, Space and 
Biotechnology. 
 
Recommendation 
8. The Committee recommends that the University Grants Commission (UGC) should take a focused 
approach through formulation of a blueprint to bolster the research scenario in India and the following 
points be examined in light of current policies while developing the proposed blueprint: 
• mechanisms to encourage a robust research culture across universities by incentivizing and 
recognizing research contributions, developing schemes that reward quality publications, patents, and 
impactful research outcomes. 
• increase funding specifically earmarked for research activities within Universities, facilitate grants 
for research projects, infrastructure development, and faculty development programs. 
• foster an environment conducive to interdisciplinary research by encouraging collaborations 
among departments and institutions and establishing more interdisciplinary research centers to tackle 
complex challenges requiring diverse expertise. 
• facilitate partnerships and collaborations with global universities and research institutions, 
encourage joint research projects, student exchange programs, and access to international funding 
opportunities. 
• invest in faculty development programs focusing on research methodologies, proposal writing, 
and mentorship with experienced researchers guiding and mentoring young faculty to elevate research 
standards. 
• upgrade and modernize research infrastructure by providing state-of-the-art laboratories, libraries, 
and technology facilities and ensuring accessibility to cutting-edge equipment and resources for 
researchers. 
• promote adherence to ethical guidelines in research practices and ensure transparency. 
•       forging stronger ties with industries to align research goals with real-world challenges, collaborate 
on research projects, internships, and skill development programs that address industry needs. 
• implement robust mechanisms for monitoring and evaluating research outcomes, ensuring 
accountability and quality assurance across universities. 
(Para 6.19 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
The UGC has implemented several measures to enhance the research environment for students and 
promote a culture of research. UGC has taken the following steps towards achieving the same: 
● In line with the recommendations of the NEP, UGC has developed a Curriculum and Credit 
Framework for both undergraduate and postgraduate programs. The Curriculum and Credit 
Framework for Undergraduate Programmes is a tool to implement holistic and multidisciplinary 
education. It provides an opportunity to focus on the chosen major and minors as per the student’s 
choices. With the introduction of these Guidelines, the Universities have the option of providing a 
Four-Year Undergraduate Programme (4th year focused to Research) so that the students can study 
extensively one or more specialised areas of interest and also develop capabilities across a range 

26 
 
of disciplines, including sciences, social sciences, arts, humanities, and languages as well as 
professional, technical and vocational subjects. 
● Multidisciplinary education prepares learners to develop more profound skills and approach 
problems with broader perspectives and it also helps foster a research culture. Towards 
implementing this vision of multidisciplinary education, the University Grants Commission 
issued the "Guidelines for Transforming Higher Education Institutions into 
Multidisciplinary Institutions”. All Higher Educational Institutions are encouraged to offer 
multidisciplinary and cross-disciplinary teaching and research across fields. 
● In line with NEP, 2020, the UGC notified the University Grants Commission (Academic 
Collaboration between Indian and Foreign Higher Educational Institutions to offer 
Twinning, Joint Degree and Dual Degree Programmes) Regulations. These Regulations will 
provide global exposure to students, internationalisation at home, multi-disciplinary education 
with an internationally relevant curriculum and enhance employability. More than 70 Indian 
universities are collaborating with foreign higher educational institutions across the world. 
● In order to capitalise on India’s demographic dividend, it is essential not only to improve the 
quality of education but also to make it relevant in terms of providing employment opportunities. 
Realising the importance of apprenticeship/internship and making fresh graduates’ employment-
ready with the necessary knowledge, competencies and attitude, the UGC launched the 
Guidelines on Internship/Apprenticeship Embedded Degree Programme in August 2020. 
The Committee appreciates the work done by the Department of High Education and UGC. 

27 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee recommends that the Department of Higher Education, UGC, AICTE and 
Department of Science and Technology must take a proactive stance in identifying key national priorities, 
emerging frontiers, and strategic research areas and imperatively allocate substantial funding to these 
crucial research projects. Moreover, the Committee emphasizes the need for adequate funding towards 
research endeavors aimed at identifying scientific and practical solutions for addressing societal, 
developmental, financial, and techno-economic challenges, aligning with the objectives outlined in the 
Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF). The Committee is of the view that this strategic 
allocation of resources is essential to drive impactful innovation and address pressing societal needs 
effectively. 
(Para 6.2 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education informed that NEP 2020 envisages the promotion of quality 
research within the Higher Education System. Research and innovation are essential aspects of enhancing 
quality education in Higher Education Institutions. 
The progress of India as a nation depends on its ability to foster innovation, research, and 
development across various fields. One crucial component of this is the support and encouragement of 
individuals pursuing Ph.D.  Doctoral research is the most significant catalyst for innovations and to 
accelerate the overall development of a country. Strengthening of innovation infrastructure is one of the 
priorities of nations to compete for a knowledge-driven market. India having the largest young population 
in the world has the highest prospect of establishing herself as a leading country in the knowledge 
division market, provided there is continuous growth in the magnitude of providing higher education of 
high standards.  
Taking the above view into consideration, the UGC has brought out Guidelines for the 
establishment of Research and Development Cell (RDC) in universities and colleges with a vision: - 
● To create a conducive environment for enhanced research productivity.  
● To encourage collaboration across industry, government, community- based organizations, and 
agencies at the local, national, and international levels.  
● To facilitate greater access to research through mobilization of resources and funding.  
 
The establishment of the Research and Development Cell (RDC) in Higher Education Institutions 
(HEIs) will enable the attainment of targets of Atma-Nirbhar Bharat and is expected to play a pivotal role 
in catalysing the multidisciplinary/ trans-disciplinary and translational research culture mandated in NEP 
2020. 
 
Further, following actions have been taken by UGC: 
 
⮚ UGC organizes online lectures by eminent persons for R&D Cell coordinators/Directors to share 
the best practices. Four lectures in the series have already been organized. 
⮚ UGC, from time to time, shares advisories regarding R&D programmes, exhibitions, conferences 
and symposia. 

28 
 
⮚ Up to the month of July, 2024, 1643 Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) have established 
Research & Development cells as per UGC guidelines. The institution-wise break-up is as under: 
 
Colleges 1294 
Central Universities 42 
Private Universities 131 
Deemed to be Universities 56 
State Universities 120 
Total 1643 
 
Providing financial support for researchers through scholarships and fellowships is imperative and 
is undertaken by the UGC under various schemes. In this direction, the Junior Research Fellowship (JRF) 
scheme of UGC caters to the scholarship/fellowship requirements for students pursuing research, 
wherein, around ₹ 2,000 crore was allocated during the year 2023-24. 
Further, for the promotion and advancement of research in key national priorities, emerging frontiers, and 
strategic research areas, UGC launched two new Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) on the 
SWAYAM platform on Arctic and Polar Studies and Understanding the Arctic which are based on the 
Arctic Policy (IAP) released by the Government of India and underscores India's commitment to 
advancing polar research and education. Two more courses, i.e., Climate and Environmental 
Protection and Arctic Studies are expected to be launched soon. An amount of  ₹27,00,000/- have been 
disbursed for the development of these MOOCs.  
A good research ecosystem is supported by several key stakeholders. In this, a pivotal role is 
played by the faculty members as they are essential for innovation and academic rigor and their training 
plays a vital role in fostering an environment conducive to high-quality research. Realizing this, UGC has 
conducted training of faculty members on Community Based Participatory Research. 
 
II.  With an aim to promote research and innovation in established and newer technologies in 
engineering sciences and emerging areas such as VLSI, IoT, Artificial Intelligence, UAV etc, AICTE has 
been running the Research Promotion Scheme (RPS) since the year 2017-18.  
 
Further, AICTE organizes various competitions on identifying the scientific and practical themes 
for encouragement to innovation and creativity in these areas. Some of these initiatives include AICTE’s 
Inter-Institutional Biomedical Innovations Programme and Bharath Cycle Design Challenge etc. 
 
III.  Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF) Act, 2023, provides for constitution of the 
Governing Board which shall provide high level strategic direction, perform and monitor the 
implementation of the objectives of the Foundation. To implement the provisions of this Act, an 
Executive Council is also to be constituted chaired by the Principal Scientific Advisor to GoI along with 
Secretaries of various line Ministries/ departments as members. This coordination will ensure a synergy 
between various departments to decide identifying key national priorities, emerging frontiers, and 
strategic research areas and allocation of substantial funding to these crucial research projects. As 
mentioned in the ANRF Act, the ANRF shall serve as the apex body to provide high level strategic 
direction for research, innovation and entrepreneurship in various fields. Various objectives are also 
outlined in the said Act to be undertaken by ANRF, which are in line with the recommendation of the 
committee.  
 
IV.  SPAs (School of Planning and Architecture) undertake research in the field of Architecture, 
Design and Planning fields with emphasis on human settlements and connected areas. 

29 
 
Department of Science & Technology 
The Department of Science and Technology has been sincerely putting its efforts to identify key 
national priorities, emerging frontiers, and strategic research areas along with allocation of adequate 
funding. DST has set up a programme division named Frontiers and Futuristic Technologies which is 
mainly focusing on the frontier technology areas. 
The centrally established ANRF will transparently seed, fund, and coordinate research across 
institutions in the country, in all disciplines in an integrated manner, with a special mandate to foster 
research and innovation in universities and colleges. This will also include interdisciplinary research to 
provide practical solutions to social development, financial and techno-economic challenges of the nation. 
The ANRF will ensure the quality and quantity of research across universities and institutions and will 
promote quality workforce. Best R&D practices will be adopted in the ANRF to make the R&D 
enterprise more vibrant, competent and productive. 
As observed by the Committee, ANRF will ensure strategic allocation of resources to drive 
impactful innovation and address pressing societal needs effectively. 
 
Department of Biotechnology 
The recommendation has been noted by D/o Biotechnology. 
 
Comments/Observations of the Committee 
The Committee appreciates the actions/steps taken by the Department of Higher Education, 
University Grants Commission (UGC), All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and 
Department of Science and Technology in identifying key national priorities, emerging frontiers 
and strategic research areas, practically addressing the endeavors of funding the scientific research 
and aligning them with the objectives of the Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF).  
The Committee also notes that the Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF) Act, 
2023 was brought out in letter and spirit. As per the provisions, an Executive Council was 
constituted wherein high level strategic directions were given, performance monitored and 
implementation of the objectives of the Foundation was envisioned.  However, in its discussions on 
the Demands for Grants of the Department of Higher Education in FY 2024-25, the Committee was 
informed that the ANRF had not been able to spend any of its budgeted funds for the previous 
financial year. In this regard, the Committee needs to be apprised of the current status of the 
ANRF’s functioning and further initiatives undertaken, if any. 
Recommendation  
2. The Committee firmly believes that coordination among the Central Government, State 
Governments, public authorities, industries, and research institutions regarding the documentation, 
analysis of expenditure on scientific research and its outcomes is the key to a synergized use of financial 
resources and achieve better outcomes and hence, recommends bolstering the coordination mechanisms 
amongst them through enhanced collaboration and information sharing. Furthermore, the Committee 
emphasizing the importance of enhancing private sector involvement in activities associated with the NRF 
recommends for encouraging and facilitating private sector investment in research, as well as promoting 
funding partnerships, which will significantly contribute to the advancement and promotion of scientific 
research initiatives. 
(Para 6.3 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 

30 
 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
I.  Inter-ministerial collaboration not only enhances the quality and relevance of research but also 
promotes efficient use of resources and fosters innovation, ultimately benefiting society as a whole. UGC 
has organized inter-ministerial consultations aimed towards smoothening the process of fellowship 
disbursements and migration of candidates. Some of the Ministries/Departments that have participated in 
these meetings are the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (MoSJE), Ministry of Minority 
Affairs (MoMA), Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA), Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities (DEPwD). 
II.  As mentioned above, to implement the provisions of the ANRF Act, Executive Council to be 
constituted chaired by the Principal Scientific Advisor to GoI along with Secretaries of various line 
Ministries/ departments as members. This coordination will ensure synergy between various departments.   
Under ANRF Act, one of the initiatives is to coordinate across the Central Government, State 
Governments, public authorities, industries, and research institutions, to document and analyze the 
expenditure on scientific research and their outcomes during each financial year, and report the same to 
the Central Government. The Foundation is also expected to encourage the Public Sector Enterprises as 
well as the private sector entities to invest in the activities of the Foundation. 
For establishment of ANRF, it is envisaged that Rs 36,000 Cr will be sourced through donations 
from industry, public sector enterprises, philanthropist organizations, foundations, international bodies 
etc.  
III.  SPAs (School of Planning and Architecture) are providing their expertise to Central Government 
and State Governments/departments, like MoHUA, GOI. Wherever there is a lack of such expertise, these 
are coordinating with private agencies/experts. 
Department of Science & Technology  
DST has been implementing the National Science and Technology Management Information 
System (NSTMIS) which is mandated with quantification of S&T resources for benchmarking and 
assessment of S&T potential of the country. Key indicators being assessed include expenditure on 
scientific research, human resources devoted to S&T activities and their outcomes. The data sources 
attribute to multiple verticals in the central government, state government and business sector. Significant 
efforts have been taken up for effective coordination and collaboration with different stakeholders to 
achieve this mammoth exercise of data collection from around 8000 institutions. 
ANRF is an overarching apex body for coordinating across Central Government, State 
Governments, Public Authorities, Industries and Research Institutions and encouraging collaboration with 
scientists, in order to enrich the Indian scientific ecosystem. 
ANRF will get involved with an annual survey of outcomes of scientific research in India, with a 
view to create a central repository, for the collection, interpretation and analysis of information and 
thereby synergize better use of financial resources and achieve better outcomes. Substantial funding will 
be resourced from the private sector. 

31 
 
Department of Biotechnology 
The recommendation of the Committee has been ‘NOTED’ for enhanced collaboration and 
information sharing between various Departments of Central and State Government and relevant 
agencies, institutions.   
Comments/Observations of the Committee 
 The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Department of Science and Technology and 
would like to be appraised of the operative aspects of implementation of the National Science and 
Technology Management Information System (NSTMIS). The Committee is, however, not happy 
with the reply of the Department of Biotechnology and, therefore, recommends that the Department 
of Biotechnology should consider putting in place a structure/working modalities in its organization 
in order to enhance collaboration and information sharing in a coordinated manner between 
Centre, States and concerned agencies to enrich the Indian scientific research ecosystem. The 
Committee expects a more concrete reply on the implementation aspects. 
Recommendation  
3. The Committee underscores the significant reliance of esteemed Institutions of Excellence, 
including IITs, IISc, IISERs, and Central Universities engaged in diverse scientific research, on 
government funding. While recognizing the invaluable contributions of these institutions, the Committee 
recommends for a strategic shift towards fostering research endeavors that hold market potential with 
these institutions to pivot towards developing and promoting research outputs that are commercially 
viable, capable of generating revenue streams to sustain their research initiatives autonomously. The 
Committee also feels that encouraging a culture of innovation geared towards marketable research outputs 
will not only reduce the strain on Government funding but also empower these institutions to become self-
sufficient entities and will channelize their research outcomes into practical applications, fostering a self-
sustaining ecosystem of innovation and funding for continual advancement. 
(Para 6.8 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education  
I.  The NEP 2020 aims to create a seamless bridge between academia and industry, fostering 
innovation, employability and economic growth. To achieve the same UGC launched the Guidelines on 
Sustainable and Vibrant University-Industry Linkage System for Indian Universities. The 
guidelines envisage that creation of R&D Clusters, Creation of the Industry Relations Cell (IRC) at a 
University/ Institute/College, Creation of the University Relations Cell (URC) in an Industry can be some 
of the major steps to be taken for enhancing industry-academic partnerships. 
Further, the "UGC Guidelines for the Institutional Development Plan for Higher Educational 
Institutions (HEIs)" advocate for a holistic approach to institutional growth emphasizing interdisciplinary 
collaboration, industry alliances, and community engagement. These encourage HEIs to strengthen 
Academia-Industry and Academia-Community partnerships via diverse initiatives. 
In particular, UGC’s Guidelines on Optimal Utilization of Resources Available in Central 
Universities/Higher Education Institutions encourages the Central Universities to generate internal 

32 
 
revenue through consultancy services and intellectual resources such as IPR, royalties, technology 
transfer etc. 
II.  AICTE has launched a scheme to establish AICTE-IDEA (Idea Development, Evaluation & 
Application) Lab in the technical institutions to support the new age learning and 21st century skills and 
encouraging students for application of science, technologies, engineering and mathematics (STEM) 
fundamentals towards enhanced hands-on experience, learning by doing and product visualization. 
AICTE co-funds the 24x7 IDEA Lab, providing up to 50% of the project cost, not exceeding Rs. 55 lakh; 
the remaining amount has to be brought in by the college or from the industry/ any other source. The 
scheme was launched on January 1, 2021. 
The Innovation Cell facilitated by AICTE has supported Higher Education Institutes to establish 
Institution Innovation Councils (IICs) in more than 14000 HEIs to support innovation and 
entrepreneurship in campuses across 28 states and 9 UTs. 
III.  To create an ecosystem that strengthen the industry-academia linkage, Research Parks have been 
established by Government in various IITs such as Madras, Bombay, Delhi, Kharagpur, Kanpur, 
Hyderabad, Guwahati and IISc Bangalore.  
Further, IITs have also developed robust ecosystems that promote marketable innovations. 
Regular workshops, training programs, and initiatives such as hackathons, fellowships, and grand 
challenges are organized to enhance the entrepreneurial mindset among researchers and students. These 
activities focus on industry-relevant problems, encouraging faculty and students to engage in research 
with commercial potential. 
Strong ties with industry partners have been established to ensure research meets market needs. 
Collaboration with industry experts, government line ministries, and startups has been pivotal in 
identifying relevant problem statements, evaluating technology, developing market-ready products, and 
fostering partnerships for successful commercialization. Incubation centers have been set up to support 
startups, providing infrastructure, mentorship, and financial support. 
IV.  IISERs fully understand the importance of creating revenue streams to sustain our research 
initiatives autonomously and reduce reliance on government funding. IISERs are committed towards 
Market-Driven Research, Encouraging Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Strengthening Industry 
Collaborations. Some of the IISERs promote entrepreneurship through institute incubation engine 
wherein start-up culture is flourishing. Atal Incubation Centre (AIC-SEED) is technology business 
incubator, hosted and promoted by IISER Pune with an objective to stimulate and encourage the growth 
of deep science-based startup. IISER Bhopal promotes entrepreneurship through its Innovation and 
Incubation Centre for Entrepreneurship (IICE) to convert in-house generated technologies and ideas in to 
commercial products. Over the past few years, faculty members and external stakeholders have shown 
interest in opening start-up companies to commercialize their innovations. Further, the Technology 
Business Incubator of IISER Mohali mentors and supports numerous technological startups which not 
only generates employment but also opens up possible future streams for the institute. The endeavor of 
IISER Mohali is to generate and commercialize Intellectual Property (IP) from its innovative research 

33 
 
outputs. Further, IISER Tirupati has cutting-edge research in many areas of strong market potential which 
includes projects sponsored by TATA Steel, GAIL, etc. 
V.  Sharing of Research facilities established with Government funding is a right move. SPAs (School 
of Planning and Architecture) are also listing their equipment on ISTEM for use of research, for intended 
users. 
Department of Biotechnology 
The institutes of the Department of Biotechnology are broadly following similar principles of 
promoting and fostering research and innovation, geared towards marketable outputs.    
Comments/Observations of the Committee 
The Committee notes the work done to enable closer coordination of research and industry 
in IITs, IISc, IISERs, and SPAs. However, the Committee would encourage the Department to also 
support such efforts in the NITs, IIITs, and Central Universities – which also offer abundant 
opportunities for such industry-linked research, but which appear to have fewer Departmental schemes 
to support them.  
 
Recommendation  
4. The Committee acknowledges the commendable initiative in awarding 3,690 scholarships under 
the PMRF (Prime Minister's Research Fellowship) between May 2018 and May 2023. 
The Committee notes that expanding the PMRF initiative will not only provide a larger platform 
for exceptional talent but also propel India's research landscape to be more competitive on the world stage 
and will serve as a catalyst for innovation and scholarly pursuits, empowering a greater number of 
scholars to pursue impactful research that contributes significantly to the nation's scientific and academic 
advancement. Towards this aim, the Committee recommends a significant increase in the number of 
fellowships offered under PMRF 2.0. The Committee also stresses that fellowship amount should also be 
increased to attract and retain the brightest minds. 
(Para 6.9 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
I.   The recommendations of the committee have been noted. Proposal to take up PMRF 2.0 to further 
improve the quality of research in various higher educational institutions in the country is under active 
consideration in this Department.  
II.  SPAs (School of Planning and Architecture) are also increasing trying to increase the intake of 
Research/Ph.D Scholars. They are giving JRF/SRF as per Gol guidelines. 
Department of Space 
1) IIST is not included in the PMRF scholarship scheme. However, IIST has around 200+ PhD 
students enrolled currently. Many students are involved in cutting-edge research. 
2) The PMRF fellowship can be extended to IIST students, too. IIST has made an appeal to the 
PMRF awarding agency for possible inclusion. They have agreed to discuss the same in the next 

34 
 
administrative meeting. There is also a positive response from MoE for considering IIST under PMRF 
scholarship scheme. 
PMRF is currently available to students in IISc, NTs and IISERs, and Central Universities/NITs 
offering science and/or technology degrees, which appear in the list of, top 25 institutes in the NIRF 
ranking (overall) in the previous year. 
Comments/Observations of the Committee 
The Committee notes the initiative undertaken by the Department of Higher Education 
regarding the Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF) 2.0 Scheme to further improve the 
quality of research in higher educational institutions and nurturing a new generation of innovative 
researchers across the country. However, the Committee notes that the PMRF 2.0 was announced 
during the Union Budget for FY 2025 but has not yet been implemented as of July, 2025. Similarly, 
the Committee observed that the IIST has not been brought under the umbrella of PMRF 
Fellowship Scheme so far. The Committee therefore recommends that initiatives should be taken by 
the Department of Higher Education to notify the PMRF 2.0 on an accelerated timeline, and to 
extend the PMRF Fellowship Scheme to IIST and apprise the Committee accordingly.  
Recommendation  
5. The Committee notes that substantial physical infrastructure, encompassing laboratories, 
computational resources, and other facilities, coupled with robust institutional and administrative support, 
are indispensable for advancing science and engineering research. The operational expenses incurred in 
maintaining these essential facilities and cutting-edge research equipment are considerable. Internationally 
renowned universities cover these costs, including infrastructure development and maintenance, through 
overheads or indirect costs on research grants. The Committee, therefore, stresses that it is imperative by 
the concerned Ministries/ Departments to reconsider the overheads provided on public-funded research 
projects as the current rate falls significantly short of meeting the actual operational expenses which 
impedes the progress and affordability of research initiatives. In light of this, the Committee strongly 
recommends that funding agencies for scientific research, such as the Department of Science and 
Technology, Department of Biotechnology, Department of Higher Education, etc. should allocate 
additional funds for the development and maintenance of physical infrastructure, including laboratories, 
computational resources, equipment and machineries in particular and other facilities, for all publicly 
funded research projects in various scientific disciplines. This supplementary allocation will help the 
institutions like IITs, Central Universities, and Higher Education Institutes to bolster their infrastructure 
and sustain high-quality research endeavours effectively. 
(Para 6.10 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
I. Currently, 46 Central Universities are fully funded by the UGC. These grants are being provided 
for their overall development covering aspects like enhancing access, ensuring equity, imparting relevant 
education, improving quality, making the administration effective, enhancing facilities for students, 
augmenting research facilities and any other plans of universities. The financial assistance to the 
universities includes both Capital and Revenue (Salary and Recurring Expenditure) grants. These Central 
Universities have been engaged in research in diverse areas.  

35 
 
II.  The Ministry of Education releases funds to IITs as Grant-In-Aid for their recurring and non-
recurring expenditure from the scheme – ‘Support to IITs’ under three Heads viz. OH-35 (Capital), OH-
36 (Salary) and OH-31 (Other Recurring exp. Such as Pension, Scholarships, Administrative expenses 
etc.) In order to make the institutions self-sustainable in terms of taking up infrastructure/ capital 
activities, HEFA has been introduced. IITs are applying for loans through HEFA to strengthen their 
infrastructure. Further this department has also initiated the proposal for expansion of 3rd generation IITs. 
Department of Biotechnology 
This recommendation has been ‘NOTED’. It is submitted that Department of Biotechnology 
supports creation of research infrastructure in academic and research institutions across the country, 
through specific programs such as DBT-Boost to University Interdisciplinary Life science Departments 
for Education and Research programme (DBT-BUILDER) and DBT-Scientific Infrastructure Access for 
Harnessing Academia University Research Joint Collaboration (DBT-SAHAJ). 
Department of Science & Technology 
The recommendation has been noted by D/o Science & Technology. 
Comments/Observations of the Committee 
The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Education regarding release of 
funds for research activities in Higher Educational Institutions. The Committee is, however, of the 
view that steps should be taken to optimize resource utilisation/management and invest in 
sustainable and cost-effective research infrastructure building which would increase research 
funding availability and enhance research affordability thereby developing a sustainable research 
eco-system in the country. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken by the Department of 
Biotechnology to bolster their research infrastructure and sustain high-quality research endeavours 
effectively. 
Recommendation  
6. The Committee notes the potential benefits of One Nation One Subscription (ONOS) initiative 
thereby promoting interdisciplinary research and its alignment with national policies like the National 
Education Policy 2020 (NEP), the draft Science Technology and Innovation Policy (STIP), and the vision 
of the National Research Foundation (NRF) in driving inclusive access to knowledge resources. The 
Committee strongly recommends the accelerated implementation of the One Nation One Subscription 
(ONOS) initiative to democratize access to scholarly publications and journals across all higher education 
and research institutions in India as access to scientific literature, primarily through digital journals, is 
currently hindered by exorbitant subscription costs and limited availability. 
(Para 6.14 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
I.  In order to facilitate inclusive access to knowledge resources, the INFLIBNET has launched e-
Shodh Sindhu, an online system that provides access to more than 10,000 e-journals and 8 lakhs e-books 
to more than 390 universities and more than 3800 colleges. 

36 
 
II.  One Nation One Subscription (ONOS) Scheme has been approved under which access to prized 
publications is provided to the needy Researchers at affordable cost. 
Department of Science & Technology 
Implementation of the ONOS is being coordinated by Office of the Principal Scientific Adviser to 
the Govt. of India. 
Department of Health Research 
This initiative is already being undertaken by PSA office and it is under consideration at ICMR 
Department of Agriculture Research & Education (ICAR) 
 Currently, Consortium for e-Resources in Agriculture (popularly known as CeRA) is an e-
Consortium of Agricultural Libraries under the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for National 
Agricultural Research and Education System (NARES) Libraries including State Agricultural 
Universities (SAUs), Central Agricultural Universities (CAUs), and Deemed Universities and ICAR 
institutes. As ONOS is implemented, CeRA e-resources would be merged in ONOS, ICAR would also be 
a part of this initiative and all e-resources subscribed under ONOS would be accessible to all Institutes 
and agricultural universities under NARES. 
Comments/Observations of the Committee 
The Committee notes that the ONOS scheme has been approved and implemented. The 
Committee’s recommendation had called for the accelerated implementation of the ONOS scheme. 
However, as the Committee noted in its 364th Report on Demand for Grants of the Higher 
Education Department (FY 24-25), about 4,000 of the 7,008 eligible institutions had still not 
received the benefits of the ONOS. The Committee would direct the Department to provide 
updated information on the current status of the ONOS’s reach, and provide an update on the steps 
taken to accelerate the scheme’s implementation. 
 
 
 

37 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation 
1.   The Committee strongly recommends for a comprehensive support framework from key 
Departments such as the Department of Higher Education and its subordinate bodies like UGC, AICTE 
and Departments of the Ministry of Science and Technology, extending their assistance to universities for 
the promotion and advancement of research in scientific and related fields. This support should 
encompass funding initiatives, active mentorship, guidance, and capacity-building measures to empower 
universities in their research endeavours. The Committee feels that these Departments can play a pivotal 
role in nurturing a robust research ecosystem across the academic landscape by actively catering to the 
needs of Universities. Initiatives such as targeted funding, guidance on best practices, and mentorship 
programs can significantly enhance the research capabilities and competitiveness of Universities to make 
them emerge and thrive as hubs of innovation, contributing meaningfully to the scientific and 
technological progress of the nation. 
(Para 6.13 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education 
I.   Research and innovation are essential aspects of enhancing quality education in Higher Education 
Institutions. Providing financial support for researchers through scholarships and fellowships is 
imperative and is undertaken by the UGC under various schemes. The Junior Research Fellowship 
(JRF) scheme of the University Grants Commission (UGC) is open to candidates who qualify in the 
National Eligibility Test-Junior Research Fellowship (NET-JRF) of the UGC and the UGC-Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research (UGC-CSIR) joint test. 
 In order to extend assistance to universities for the promotion and advancement of research, the 
Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET), an Inter-University Centre (IUC) of UGC has 
developed and maintains Shodhganga- a reservoir of full-text online thesis contributed by HEIs. 
Shodhgangotri, another initiative by INFLIBNET, is a repository of Indian Research in Progress that 
hosts synopses /Major-Minor Research Projects (MRP)/Post-Doctoral Fellowship (PDF)/Emeritus 
Fellowship. Shodh-Chakra, another initiative of the INFLIBNET, provides a unique space to the 
researcher, guide/supervisor and university to manage the research lifecycle of a research scholar. This 
works as digital workspaces wherein researchers can collect, store, organize and cite their research work.  
 Further, under ShodhShuddhi, the Ministry of Education, Govt. of India has initiated a project to 
provide Plagiarism Detection Software (PDS) to all Indian Universities/ Institutions. 
II.  SPAs (School of Planning and Architecture) are willing to share their resources with Researchers. 
Department of Agriculture Research & Education (ICAR) 
● ICAR has been facilitating and supporting in the conduct of training programmes in the cutting 
edge areas of agriculture and allied sciences for the capacity building of the faculty, teachers and 
researchers in the National Agricultural Research, and Education System (NARES) comprising of ICAR 
Institutes and Agricultural Universities. This support is to enhance the competency level of Agricultural 

38 
 
faculty and to elevate the quality of agricultural education and research by offering advanced trainings 
across agricultural universities/ institutions. During last five years, 411 such training programmes have 
been organized benefitting 9688 participants.  
● Centres of Advanced Faculty Training (CAFT) are established across the country for undertaking 
discipline oriented advanced training for teaching, research and extension in cutting edge areas of 
agriculture and allied sciences for use in capabilities enhancement, educational innovations, modern 
teaching and research methodologies along with serving as repository of ideas and information in 
concerned disciplines. 
● ICAR promotes excellence in research by establishing and nurturing novel school of thought and 
developing strong centres of agricultural research and education around outstanding scientists through 
award of positions of National Professors and National Fellows. The contribution of National Professors 
and National Fellows in the form of technologies, patents, copyrights has immensely benefited the 
knowledge pool of the country. 
● The services of outstanding superannuated scientists/teachers from NARES in the form of 
Emeritus Scientists and Emeritus Professors are being utilized for supporting ongoing nationally 
important research, teaching specialized courses, developing quality instructional material for use in 
national agricultural education programme including distance education. The programme has helped to 
make use of the experience of retired professionals for remedying manpower imbalances in some of the 
crucial areas of research and teaching. This initiative aims to initiate new programmes in nationally 
important priority areas. 
Department of Biotechnology 
This recommendation has been ‘NOTED’. It is submitted that various programs of the Department 
support Universities for promotion and advancement of research in science. For example:  Junior Research 
Fellowship (JRF), Post Graduate Program,  Post-Doctoral Fellowship, Ramalingaswami Re-entry 
Fellowship etc. support high quality Post Graduate, PhD and Post-Doctoral Fellows to work in 
universities; the Star College, DBT-BUILDER and DBT-SAHAJ programs support development of 
scientific research infrastructure at College or University level.  
Additionally, teachers from universities are eligible to receive extra mural research grants to fulfill 
their research endeavors. Furthermore, research fellows and faculty members from universities are also 
supported to present research papers at international conferences and seminars through the Conference, 
Travel, Exhibition and Popular Lectures (CTEP) program of the Department. Though these initiatives, the 
Department has been playing pivotal role to nurture a robust research ecosystem in the Universities.  
Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 
The recommendation of committee is noted with thanks.  Department may like to submit that 
CSIR under its Capacity Building and Human Resource Development Schemes has been supporting two 
major programmes: (1) Extramural research Scheme and Emeritus Scientists; (2) Doctoral and 
Postdoctoral Fellowships in universities and affiliated colleges, institutions of national importance and 
R&D institutions including that of CSIR with the aim of promoting and advancement of research in 

39 
 
scientific & related field including engineering and technology, medical and pharmaceutical sciences. 
These schemes are playing a pivotal role in strengthening the capacity building of universities and grantee 
institutions and helping in mentorship of thousands of doctoral and postdoctoral young scientific talents.  
The specifics of these two programmes and their highlighted achievements are given hereunder: 
CSIR under its Capacity Building and Human Resource Development Scheme has implemented a 
programme “Extramural Research Scheme and Emeritus Scientist Scheme” promotes advancement of 
research in the fields of Science & Technology, including Agriculture, Engineering and Medicine and in 
inter- trans-disciplinary areas in academic and R&D institutions. Under this programme, CSIR provides 
research grants to superannuated outstanding scientists/academics. The financial grant is known as 
Emeritus Scientists grant which is given to superannuated researchers who wish to continue to pursue 
research in their respective fields of specializations in universities and R&D institutions and thereby 
contribute in strengthening institutional R&D capabilities, nurture young budding scientific talent and 
contributed in CSIR’s national efforts for human resource development. The experience of these 
superannuated scientists has proven a great help to the laboratories/academic institutions in carrying out 
some of the ongoing projects and mentoring the younger ones.  
Under the Extramural Research Scheme, research proposals from the universities and R&D 
institutions are funded in frontier areas of science and technology which are also in line with the research 
programme of CSIR laboratories. These extramural research schemes are beneficial towards building the 
R&D capabilities of the universities which in turn benefits the country in its scientific pursuits. It is worthy 
to apprise the committee that in the year 2023 on International Women’s Day 2023, a novel initiative was 
launched by CSIR under the auspices of the Hon’ble Minister of S&T (I/C), Dr Jitendra Singh where 
research grant proposals from only women scientists under the Extramural Research Scheme were invited.  
Accordingly, “A Special Call for Research Grants for Women Scientists (CSIR-ASPIRE)” was 
made by CSIR with the following objectives: 
● To align the Government of India’s initiative to empower women and promote ‘Nari Shakti’ in the 
country  
● To support the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s efforts to put Nari Shakti at the forefront of India’s 
development journey 
● To celebrate the Amrit Kal, CSIR for the first time in its history announced A Special Call for 
Research Grants for Women Scientists (CSIR-ASPIRE).  
The salient features of the CSIR-ASPIRE scheme are as follows: 
● The proposal to be supported invited from women scientists across the country. 
● Only women scientists across the country are eligible to apply for research grants to carry out 
R&D in major disciplines of science and engineering viz. Life Sciences, Chemical Sciences, 
Physical Sciences, Engineering Sciences and inter/trans disciplinary sciences.  
● The funds will be provided for staff (JRF/SRF/RA), contingency and equipment.  
● The total budget of a research proposal including research fellow’s stipend may be upto Rs. 
30 lacs.  
● The normal tenure of research proposal may be two or three years. 

40 
 
Additionally, at present CSIR has been supporting 850 Research Projects out which about 300 are 
funded to universities and colleges and rest in R&D institution including institutions of national 
importance to promote research in the fields of Science & Technology, including Agriculture, Engineering 
and Medicine and building the R&D capabilities of the universities and colleges.  
It is important to apprise here that majority (95-97%) of these extramural research projects are 
awarded to postgraduate colleges, deemed universities, State and Central universities, institution of 
National importance (IITs, IISc, IISERs, NITs) and other Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)  in the 
country.   
It is also important to apprise the Hon’ble Committee that CSIR under its Capacity Building and 
Human Resource Development: Doctoral and Postdoctoral Fellowship programme awards fellowships 
to young researchers to attract them to pursue doctoral and postdoctoral research in their subject domain in 
basic & applied sciences, engineering & technology and medicinal & Pharmaceutical sciences or in 
interdisciplinary & transdisciplinary area of research.  The young budding scientific talent undergoes 
extensive training in modern R&D methods in Science and technology followed in premier institutions 
across the globe under the mentorship of universities professors and scientists. The tenure of these 
fellowships varies from 3 years to 5 years.   
CSIR through Joint CSIR-UGC National Eligibility Test (NET) awards Junior Research 
Fellowship (JRF) for pursuing doctoral research in basic sciences and inter- & trans-disciplinary area of 
research. To promote academic excellence, the GATE qualified engineering graduates and GPAT 
qualified pharmaceutical graduates are provided JRF-GATE Fellowships to pursue research through a 
suitable PhD programme in AcSIR or in any other institution. CSIR also provides Senior Research 
Fellowships (SRF)-Direct to those young researchers who have postgraduate qualifications in science, 
engineering, and medicinal & pharmaceutical sciences, Trans-disciplinary area of research and Science 
and Technology Studies. CSIR also offers postdoctoral fellowships such as and Research Associateship 
(RA) and Senior Research Associateships (SRA) to PhD holders who have interests in science and 
technology research and are enthusiast about the advancement of their scientific career.  During 2021-22, 
2022-23 and 2023-24 the number of young researchers benefited from this programme “Capacity Building 
and Human Resource Development: Doctoral and Postdoctoral Fellowship Programmed” of CSIR are 
summarized in the table below:  
 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Total number of research 
students benefitted 
10885 9185 7379 
 
Further to place on record, the major beneficiaries of the CSIR’s doctoral and postdoctoral 
fellowship programmes are Educational Institutions (Colleges, Deemed universities, State and Central 
universities, institutions of national importance (INI), and higher educational Institutions (HEIs)) as 
majority of the students (>65%) pursue their doctoral and postdoctoral research. 

41 
 
  The students, researchers & budding scientists while learning modern techniques and R&D 
methods under the mentorship of university professors and scientists, earn monthly stipend to support their 
studies and families. These young researchers contribute to scientific output particularly in research 
publications of high impact factor and it is also a fact that the research publications from an institute are 
directly co-related with the number of research fellows working in that institute. 
Recommendation 
 
2. The Committee appreciates the concerted efforts by various departments and institutes which has 
helped the IITs and IISCs to excel in World QS rankings. The Committee also appreciates the IISCs 
Bangalore for being ranked as the World’s Top Research University in terms of University Citation per 
Faculty in QS World Ranking 2022. 
(Para 6.20 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
3. The Committee appreciates that India has witnessed a massive jump in its Global Innovation 
Index (GII) from 52nd in the year 2019 to 40th in the year 2023 among 132 economies of the world. Also 
its international research collaboration, especially in themes related to SDG 07 (Affordable and clean 
energy from 16% in 2018 to 20% in 2022). The Committee also appreciates the submission of the 
Department of Higher Education that the national spending on research and development (R&D) 
measured in terms of gross expenditure on Research and Development has increased over the years and 
more than doubled from Rs. 60,196.75 crore in 2010-11 to Rs. 1,27,380.96 crore in 2020-21 which is 
worth of appreciation. The Committee also appreciates the efforts of the Department of Higher Education 
for benchmarking Innovation and Entrepreneurship (I&E) ecosystem in higher education institutes (HEIs) 
through Atal Ranking of Institutions on Innovation Achievements (NIRF-Innovation) 
(Para 6.21 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
4. Upon examining various Higher Education Institutes (HEIs) for future-readiness in the upcoming 
Industry 4.0 technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, Block Chain, Internet of Things (IoT), Quantum 
Technologies, etc., the Committee found their ongoing efforts in research, innovation and implementation 
of these future technologies to be satisfactory and on the right trajectory. 
(Para 6.22 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Department of Higher Education and Department of Biotechnology 
The recommendation has been noted by D/o Higher Education and D/o Biotechnology.   

42 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE 
***** 
 
Comments/Observations of the Committee 
1. The Committee appreciates the actions/steps taken by the Department of Higher Education, 
University Grants Commission (UGC), All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and 
Department of Science and Technology in identifying key national priorities, emerging frontiers 
and strategic research areas, practically addressing the endeavors of funding the scientific research 
and aligning them with the objectives of the Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF).  
The Committee also notes that the Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF) Act, 
2023 was brought out in letter and spirit. As per the provisions, an Executive Council was 
constituted wherein high level strategic directions were given, performance monitored and 
implementation of the objectives of the Foundation was envisioned.  However, in its discussions on 
the Demands for Grants of the Department of Higher Education in FY 2024-25, the Committee was 
informed that the ANRF had not been able to spend any of its budgeted funds for the previous 
financial year. In this regard, the Committee needs to be apprised of the current status of the 
ANRF’s functioning and further initiatives undertaken, if any. 
(Para 6.2 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
2. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Department of Science and Technology and 
would like to be appraised of the operative aspects of implementation of the National Science and 
Technology Management Information System (NSTMIS). The Committee is, however, not happy 
with the reply of the Department of Biotechnology and, therefore, recommends that the Department 
of Biotechnology should consider putting in place a structure/working modalities in its organization 
in order to enhance collaboration and information sharing in a coordinated manner between 
Centre, States and concerned agencies to enrich the Indian scientific research ecosystem. The 
Committee expects a more concrete reply on the implementation aspects. 
(Para 6.3 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
3. The Committee notes the work done to enable closer coordination of research and industry 
in IITs, IISc, IISERs, and SPAs. However, the Committee would encourage the Department to also 
support such efforts in the NITs, IIITs, and Central Universities – which also offer abundant 
opportunities for such industry-linked research, but which appear to have fewer Departmental schemes 
to support them.  
(Para 6.8 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
4. The Committee notes the initiative undertaken by the Department of Higher Education 
regarding the Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF) 2.0 Scheme to further improve the 
quality of research in higher educational institutions and nurturing a new generation of innovative 
researchers across the country. However, the Committee notes that the PMRF 2.0 was announced 
during the Union Budget for FY 2025 but has not yet been implemented as of July, 2025. Similarly, 
the Committee observed that the IIST has not been brought under the umbrella of PMRF 
Fellowship Scheme so far. The Committee therefore recommends that initiatives should be taken by 

43 
 
the Department of Higher Education to notify the PMRF 2.0 on an accelerated timeline, and to 
extend the PMRF Fellowship Scheme to IIST and apprise the Committee accordingly.  
(Para 6.9 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
5. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Education regarding release of 
funds for research activities in Higher Educational Institutions. The Committee is, however, of the 
view that steps should be taken to optimize resource utilisation/management and invest in 
sustainable and cost-effective research infrastructure building which would increase research 
funding availability and enhance research affordability thereby developing a sustainable research 
eco-system in the country. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken by the Department of 
Biotechnology to bolster their research infrastructure and sustain high-quality research endeavours 
effectively. 
(Para 6.10 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
6. The Committee notes that the ONOS scheme has been approved and implemented. The 
Committee’s recommendation had called for the accelerated implementation of the ONOS scheme. 
However, as the Committee noted in its 364th Report on Demand for Grants of the Higher 
Education Department (FY 24-25), about 4,000 of the 7,008 eligible institutions had still not 
received the benefits of the ONOS. The Committee would direct the Department to provide 
updated information on the current status of the ONOS’s reach, and provide an update on the steps 
taken to accelerate the scheme’s implementation. 
 
(Para 6.14 of the 358th Report of the Committee) 
 
 
 
 
 