PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR. GRANTS 1997-98 (DEMAND NO. 50) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 1997/Chaitra, 1919 (Saka)

1520 / RS FLA


FE AGYE FO WEALIA/.¢

AWGA2 AVLAR

TOMAT? YSATAAALIAAD GUT AGAA-TVGMT AIAG

VO aaTTIIMOO
TVEMIOJSVAG JOqUOedH MAMI

Bee ace aero ce antes
fee 20
40 (02 On MAING) १९७७४  20/979 401
AAUTAID 10 THT AAI
TMIOTAVAG TOAUOCIT WAMU जछ प्रा

(Weel AGA DHSS 6७ cidke nie Acoih of bore
(५७ JingA- bast no ७0672 dod io 58187" sty;

TAVPIAT ARON BRB ACCA CAA
i wan

CGV AM AG

1520/ RS F-1-B



CONTENTS

2७685
ComposiTION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii)
PREFACE : (iii)
REPORT 1—11
13—17

Minutes


| 7

SRTTIMMOD sir 26 Korrz0IMOD



2
3

4

5

6

1

8

9
10. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
1l
12.
13
14,
15

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(1996-97)

1. Shri $.B. Chavan——Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
. Dr. B.B. Dutta

. Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Shri Raj Nath Singh

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr. Mohan Babu

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
17. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

18. Shri Sartaj Singh

19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Shri Jai Prakash

21. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

22. Shrimati Divya Singh

23. Shri Mahant Abedyanath
24. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

25. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

26. Dr. C. Silvera

27. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
28. Shri Dutta Meghe

29. Shri I.G. Sanadi

30. Shrimati Krishna Bose

31. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao
32. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
33. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

34. Shri Pawan Diwan

35. Shri Krishna

36. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
37. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
38. Shri Samik Lahiri

39. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

40. Shri Mukhtar Anees

1520/ RS F—2-A

(i)


41
42.
43
*44
45

(ii)

. Dr. M. Jagannath

. Dr. Bali Ram

. Shri Ranen Barman

. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego
. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

*Nominated td the Committee w.e.f. 26th February, 1997.

1520/ RS F—2-B


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty-eighth Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 50) of the Department of Culture Ministry of Human
Resource Development for the year 1997-98.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource Development and also heard the
Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the said Demands for Grants in its
meetings held on 3rd & 19th April, 1997.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 19th April,
1997.

New छह ला; S.B. CHAVAN
19th April, 1997 Chairman,
Chaitra 29, 1919 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
aitra 29, 1919 (Saka) Standing Committee on

Human Resource Development.

(iii)



7 ASA : y

131901910-2: 80179832
seorty 01138

>अ्रणांपाप )
Ho 36 Yani sini 4

nome polajsiTnsnneqed. 8

7९१७) aid. 1044५ (0३४४४
गम 0190 silt 10 (02 OV 808#8

977४5 आग$59 00978 %)357%07१३४ Tha आऑ:0०२७७। spunmoo कह

G wari A K

th ९ |

a
५ ४४७४


ee a ees

REPORT

I. INTRODUCTION

1. The Department of Culture plays a vital role in the promotion and dissemination of art
and culture. The aim of the Department is to develop ways and means for instilling basic
values and perceptions in the minds of people, particularly the young. The Department also
undertakes the programme of preservation, encouragement and dissemination of various
manifestations of creative activity, both past and present. The Department is engaged in
excavation, conservation and promotion of ancient monuments and historic sites;
administration of libraries, museums and institutions of anthropology; collection,
preservation and ethnology of national character; catering of institutions and organisations in
the areas of Buddist and Tibetan Studies; promoting literary, visual and performing arts;
observing centenaries and anniversaries of important personalities and entering into cultural
agreements with foreign countries.

1.1 The Department carries out its various programmes through two attached offices, six
subordinate offices and 26 autonomous organisations. The allocation of funds during the
Eighth Five Year Plan to Department of Culture was Rs. 460 crores which was only 0.19%
of the total Plan outlay.

1.2 During 1997-98 the Department proposed a Plan of Rs. 368 crores, which would have
made the total plan allocation to the Department of Culture around 1% of the total Annual
Plan outlay. However,the Department of Culture in its BE for 1997-98 has been allocated
Rs. 247.90 crores which includes Rs. 120.90 crores as Plan component and Rs. 127.00 crores
as-non-plan component. This is insufficient to carry out the objectives and duties of the
Department.

1.3 Culture is one of the basic components of the development process and is linked
closely to the identity of the nation. During the Ninth Five Year Plan period, the focus
would be on a comprehensive plan for preservation of the archeological heritage and
development of the monumental complexes in the country. Efforts would also be directed
towards the preservation of archival heritage and the promotion of classical, folk and tribal
-art and crafts and oral traditions which are threatened with extinction.

1.4 Committed Liability— The Committee has noted that the committed liability of the
plan schemes has not been reflected in the budgetary allocations for 1997-98 which is the
first year of the Ninth Plan. The Committed expenditure which is accounted in the
subsequent plan at the termination of the previous plan is taken out from the plan and
becomes a separate committed expenditure. If this is not done, the Departments will be
handicapped by this amount of plan expenditure. The exercise of identifying committed
liability has not been done by any of the Departments for 1997-98. Committee in this
connection has considered the report of the Tenth Finance Commission. The Tenth Finance
Commission have observed in this regard as under:—

“Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in
deciding the cut-off date for transfer of committed liability on account of plan
scheme, the incremental liabilities that would arise in 1997-98 on account of 8th Plan
scheme completed in the next two financial years would have to be provided for. The
Commission are, therefore, of the view that the Planning Commission may consider
providing for the maintenance of such schemes till 1999-2000 in the Plan itself as was
done for the schemes of the two Annual Plans of 1990-91 and 1991-92”.

The Committee was also given to understand that the Planning Commission issued

1



2)

circular to all the Departments dated November 5, 1996 sending therewith guidelines for
classification of expenditure. The Ministries were also requested to make necessary provision
as committed non-plan expenditure for the upkeep of existing assets etc. Accordingly, all the
Ministries/Departments were asked to adopt the guidelines while submitting the plan
proposals for Ninth Five Year Plan and Annual Plan 1997-98. However, the Departments
have not done this excercise. The Committee in this connection heard the views of the
Secretary, Department of Expenditure of clarify the position. He informed the Committee
that even though communications were sent to various Ministries the Ministries could not
identify the committed expenditure in time. Accordingly a lumpsum amount has been
provided under Demand No. 31. The Department may approach the Department of
expenditure for their share. The Committee, also desires that the Department may complete
the exercise at the earliest so that they may not be handicapped on account of this. The
Committee is also constrained to note that many Departments have not done the exercise of
identifying committed expenditure and to get it earmarked separately for several plan
periods. Accordingly the committed expenditure plan schemes completed in 7th Plan or even
earlier and the assets created and staff employed in plan schemes has been continuing on
plan side resulting in severe resource crunch for the Departments. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should make a thorough review of the schemes
and identify the committed liability.

1.5 The Committee in its Tenth, Eighteenth and Forty Third Reports had recommended
for setting up of a National Cultural Fund. The Committee was given to understand that a
corpus fund with the Government contribution of Rs. 19.5 crores has been created. On this
the Department clarified that due to resource crunch the amount from Government side was
reduced to 19.5 crores from Rs. 100 crores as proposed originally. The Committee is happy
to note that the National Cultural Fund (NCF) has now been set up in terms of a
Notification published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary dated 28.11.96.

1.6 The Committee was given to understand that NCF is essentially a mechanism to
elicit people’s support, both intellectual and financial to culture related endeavours. NCF
will accept institutions and individuals as equal partners of the Government in the
management of the cultural scenario in the country, constitute an initiative for forging
meaningful inter-institutional partnership, help overcome the resource crunch etc. The
Department informed that out of NCF a corpus contribution by the Department equal to
Rs. 19.5 crores, Rs. 2 crore was made available during the financial year 1996-97. The rest
of the contribution is expected to be spread over five years of the Ninth Five Year Plan. The
Committee however feels that in view of the laudable objectives for setting up NCF, the
funds provided are not adequate enough and therefore recommends enhancement in budget

allocation to NCF.
Il. ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA

2.1 The Archaeological Survey of India was set up in 1861. Conservation, preservation

‘and maintenance of centrally protected monuments and sites is the prime task of this

organisation. At present it has 3593 centrally protected monuments declared to be of
national importance, with more than 5000 individual structures.

2.2 The BE of 1997-98 is Rs. 65 crores as against Rs. 57.55 crores in the RE for the
year 1996-97. Although there has been an increase in the budget provisions, the Department
stated that these additional funds would be inadequate. The Committee was given to
understand that meagre plan resources do not allow the Department to set up its activities in
various sectors in the manner it would like to achieve. The Committee feels that

1520/7 RS F—3-B



3

maintenance and conservation of heritage, ancient monuments and historic sites is important
both for encouraging domestic tourism as well as attracting overseas visitors. Unfortunately
this aspect of heritage preservation/promotion has never received the kind of attention it
deserves. The Committee, therefore recommends that sufficient allocation should be made

to the ASI at RE stage.

2.3 The Committee enquired about the details regarding the enormous funds that were
being made available by the Japan Government for preservation and conservation of
Buddhist sites at Nalanda, Sarnath, Ajanta, Ellora, Bodh Gaya etc. In its reply the
Department stated that the State Governments of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra
have got projects approved under overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, through the
Government of Japan for development of infrastructural facilities along identified Buddhist
travel circuits. The programme included the development of roads, airports, electric supply,
water supply, tourist amenities, land-scaping etc. For the same loan from the OECF had
been made available to ASI through the Government of Maharashtra for the conservation of
Ajanta and Ellora by the ASI. Under this arrangement the ASI invested its own funds for
the purpose, which were later reimbursed by the OECF. The Archaeological Survey of India
was developing the protected monuments at Nalanda and Sarnath, out of its own resources.
The Bodh Gaya Temple was looked after by the Management Committee of Bodh Gaya,
under the control of Government of Bihar, the Department further clarified. The
Archaeological Survey of India had also got a US$ 500,000 project sanctioned by UNESCO
for the exploration, conservation, preservation and soil conservation of the Buddhist
monuments complex of Sanchi and Satdhara. The project was funded by the Government of
Japan through the Japanese Trust Fund. The ASI had also prepared a project report for the
excavations, conservation and preservation and ‘environmental development of monuments at
Hampi. This was part of the project prepared by the Government of Karnataka, under
Department of Tourismfor being funded by the Government of Japan under OECF, the
Department informed/The Committee is happy to know about the enormous funds made
available by the Japanese and American Governments but the Committee desires that these

funds must be spent for the Schemes for which they have been specifically provided for <3

हे
\
}
|
{
f

|

|

\

2.4 The Committee desired that apart from the 12 world Heritage Sites, already

included for upgradation in the 9th Five Year Plan, the following should also be included.

(i) Mahabalipuram, (ii) Udaipur (iii) Bhinddevara, Rajasthan, (iv) Kannauj (v) Udaigiri
(vi) Murshidabad. The Department in its reply clarified that the Archaeological Survey of
India had identified 14 monuments and Buddhist sites for development of infrastructure in
the Annual Plan 1997-98. These included seven World Heritage Monuments and six

Buddhist sites such as:

(i) Mahabalipuram — The group of monuments at Mahabalipuram were already
included in the World Heritage List of UNESCO. The
maintenance and conservation of this complex was being done
by ASI out of its own funds.

(ii) Udaipur — There were only two centrally protected monuments viz.
ancient ruins at Kalyanpur and the Sas Bahu Temple at Nagda,
in the district of Udaipur. The site at Kalyanpur had been
conserved and maintained. The conservation of the Sas Bahu
Temple had been taken up by the ASI and was in progress.


(iii) Bhinddevara, _— The Shiva Temple or Bhinddevara Temple in village Ramgarh

Rajasthan was a State protected monument, under the control of the

; Government of Rajasthan, the State Government had
H proposals to develop the monument.

| (iv) Kannauj — The Archaeological Survey of India had 10 centrally protected
} monuments at Kannauj in district Farukhabad. These were

being maintained and looked after by the ASI.

(v) Udaigiri — The Buddhist site at Udaigiri in district Jodhpur of Orissa had
: already been included for development of infrastructure during
\ the current financial year.

(vi) Murshidabad — There were seven centrally protected monuments in the district
of Murshidabad. These monuments were being maintained and
i conserved by the ASI.

| 2.5 The Committee expressed the desire to know if something substantial was being
+ about Sankisha in Farukhabad district, which were of Jain and Buddhist importance.

The Department in its reply stated that the ASI had taken up excavation at Sankisha in
| Farukhabad district. The site had yielded painted gray wares which pushes the antiquity of
| Sankisha to the beginning of the first millenium BC. The ASI had taken up the conservation
| and the development of the site in phased manner.

; 2.6 The Committee is constrained to note that there have been several instances of
vandalism of protected monuments and temples. The Department inits reply stated that for
exercising proper watch and ward on the protected monuments, a proposal had been sent to
the IFD/Department of Culture for the creation of 5000 posts of monuments attendants in
the first phase against an overall requirement of about 11000 additional posts. This issue has
been commented upon by the Committee in its earlier Reports also. Follow-up action taken
by the Department reveals half hearted attempts on its part to improve the situation. The
Committee strongly recommends that the Department should take immediate steps for
creation of 5000 posts of monument attendants and their subsequent filling up.

2.7 The Committee was of the view that all and sundry should not be permitted entry
inside the protected temples. The Department in its reply stated that all Superintending
Archaeologists had been directed to regulate the entry of visitors into the monuments.

Ill. MUSEUM

3.1 Indian Museum Calcutta— The Committee expressed its concern over the issue that
along with the need for expansion of space for increasing the range of display in Indian
Museum, Calcutta, there should also be a simultaneous upgradation of technology as well
and adequate arrangements need to be taken in this regard. The Department in its reply
stated that besides arranging availability of additional space after construction of the annexe
building of the Indian museum, the Museum was also planning due upgradation of the
existing technology, i.e. making the entire building centrally airconditioned, installation of
fideorama, audio playback system and interactive. display methods, particularly in the
scientific sections, installation of wireless close circuit TVs, electronic surveillance system,
infra-red cordoning of the rare and valuable exhibits, installation of elevators, sound and
light projection of some historic phases of Indian art and culture etc. Some of these items
had already been taken care of while planning the galleries. The Museum was well set to
introduce all these arrangements in due time. The Department further clarified. The


5

Committee is constrained to note that only the Planning stage has started and nothing
positive has been achieved. Hence the Committee recommends that the allotted tasks should
be carried out without delay. Proper monitoring and time bound projects need to be
undertaken.

3.2 Salarjung Museum— Expressing its concern over a number of thefts that have taken
place in the Salarjung Museum over the last couple of years, the committee enquired about
the details of action taken by the Government in this regard. The Department in its reply
stated that a Committee of Experts was appointed in 1993, to conduct a physical verification
of the art objects of Salarjung Museum. As the report of the Committee submitted in 1994,
confirmed that a number of art objects‘manuscripts were missing from the Museum, the
Government of India referred the case to CBI. In August 1996, the CBI informed that
during their investigations, they have found that out of 635 art objectsymanuscripts as
reported missing earlier, 326 have since been traced out by the Salarjung Museum
Authorities and are available in the Museum. The CBI found it desirable that the traced 326
items be again examined by the same team of experts which had earlier conducted the
Physical Verification of art objects of Salarjung Museum, so that the traced items could be
excluded from the purview of further investigation by CBI, the Department clarified. The
Expert Committee was accordingly reconstituted in November, 1996. Report of the
Committee submitted in February, 1997 is at present under consideration of the
Department. The Committee expresses its deep concern over a large number of precious art
objectsymanuscripts missing from the museum and recommends the CBI inquiry be further
strengthened and the culprits brought to book . The Committee hopes that appropriate
action on the findings of the Expert Committee would be taken without delay. The
Committee strongly recommends that concerted efforts should be made for further
strengthening the security of Salarjung Museum so that this sort of mishappenings do not
recur in future.

3.3 The Committee was constrained to note that the Salarjung Museum’s building was in
a dilapidated condition and no steps had been taken to have it renovated. The Department
in its reply stated that the construction of the new wing of the Salarjung Museum which was
likely to have been completed by 31st March, 1997 could not be accomplished due to the
indifferent performance by NBCC. The Committee is anguished to note that the
construction of two additional wings i.e. Far Eastern gallery and European gallery supposed
to be completed earlier by 31st May & 15th July, 1996 respectively and further extended to
31st December, 1996 still remains incomplete. The Committee hopes that decision of the
Salarjung Board Museum to interact with other available authorised construction agencies
for accomplishing to his unfinished job would bear fruit and construction of two additional
wings would be completed without delay.

3.4 The Committee desired to know about the steps being taken to professionally
catalogue its collection. The Department in its reply stated that a number of art objects were
catalogued and published from 1979 to 1989, Portfolios in 1987 and thereafter monographs
in 1996. The Committee is constrained to note that the work of cataloguing of all the art
objects in Salarjung Museum still remains incomplete. The Committee therefore
recommends that the Department must take effective steps in this regard.

3.5 The Committee expresses its concern regarding the financial constraints faced by the
Salarjung Museum. The Department in its reply stated that the Salarjung Museum had been
facing financial crunch on Non-Plan side. During 1996-97 against an allocation of Rs. 73.39
lakhs under Non-Plan, an expenditure of Rs. 165.15 lakhs upto February, 1997 was incurred.
For meeting this expenditure on the Non-Plan side, the Salarjung Museum is diverting plan

1520/RS F—4-


6

funds, the Department admitted. Unless additional funds to the tune of Rs. 90-100 lakh
approx. are made in the provision under Non-Plan for the year 1997-98 onwards, these
financial problems will persist. The Committee observes that the reason for this extra
expenditure on Non-Plan side is mainly on account of pensiompensionary benefits to the
retiredtetiring employees of Salarjung Museum and on deployment of Central Industrial
Security Force for the Security of Salarjung Museum. The Committee strongly feels that
additional funds for meeting the entire expenditure under the Non-Plan side have to be
provided for, without which plan funds are bound to be affected. Hence the Committee
recommends that adequate allocations be made at the RE stage.

3.6 National Council of Science Museum (NCSM)—While discussing the budgetary
allocations to the National Council of Science Museum (NCSM), the Committee was
perturbed to note that the plan allocation under BE 1996-97 for National Council of Science
Museum was drastically reduced from Rs. 18 crores at BE 1996-97 to Rs. 14 crores at RE
stage of 1996-97 showing a cut of Rs. 4 crores. The Committee was surprised to note that
the plan allocation for this organisation has further been drastically cut at BE 1997-98 to a
nominal amount of Rs. 5 crores only showing a steep fall of Rs. 9 crores compared to RE of
1996-97 and Rs. 13 crores as compared to BE 1996-97. This is an unprecedented cut of
about 72% compared to BE of Rs. 18 crores for 1996-97.

3.7 The Committee fails to understand how this organisation with 26 Science Centres’
MuseumsParksCorners: functioning under its control, will survive for one year with this
meagre allocation of Rs. 5 crores. The Committee fails to understand the logic of imposing
such a drastic cut on NCSM, particularly when this organisation has been performing an
excellent job of promoting and popularising science all over the country. The Committee
observes that the cuts made in the budgetary allocations to this organisation seems to have
been made arbitrarily and without any rational justification. The Committee is seriously
disturbed about the neglect shown to this organisation which now faces a serious threat to its
very existence. The Committee also gets the impression that the Department is least
bothered about the promotion and popularisation of science through the various museums
functioning under the control of NCSM.

3.8 The Committee was also constrained to note that the Department misled the
Committee by intimating that the National Council of Science Museum was transferred to
them from the Department of Science and Technology in the later half of Seventh Five Year
Plan. The Committee came to know that this organisation was transferred to the
Department of Culture from the Department of Education. The Committee was also misled
on the point that the expenditure of this organisation had never been audited in the past.
During the course of discussions, the Committee came to know that the expenditure of this
organisation were duly audited by the Comptroller & Auditor General of India. Thus the
Department has once again tried to mislead the Committee by giving a totally wrong picture.
There were number of typographical mistakes in the replies to the queries given to the
Committee by the Department. This shows the casual approach of the Department of
Culture in dealing with the Parliamentary Standing Committee. The Committee takes a
serious view of the matter and warns the Department about the consequential effects of
misleading the Committee.

3.9 The Secretary, Department of Culture and the other officers who appeared before
the Committee on 3.4.1997 and again on 19.4.1997 could not give any satisfactory


i

vi

explanation for the imposition of cuts in the budgetary allocation made to this organisation
both at the RE stage 1996-97 as well as at BE 1997-98. The argument given by the
Department that the allocations made to the Deptt. could not be regularised by the
Expenditure Finance Committee does not convince the Committee as it is the primary duty
of the Department to see that the allocations are got timely regularised through EFC by the
nodal Ministry/Department concerned. The Committee was informed that all the
information/dates required by the Expenditure Finance Committee were duly supplied by
NCSM to the Department of Culture well in time. But the Department does not seem to
have taken interest on the whole issue for an unduly long period and resorted to arbitrary
cuts instead of getting the allocation regularised in time through EFC. The Committee has
been left with the impression that the Department of Culture is heavily biased against this
organisation as they have by and large given enhanced budgetary allocations to all the other
organisations barring one or two, irrespective of the fact whether the Expenditure Finance
Committee clearances were obtained or not.

3.10 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the National Council of
Science Museum should be given a realistic allocation of funds immediately at least to the
level of allocation made in 1996-97. Any approval required from Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA) should be obtained without further delay. The additionality
amount of Rs. 15 crores due from Planning Commission for the Science City Project may
also be made available to NCSM fully. The Committee further recommends that in
consideration of the predominantly educational objectives for which NCSM was set up
initially in 1978 under the Deptt. of Education, this organisation may be transferred back to
the Deptt. of Education under the Ministry of Human Resource Development. The Deptt.
of Culture may also send a detailed report in the matter as promised by them to the
Committee in the meeting held on 19.4.1997.

५. LIBRARIES

4.1 The Committee expresses its concern over the poor progress in the growth of the
e Library Scheme, The Department in its reply stated that the Rural Library Scheme
proposed to be implemented through the Raja Rammohan Roy Library Foundation would
be known as the “Scheme of Financial Assistance for setting up Rural Libraries at the
Panchayat level”. The Programme sought to set up libraries in areas where such facilities
were non-existent and to nurture reading habits among the rural people. The Scheme would
be implemented through the State Govts. on a cost sharing basis (3:1). The Library would
be administered at the Panchayat level by a Committee comprised of the Panchayat Pradhan
and the Block Development Officer in their ex-officio capacities and such other
representatives as the State Govt. may nominate, the Department clarified.

4.2 The Committee enquires about the quantum of funds that will be needed to
establish rural libraries iri all the Panchayats. As the success of this scheme would depend on

, the continued cooperation of the State/Panchayat authorities, it was being launched on a

modest budget of Rs. 15 crore in the 9th plan, with an annual outlay of Rs. 3 crore, the
Department informed. If successful, provision for additional funds would be made for
multiplying the rural library network. The Committee observes that the Rural Library
Scheme is proposed to be implemented through the Raja Rammohan Roy Library
Foundation. However, the budget allocation of 1997-98 for RRRLF in plan i.e. Rs. 5.40
crores is Rs. 3.00 crores less than the demand made by the organisation which was Rs. 8.40
crores. The Committee notes that these 3.00 crores were specifically required by RRRLF for
taking up a scheme for assistance for setting up libraries in Gram Panchayats. The


os

1

|

j

8

Committee is of the view that during 1997-98 too. Rural Library Scheme would remain
unimplemented. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that Rs. 3 crores should
definitely be provided to RRRLF at the RE stage.

4.3 The Committee desired to know whether the Raja Rammohan Roy Library
Foundation had the infrastructure to implement this programme. The Department in its
reply stated that the RRRLF has the infrastructure to initiate this programme and administer
it in collaboration with the State Govts. Its monitoring infrastructure will be reviewed after
the scheme has been in operation for a period of 2 years. The Committee is constrained to
know that the scheme of Rural Libraries is yet to be approved by the Planning Commission.

9५. ADVERSE IMPACT OF FOREIGN MEDIA

5. The Committee expresses its concern over the adverse impact of foreign media on
Indian Culture and enquired what steps has the Department of Culture taken to reduce it
through the electronic media and whether the Department of Culture had developed a
strategy for an environment which would provide necessary resistance. The Department in
its reply stated that the strategy to combat the adverse effect of foreign culture through the
electronic media required an integrated approach involving not only the Department of
Culture but also a number of other Ministries and Organisations including more importantly
the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. In fact the Ministry of I&B alone could have
the direct role in that as it was they ultimately who decide as to what was to be beamed
through the electronic media. The role of this Department would be limited to giving an
input to the media policy that Ministry might formulate in that context. The Department of
Culture was quite alive to this responsibility as the National Policy on Culture which was at
present under formulation is expected to make appropriate recommendations in this regard.

VI. NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

6. The Committee expresses its concern over the poor maintenance in the National
Archives. Facilities of public conveniences for visiting scholars also needed improvement.
The Department in its reply stated that apart from having thymal fumigation facilities, the
‘National Archives of India has a vacuum fumigation chamber with a capacity of 300 quc.
feet. The National Archives also has an air-cleaning chamber for making incoming records
dust free. The department further stated that the library of the National Archives of India
had already been transferred to the Annexe building which was centrally air-conditioned.
Facilities such as drinking water, toilets, resting place etc. have been provided to scholars.
The Research room will also be moved to the Annexe building partly, which has better
amenities for Research Scholars including lounge facilities. The Committee appreciates the
efforts being made by the Department in the proper maintenance of the National Archives
and hopes that there would be no let up in these efforts.

VII. NETAJI RESEARCH BUREAU

7. The Committee expresses its concern over corpus grant of Rs. 3 crore only in Netaji
Research Bureau which was yet to be leased, even though there was a commitment from
two previous Prime Ministers to give a sum of Rs. 6.5 crore to it out of the total project cost
of Rs. 12.5 crore. The Department in its reply stated that the idea behind the corpus grant
was to ensure a steady income to the Bureau to enable them to pursue their existing
activities more intensively as also to expand their scope and range in due course and at the

‘moment, there was no ‘proposal to give an additional grant to the NRB. The Committee is

surprised to note that even though two previous Prime Ministers had made commitments in

4


9

this regard Rs. 3 crores corpus grant is yet to be released to NRB. The Committee
recommends that the Rs. 3 crores corpus grant and Rs. 3.5 crores for technology
upgradation of the archives of NRB be released at the RE stage.

' VIII. CENTENARIES

8.1 The Committee desired to know about the initiatives taken by the Government of
India for commemorating in a befitting manner the 400th Death Anniversary of Maharana
Pratap. The Department in its reply stated that a National Committee constituted under the
Chairmanship of the Minister of Human Resource Development has taken a number of
decisions in this regard. Commissioning of a historian by Govt. of India for writing a
biography of Maharana Pratap. Commissioning of a TV film and a serial on Maharana
Pratap by I&B Ministry, preparations of a Master Archaeological plan for excavation at the
places connected with the life of Maharana Pratap by ASI are some of the decisions of this
Committee. A commemorative postal stamp will be issued on 19th January, 1998 the
Department further informed. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the
Department for commemorating in a befitting manner the 400th Death Anniversary of

Maharana Pratap.

8.2 Netaji Centenary— The Committee feels that adequate provision should be there to
assist the Government of Orissa to celebrate Netaji’s centenary at his birth place, Cuttack.
The Department in its reply stated that the Chief Minister of Orissa who attended the
meeting of the national Committee for the celebrations of birth centenary of Netaji Subhash
Chandra Bose on 15th January, 1997 sought the assistance of the Central Government for:

(i) the renovation and development of Netaji’s ancestral house at Cuttack into a
Museum; and

(ii) maintenance of Revenshaw Collegiate School, Cuttack where Netaji studied.

A detailed proposal, bringing out clearly the financial implications, in this regard was
awaited from the State Government, the Department informed. The Committee is of the
view that timely action in the matter is called for.

IX. ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES(ZCCs)

9. The Com.inittee was of the view that activities of ZCCs have declined in general and
Udaipur in particular. The Department in its reply stated that the activities of the ZCCs had
maintained a steady growth. The seven Zonal Cultural Centres were set up under the 7th
Plan for creative development of Indian Culture in various regions with a thrust on folk art
and to create cultural awareness and participation at the grass root level as would emphasize
and underscore the cultural cohesiveness and unity of India. Besides their normal intrazonal
programmes the ZCCs have taken up 3 new schemes during the 8th Plan, such as National
Cultural Exchange Programmes, setting up of Shilpgram to provide promotional and
marketing facilities to craftsmen. Setting up of documentation centres to record both orally
and visually, vanishing and rare art forms. The Udaipur Centre had been very actively
involved in the National Cultural Exchange Programme and had been the first Zonal
Cultural Centre to set up the Shilpgram at Udaipur, the Department further clarified.

X. TRIBAL AND FOLK ARTS

10. The Committee wanted to know about the reasons for only short-term projects and
not long-term being funded under the scheme for support of Tribal and Folk Art. In its


10

reply the Department stated that the nature of projects was preponderantly such that they
have to be completed within a short time frame. Further, if the project took unduly long
time the benefits from the completion will not accrue to the voluntary organisations and
community. Long term project on tribal and folk art were also undertaken through
subordinate/attached offices of the Department like Anthropological Survey of India and the
Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, Bhopal, the Department clarified. The Committee feels the
necessity of wider publicity and spread of tribal and folk art. The Committee is therefore, of
the view that more concerted efforts on the part of the Department are required in this

regard.
XI. MULTI-PURPOSE CULTURAL COMPLEXES

11. The Government of India provided one crore to each State for setting up Multi-
purpose Cultural Complexes. The Committee desired to know whether the Government
indicated a priority within the different components of the Project and if anyone from the
Department physically inspected any of these complexes set up by the States. The
Department in its reply stated that these complexes were intended to serve as major
resource centres for each State and their basic infrastructure included any or all of these

i components such as Auditorium, library, museum, exhibition area, gallery, open-air theatre,

recording studios. However, no priority within the various components had been indicated
by the Central Government, and the Officer from the Department of Culture had visited
and inspected some of these complexes under construction, in the different States. The
Committee desires that these should be a proper monitoring mechanism for the successful
completion of such sites and making them functional at the earliest.

| XII. 50TH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS

12.1 The Committee desired to have the details of various programmes being
formulated for the 50th Anniversary Celebration of India’s Independence. The Department
in its reply stated that an Implementation Committee which met under the Chairmanship of
Minister for Human Resource Development on 50 March, 1997 approved the programmes
such as (a) Curtain Raiser Event to focus on the entire episode of Quit India Movement of
9th August, 1942 (b) Inaugural Event in Main Hall of Parliament on 14.8.97 (Mid-Night)
which would focus on Nehru’s speech ‘A Tryst with Destiny’ Dr. Ambedkar’s speech on
29th November, 1949 when the Constitution of India was adopted and concluding remarks of
Dr. Rajendra Prasad on the same day etc. (c) Programme for 15th August, 1997 which
should essentially be a people’s affair and (d) Programmes from 16.8.1997 to 31.8.1998
which will be planned on the basis of suggestions received from individuals. Voluntary

Organisations, State Governments and Central Ministries and in accordance with the

guidelines given by the National Committee. The Committee is of the view that these
programmes must be celebrated in a befitting manner. In this 5070 year of India’s
Independence Culture should be used in such a way that would create among each individual

' a sense of ‘unity in diversity’ and also a feeling of universal brotherhood.

12.2 The Committee expresses its concern over the steps being taken to involve the
youth and students in these celebrations in particular. The Department in its reply stated
that a separate Advisory Group had been constituted on the themes of ‘Children, Students
Youth, Sports, etc.’ under the Chairmanship of Shri Prakash Ambedkar to suggest
programmes to the Implementation Committee. Besides a grant of Rs. 57.2 lakh had been
given during 1996-97 to the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports for programmes
involving youth and students. That Department would involve Nehru Yuva Kendra


11

Sangathan, National Service Scheme and Bharat Scouts and Guides in the implementation of
various programmes involving youth and students, the Department further clarified. The
Committee feels that this Anniversary should be used in such a way which would create a
positive sense and optimistic outlook among the Indian youth.



$ Ti अत # abla 918 eu0sd eed baa ३957 53७७
7. /.5ओ510 ied 103 1 8व80/ ont छा: 0७६ bas 771107 i

1899 blvow outa wow ७ 1९ 190५३ sd 10072 (15५४1 air}
imey. प

४1 SH उच्चेठ155 3७816 :12:17 2 di



MINUTES



4



XIV
"FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 3rd April, 1997 in Committee
Room 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan——Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. 8.8. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

9० 1 9 ७ #+ ९७ ७

LOK SABHA

9. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

12. Shri Dutta Meghe

13. Shri 1.0. Sanadi

14, Shrimati Krishna Bose

15. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
16. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

17. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
18. Shri Samik Lahiri

19. Dr. M. Jagannath

20. Shri Ranen Barman

21. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

WITNESSES

. Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Culture

४ Shri B.P. Singh, Secretary

. Shri Ashok Vajpeyi, Joint Secretary

. Shri Sanjay Narayen, Joint Secretary

. Shrimati Kasturi Gupta Menon, Joint Secretary
. Shri S. Sathymoorthy, Financial Adviser

. Shri Rajiv Yadav, Director

Shrimati Humera Ahmed, Director

>3 9 (५ + ७० (७ ++

*Minutes of the 15 to 13th meetings relate to other matters.

ab)


16

8. Shrimati Kalpana Das Gupta, Director
9. Shri Ajay Shankar, Director-General
10. Dr. S.S. Biswas, Director-General

11. Dr. S. Sarkar, Director-General

u* * *
SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary

Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the
Department of Culture *****in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants
for the year 1997-98.

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on
7th April, 1997.

*****Relates to other matters.

cA


XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 19th April, 1997 in Committee
Room 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
MEMBERS

1. Shri S.B. Chavan——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Dr. B.B. Dutta

#y.Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Yrof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

8. Dr. Mohan Babu

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

10. Dr. C. Silvera

11. Shri Dutta Meghe

12. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

13. Shri Samik Lahiri

14, Shri S.K. Karvendhan

15. Dr. M. Jagannath

16. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Demands for Grants for 1997-98
of the Department of *****Culture (Demand No. 50), **’**The Committee, after some
discussions, adopted the same with some modifications.

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati
Ray and Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar to preserit the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri
Sartaj Singh and Shri Dau Dayal Joshi to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha. The Committee
decided that the reports may be laid/presented on 22nd April, 1997.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 p.m.

Relates to other mutters:

17



j We
i DATES BTNSS TAA
ing Ac MQ Losty, . Webs ied } limo en
Cl wa 8३2 oH it 11 i ९६५ te
raid
tt
‘
(
i
i
q f
की = ade
( H
a ०४०४ pat
#॥19 8108
ned sat i
si ‘ ३( 1
ley ४110:
i i tui
i i