PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

HUNDRED - EIGHTH REPORT
ON

ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE FIFTY FIFTH REPORT ON ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF
SPEECH AND HEARING, MYSORE
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 317 JULY, 2001)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 31° JULY, 2001)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JULY, 2001/SRAVANA, 1923 (SAKA)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

PREFACE
REPORT
CHAPTER 1

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER IV

MINUTES

Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue in view of the

Government's replies

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted

By the Committee-----------------------------------
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Replies of the Government have not been received.

PAGES
ii)
(iii)
1-14
2-6
7-10

11-13

15-18


ing.

(ii)

tht



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2001-2002)

Shri 5.8. Chavan — Chairman
MEMBERS

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Maurice Kujur

Shri Akhilesh Das

Shri Eduardo Faleiro

Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”

Shri Dina Nath Mistra

Prof. R. 8. S. Varma

Shri Bratin Sengupta

Shrimati Kamala Sinha

Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”
Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
Shri Mrinal Sen

Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

Shrimati Jaskaur Meena
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
Shri Ramakant Angle

Shri Kirti Jha Azad

Shri Baliram Kashyap

Shri Ramanand Singh

Shri Dileep Sanghani

Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
Shri 0. S. Baswaraj

Shri V. M. Sudheeran
Shrimati Shyama Singh
Shri Sunil Dutt

Shri Ramesh Chennithala
Shri Kantilal Bhuriya

Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Samik Lahiri

Dr. D.V.G. Shankar Rao
Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
Shrimati Renu Kumari

Shri Shivaji Mane

Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Dr. Baliram

0)


Dr. A.D.K. Jayaseelan

Dr. V. Saroja

Shri Trilochan Kanungo

Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
Shri Vanlal Zawma

Shrimati Kumudini Patnaik

Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao
Dr. S. Venugopal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Director

Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary

Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer
Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer

(ii)



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Hundred and Eighth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations contained in the 55" Report on All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore
of Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

2; The Fifty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
25" February, 1997. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report,
received from the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare were considered by
the Committee. Clarifications were also sought by the Committee from the representatives of the
Department.

3 The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 8”
June, 2001.

NEW DELHI; S.B. CHAVAN

June 8, 2001 Chairman,

Asadha 18, 1923 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on

Human Resource Development

(iii)


48507 97 ig Saeko
wf! ao § magZroo),
noe पंत कआत bag:

tsiiqolsvo"!

to: elqest OSL रह
to 48#067 90 छाए) boy isoy
|] 1 he जा
ही tex

Rath ott कला प sohiumno) का

THIS

no annie कप
rreamiqaievaG —


REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government, Department of
Health on the recommendations contained in its Fifty-fifth Report on the All India Institute of Speech
and Hearing, Mysore which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha m
25" February, 1997

2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations
contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:-

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 4.1,6.4, 6.5,
8.1 and 10.1 (Chapter I)

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies: 4.2,4.3,7.1,10.2 and 10.3 (Chapter II)

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee: 3.1,5.2,9.1,9.2,9.3 and 9.4(Chapter-III)

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
received — Nil (Chapter - IV)


CHAPTER-I

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNEMNT

Recommendation

4.1 The Committee was informed during its visit to the Institute that for clinical, research and
training purposes, they have to purchase necessary equipments available indigenously, and also to import,
from out of the budgetary grants available to the Institute. The Committee has learnt that even though
laser facility is one of the latest technologies available in the medical field, this is not available in the
Institute. The Director informed that it is under consideration. The Committee has also been given to
understand that the Institute is in need of some more sophisticated equipments for which additional
grants are required. The Committee, strongly feels that the Department may examine the matter.

Action Taken

Laser technology facilities are available at the Institute now. Laser equipment for surgery of the
ear, nose and throat was procured in 1997-98. There are certain prerequisites to conduct laser surgery
which includes training of the manpower, specialised infrastructure for operation, and protective devices
for surgeons and other staff involved in surgery. Specialised infrastructure will be provided at the KR
Hospital, Mysore in 20 days time and the ENT surgeons have received the necessary training and
therefore, laser surgery would be very shortly introduced.

The Institute has been procuring state-of-technology equipment. However, change in technology and
consequent procurement of a new equipment is a continuous process.

Recommendation

6.4 The Committee, however, feels that the public education programme is mainly limited to
Karnataka. However, communication disorders are prevalent everywhere in the country. Therefore, the
excellent work done in the Institute should spread and reach out to every nook and corner of the country.
The awareness programme is required to be spread to all walks of life and spheres of activities. Public
education programme could be taken.

Action Taken
The following activities for zone-wise public education programme are being carried out by the Institute:
(a) Two speech and hearing centres in Indore and Guwahati have been upgraded to carry out
activities regarding evaluation and management of speech and hearing problems with WHO
funds. Public education material is being translated into languages spoken in north and
northeastern regions of India.

(b) Students from different States are required to carry out orientation lectures regarding
prevention, identification and management of speech and hearing problems.

c) Refresher Programmes, seminars and workshops for speech and hearing professionals and
allied professionals from different states are being conducted to enable them to update their


expertise. In collaboration with ‘NGOs, lectures on prevention of deafness have been
conducted for rehabilitation workers from different states of India and SAARC countries.

Recommendation

6.5 The Committee has also learnt that in collaboration with the Family Planning Association of India, the
staff and students of AIISH carry out field visits around a radius of 25 kms of Mysore to bring about
awareness and early identification of speech and hearing problems. The Committee is of the view that
such activities are required to be extended to other areas/States. More funds and staff as required, may be
provided to the Institute for the purpose.

Action Taken

6.5 A number of activities are being carried out in collaboration with Family Planning Association of
India (FPAI). These, inter-alia, are:-

(a) Creating awareness among womenfolk on causes of hearing impairment, measures to be
taken to prevent hearing loss, and need for immunization.

(b) Educating expecting mothers .on prenatal, natal and antenatal care to prevent hearing
impairment.

(c) Educating women on development of auditory behaviour in babies and children, and
identifying children with hearing problems.
(d) Hearing screening of people in rural areas of all age groups.
(e) Distribution of pamphlets.
(f) Administration of high- risk checklist.
(g) Prescription of medications for ear infections.
(h) Screening of the video cassette on facilities available for the speech and hearing impaired in
the country.
(i) Screening of infants are done during the pulse polio programs.
Gj) Hearing screening is being carried out at immunization centres on a regular basis.
These are ongoing activities. Similar activities are being carried out in camps in different
districts of Karnataka, neighbouring states and Maharashtra. Additional staff is required to carry out the
activities in other states.

Prevention of Deafness project (POD) was initiated in 1996-97. Under this project, prevention,
identification and management of hearing loss has been carried out both in rural and urban areas. The
activities include:

(a) Creating awareness among the general public and professionals through

pe orientation lectures given to allied professionals, grass root level workers and the general

public,


+ distribution of printed material such as public education pamphlets, handbills, posters,
slogans, etc.,

screening of audiovisual material for different target groups,

conducting open house and exhibition,

conducting street plays,

cairying out debates and other co-curricular activities to promote information regarding
prevention of deafness among school children, and

conducting workshops and seminars.

Evaluation of hearing:

Screening of hearing of infants, preschool children, school going children, industrial
workers, women groups, geriatric groups etc.

Administering appropriate hearing checklists for different age groups.

Detailed hearing evaluation using state-of-the-art equipment.

Evaluation for the presence of ear, nose and throat problems.

Conducting hearing evaluation camps.

Management of hearing problems:

Prescription and distribution of free hearing aids.

Counselling regarding hearing aid use and trouble shooting.

Counselling regarding auditory training, speech reading and communication strategies.
Follow up of hearing aid users.

Conducting open house discussion and exhibition of devices for the hearing impaired.
Conducting workshops.

Since the start of the project, over 50,000 individuals have been screened for the presence of
hearing problems and have been provided necessary help for the management of their problem including
free supply of hearing aids. These activities have been carried out in immunization centres for the infants
as a part of the pulse polio programmes, in schools, industries and in association with various government
and non-government organizations.

ee eH

*e*

** * >
* kat adi

Initially, this project was concerned only with the hearing problems of hearing impaired. Now,
its scope is being extended to include communication disorders of the hearing impaired as well as of
others. A proposal for the same involving a budget of Rs. 20 lakhs has been included in the RE for 2000-
01. It is proposed to include the neighboring states of Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, in the
coming years, under the scope of this project.

Resource kit for language training: A resource kit for language training in nine Indian languages,
namely, Hindi, Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Marathi, Oriya, Bengali, Kannada and Urdu was developed at
the Institute. The kit titled "With a little bit of help - early language training management" is copyrighted
and is being marketed by the publishers - "Books for change", a unit of ACTIONAID, Karnataka projects,
Bangalore. :

Recommendation

8.1 Noise pollution is a major health hazard, particularly in the industrial units. The Committee is happy
to learn that on account of the efforts of the Institute in creating awareness regarding health hazard of
noise pollution, the industrial units i.e. M/s Vikrant Tyres and Rare Material Projects (Bhabha Atomic
Research Centre) are utilising the facilities of the Institute, for introducing hearing conservation
programme. The Committee feels that this is required to be introduced in all the industrial units. The
Institute may take up this matter with the major industrial units and increase awareness among the
management about the necessity of the programme. This would, besides spreading the network of the
Institute, make the environment at work place more comfortable.


Action Taken

Activities conducted
(a) Creating awareness among workers who work in noisy surroundings including traffic
police through a
4 Orientation lectures given along with audiovisual material such as slides and audio
material

: Distribution of handbills, public education pamphlets

‘4 Demonstration of ear protective devices

+ Conducting exhibitions for the managerial level personnel of industries

(b) Evaluation of hearing of factory workers

bs Through industrial workers checklist

कर Through baseline testing and monitoring their audiological status through periodic testing

(c) Management of individuals exposed to noise

: Recommendations of appropriate noise control measures

के Prescription of ear protective devices

$ Counselling

Forty industries have been covered under this programme which includes orientation and/or
hearing testing. So far, about 1000 employees from different industries have been tested in detail for their
hearing status and rendered required help for hearing conservation. The activity is ongoing and has been
carried out in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.

Further, the Institute -has been helping several industries by evaluating their equipment for noise
levels and in this way, helping them adhere to ISO standards.

Recommendation

10.1 The Director informed the Committee that the Institute gets grants from the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare under Plan and Non-plan. Occasionally, they get grants from other sources also for some
specific purposes. Government of Karnataka also gives grants occasionally. Otherwise the Institute
depends mostly on grants that are received from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, it was added.
The Institute got Rs.75 lakhs under the 77 Plan for all the five years. Under the 8" Plan, it got Rs.275
lakhs. The Director further added that they hope to get more funds in the 97 Plan. She, however, stated
that special funds are required to purchase the equipment, because almost all of them have to be imported
and most of them are very expensive. Sometimes, an instrument cost Rs.7 lakhs to Rs.12 lakhs, the
Director added. World Health Organisation has also assisted the Institute. But the Director is
apprehensive that since it is not a committed package, in future it may not come. The Director, therefore,
pleaded that they would like to have more grants for purchase of equipment and building. Patients load
has also gone up. The patients have to be tested within a reasonable time. When they come there for
treatment, they have to stay for 2-3 days to get the comprehensive evaluation and for each test they may
have to wait. Therefore, the Director added, the Institute propose to increase the number of test rooms and
also to increase the staff strength. The Committee recommends that the Department of Health may
consider the requirements of the Institute and make necessary allocations. The Committee also reiterates
the recommendation made earlier that necessary staff strength may be sanctioned as per requirement.

Action Taken

The details of the grants received from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare under plan and
Non-plan during the 8° Five-year plan and up to 2000-01 in the 97 Five-year Plan is given below.


Details of budget allocations (Rs. in lakhs)

Project on
Prevention of

Non-Plan _ Deafness

1997-98 150.00 150.00
1998-99 150.00



CHAPTER-II

RECOMMENDATINS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES

Recommendation

42 The Director also informed the Committee that they have to import many equipments. Many of
the instruments that are required are not manufactured indigenously. The industrialists are not coming
forward to manufacture the instruments because of weak market position. The Committee feels that
intensive efforts have to be made to develop indigenous instruments so that more and better services can
be provided. The manufacturers will also have the opportunity to export their products. The Department
may consider providing necessary incentives for this purpose. The Department may also examine, in
consultation with the Ministries of Industry and Commerce, the possibility of allowing exports by the
manufacturers.

Recommendation

4.3 The Director has also informed the Committee that they propose to develop as many indigenous
materials and equipments as possible and for this purpose the Institute is interacting with various
departments and ministries to fabricate and develop instruments that they require. The Committee desires
that the Department of Health may extend the necessary support to the Institute for this purpose.

Action Taken

The equipment required in the area of speech and hearing may be broadly classified into
diagnostic and therapeutic category. In the diagnostic category, the equipment required, even in the global
scene, are very few. Even if the extent of availability of speech and hearing services in the country are
doubled in the next five years, the number of diagnostic equipments required in the country still
constitutes only a small number. Therefore, indigenous production of these equipments is not a viable
proposition even for a small scale industry. Moreover, availability of diagnostic equipments is not a major
reason for the present state of very meagre spread of speech and hearing services in the country.

However, depending upon the nature of the disorder, development and production, several therapeutic
gadgets could be considered. The Institute has developed several such therapeutic gadgets either by itself
or in collaboration with others. Some of these are:-

(a) Visual reinforcement unit used for evaluating paediatric hearing was developed in association
with M/s Voice and Speech Systems, Bangalore in the year 1997-98.

(b) Audio Lab- Software for preparing and presenting central auditory processing tests has been
developed by M/s Voice and Speech Systems, Bangalore based on technical advise and expertise
of the Institute. It is marketed by this company since 1998.

(c) Mobile audiological unit- This work was undertaken by National Aeronautic Lab, Bangalore
with technical know-how from the Institute. The project was initiated in 1995-96 and is nearing
completion. Right now, work is progressing on the air conditioning of the mobile unit.

(9) M/s SEICO, Bangalore have completed the fabrication of acoustic booth with technical
input from the Institute. The know-how is to be disseminated to other centres.


(०) Tangible reinforcement operant conditioning audiometry (TROCA)-a test for hearing
evaluation in children is under progress.

(f) FM system is a system to help hearing-impaired hear acoustic signals in the presence of
ba¢kground noise. In collaboration with Indian Telephone Industries(ITI), Bangalore, a proposal
for low cost FM system was submitted to the District Rehabilitation Centre for funding for large
scale production. The prototype was ready at the time of submission of the proposal. Since funds
were not sanctioned for the project, mass production could not be undertaken. A firm in Chennai
is currently making group FM systems which are suitable for individuals with less severe degree
of hearing loss.

(g) Body level hearing aids are manufactured by Indian firms like M/s Alps International,
M/s Arphi Electronics and M/s Elkon Pvt. Ltd. The Institute has been providing feedback to the
firms regarding the quality of these hearing aids based on reports received from users as well as
electroacoustical tests. As a result, these firms have been continuously improving the standard of
their hearing aids.

(h) Programmable hearing aids: These are hearing aids wherein the output of the device can
be changed using digital technology to customize the device for a given hearing impaired patient.
Since 1997-98, the Institute has been extending its expertise for evaluating a device developed by
IIT, Delhi and Semiconductor Complex India, Chandigarh. The product is being modified based
on the report given by the Institute.

(i) VAGHMI software - M/s Voice and Speech Systems, Bangalore have developed
diagnostic and therapeutic computer software for assessment of speech and its disorders as well
as for conducting therapy for speech disorders. The AIISH has actively collaborated with this
firm not only in terms of giving technical advice, but also in evaluating the product.

6) Speech Science Laboratory - a software for analyzing voice and speech has been
developed by M/s Voice & Speech Systems, Bangalore with technical know-how from the
Institute. M/s Voice and Speech Systems have been marketing this product.

(k) N-Indicator - an instrument for measuring nasality in speech has been developed at
AIISH and is currently being used with patients.

(i) "All India Institute of Speech and Hearing (AIISH) communicator" - a hardware for use
with nonverbal patients has been developed at AIISH. A PC-version of this instrument was
developed as "PC based AIICOM (AIISH Communicator)", which is really a software for
alternative and augmentative communication. This was developed at the Institute with technical
know-how and input from the College of Engineering, Coimbatore.

(m) Induction loop device : an aid for augmenting listening skills in the hearing
impaired has been developed at AIISH.

(n) Infant vibro-tactile chair : an instrument used with communicatively impaired has
been developed at AIISH.

(0) Speech oriented learning system for the hearing impaired : software for use with
the hearing impaired has been developed by IIT, Chennai with technical assistance and
input from the Institute.


(p) "Voicelite" : a device to indicate voice and used with various speech-language
and hearing disorders has been developed at AIISH.

@ The following are some of the other gadgets which are developed at AIISH in
collaboration with biomedical departments of engineering colleges in Karnataka B.E
projects):

x 64 channel PC based Assistive listening device.

* Software for analysis of morphology of Electro-glottography (EGG) patterns and
diagnosis of voice disorders on MATLAB platform.

¥ Screening audiometer

AIIS&H is in the process of identification of small scale entrepreneurs who can take up mass
production of gadgets listed from (k) to (q) above.

Recommendation

ph The Committee has learnt that the Speech and Hearing Impaired from both within and outside the
country have been availing clinical services provided in AIISH premises. Evaluation of patients is done
on the problems such as voice, speech, language and hearing impairment etc. Medical specialists from
K.R. Hospital, Mysore also make visits. The Committee has also noted that out patient services for
medical and surgical treatment, are rendered once a week and operations are conducted for organic
lesions related to speech and hearing disorders twice a week at the K.R. Hospital, Mysore by the ENT
doctors of AIISH. The Committee feels that the Institute should also develop sufficient infrastructure for
conducting operations so that the staff of the Institute can have better exposure and the services of the
Institute can be better utilised.

Action Taken

It is felt that providing facilities for surgical procedures within the Institute is not desirable, as the
Institute will lose its unique characteristics of providing diagnostic and rehabilitative services for the
speech & hearing handicapped. The ENT doctors of AIISH who conduct operation in the K.R.Hospital
get sufficient exposure for the purpose.

Recommendation

10.2 The Committee was surprised to find that different methods were being followed in the case of
committed expenditure of the previous plan. According to the understanding of the Committee,
committed expenditure will not get reflected in any shape or form in the subsequent plan. What is termed
as a non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan becomes relevant only to the expenditure of new non-
plan expenditure of the subsequent plan period. This applies in the case of both autonomous as well as
deemed university institutions. In order to get further clarification in the matter the Secretary and the
Financial Adviser of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare were specially called to clarify as to
whether this view of the Committee is correct or not. The Secretary could not come because of illness.
The Financial Adviser appeared before the Chairman and he confirmed that the non-plan committed
expenditure of the previous plan should not get reflected into the non-plan expenditure of the subsequent
plan. He also confirmed that they are not making any distinction between the Government institutions and
other autonomous and deemed university institutions which naturally means that the confusion which is
prevailing in some of institutions in treating committed expenditure as part of the new non-plan


expenditure should be clarified by the department concerned to all the institutions in the country so that
there should be uniformity in matters of procedure of not including the committed non-plan expenditure
in the subsequent plan’s non-plan expenditure.

Action Taken

The committed expenditure in respect of Plan schemes completed during the III 5-year plan
period has been included in the Budget Estimates 1997-98 (first year of the IX plan) under Non-plan, as
per the instructions received from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide No.G-2001 1/2/96-Bud.
dated 30.9.1996.

Recommendation

10.3. The Committee also noticed that in some of the institutions where vacancies were available, they
were utilising the funds meaut for vacancies, for the purpose of non-plan expenditure, which according to
the Committee is not a desirable feature. Plan money cannot be diverted for non-plan side or even the
non-plan expenditure should have any element of the scheme provided under the plan. All the vacancies
prevailing in different institutions will have to the filled in against the non-plan expenditure of the
subsequent plan as the burden of the expenditure will not be there.

Action Taken
No posts have been created during IX plan period so far. However, following the 55th Report of
the Parliamentary Standing Committee on HRD, the Institute has been receiving more and more funds

towards equipments/ building under Plan. As a result, the Institute has developed a very good
infrastructure.

10


CHAPTER-III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Recommendation

Suh When the Committee sought to know as to whether any vacancies are there in the Institute; if so,
whether there is any adverse impact on the activities of the Institute due to this shortfall, the Director of
the Institute apprised the Committee that they try their level best to fill up the sanctioned posts whenever
any posts fall vacant. The Director, however, stated that they do not get qualified staff in-spite of repeated
advertisements. The main reason for this is that the pay scales are not attractive, it was added. The
Committee was further informed that unless the pay scales of the staff are revised the efforts being made
by the Institute to fill up the vacant posts would not yield any results. The Committee agrees that in an
institution of this kind where excellent work is done particularly for the handicapped people, it is
necessary to have well qualified staff. All necessary steps may, therefore, be taken to enable the Institute
to attract more qualified staff.

Action Taken

Following the recommendation of the Executive Council, a proposal was sent by the Institute for revision
of the pay scale of the Director and other faculty members of the Institute. The proposal is to be examined
again as per the provisions contained in the order of the DOP&T vide their letter dated 9.11.1998.

However, action has been taken to fill up the vacant posts at the Institute. There are some interviews
scheduled for 21" September 2000.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is dejected to note that in an Institute of national repute, vacancies of staff
exist despite repeated advertisements. The Committee was given to understand that the main
reason for non-fulfilment of vacancies is unattractive pay scales. The Committee in this connection
had earlier recommended that all necessary steps should be taken to enable the Institute to attract
qualified staff to overcome the problem of vacancies. The Committee is pained to point out that no
concrete and serious effort has been made either by the Institute or the Ministry in this regard.
The Committee once again reiterates its earlier recommendation and hopes that necessary action
would be taken in the right earnest.

Recommendation

Sz The main objectives of AIISH resolve around generation of man power in the areas of Speech
Pathology and Audiology. The successful trainees in the respective programmes are awarded the degrees
of B.Sc.(Speech and Hearing), M.Sc. (Speech and Hearing), Ph.D.,(Speech and Hearing by the University
of Mysore. The students are drawn on a zonal basis to ensure the availability of services throughout the
country. The Committee has learnt that no tuition fee is charged. In the past the students were getting
stipend, but now this system has been discontinued. The Committee was also informed that students now
get merit scholarships only. The Committee, however, feels that the original system of stipend is better to
attract better talent and possibility of restoring and enhancing it may be examined.

11


Action Taken

The proposal to implement stipend for B.Sc and M.Sc students is being implemented from this
academic year as per the approval of the 45th Executive Council which met on 26.2.2000. Accordingly,
the students of B.Sc (Indian students) will be paid an amount of Rs. 400/- per month and students of M.S<
would be paid Rs. 650/- per month, for 10 months in a year.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is happy to note that the original system of stipend has been restored. The
Committee, however, feels that the stipend amount of Rs. 400/- per month for the students of B. Sc.
And Rs. 650/- per month for M.Sc. is too meagre to serve any practical purpose. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the stipend for students in the All India Institute of Speech and
Hearing should be suitably enhanced.

Recommendation

9.1 The Committee has noted that even though All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, (AIISH) is the
only institution working in the area of speech and hearing but in terms of salary and other benefits, the
Institute is not at par with other National Institutions like All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Pondicherry
and National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore. The Director of
the Institute informed the Committee that the pay scales of the teaching staff in the Institute are very
low as compared to UGC pay scales as well as that of other autonomous Institutes.

9.2 The Director further informed that even though the staff has demanded UGC pay scales but the main
difficulty is that since it is not a deemed university, UGC pay scales cannot be given. She has, also stated
that the matter was considered by the Finance Committee and it recommended flexible complementary
and Central Health Services(CHS) scales for medical staff and flexible complimentary scales for non-
medical staff. This was to be approved by the Executive Council, the Director stated. The Director has,
however, requested that this Institute should be treated at par with other institutes.

9.3 When the Committee sought to know as to whether the issue of pay scales of the Institute was referred
to the Fifth Pay Commission, the Department informed the Committee that the Institute has already
submitted a comprehensive memorandum to the Fifth Pay Commission. The Committee is of the view
that even though the Institute has been doing excellent work, the Department of Health does not appear to
have paid any attention on the issue of pay scales in the Institute. The Committee desires that the issue
may be settled once for all so that well qualified staff may join the Institute. This would enable the
Institute to concentrate more on its work with devotion.

9.4 The Director also informed the Committee that promotional avenues are not good as compared to
institutes like NIMHANS where promotions are given after every 5-8 years service. She pleaded for
better promotional avenues in AIISH also. The Department may look into the matter and take necessary
action.

Action Taken
As stated under 3.1, a proposal to implement Flexible Complementary Scales (FCS) for non

medical teaching/research staff and CHS pay scales to medical staff of the Institute is under consideration.
Simultaneously, a new comprehensive proposal, encompassing both pay scales and time-bound

12


promotions on the lines prevalent at other institutes like NIMHANS. Bangalore. would be placed before
the next EC meeting of the Institute.

In respect of Group B. C & D employees. Time Bound Promotion Policy/Assured Career
Progression Scheme as applicable to the Central government civilian employees is under consideration at
the Institute.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is dismayed at the fact that the employees/ research staff of the All India
Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore are being subjected to stepmotherly treatment for years
in comparison to other National level Institutes in terms of their salary and other benefits. It does
not find any cogent reason as to why a national institute like AIISH should not be placed at par
with other national institutes in terms of salary, promotion and other benefits. The Committee is of
the view that the present discrimination with AIISH should be done away with immediately by
extending the same benefits and privileges to AIISH as are being available to other national
institutes.


CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED

NIL

14


x
TENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 8" June, 2001 in Committee Room’ A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri S.B. Chavan — Chairman

MEMBERS

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Maurice Kujur

Shri Eduardo Faleiro

Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”

Shri Dina Nath Mishra

Shri Bratin Sengupta

Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”
Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA

9. Shrimati Jaskaur Meena

10. Shri Baliram Kashyap

11. Shri Ramanand Singh

12. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
13. Shri ५. M. Sudheeran

14, Shri Ramesh Chennithala
15. Shri Samik Lahiri

16. Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
17. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
18. Dr. Baliram

19. Dr. A.D.K. Jayaseelan

20. Shri Trilochan Kanungo
21. Dr. S. Venugopal

9० ०9 ७ के ५० ७

SECRETARIAT

Smt. Vandana Garg, Director

Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary

Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer

Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer

17


2; The Committee considered the Draft 107", 108", 109" and 110" Acticn Taken Reports of the
Committee on the Problem of Drop-Outs, All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore, Adult
Education and Vocational Education respectively. The Committee, after some discussion, adopted the
Reports with certain modifications.

3 The Committee decided that the reports may be presented/laid in both the Houses in the ensuing
Monsoon Session. The Committee, in this connection, authorised Shri Maurice Kujur and Shri Dina
Nath Mishra to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Trilochan Kanungo and Shri Baliram
Kashyap to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.

4. The Chairman informed that the Committee will meet again on the 2 and 37 July,2001 to hear
the Secretaries of various Ministries/Departments and NGOs who are concerned with the Cigarettes and
other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce,
Production, Supply and Distribution), Bill, 2001.

5: The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 11.40 A.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the
2™ July, 2001.

18