PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December 
TWO HUNDRED 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS 
(MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL OPMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
December , 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY SECOND  REPORT 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 -2016 (DEMAND NO. 109 
DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS   
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS ) 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO. 
272  
REPORT  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
 
(DEMAND NO. 109 )  

PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS 
(MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 -2016 (DEMAND NO. 109 
DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS   
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS) 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
December , 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
 
(DEMAND NO. 109 )  

C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................... .......................................  (i)-(ii) 
2.         PREFACE..................................................................................................................  (iii) 
3. ABBREVIATIONS....................................................................................................  (iv) 
4.  REPORT............................................ .............................................…............................         
5. *OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -  AT A GLANCE ...   
6. *MINUTES........................................ ...................................................... ................    
7. *ANNEXURES...................................... ............................................................ ..   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
*Appended on printing stage 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st  August, 2015) 
 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13.  Shri C.R. Chaudhary 
14.       Shrimati Bhawana Gawali Patil 
15.       Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16 .       Shri  Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.       Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.       Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.       Shri Chand Nath 
20.       Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.       Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.       Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.       Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.       Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
26.       Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.       Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.       Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
30.       Shri Ajay Tamta 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher  
  
 
 
 
 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri K.P. Singh, Additional Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director 
Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
  

P R E F A C E 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorised by the Committe e to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred Seventy-second Repo rt on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Sixty-  sixth Report on Demands for Grants 
(Demand No. 109) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs a nd Sports, Department of Youth Affairs for 
the year 2015-16.   
 
2. The Two Hundred Sixty-ninth  Report of the Departme nt-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development was present ed to Rajya Sabha on 23 rd  April, 2015 
and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 23 rd  April, 2015.  Replies of the Government to the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Repor t, were considered by the Committee at its 
meeting held on the 18 th  December, 2015. 
 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopt ed the same at its meeting held on 
the 18 th  December, 2015. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
December 18, 2015 
Agrahayana 27,1937 (Saka) 
 
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

REPORT 
 
 The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development deals with the action taken by  the Government on the recommendations 
contained in its Two hundred sixty-sixth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(Demand No. 109) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs a nd Sports, Department of Youth Affairs for 
the year 2015-16. 
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the 266 
th  Report have been categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been a ccepted by the Government – paras –  
14, 15,  49 and 53 
 (Chapter-I) Total – 4 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply – paras -21, 23, 24, 39, 44, 45,46, 51 and 52 
 (Chapter-II) Total – 9 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee – paras – 4, 10, 20, 28, 33, 34, 41 and 43  
 (Chapter-III) Total – 8 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which  reply of the Government is still awaited. 
 (Chapter-IV)  Para -3 
 Total -1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT  
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN  
 
Recommendations/observations  
 
14. The Committee notes that NYKS implements and also h as to undertake a number of 
important programmes mentioned above.  However, due  to inadequate funds which work out to 
about Rs.8 lakhs per District only, NYKS will not b e able to cater to a small fraction of the youth 
enrolled with its Youth Clubs.  Most of it goes in paying salaries and allowances only.  Further, 
regarding five parameters falling under NYKS, viz. No. of volunteers enrolled, Skill Upgradation 
Training Programme, Promotion of Sports (sports mat erials to youth clubs), National Integration 
Camps and Tribal Youth Exchange; the Committee find s that there are no substantial short-falls in 
the targets fixed and the achievements made. The Co mmittee, accordingly recommends need to 
increase the funding for NYKS for taking up its var ious programmes. The matter should be taken 
up at RE stage for additional fund allocation for N YKS.  In addition, efforts be made for 
mobilization of funds for NYKS from other Ministrie s/ Departments/ Organisations for taking up 
various programmes like 'Swachh Bharat', 'Beti Bach ao, Beti Padhao Aandolan', 'Aadarsh Gram 
Yojana', etc. The Department should also request th e State Governments to support NYKS by 
pooling their resources for its various schemes in view of devolution of funds to the States after 
14 th  Finance Commission's recommendations. 
 
Action Taken  
 
 In view of urgency of funds requirement for ongoin g programmes of NYKS, an additional 
allocation of Rs.25 crores (under Plan) has been ma de for NYKS at first supplementary stage, 
through internal appropriation within existing over all budget allocation. The necessary approval 
from Ministry of Finance has been received. Further  increase in allocations will be proposed at RE 
stage as per the funds requirement. NYKS has been m aking proactive efforts for mobilisation of 
funds from Central/ State Government Ministries/ De partments, other Organisations, etc. For 
instance, proposal has been sent to Ministry of Hom e Affairs for organising 8 th  Tribal Youth 
Exchange Programme involving 2,000 tribal youth fro m LWE-affected Districts and funds 
allocation is expected shortly. Similarly, the Mini stry of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
Government of India, has sanctioned Rs. 6.18 crore for two projects on Awareness and Education 
for Prevention of Drug Abuse and Alcoholism in 21 d istricts of Punjab, the implementation of 
which is going on . Further, NYKS is collaborating with United Nations Population Fund 
(UNFPA) for implementation of Adolescent Health and  Development Project in 10 Districts of 5 
states (viz. Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Od isha and Rajasthan) through 1,860 teen clubs. 
The total project cost is Rs. 3.43 crore for the year 2015. 
 
Regarding flagship initiatives of the Government su ch as 'Swachh Bharat', 'Beti Bachao Beti 
Padhao Aandolan', 'Aadarsh Gram Yojana', ‘Jan Dhan Yojana’, ‘Social Security Schemes’, etc., 
NYKS is working in close collaboration with Central  Ministries/ State Government Departments 
and local bodies for making these programmes a gran d success. NYKS has also signed an MOU 
with National Mission for Clean Ganga for implement ing a Project called ‘Youth Partnership in 
Ganga Rejuvenation Mission’ to create awareness in 1,649 Gram Panchayats along flanks of 

Ganga river for keeping the river clean.  Proactive  efforts are being made for pursing the matter 
with State Governments for supporting NYKS by pooli ng their resources for its various schemes. 
NYKS has also submitted a proposal for Rs. 1.72 cro re to Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, Government of India, for celebration o f 125 th  birth Anniversary of Dr. B. R. 
Ambedkar. Under this Project, 105 Districts (36 Sta te Capitals/ UT HQs. and 69 other Districts) 
would be covered. In these Districts, it has been p roposed to organize activities such as Sports 
Tournaments, District Youth Conventions, Exhibition s, Casteless Youth Run/ Rallies/ Human 
Chain for National Unity, etc.  
 
Recommendations/observations  
15 . On a specific query regarding vacancies in NYKS, the Committee came to know that as per 
DOPT instructions, cadre restructuring needs to be undertaken every 5 years.  However, the same 
has not been done in case of NYKS.  The Committee f eels that the current structure is flawed, 
resulting in serious stagnation in promotions which  poses some operational difficulties.  The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends that it is imper ative to take urgent initiatives to fill-up 
vacant posts in NYKS, especially in the category of  District Youth Coordinators (DYCs) (342 
vacancies) and Accounts-cum-Typists (ACTs) (210 vac ancies).  These vacancies are adversely 
affecting NYKS work.   The Committee was informed t hat the cadre restructuring proposal is 
being finalized in the Department to improve the op erational efficiency as well as promotional 
avenues without increasing the total strength.  The  proposal has been referred to Ministry of 
Finance for consideration and approval.  The Commit tee feels that efforts be made for filling up 
the vacant posts, by engaging a Government/PSU recr uiting agency and also by either taking 
persons on deputation or on outsourcing basis.  Ste ps be taken for filling up vacancies in other 
posts as well on urgent basis.  Besides, the Cadre restructuring be completed at the earliest as it 
aims at rationalizing existing staff strength with no additional financial burdening and it would 
ease out the problem to a great extent. 
 
Action Taken  
   
Regarding cadre restructuring of NYKS, the Ministry  of Finance, Department of Expenditure, has 
advised, vide their ID No.2(16)/E.III Desk/2015 dat ed 22.06.2015, that the Ministry may carry out 
the restructuring with the approval of the Governin g Body of the NYKS and the Minister-in-
charge, subject to the condition that (i) the proposal remains within the stipulated parameters of the 
cadre review and (ii) NYKS has finances to absorb t he extra expenditure/ the proposal is 
financially neutral. Accordingly, further necessary  steps are being taken to complete the process. 
Regarding filling up of vacant posts of District Yo uth Coordinators (DYCs) and Accounts Clerk-
cum-Typists (ACTs), NYKS has finalised the Recruitm ent Agency. Further steps are being taken 
to complete the recruitment process. Initially, 150  vacant posts of DYCs and 177 vacant posts of 
Accounts Clerk-cum-Typists are sought to be filled up.  Pending completion of regular recruitment 
process, steps are being taken to take officers on deputation/ outsourcing basis, so that work does 
not suffer. 11 officers on deputation are continuin g since earlier years and 20 more officers have 
been selected this year. Second advertisement has b een issued for inducting more officers on 
deputation.  
 
Young Leaders Programme (YLP) 
 
Recommendations/Observations  

 
Para-49: The department of Youth Affairs has launched a new ‘National Young Leaders 
Programme’, with the objective of developing leader ship qualities among the youth, so that they 
can realize their full potential and can contribute  to the task of nation-building in an effective 
manner.  There is no reduction in the total allocat ion of the Department of Youth Affairs for the 
year 2015-16 as compared to the year 2014-15.  The allocation for Plan for BE 2015-16 is at the 
same level as BE 2014-15, i.e. Rs.384 crores.  The allocation for Non-Plan has increased from Rs. 
62.39 in BE 2014-15 to Rs. 75 crores in BE 2015-16.   The Committee notes that the scheme is 
new one and it has been finalized only in December,  2014.  Hence, it is expected that it will 
fulfill all five components and make it a novel scheme.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Department is making all possible efforts for effective implementation of the National 
Young Leaders Programme (NYLP). The Progress made s o far in implementation of various 
components of NYLP  is as follows: 
 
a. Neighbourhood Youth Parliament (NYP) : The implementation of the Programme is 
going on.  NYKS finalised the detailed operational guidelines for the programme in January, 2015 
with the approval of the Department and the same we re issued to all field offices of NYKS. For 
implementation of the Programme, an amount of Rs.10 .67 crores was released to NYKS during 
2014-15 and an additional amount of Rs. Rs.27.58 cr ores has been released during 2015-16 so far. 
During 2014-15, 4,640 Youth Parliament Programmes w ere organised at Block level, in which 
3.71 lakh youth club members participated. During f irst quarter of current year, NYKS has 
organised 4,929 Block-level programmes, in which 3. 96 lakh youth club members participated. 
The Programmes organised during the first quarter of 2015-16 were effectively leveraged for Yoga 
Awareness and Training, in addition to other themes , which played a key role in effective 
participation of NYKS in Yoga programmes across the  country on the 21.06.2015, i.e., the 
International Day of Yoga. In fact, on 21.06.2015, yoga programmes were organised in 68,568 
NYKS-affiliated youth clubs, in which 22.42 lakh yo uth club members participated. In future also, 
this Programme will be effectively leveraged for bu ilding awareness about important Government 
initiatives and for involving NYKS youth clubs in their successful implementation. 
 
b. Youth for Development (YFD) Programme : The implementation process of the 
Programme through NYKS has been initiated.  NYKS fi nalised the detailed Operational 
Guidelines for the Programme in January, 2015 with the approval of the Department and the same 
were issued to all field offices of NYKS.  In order  to reward outstanding work done by the youth 
under the Programme, Awards have been introduced. A t the end of each year, two youth clubs in 
every block will be given awards based on their wor k, the first award being Rs.8,000/- and a 
certificate and the second award being Rs.4,000/- a nd a certificate. For implementation of the 
Programme, an amount of Rs.1.54 crores was released  to NYKS during 2014-15 and an additional 
amount of Rs. Rs.8.10 crores has been released duri ng 2015-16 so far. During 2014-15, NYKS 
implemented IEC component of the Scheme in 552 Dist ricts to create awareness/ motivation about 
Shramadaan. This is continuing during the current year. Shramadaan activities have started. 
 
c. National Young Leaders Awards (NYLA) :  The process of implementation has been 
initiated. Hon’ble MOS(IC), YAS had addressed a DO letter dated 10.03.2015 to the Hon’ble 

Ministers of the concerned Ministries/ Departments,  requesting them to send nominations of two 
young persons (one male and one female) in respect of the identified domain areas/ sectors, by 
30.09.2015, so that necessary steps could be taken to organise the Award ceremony in a befitting 
manner. This was followed by another DO letter date d 23.04.2015 from the Secretary, Youth 
Affairs to the Secretaries of concerned Ministries/  Departments on the subject. The matter is being 
followed up for obtaining nominations, so that the Awards Ceremony can be organised.  
 
d. National Youth Development Fund (NYDF) :   The detailed Operational Guidelines for 
NYDF were prepared broadly on the pattern of the Na tional Sports Development Fund (NSDF), 
which is already existing and in being operated. Th e Guidelines have been finalised after vetting 
by the Ministry of Law and Justice and with the app roval of the Hon’ble MOS (IC), Youth Affairs 
and Sports. The guidelines have been notified vide Notification dated 08.07.2015.  Further steps 
are being taken to operationalisation of the Fund, namely, (i) Constitution of the Council and the 
Executive Committee, (ii) Opening of a Bank Account  and transfer of Rs.5 crores from the 
relevant budget head to the Fund as initial Corpus and (iii) Initiating proposal for seeking income 
tax exemption for the Fund, since the Fund has been  constituted under the Charitable Endowments 
Act, 1890. 
 
e. National Youth Advisory Council (NYAC) :  The process of constitution of NYAC is 
going on. The matter is under consideration of the Hon’ble MOS(IC), YAS for nominating the 
Young Leaders who will act as members of the Council. 
 
CONCLUSION 
  
Recommendations/observations  
53. As regards augmentation of funds concerning differe nt schemes of the Department, the 
Secretary pleaded before the Committee that he woul d be striving for augmentation of fund 
allocations during the RE stage.  However, it is no t clear to the Committee as to how allocation of 
funds, in the perspective of the 14 th  Finance Commission, would be adjusted between the Centre 
and the States for the on-going schemes/programmes wherever the expenditure has to be borne by 
both.  The Committee shows its concern for the Depa rtment to clarify its stand on this count.  The 
Committee desires to have a note on this issue to be sent to it at the earliest. 
 
Action Taken  
 
 The Department has only one Scheme, namely, Nation al Service Scheme (NSS), where 
expenditure is shared between the Centre and the States, in the following ratio: 
 
a. In case of J&K and UTs (without legislature), the C entral Government provides 100% 
funding. 
b. In case of NE States (including Sikkim), Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, the sharing of 
expenditure between Centre and States is in the ratio of 75:25. 
c. In case of all other States/ UTs, the sharing of ex penditure between Centre and States is in 
the ratio of 7:5. 
 
As far as NSS is concerned, the Ministry of Finance , Department of Expenditure has already 
clarified, vide their OM No. 66(1)/PF.II/2015 dated  23.04.2015 that there is no change in the 

funding pattern (i.e. ratio of sharing of expenditu re between the Centre and the States) for NSS 
during 2015-16 and that it will remain the same as was during last financial year.  Thus, 
Department of Youth Affairs is so far not impacted by the ongoing exercise for restructuring of 
various centrally sponsored schemes. 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY  
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)  
Recommendations/observations  
21. The Committee feels that the effective execution of  this scheme, in fact, leaves a lot to be 
desired.  There is a need to devise some innovation s to bring fresh energy into it.  It would be 
better to associate people, who are absolutely apol itical, i.e, scientists, engineers, social thinkers , 
etc., to have interactions with the students for gu iding and motivating them.  Their services may 
also be used to draw programmes for the benefits of  our young volunteers in the present situation. 
Availability of thirty-three lakhs volunteers is a big army.  They can do miracle if their energies 
are channelized positively.  People having knowledg e for the maintenance of communal harmony 
may also be associated to be effectively utilized f or achieving national integration, communal 
harmony, etc. 
 
Action Taken  
 
 In fact, the NSS follows a very dynamic framework,  which provides opportunities to take 
up any innovative activity with the broad area of ‘ voluntary community service’. In practice, a lot 
of innovations are taking place in every State/ UT.  These innovative activities are duly 
documented and brought out in the form of an Annual  Report by NSS Organisation. An important 
component of all NSS activities, esp. NSS Camps, is  “Suvichar”, under which eminent persons 
from different fields are invited to address NSS vo lunteers and to interact with them. NSS 
volunteers are put through 20 hours of orientation programme, during which eminent persons are 
invited to address the volunteers and to interact w ith them. Communal Harmony and National 
Integration are key themes of all NSS activities. A ctivities like NSS Mega Camps, Youth 
Festivals, North-East NSS Youth Festivals etc. help  in fostering the spirit of communal harmony 
and national integration. NSS volunteers play an ac tive role in all important initiatives of the 
Government. For instance, 8.92 lakh NSS volunteers participated in Yoga Programmes organised 
in various parts of the country on the occasion of International Day of Yoga (21 st  June, 2015). In 
addition, in the Programme at Rajpath, 700 NSS volunteers worked as Stewards (observers). Some 
significant achievements under NSS during 2014-15 were as follows: 
 
• 71.33 lakh saplings were planted by NSS volunteers. 
• 4.27 lakhs units of blood was donated by NSS volunteers. 
• 20.47 lakh children administered Pulse Polio drops by NSS volunteers. 
• 17,063 health/ eye/ immunisation camps were organis ed, in which 9.50 lakh volunteers 
 participated.  
• 30,538 awareness programmes/ rallies/ campaigns wer e organised on issues of relevance 
 to the community, in which 19.89 lakh volunteers p articipated.  
• 107.67 lakh volunteer-hours of Shramadaan was under taken by NSS volunteers during 
 the year. 
• 5 North East NSS Youth Festivals were organised, involving 1,500 youth. 

• 2 NSS Mega Camps organised in (i) Ladnun in Rajasth an and (ii) Majuli in Jorhat 
 District of Assam, with participation of about 880  NSS volunteers and programme 
 officers. 
• 1,453 NSS volunteers have participated in adventure activities. 
• Self-Defence Training was imparted to 1.88 lakh NSS volunteers. 
• 160 NSS volunteers participated in Republic Day Parade, 2015. 
 
NATIONAL YOUTH CORPS (NYC)  
Recommendations/observations  
23. The Committee finds out that under the NYC Scheme, NYKS is expected to be engaged 
more in convergence activities as well as different  projects/Special Programmes of different 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India being  undertaken by NYKS.  NYC volunteers are 
the backbone of NYKS.  They are the actual field fu nctionaries who assist in the implementation 
of programme and activities of NYKS.  It is through them that the youth even in the remotest areas 
may get awareness/benefit of the on-going schemes o f the Government.  But two volunteers per 
block, Committee feels is not sufficient which need s to be increased.  Besides, keeping in view the 
special circumstances in the North-Eastern States a nd 83 Districts affected by Naxalite violence, 
these areas need to have much more, may be 10 NYCs per block.  In addition more volunteers will 
be required for the 123 districts where NYCs is exp ected to come up with new Kendras in the 
coming months. The Committee was informed that as s uch total requirement of NYCs works out 
to 43,000.  The Committee expresses its concern abo ut just two volunteers in each block who are 
paid a meager honorarium of Rs. 2500 per month.  Th is amount has stagnated since the 
introduction of the scheme in 2010.  Recently, an E valuation Study of the Scheme was conducted 
through an independent agency, which recommended in creasing the Honorarium to improve the 
motivation level of the volunteers.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that this honorarium 
should be made double, i.e at least @ Rs.5000/- per  month.  Furthermore, for accommodating this 
enhancement of honorarium, the Department is requir ed to make initiative for requisite increase in 
budget allocation.  
 
Action Taken  
 
 The matter was considered in the 46 th  Meeting of the Board of Governors of the Nehru 
Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) held on 16 th  June, 2015, in which it was recommended that the 
number of NYCs may be increased from 2 to 4 per Blo ck and their honorarium may be increased 
from Rs.2,500/- to Rs.5,000/- per month. This will have the implication of increasing the funds 
requirement under NYC Scheme four-fold. Since NYC i s a Scheme of the Department, this 
requires approval of the Standing Finance Committee  (SFC).  Steps are being taken to complete 
the procedural requirements and obtain the necessary approvals. 
 
 
Recommendations/observations  
 
24. The Committee also notes that there is a reduction in the allocation to Rs. 22.46 crore  in 
RE from to Rs. 33.00 crore in BE 2014-15.  The Comm ittee has been apprised that the decrease in 
RE was due to less number of registered volunteers.     The BE 2015-16 amounting to Rs. 33.00 
crore is same as that of BE 2014-15.  The Committee  feels that the Department should look into 
why the required number of volunteers could not be registered and to see that it does not happen 

again.  The Committee recommends for the suitable e nhancement in the budget allocation for this 
scheme. 
 
Action Taken  
 
  NYKS has initiated necessary steps to ensure that  there is no shortfall in the number 
of NYCs this year. The funds requirement will incre ase manifold once the SFC approval is 
received for increase in the number of NYC voluntee rs and increase in their monthly honorarium. 
Additional funds will be sought accordingly.  
 
 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION  (IC)  
 
Recommendations/observations  
39. The Committee also observes that no physical target s can be fixed as the number of visits 
depended upon CEP/protocols signed with foreign cou ntries and invitations received from other 
countries.  The Committee notes with satisfaction t hat under this programme, exchange of 
delegations with friendly countries is taken up on reciprocal basis for promoting exchange of 
ideas, values and culture amongst the youth of diff erent countries.  As no specific timelines are 
fixed, the Committee hopes that visits of delegations will take place as per scheduled programmes.  
 
Action Taken  
 
  Since 2006, the Department has been exchanging 10 0-member Youth Delegations 
with China and 20-member Youth Delegations with Sou th Korea. In addition, 100-member Youth 
Delegations from Bangladesh have been visiting Indi a since 2012. In addition, Indian Youth 
Delegations visit various countries for specific ev ents from time to time. These exchanges are 
continuing during current year as well. However, th ere has been considerable step-up in youth 
exchanges during current year due to various initiatives taken by the Department, namely, 
 
• The size of the Delegations being exchanged between  India and China has been increased 
from 100 to 200 from current year. 
• It has been agreed to increase the size of the Dele gations being exchanged between India 
and South Korea from 20 to 50 from the year 2016 onwards. 
• Youth Exchange with Nepal has been started with 50- member Nepalese Youth Delegation 
visiting India in April, 2015. 
• Youth Exchange with Sri Lanka has been started with  12-member Sri Lankan Youth 
Delegation visiting India in August, 2015. Indian Y outh Delegation will visit Sri Lanka later this 
year. 
• Process is on to take up exchange of Youth Delegati ons with Vietnam and Bahrain in later 
part of this year. 
 
The Department will continue to make proactive effo rts to initiate youth exchange programmes 
with more and more countries in future.  
 
YOUTH HOSTEL (YH)  
Recommendations/observations  

44. The Committee views with dissatisfaction that the s light decrease in budget allocation for 
this scheme in RE 2014-15 amounting to Rs. 0.49 crore with respect to  Rs. 1.50 crore in BE 2014-
15 is on account of non-submission of UCs. The Comm ittee strongly recommends for initiating 
requisite initiatives so as to curb the delay in ge tting U.Cs which hampers the budgetary 
allocations.   
 
Action Taken  
 
 The pending Utilisation Certificate from the Gover nment of Arunachal Pradesh has since 
been received and the balance grant is being released. 
 
 
Recommendations/observations  
45. The Committee also suggests that Youth Hostels have  been built-up at different tourist 
places in the country and if the budget allocation gets enhanced, constructing a Youth Hostel at 
Chitrakoot in Uttar Pradesh, which is a prominent religious place, may be considered.   
 
Action Taken  
 
 The proposal for construction of a new Youth Hoste l at Chitrakoot in Uttar Pradesh shall 
be considered subject to enhancement of budget allocation. 
 
SCOUTING AND GUIDING  
 
Recommendations/observations  
46. Scouting and Guiding is an international movement.  Scouting and Guiding Organisations 
avail assistance from various sources.  Department of Youth Affairs also provides small assistance 
to the tune of about Rs.1 crore per annum.  There h as been litigation in respect of scouting and 
guiding organizations and also, a decision was take n to enforce ‘good governance norms’ on these 
organizations.  These issues have now been resolved .  Hence, the subject matter of merging 
NPYAD and ‘Assistance to Scouting and Guiding Organ isations’ will now be considered.  The 
Committee, accordingly, is of the opinion that need ful may be done in right earnest without losing 
further time.   
 
Action Taken  
 
 The issue of merging the Scheme of “Assistance to Scouting and Guiding Organisations” 
with the National Programme for Youth and Adolescen t Development (NPYAD) is under active 
consideration. 
 
CONCLUSION  
Recommendations/observations  
51. It has been informed that there is only one Audit P ara (Para 9.1 of Report No. 38 of 2010-
11) is pending.  It is regarding irregular excess e xpenditure of Rs.67.11 lakh in payment of House 
Rent Allowance and City Compensatory allowance to t he employees of Rajiv Gandhi National 
Institute of Youth Development, Sriperumbudur, Tami l Nadu. The Committee is convinced that 
current status that the Ministry of Finance have co nveyed its approval for grant of HRA to the 

employees of RGNIYD prospectively.  Revised ATN is being sent to Audit for vetting.  The 
Department, however, proposed to request MOF for regularizing HRA paid to its employees. 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
 Regarding regularisation of the HRA paid to the em ployees in the past, the Ministry of 
Finance has sought information as to the date from which Chettipedu village has become part of 
Urban Agglomeration (UA) of Chennai. Director, RGNI YD has taken up the matter with the 
concerned State Government authorities to obtain th e necessary information. The same is awaited. 
The matter is being followed up. 
 
Recommendations/observations  
52. The Committee views that the youth programmes of th e Department under operation needs 
to be more focused and there is requirement of new vision and enthusiasm.  The so-called 
backward areas, like Chambal, Bundelkhand, Kalahand i in Orissa, Bhadrachalam in Telangana, 
etc., are the areas which are abound in natural res ources like forest, water, land, minerals, etc.  Th e 
Committee suggests that the Department should come up with new programmes so that youth in 
these areas get involved in constructive work and c ontribute in development of these regions.  The 
Committee also suggests that department should work  out to amalgamate the different schemes 
into one/two mega thrust schemes so that available funds can be fully utilized with the resources of 
man power at their disposal. 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
 The Department lays special emphasis on backward a reas while implementing various 
programmes. However, the function assigned to the D epartment are mainly focused on the 
development of personality and leadership qualities of the youth and involving them in community 
service/ nation-building activities. However, all-r ound development and empowerment of the 
youth would involve educating them, imparting them vocation skills and developing 
entrepreneurship, promoting health and healthy life style and other such activities, for which the 
concerned Ministries/ Departments would have to tak e necessary steps. The Department of Youth 
Affairs is playing a coordinating and facilitating role.  Regarding amalgamation of existing 
schemes into one or two mega thrust schemes, it is stated that over the years, serious efforts have 
been made in this direction and as a result, the nu mber of schemes has come down considerably. 
For instance, as many as 12 Schemes have got merged / subsumed in the National Programme for 
Youth and Adolescent Development (NPYAD) through a multi-stage process of consolidation of 
Schemes. Currently, there are only 9 major Schemes,  each with a distinct objective. The matter is 
under consideration for merging ‘Assistance to Scou ting and Guiding Organisations’ Scheme with 
NPYAD, as stated in reply to Para-46.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
YOUTH DEVELOPMENT INDEX (YDI)  
Recommendations/observations  
4. It has been learnt that the youth development index  (YDI) to serve as a ready reckoner for 
educators and policymakers has been proposed.  Ther e would be focus on developing qualities of 
good citizenship and community service amongst the youth besides inculcating in them the spirit 
of volunteerism.  They would be provided training a nd research support and encouraged to take up 
sports and adventure activities.  Youth travel woul d be promoted and initiatives would be taken to 
create an international perspective amongst them.  All this would be done by building on synergies 
with the activities of other Ministries, Department s and agencies.  Special focus would be on the 

rural youth.  These efforts would aim at channelizi ng youth energy in productive activities and 
engaging them in nation-building activities.  Align ed with this thinking, a National Youth Policy 
(NYP) - 2014 has been formulated through a consulta tive process. The Committee emphasizes the 
urgent need to develop YDI for making youth related  policies/ programmes that would be focused 
and effective.  It, therefore, should be done as soon as possible. 
 
Action taken  
  
In fact,  Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Developmen t (RGNIYD) under the Department, 
had developed India Youth Development Index (YDI), 2010 with technical support from Tata 
Institute of Social Sciences (TISS).  The Report wa s duly published. RGNIYD has now taken up 
the task of developing a revised and updated Youth Development Index. The Institute has 
constituted a Steering Group, comprising of eminent  persons from different backgrounds, for 
providing guidance in this regard. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee finds that the Action Taken Notes, s ubmitted by the Department  is 
silent on the pivotal aspect of targeted time  for achieving this work of revision and updation 
of Youth Development Index.  The Committee notes th at the entrusted organization, i.e., 
RGNIYD for carrying out this task is itself  reelin g under the fund constraint and there is 
requirement of strengthening the faculty position o f the Institutes, which needs filling up of 
the academic posts urgently. The Department has giv en assurance to the Committee, 
germane to its recommendation vide para 34 that add itional allocations of fund would be 
sought at RE stage concerning RGNIYD for this purpo se. The Committee,  accordingly 
directs the Department to provide the details of ad ditional allocations it had sought at RE 
stage and also comment whether it would be adequate enough to meet the requirement. 
 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
Recommendations/observations  
10. The Committee notes that the Department was given m uch lower amount this year than 
what it had projected; it got same amount in 2015-1 6 as given in previous fiscal.  Therefore, it 
leaves no scope for any expansion except continuing  with existing schemes, which is not a happy 
situation.  In view of reaping the benefits of demo graphic dividend, we have to empower the 
Department to undertake activities to empower our y outh in a big way.  The current level of 
allocations, in fact, does not reflect that approac h. Many of the major schemes launched by the 
Prime Minister, it appears are not factored into th e funds allocated. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends strongly to increase Department's alloca tion suitably at RE stage.  While 
recommending to increase the plan allocation for 20 15-16, the Committee likes to underline the 
good performance of the Department in terms of util ization of funds as well as achieving it targets. 
 It means, had the allocations been higher in line with its demands, the achievements also would 
have been still better. As a result, Department cou ld not propose/ undertake any revision/ 
expansion of its on-going activities. 
 
Action Taken  
 

 During 2015-16, all the schemes/ programmes are bei ng implemented with great sense of 
urgency. About 46% of the Plan Allocation has alrea dy been utilised by 31.08.2015. The pace of 
funds utilisation is expected to pick up further in  coming months. On the strength of this 
performance, proactive efforts shall be made for se eking substantial increase in allocations for the 
year at RE stage.   
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 The Committee notes that inadequate allocation of f unds has remained the main 
constraint in effective implementation of schemes o f the Ministry. The Committee is helpless 
to make an assessment of the enhanced allocation of  funds at the RE stage as the acceptance 
of the revised budget proposals are still awaited f rom the Ministry of Finance.  Considering 
the performance of the Department in terms of utili zation of funds as well as achieving its 
targets, the Committee, therefore, can only await f or the intimation from the Ministry of 
Youth Affairs and Sports,  Department of Youth Affa irs with respect to enhancement of 
allocation of funds so that the demographic dividend of India should be put to greater use.  
 
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)  
 
Recommendations/observations  
20. The Committee notes that NSS is a noble programme o f personality and character 
development of students through community service.  However, it currently covers less than 10% 
student’s strength eligible to join NSS.  This is m ainly due to inadequate funds allocations which 
have remained stagnant for last many years. Visuali sing the slightly enhanced allocation 
amounting to Rs.82.18 crores in RE 2014-15 in relat ion to Rs. 75.50 crores in BE 2014-15 for 
NSS, the Committee gathered that the increase in RE  was to clear the backlog expenditure. 
 Further, in regard to three components of activiti es under NSS, viz. volunteers performing 120 
hours of work; number of villages adopted; and adve nture activities, the Committee has been 
informed that there is no substantial shortfall in targets achievement by the Department with only 
exception of Adventure activities, that have to be suspended in 2015-16 on account of reduced 
allocation of funds, i.e., Rs. 70.15 crores in BE 2 015-16.  The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that there is a need to increase fund allocations.  The Department has informed that the States have 
been demanding upward revision of norms concerning financial assistance under NSS.  It seems 
justified to look into this aspect so that the prov ision of financial assistance gets increased.  The 
Committee specifically points out that NSS involves  organizing regular community service 
activities for at least 120 hours per volunteer per  annum and a special camp of 7-day duration in 
adopted village/slum. The Department should endeavo ur to fulfill the suggestions for providing 
them a Tee –Shirt and Cap with NSS Logo, NSS Badge and NSS Identity Card.  
 
Action Taken  
 
 The progress of utilisation of funds under NSS is very encouraging. About 73% of the 
allocation for 2015-16 was utilised by 31.08.2015. In view of pressing need for additional funds, 
an additional allocation of Rs.12 crores (under Pla n) has been made for NSS during the first 
supplementary stage this year, through internal app ropriation within existing overall budget 
allocation of the Department. As a result of this a dditional allocation, the adventure activities have  
now been taken up during current year.  Proactive e fforts will be made at RE stage for further 

increase in the allocation for NSS, so that the Programme implementation can be further improved. 
However, upward revision of norms for financial ass istance to States will be feasible only if the 
there is substantial step-up in the allocations. Th e current allocations are inadequate to even meet 
the funds requirement as per existing norms. As per  current norms, allocation is @Rs.475 per 
volunteer per annum. Instructions have been issued for providing NSS Badge and NSS Identity 
Cards, but provision of Tee Shirt and Cap would be possible only if the allocations are increased 
substantially. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 The Committee notes that the adventure activities have been taken up in the current 
year.  However, the Committee expresses its concern  that the current allocations are 
inadequate to even meet the funds requirement as per existing norms.  The NSS is a centrally 
sponsored scheme with the objective to develop char acter and personality of youth.  
Therefore, the Department need not give up the init iatives on its part to get the funds raised 
for fulfilling the morale boosting efforts like, providing the Tee shirt and Caps with NSS logo 
to NSS volunteers. Due to the pending acceptance of  the budget proposals from the Ministry 
of Finance, the Department could not give any infor mation as to whether there has been an 
increase in the budget allocation for this scheme at RE stage.  
National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development (NPYAD) 
28. The Committee, in the light of the resource sca rcity for this scheme, recommends that there 
is need for substantial increase in the fund alloca tion. The Department should follow-up for the 
increase in the fund allocation for NPYAD at RE stage. 
 
Action Taken 
 The allocation for NPYAD was reduced from Rs.32 cr ore in RE 2014-15 to Rs. 17.10 crore 
in BE 2015-16.  During the first supplementary stag e this year, an additional allocation of Rs.11 
crore (under Plan) has been made for NPYAD, through  internal appropriation within existing 
overall budget allocation of the Department. Proact ive efforts will be made at RE stage for further 
increase in the allocation for NPYAD, so that the P rogramme can be implemented smoothly and 
the intended objectives of this Programme can be achieved. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is of the view that it would be appr eciated if concerted efforts bring 
the result concerning fund allocation for NPYAD. On  account of scarcity of requisite funds, 
the intended role of an umbrella programme for assi stance to various organizations 
concerning youth and development activities cannot be played by NPYAD.  Whether there 
has been an increase in the fund allocation at RE s tage cannot be ascertained as the Ministry 
of Finance is yet to give its acceptance to the budget proposal sent by the Department. 
 
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD)  
 
Recommendations/observations  
33. The Committee is constrained to note that the Budge t provision for BE 2015-16 has been 
kept at Rs. 20.00 crore (inclusive of Rs.2 crore fo r NE), as there is no increase in the overall 
Budget allocation for the Department in 2015-16, wh ich is kept at the same level as during 2014-
15, i.e., Rs. 384.00 crore.  The Committee is surpr ised that the decrease in budget allocation for 

this scheme in RE 2014-15 amounting to Rs.15.86  cr ore  with respect to Rs.20.00 crore in BE 
2014-15 is on account of Non-submission of Utilization Certificate, it is unacceptable.  
 
Action Taken  
 
 During current year, the timely release and utilis ation of funds is being closely monitored, 
so that allocated funds are fully utilised and fund s do not lapse on account of non-submission of 
UCs etc.  
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 RGNIYD is a nodal agency for training youth as a f acilitator of youth development 
activities in rural, urban and also tribal areas. However, to note that the budget provision for 
this ‘Institute of National Importance’ has been re duced to Rs. 15.86 crores in RE 2014-15 
due to lesser requirement of funds owing to non-sub mission of Utilisation Certificates is a 
very unfortunate situation. The Committee finds the  response of the Department very 
routine. The Committee would like to reiterate that  concerted and serious efforts need to be 
taken up for the proper and full utilisation of fun ds and also ensure timely submission of 
Utilisation Certificates.  
  
 
Recommendations/observations  
34. However, owing to the mandated assignments to RGNIY D and in view of the task of up-
scaling of multifarious activities of the Institute  to establish a brand image, the Committee firmly 
believes that the budget allocations of RGNIYD will require substantial stepping up, if the Institute 
has to play its intended role satisfactorily.  The Department is, therefore, required to continue 
follow-up for increasing allocations for RGNIYD. Th e Committee strongly recommends for 
initiating requisite initiatives so as to curb the delay in getting U.Cs which hampers further 
budgetary allocations.  As regards the need for str engthening the faculty position of the Institute, 
the Committee is not fully convinced with the expla nation of the department.  In order to 
strengthen the faculty of the Institute, the Commit tee feels the academic posts have to be filled 
with a sense of urgency.  
 
Action Taken  
 
 Proactive efforts will be made to utilise allocate d funds expeditiously and seek additional 
allocations at RE stage. Efforts are being made to expedite completion of the recruitment process 
for the existing vacant posts. The matter will be f ollowed up vigorously for sanction of additional 
posts as per the requirement of the Institute.  
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 Merely agreeing in principle by the Department to take up proactive efforts to utilise 
funds expeditiously and to expedite completion of t he recruitment process for the vacant 
posts, the Committee feels, are not enough. Urgent steps need to be taken up to complete the 
recruitment process. The Committee finds that the A ction Taken Notes submitted by the 
Government appears to be of routine nature and with out any determination for execution 

within a targeted time. The Committee once again em phasizes that the Department will have 
to make vigorous efforts to raise the required fund s for RGNIYD.  The Department could 
not give an exact amount of funds allocated at the RE stage as the budget proposals sent by 
the Department are yet to be accepted by the Ministry of Finance. 
 
YOUTH HOSTELS (YH) 
 
41. The Committee views with serious concern that t he main constraint as it was informed, 
being faced by the Department is that the State Gov ernments are not taking due interest in proper 
maintenance and operation of the Hostels.  The Stat e Governments do not sanction adequate funds 
for maintenance of Hostels, due to which a number o f the hostel buildings are in bad shape.  In 
fact, 16 Youth Hostel buildings are under unauthori zed occupation and are being utilized for 
purposes other that the purpose for which these wer e constructed. In a number of cases, the Hostel 
management Committees have either not been formed o r are non-functional.  These issues have 
been taken up with the State Governments.  The Comm ittee strongly recommends that the 
Department must take all appropriate steps to get 1 6 hostels vacated from unauthorized occupants 
and it is imperative upon the Department to take al l requisite steps on priority to resolve and get 
extraneous activities stopped from these hostels.  The Committee views it very seriously and 
would like to have a status report on this within a month. 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The matter is being followed up with State Governm ents for vacating 16 Hostels 
from unauthorized occupants. In fact, 2 out of 16 y outh Hostels, namely, Bhiwani in Haryana and 
Secunderabad in Telangana, have been got vacated fr om unauthorized occupants. The issue of 
unauthorised occupation of Youth Hostels also came up during the meeting of Central Policy 
Committee of Youth Hostel Scheme held on 11.7.2015.   The Minutes of the Meeting have been 
circulated to all State/UT Governments for appropri ate action.  The Nehru Yuva Kendra 
Sangathan has also been entrusted to inspect all th ese Hostels and submit Report to the 
Department, so that further necessary steps can be taken. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee views it very seriously that the  rec ommendation of the Committee 
for submitting a status report on unauthorized occu pancy of Youth Hostels within a month 
have been overlooked by the Department.  Further th e Action Taken notes submitted by the 
Department in the end of month of September, 2015   appears to be perfunctory.  The result 
could not  be derived without a distinct execution of strategy and  the problem of 
unauthorized occupancy of Youth Hostels will contin ue ceaselessly. The Committee, 
henceforth,  notes with dismay that inadequacy of r eal spirit would fail to promptly resolve 
the issue of unauthorized occupancy of Youth Hostels. 
Recommendations/observations  
43. The Committee is also seized of the fact that the S tates have been demanding sanction of 
additional Hostels.  However, currently no new Host els are being set up.  The erstwhile Planning 
Commission (now NITI Ayog) had asked the Department  to explore PPP Model for operation of 
Hostels.  Accordingly, a Proposal was sent for 3 Ho stels seeking suggestions of the Commission, 

but no reply was received.  Some States are suggest ing that the Hostels should be either entirely 
with the Centre or the State and that the current m odel of joint management is not working well. 
 The Committee feels that all the suggestions and o ptions should be carefully considered in 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the N ITI Ayog, for deciding the future course of 
action and the Committee may be apprised of this position as well.  
 
Action Taken  
 
 In the meeting of the Central Policy Committee hel d on 11.07.2015, it was decided that the 
ownership of the Youth Hostels would remain with th e Government of India, Ministry of Youth 
Affairs and Sports and the existing system of joint management will continue.  
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 Some States have suggested that the current model of joint management of Hostels is 
not working well, yet the Ministry of Youth Affairs  and Sports has decided to stick to this 
system. This is a matter of great concern. The Comm ittee is of the view that experts in this 
field should be consulted for the proper management  of the Hostels as Hostels are an 
important tool to promote youth travel and to enabl e young people to experience the rich 
cultural heritage of the country. Regarding the est ablishment of additional Hostels, the 
Committee feels that the Department should follow-up with NITI Ayog earnestly.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
DEMOGRAPHIC DIVIDEND 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3.  The Committee came to know that according to the i ntial figures of the 2011 census, the 
youth population in the country including adolescents is around 550 million with about 70 per cent 
being in rural areas.  This phenomenal rise in the youth population has made India the youngest 
nation with a demographic dividend appearing to be a reality.  It is indeed vital to utilize this 
demographic dividend.  The Committee was informed t hat in India, youth in the age-group of 15-
29 years constitute 27.5% of the population.  It is  expected that by the year 2020, the population of 
India would have a median age of 28 years only as a gainst 38 years for USA, 42 years for China 
and as high as 48 years for Japan.  In a nutshell, this ‘demographic dividend’ offers a great 

opportunity and the skill development of youth must  be seen as a key priority by the Government.  
The Committee is of the opinion that such a demogra phic advantage would be wasted, if it is not 
accompanied by simultaneous process of creation of jobs and development of skills for these new 
work forces. 
 
  

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
YOUTH DEVELOPMENT INDEX (YDI) 
 
 The Committee finds that the Action Taken Notes, s ubmitted by the Department  is 
silent on the pivotal aspect of targeted time  for achieving this work of revision and updation 
of Youth Development Index.  The Committee notes th at the entrusted organization, i.e., 
RGNIYD for carrying out this task is itself  reelin g under the fund constraint and there is 
requirement of strengthening the faculty position o f the Institutes, which needs filling up of 
the academic posts urgently. The Department has giv en assurance to the Committee, 
germane to its recommendation vide para 34 that add itional allocations of fund would be 
sought at RE stage concerning RGNIYD for this purpo se. The Committee,  accordingly 
directs the Department to provide the details of ad ditional allocations it had sought at RE 
stage and also comment whether it would be adequate enough to meet the requirement. 
(Para 4) 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
 The Committee notes that inadequate allocation of f unds has remained the main 
constraint in effective implementation of schemes o f the Ministry. The Committee is helpless 
to make an assessment of the enhanced allocation of  funds at the RE stage as the acceptance 
of the revised budget proposals are still awaited f rom the Ministry of Finance.  Considering 
the performance of the Department in terms of utili zation of funds as well as achieving its 
targets, the Committee, therefore, can only await f or the intimation from the Ministry of 
Youth Affairs and Sports,  Department of Youth Affa irs with respect to enhancement of 
allocation of funds so that the demographic dividend of India should be put to greater use. 
(Para 10)  
 
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)  
 
 The Committee notes that the adventure activities have been taken up in the current 
year.  However, the Committee expresses its concern  that the current allocations are 
inadequate to even meet the funds requirement as per existing norms.  The NSS is a centrally 
sponsored scheme with the objective to develop char acter and personality of youth.  
Therefore, the Department need not give up the init iatives on its part to get the funds raised 
for fulfilling the morale boosting efforts like, providing the Tee shirt and Caps with NSS logo 
to NSS volunteers. Due to the pending acceptance of  the budget proposals from the Ministry 
of Finance, the Department could not give any infor mation as to whether there has been an 
increase in the budget allocation for this scheme at RE stage.  
(Para 20) 
National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development (NPYAD) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that it would be appr eciated if concerted efforts bring 
the result concerning fund allocation for NPYAD. On  account of scarcity of requisite funds, 
the intended role of an umbrella programme for assi stance to various organizations 
concerning youth and development activities cannot be played by NPYAD.  Whether there 

has been an increase in the fund allocation at RE s tage cannot be ascertained as the Ministry 
of Finance is yet to give its acceptance to the budget proposal sent by the Department. 
(Para 28) 
 
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD)  
 
 RGNIYD is a nodal agency for training youth as a f acilitator of youth development 
activities in rural, urban and also tribal areas. However, to note that the budget provision for 
this ‘Institute of National Importance’ has been re duced to Rs. 15.86 crores in RE 2014-15 
due to lesser requirement of funds owing to non-sub mission of Utilisation Certificates is a 
very unfortunate situation. The Committee finds the  response of the Department very 
routine. The Committee would like to reiterate that  concerted and serious efforts need to be 
taken up for the proper and full utilisation of fun ds and also ensure timely submission of 
Utilisation Certificates. 
(Para 33)   
 
 Merely agreeing in principle by the Department to take up proactive efforts to utilise 
funds expeditiously and to expedite completion of t he recruitment process for the vacant 
posts, the Committee feels, are not enough. Urgent steps need to be taken up to complete the 
recruitment process. The Committee finds that the A ction Taken Notes submitted by the 
Government appears to be of routine nature and with out any determination for execution 
within a targeted time. The Committee once again em phasizes that the Department will have 
to make vigorous efforts to raise the required fund s for RGNIYD.  The Department could 
not give an exact amount of funds allocated at the RE stage as the budget proposals sent by 
the Department are yet to be accepted by the Ministry of Finance. 
(Para 34) 
 
YOUTH HOSTELS (YH) 
 
 The Committee views it very seriously that the  rec ommendation of the Committee 
for submitting a status report on unauthorized occu pancy of Youth Hostels within a month 
have been overlooked by the Department.  Further th e Action Taken notes submitted by the 
Department in the end of month of September, 2015   appears to be perfunctory.  The result 
could not  be derived without a distinct execution of strategy and  the problem of 
unauthorized occupancy of Youth Hostels will contin ue ceaselessly. The Committee, 
henceforth,  notes with dismay that inadequacy of r eal spirit would fail to promptly resolve 
the issue of unauthorized occupancy of Youth Hostels. 
(Para 41) 
 
 Some States have suggested that the current model of joint management of Hostels is 
not working well, yet the Ministry of Youth Affairs  and Sports has decided to stick to this 
system. This is a matter of great concern. The Comm ittee is of the view that experts in this 
field should be consulted for the proper management  of the Hostels as Hostels are an 
important tool to promote youth travel and to enabl e young people to experience the rich 
cultural heritage of the country. Regarding the est ablishment of additional Hostels, the 
Committee feels that the Department should follow-up with NITI Ayog earnestly. 
(Para 43)  
 