PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Three Hundred Fourth Report on the Demands
For Grants 2018-19 of the Ministry of Women
and Child Development
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31th December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31th December , 2018 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Pausha, 1939 (Saka)
308
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Three Hundred Fourth Report on the Demands
For Grants 2018-2019 of the Ministry of Women
and Child Development
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31th December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31th December , 2018 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Pausha, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ...................................................................................................... (iv)-( V)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-29
Chapter-I Observations/Recommendations  which  have  been  accepted  by the
Government...................................................................................... 2-5
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does  not  desire
to pursue in view of the Government's replies.................................... 6-13
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations in respect  of  which  replies  of  the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee....................... 14-28
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which  replies of the
Govermnent is still awaited................................................................ 29
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS—AT A GLANCE ........................................................ 30-32
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 33-36
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 37-45

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2018)
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
5. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
6. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Dr. Sasikala Pushpa Ramaswamy
9. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
10. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK SABHA
1l. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
12. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
13. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
14. Ms Bhawana Gawali (Patil)
15. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
16. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
17. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
18. Shri Ramachandran Mullappally
19. Shri Hari Om Pandey
20. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
21 Shri N.K. Premachandran
22. Shri Krishnan Narayanaswamy Ramachandran
23. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
24. * Vacant
* Member expired.

(ii)
25. Dr. Nepal Singh
26. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
27. Shri Satya Pal Singh
28. Shrimati Neelam Sonker
29. Shri P.R. Sundaram
30. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
31. Shrimati Tabassum Begum
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer
Shrimati Suman Khurana, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this Three Hundred Eighth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Three Hundred Fourth Report on the Demands for Grants (2018-19)
of the Ministry of Women and Child Development.
2. Three Hundred Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 9th March, 2018 and simultaneously
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th March, 2018. Replies of the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the
28th December, 2018.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the 28th
December, 2018.
  N EW D ELHI; DR. SA TYANARAYAN JA TIYA
December, 28th 2018 Chairman,
Pausha 7, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
AWCs : Anganwadi Centres
A WHs : Anganwadi Helpers
BBBP : Beti Bachao Beti Padhao
B E : Budget Estimate
CARA : Central Adoption Resource Authority
CARINGS : Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System
CCI : Child Care Institutions
CDPOs : Child Development Project Officers
CSR : Child Sex Ratio
CWC : Child Welfare Committee
DLCW : District Level Centre for Women
DPOs : District Programme Officers
EAP : Externally Aided Project
FFC : Fourteenth Finance Commission
FY : Financial Year
ICDS : Integrated Child Development Services Scheme
ICPS : Integrated Child Protection Scheme
IFA : Iron and Folic Acid
ISSNIP : ICDS System Strengthening & Nutrition Improvement Project
JJB : Juvenile Justice Boards
MBP : Maternity Benefit Programme
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MLALADS : Members of Legislative Assembly Local Area Development
Fund
MoF : Ministry of Finance
MPLADS : Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme
MSK : Mahila Shakti Kendra
(iv)

(v)
MWCD : Ministry of Women & Child Development
NALSA : National Legal Services Authority of India
NCPCR : National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
NCRB : National Crime Bureau
NFHS : Nat ional Family Health Survey
NGOs : Non-Government Organizations
NHRC : National Human Rights Commission
NMEW : National Mission for Empowerment of Women
NNM : National Nutrition Mission
OAS : Orphaned, Abandoned & Surrendered
OSCs : One Stop Centres
PAPs : Prospective Adoptive Parents
PMMVY : Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana
PRIs : Panchayati Raj Instittions
PSE : Pre-School Education
SAA : State Adoption Agencies
SAG : Scheme for Adolscent Girls
SALSA : S tate Legal Services Authority of India
SOPs : Standard Operating Procedures
SRB : Sex Ratio at Birth
STEP : Support to Training and Employment Programme
UA T : User Acceptance Test
VC : Video Conferences
WHL : Women Helpline
WW : Women Welfae
WWH : Working Women Hostel

REPORT
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in its 304th Report on the Demands for Grants 2018-19 of the Ministry of Women and Child
Development, which was presented in both the Houses of Parliament on 9th March, 2018.
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of observations/recommendations contained in above mentioned
Report were received from the Ministry of Women and Child Development vide their communication
dated 17th September, 2018. These have been categorized as follows :
(i) Chapter I : Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government
Paras - 2.3, 2.4, 5.6, 7.5, 10.4
T
OTAL - 5
(ii) Chapter II : Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government's replies.
Paras - 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 3.7, 4.6, 8.4, 9.4A
T
OTAL - 7
(iii) Chapter III : Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee.
Paras - 2.10. 2.11, 2.12, 3.9, 3.11A, 3.14, 3.18, 3.20, 3.23, 4.8,6.4,6.6, 11.6, 12.4
TOTAL - 14
(iv) Chapter IV : Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited.
Paras - Nil
T
OTAL - Nil

2
CHAPTER -I
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Observations/Recommendations
1. As it is evident from the data that there has always been a gap in the overall projected demand
of the Ministry and actual allocation. In the year 2015-16, out of the Ministry's overall projected demand
of 
` 30,807.77 crore only 58 per cent funds were allocated. In the year 2016-17, the fund allocation
was 69 per cent of the projected demand. In the year 2017-18, around 87 per cent of the Ministry's
projected demand was met. For the year 2018-19, about 80 per cent of the Ministry's overall projected
demand has been met. The Committee notes that there has always been a gap between the projected
demand of the Ministry and actual allocation to it. This gap is a cause of serious concern for the
Committee as it ultimately affects the implementation of some of the most important schemes/programmes
of the Ministry, catering to the needs of most vulnerable sections of the society i.e women and children.
Similarly, except for the schemes of Support to Training and Employment Programme (STEP), Ujjawala,
Information and Mass Education, Women Helpline and One Stop Centres Schemes, where allocation has
been as per the projected demand, all other schemes/programmes of the Ministry have been allocated
lesser funds against the projected demands. The Committee feels that either the projected demands of the
Ministry are not realistic or it is not able to convince the Ministry of Finance to get its projected demands
met. In both the cases, it is the implementation of the schemes/programmes that gets affected resulting
in depriving the targeted beneficiaries, the benefits of various schemes/programme. The Ministry may
look into it. The Committee suggests that the Ministry should continue to pursue with the Ministry of
Finance for the requisite funds at appropriate stage(s). (Para 2.3)
Action Taken
NATIONAL NUTRITION MISSION (NNM)
It is to be stated that the projected Demand for NNM Programme Component for 2018-19 was
`2928.70 crore against the BE of ` 1100 crore for 2017-18. The increase is due to the fact that NNM
was approved for 315 districts in 2017-18 will be implemented in 235 additional districts in 2018-19.
The BE for NNM Externally Aided Project (EAP) Component has been reduced to `71.30 crore as
1CDS System Strengthening & Nutrition Improvement Project (ISSNIP) Phase I will be concluded in
June 2018 and as per administrative approval of 1SSN1P Phase I, the funds are to be released only to
the state of Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh in 2018-19 (upto June 2018).
SABLA
Government approved phased expansion and revision in the cost norms for nutrition under the
Scheme for Adolescent Girls. With this the scheme has been extended to all the districts of the country
from 01.04.2018 with revised financial norms of nutrition. Hence, demand of ` 870.47 crore was made
for the scheme for 2018-19, against which a sum of ` 500 crore have been earmarked. The matter will
be pursued with the Ministry of Finance for the requisite funds at appropriate stage(s).
2

3
Observations /Recommendations
2. The Committee also took note of the overall actual expenditure of the Ministry for the last three
years against the actual allocations. In the year 2015-16, the Ministry could exhaust allocated funds upto
96 per cent. For the year 2016-17, the Ministry exhausted 95 per cent of the allocated funds. In 2017-
18, the reported expenditure of the Ministry is 73 per cent of the allocated funds upto 3.2.2018. The
Committee feels that by the end of the financial year 2017-18, the expenditure percentage would go up
further. Seeing the overall pace of the expenditure of the Ministry, the Committee feels that it should
rigorously pursue the Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds as per its projected requirement.
(Para 2.4)
Action Taken
The Hon'ble Committee's observation has been noted. Ministry shall accordingly pursue with MoF
for fund allocation as per requirement.
BET BACHAO BETI PADHAO (BBBP)
Observations/Recommendations
3. The Committee while noting the above initiative is of the concerted view that the scheme deals with
a grave matter and the funds remaining unutilized is a cause of serious concern. The Committee
accordingly, recommends that the factors responsible for funds remaining unutilized may be identified and
remedial measures taken accordingly so that the objectives with which the scheme has been introduced
are achieved. Further, as has been informed by the Ministry the scheme is to be implemented only through
district collector or deputy Commissioner. The Committee apprehends that this will overburden them. The
Committee also feels that the representatives of people i.e. Member of Parliament or Member of
Legislative Assembly may be taken into board in the implementation process of the scheme.
(Para 5.6)
Action Taken
The comments of the Committee have been noted.
The Ministry has been regularly taking the requisite remedial measures for implementation of BBBP,
release and utilization of funds for the BBBP Campaign. The matter is being rigorously taken up districts
and State Governments/UT Administrations by holding review meeting/ video conferences on implementation
of BBBP Campaign. Financial targets/achievements have improved considerably especially from last FY
2017-18. Sex Ratio at Birth (SRB) is improving in most intervened districts. We see that initial inertia
or slow movement of the programme is to a good extent overcome, and now is fairly stabilized.
The districts have been motivated to implement the BBBP Campaign. BBBP aims to address the issue
of declining Child Sex Ratio (CSR) through a mass campaign at Central and State level across the
country targeted at changing societal mindsets and creating awareness about the criticality of the issue
and safety of girl child. The improvement in CSR is a slow process. The outcome is expected as per
the objectives of the BBBP to check and improve the declining Child Sex Ratio.
The District Collector is supported by District Task Force and guided by State Task Force constituted
under BBBP Scheme. However, there is no board constituted under BBBP Scheme for its implementation.

4
The guidance, services and support of the representatives of people i.e. Member of Parliament or
Member of Legislative Assembly have been encouraged during the various awareness campaigns organized
in the District Administration. In fact more of such supports are welcomed. Ministry has not received
any information or request in regards to any overburden with the implementation of the BBBP in the
Districts.
MATERNITY BENEFIT PROGRAMME (MBP)
Observations/Recommendations
4. It is evident that a number of States/UTs have not reported any beneficiary or disbursal of fund
for the year 2017-18. Assam, Daman & Diu, Delhi, Goa, Lakshadweep, Manipur, Nagaland, Tamil
Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand and West Bengal show zero beneficiaries and zero fund disbursal under
the scheme. Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Odisha and Puducherry have also shown negligible
beneficiaries and fund disbursal. It appears that benefit of the scheme is not percolating down to the
intended or targeted beneficiaries and that the States/UTs are not taking full advantage of the scheme.
The Committee recommends to the Ministry to take a pro-active role in implementing the scheme by
co-ordinating with the States/UTs. (Para 7.5)
Action Taken
The State/UT-wise details of number of beneficiaries paid and maternity benefit disbursed during
the year 2017-18 (as on 22.04.2018) is at Annexure-I.
The Ministry has hold review meeting with all States/UTs through Video Conferences (VCs) to
monitor the progress of implementation of Pradhan Mantri Matru VandanaYojana (PMMVY) during 10th
April to 13th April, 2018. In addition, officers from the Ministry have conducted visits to 50 aspirational
districts to monitor the progress of implementation of PMMVY .
Further, the Ministry has taken up the matter with concerned States/UTs who have not yet started
disbursing the maternity benefits to eligible beneficiaries on high priority basis.
NATIONAL MISSION FOR EMPOWERNMENT OF WOMEN (NMEW)
Observations/Recommendations
5. The Committee observes that the objectives of the National Mission for Empowerment of Women
Scheme are of vital importance as they aim to empower women socially, economically and educationally.
However, the pace of the expenditure under the scheme has been quite low. The Committee is of the
concerted view that the underutilisation of funds is indicative of the fact that the benefits of the scheme
are not reaching the targeted beneficiaries. The Committee feels that the Ministry should play a pro-
active role in achieving the objectives of the scheme by completing the process of putting all the
necessary structures in place and receipt of viable proposals from the States/UTs. The Committee hopes
that with the subsuming of scheme under Mahila Shakti Kendra and enhanced allocations for the year
2018-19 many new initiatives would be undertaken and allocation would be utilized fully.
(Para 10.4)

5
Action Taken
The observations have been noted and it is stated that central share of funds of ` 51.66 crore for
the newly approved Mahila Shakti Kendra Scheme has been released and ` 61.81 crore has been
revalidated (released during FY 2017-18) as 1st installment in the current FY 2018-19 so far.
Concerned officials of MWCD are in constant touch with all State Govt./UTs towards facilitating
the implementation of MSK scheme through Video Conferencing and State visit have also been undertaken.
Letters from Secretary (WCD) and Joint Secretary to the State Govt./UTs have been written to
expedite the release of funds to the districts authority for implementation of the scheme.

6
CHAPATER-II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Observations/Recommendations
1. The Committee was apprised that the total allocation for the child development schemes has been
increased from `20755.19 crore in BE 2017-18 to ` 23088.28 crore in BE 2018-19 whereas for women
welfare schemes, the allocation increased from ` 1089.02 crore in BE 2017- 18 to ` 1365.58 crore in
BE 2018-19. A comparison of the allocations to the child development schemes and women welfare
schemes for the past five years is as follow:
(
` in Crore)
Financia Year Child Development Schemes Women Welfare Schemes
Budget Revised Budget Revised
2014-15 201 11.00 17936.80 909.00 507.80
2015-16 9486.231 16723.92 719.50 462.08
2016-17 16260.00 16579.60 907.00 821.40
2017-18 20755.19 19962.75 1089.02 987.50
2018-19 23088.28 - 1365.58 -
(Para 2.5)
Action Taken
Ministry is implementing various schemes related to women welfare which aim at the development
and empowerment of women with protection, and emergency support services to women affected by
violence. These are (i) Beti Bachao Beti Padhao, (ii) Information & Mass Communication (Media),
(iii) Gender Budgeting and Research, Publication & Monitoring, (iv) One Stop Centre, (v) Women
Helpline, (vi) Mahila Shakti Kendra, (vii) Swadhar Greh, (Viii) Ujjawala, (ix) Working Women Hostel, and
(x) Mahila Police V olunteer.
Recently Cabinet has approved the expansion of all schemes across the country under Umbrella
Scheme "Mission for Protection and Empowerment of women". The activities of the schemes have
increased and being expanded for the welfare of women.
Observations/Recommendations
2. As it is evident from the table, the allocation for child development schemes has always been higher
than that of the women welfare schemes. The reason for such a huge difference between the two,
according to the Ministry, is that the child development schemes are implemented on a pan India basis
whereas the women welfare schemes are implemented in selected areas/ districts of the country. Further,
6

7
a close scrutiny of budget and revised allocations for both the child development schemes and women
welfare schemes reveals that at revised stage the allocation for women welfare schemes has always been
reduced substantially in comparison to child development schemes. The Committee feels that women
welfare schemes deserve equal attention and importance and required funds should be allocated to women
welfare schemes as well if the objectives of social and economic empowerment of women are to be
achieved. (Para 2.7)
Action Taken
Ministry is implementing various schemes related to women welfare which aim at the development
and empowerment of women with protection, and emergency support services to women affected by
violence. These are (i) Beti Bachao Beti Padhao, (ii) Information & Mass Communication (Media),
(iii) Gender Budgeting and Research, Publication & Monitoring, (iv) One Stop Centre, (v) Women
Helpline, (vi) Mahila Shakti Kendra, (vii) Swadhar Greh, (Viii) Ujjawala, (ix) Working Women Hostel, and
(x) Mahila Police V olunteer.
Recently Cabinet has approved the expansion of all schemes across the country under Umbrella
Scheme "Mission for Protection and Empowerment of women". The activities of the schemes have
increased and being expanded for the welfare of women.
The Hon'ble Prime Minister of India has launched the Pan India Expansion of Beti Bachao Beti
Padhao (BBBP) covering all 640 districts of the Country in place of 161 at Jhunjhunu, Rajasthan on 8th
March, 2018.
A new scheme namely Mahila Shakti Kendra (MSK) was launched during 2017-18 to empower rural
women through community participation. Under the scheme District Level Centre for Women (DLCW)
has also been envisaged for 640 districts to be covered in phased manner. Community engagement
through College Student V olunteers is envisioned in 115 most backward districts as part of the Block
Level initiatives
In its meeting held on 21.04.2018, Cabinet has also decided to set up One Stop Centre in every
district in the coming years. Accordingly, 197 OSCs have been sanctioned for setting up in States during
the year 2018-19. The process will also be initiated for setting up of remaining OSCs shortly.
As such, the scheme of women welfare is being expanded and activities are being carried out. This
will result in enhancement of allocation of budget and expenditure for the welfare of women.
Observations/Recommendations
3. The Committee feels that the socio-political empowerment of women should be a core development
goal for any society if it wishes to be a developed and equal society. This goal requires gender equality
which in turn needs critical policy steps in favour of women. Indian women have traditionally been
vulnerable and marginalized section in the society. This is the reason that the constitution of India not
only prohibits discrimination on the grounds of sex but also permits positive discrimination in favour of
women. Seen in this context, the formulation and implementation of women centric schemes acquires
utmost importance. It is the implementation part of the schemes that suffers due to lack of funds.
Therefore, it is Committee's concerted opinion that sufficient funds should be provided for the women

8
welfare schemes as well if the objective of socio-economic development of women is to be achieved.
Further, the Committee feels that there is a need to universalize women welfare schemes also so as to
ensure their participation in social, economic and political decision making process. (Para 2.8)
Action Taken
Ministry is implementing various schemes related to women welfare which aim at the development
and empowerment of women with protection, and emergency support services to women affected by
violence. These are (i) Beti Bachao Beti Padhao, (ii) Information & Mass Communication (Media),
(iii) Gender Budgeting and Research, Publication & Monitoring, (iv) One Stop Centre, (v) Women
Helpline, (vi) Mahila Shakti Kendra, (vii) Swadhar Greh, (Viii) Ujjawala, (ix) Working Women Hostel, and
(x) Mahila Police V olunteer.
Recently Cabinet has approved the expansion of all schemes across the country under Umbrella
Scheme "Mission for Protection and Empowerment of women". The activities of the schemes have
increased and being expanded for the welfare of women.
The Hoirble Prime Minister of India has launched the Pan India Expansion of Beti Bachao Beti
Padhao (BBBP) covering all 640 districts of the Country in place of 161 atJhunjhunu. Rajasthan on 8th
March, 2018.
A new scheme namely Mahila Shakti Kendra was launched during 2017-18 to empower rural
women through community participation. Under the scheme District Level Centre for Women (DLCW)
has also been envisaged for 640 districts to be covered in phased manner. Community engagement
through College Student V olunteers is envisioned in 115 most backward districts as part of the Block
Level initiatives.
In its meeting held on 21.04.2018, Cabinet has also decided to set up One Stop Centre in every
district in the coming years. Accordingly, 197 OSCs have been sanctioned for setting up in States during
the year 2018-19. The process will also be initiated for setting up of remaining OSCs shortly.
As such, the scheme of women welfare is being expanded and activities are being carried out. This
will result in enhancement of allocation of budget and expenditure for the welfare of women.
INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (ICDS)
Observations/Recommendations
4. The Committee while taking note of the above findings observes that ICDS scheme is one of the
biggest and most unique scheme of the Ministry aimed at improving the nutritional and health status of
children in the age group of 0-6 years and laying the foundation of their proper psychological, physical
and social development. Further the findings of NITI Aayog also point towards issues relating to
medicines, space, accommodation and hygiene conditions in the AWCs requiring immediate attention of
all the stakeholders. Further, it is also of utmost importance that adequate funds should be provided
under the scheme to cover all the targeted beneficiaries who are children in 0-6 years of age, pregnant
women and lactating mothers. The Committee notes that the Ministry has got around 23 per cent less
allocation in BE 2018-19 than their projected demand. It is Committee's concerted view that shortage
of fund should not hamper the proper implementation of the scheme. It is the duty of the Ministry to
get the required funds allocated for its major scheme. (Para 3.7)

9
Action Taken
The Ministry is regularly demanding sufficient funds for Anganwadi Services from Ministry of
Finance. Every year the matter is taken up with MoF by the Minister and Secretary, WCD. However,
funds allocated to States/UTs are sufficient for implementation of Anganwadi Services in the respective
State/UT. If States/UTs incur excess amount in a particular year on the prescribed norms for implementation
of the Scheme, the same is reimbursed to them in the following financial year.
INTEGRATED CHILD PROTECTION SCHEME (ICPS)
Observations/Recommendations
5. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry to deal with the issue of missing children.
However, it cannot be denied that everyday thousands of children are reported missing and many of them
are never found. Therefore, it is imperative that all out efforts be made by all the stakeholders i.e.
Central Government, State/UTs Governments, police and other law enforcement agencies in coordination
with each other to tackle the issue of missing children on the priority basis. The Committee reiterates
its earlier recommendation for establishing separate cells in all the police stations for handling the
missing children cases. Further, as the issue of missing children requires sensitive handling, efforts to
locate them need to be synergized to build an effective and functional system where all the stakeholders
work in a concerted, coordinated and integrated manner. The Committee feels strongly about utilisation
of advanced technologies, skills and training for the same. (Para 4.6)
Action Taken
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 under section 2 (14) (vii) includes
a "Missing Child" as a 'child in need of care and protection'. The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Model Rules, 2016 (JJ Rules) came into force on 21st September, 2016 which were made
as per provision given under sub-section (1) of section 110 of the JJ Act, 2015. Rule 92 of the JJ Rules,
2016 clearly defines the term "missing child" and also includes a procedure of inquiry regarding a missing
child. In addition to this, the Ministry has prepared the "Standard Operating Procedure on Missing
Children" on 23rd November, 2016 and has issued it to the State Governments.
For the better implementation JJ Act and to tackle the issue of missing children on priority basis
and with sensitivity, this Ministry is implementing a comprehensive Centrally Sponsored Scheme from
the financial year 2009-10 onwards namely, Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS), under which
financial assistance is provided, inter-alia, to State Governments/UT Administrations for setting up and
maintenance of the above mentioned institutions. To implement the Scheme, States are required to
sign a Memorandums of Understanding (MoU) with Government of India and all States/UTs have done
so.
Following measures have been undertaken by the Ministry for providing a priority and sensitive
response to the Missing Children:
• In order to provide outreach services to the missing children or needy children, the Ministry
of Women and Child Development is operating Child helpline no. 1098 which is operational
24/7.

10
• Besides, the Ministry has set up web portals 'TrackChild' and 'Khoya-Paya' under its centrally
sponsored Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS) to track the missing and found child.
• In sync with Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, Model Rules 2016
& Child Protection Services, the Track Child portal became functional in 2012. It provides a
pan India data base of missing and found children. The portal provides a facility of searching
missing children and matching of missing children with the recovered/found children under the
pre-defined parameters such as name, age, parents details date of missing etc. Further, it
provides details of missing children provided by police and received through KhoyaPaya while
details of found children provided by CWCs/JJBs/CCIs. Separate modules for police and
CWC, JJB and CCIs are getting implemented. Under the Portal, option for searching and
matching of missing and recovered children provided to stakeholders.
The TrackChild Portal is implemented in association with the various stakeholders. It is a
networking and interactive platform to bring a synergy of action and integration among the
various stakeholders such as Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Ministry of Railways, State
Governments/UT Administrations, Child Welfare Committees, Juvenile Justice Boards, National
Legal Services Authority, Police, Deptt. of WCD, National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB),
NALSA, SALSA, NCPCR, NHRC, PRIs, NGO andd Citizens etc.
There are two modules on TrackChild; one is used by the Police to upload the information
of a missing child after registering FIR and second module used by CWCs, JJBs, staff of the
CCIs or entering information of a recovered/ found child. The Ministry with the assistance
of NIC has trained different stakeholders all over the country on how to use the software for
uploading information of missing children as well as children residing in the Child Care
Institutions (CCIs). A revised and user friendly version i.e. 2.0 TrackChild was launched for
better connectivity and with enhanced features such as Mobile Application during 2015-16.
The URL of TrackChild is www.trackthemissingchild.gov.in. As on 15/06/2018, out of 16866
Police stations, 11684 are making entries of missing/recovered children in TrackChild. Out of
618 CWCs, 461 are updating records of children and out of 617 JJBs 367 are entering data
of children on TrackChild portal. Out of 6020 CCIs, 4346 are making entries of children in
their care.
• Khoya-Paya: In case of missing child, information is extremely important, and so is speed.
Therefore, it was felt that the use of social media can play a pivotal role in searching missing
children. The Ministry of Women and Child Development launched Khoya-Paya on 2nd June
2015. Khoya-Paya, is an enabling platform, where citizens can report missing children as well
as sightings of their whereabouts without loss of time. Found children can also be reported.
Any citizen can register on KhoyaPaya by using an Indian Mobile number.
Objectives of Khoya-Paya are as follows:
• Immediate reporting of missing and found children.
• Tracking missing children through location based interaction.
• Citizens encouraged to participate in locating missing children.

11
• Locating missing children through site based interaction.
• Restoration of missing children with help of TrackChild data base.
Key features of Khoya-Paya:
• Citizens can upload information on found children.
• It also provides facility for matching the two databases.
• Matching of physical attributes of Missing Children with those Found elsewhere.
• Data of missing and sighted/found children maintained centrally.
• Mobile Application available.
• Citizens were encouraged to provide information of sightings of abandoned, lost children and
those accompanied by suspicious persons.
As on June 15, 2018, more than 8967 users had registered on the Portal and nearly 10,682 cases
of missing- sighted children have been published on the portal.
• Railway CHILDLINES - For Securing Missing, Runaway and Abandoned Children, the Ministry
of Women and Child Development and the Ministry of Railways has developed Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) to be implemented by Railways for rescue and rehabilitation of
runaway, abandoned, kidnapped, trafficked children via railways with help of CHILDLINE
India Foundation.
In this regard, the first CHILD Help Desk was set up in the year 2015. The CHILD Help Desk
works with railway station authorities for restoration of children of their parents / guardians
or their rehabilitation in the absence of parents/ guardians. From 2015 until Apr. 30, 2018,
CHILD Help Desks are functional at 70 major railway stations and 40315 children were
assisted through the Help Desk.
Awareness campaign via posters in railway coaches was launched in November, 2015. Around
2 lakh posters have been put in trains which caution passengers about children around them
who may need protection. Children are brought for temporary stay before they are restored
to their parents or are sent to children's home. Continuous announcements along with
advertisements on the Rail Neer Bottles are being made for passengers to keep a lookout for
such children.
• Expansion of CHILDLINE: CHILDLINE is a nation-wide initiative for rescuing and assisting
children in distress conditions. In the last four years, CHILDLINE (1098 helpline number) has
been extended to 420 locations from 279 (in 2013-14) locations and will be expanded to 80
new locations. With the expanded reach, CHILDLINE has been able to help lakhs of children
and restore them to their families. Phone calls to the helpline have also increased from 38 lakhs
(in 2013-14) to 1.8 crore calls in 2017-18.
• Further as per direction of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India WP (C) 75/2012 BBA vs Union
of India dated 13.1.2015. The Ministry of Women and Child Development has developed a

12
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for tracing of Missing Children to be used by the
different Stakeholders to follow uniform procedure across the country in searching and
rehabilitation of missing children. The SOP for missing children was issued on 23rd November,
2016 to different Stakeholders such as MHA, Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of States/UTs,
DGPs of States and UTs, NHRC, Ministry of External Affairs, National Police Academy,
NALSA, NGOs etc. The soft copy of the SOP is also available on the website of the WCD
i.e. www.wcd.nic.in.The SOP for missing children is a comprehensive document which has
brought within its purview various stakeholders and defines their role for tracking missing
children and their rehabilitation. SOP provides the inter-linkage, stresses on the need to bring
synergy and integration among the various stakeholders, which is crucially required among the
different stakeholders for concerted work on the plight of missing children. The SOP also
generates awareness among various stakeholders about each other's roles and responsibilities.
• Towards Utilization of advanced technologies, skills and training, The Ministry of Women and
Child Development has entrusted National Informatics Centre (NIC) to explore options available
for Facial Recognition Software (FRS) for matching photos of missing children with recovered
children on TrackChild portal. Recently, the TrackChild portal has tested the utility of Facial
Recognition Software (FRS) with the help of Delhi Police.
• In the direction of an Integrated Stakeholders response towards a more stringent action on the
ground for the missing children, the MHA in collaboration with the State Police had launched
Operation Smile/Muskan on 12th December, 2014 to provide focused interventions on the
ground in a phased manner.
With regard to the establishment of the Separate cells in all the police stations for handling the
missing children cases, it is pertinent to mention that, as per the allocation of business Rules, the subject
matter of establishing special cells in all the police stations is concerned with the Ministry of Home
Affairs.
HOSTELS FOR WORKING WOMEN
Observations/Recommendations
6. The data shows that actual expenditure under the scheme has always been low indicating a gap in
the targets and achievements. The Committee hopes that with the revision of the scheme in 2017 the pace
of expenditure under the scheme would pick up. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to
coordinate with the States/UTs in a pro-active manner so that required number of hostels for working
women are constructed. (Para 8.4)
Action Taken
The Ministry has requested the State Governments to assess the need of hostels in their States and
communicate the same to the Ministry.
The Ministry has also requested to all State Governments/UTs with revised guidelines vide Ministry's
letter dated 15.12.2017 and 05.05.2018 to invite more and more proposals from implementing agency
to increase and facilitate working women hostels in their States/UTs.

13
UJJAWALA SCHEME
Observations/Recommendations
7. The Committee would like to know the reasons for low expenditure in the years 2016-17 and
2017-18. As the scheme is meant for the protection of two most vulnerable sections of the society i.e.
women and children, there should be optimum utilization of funds if the objectives of the scheme are
to be achieved. The Committee is of the concerted view that besides utilizing allocated funds optimally,
the Ministry would ensure strengthening of the monitoring mechanism to see that the concerned NGOs
are implementing the scheme effectively. (Para 9.4A)
Action Taken
As per revised Ujjawala Scheme guidelines w.e.f. 01.04.2016, the Ujjawala Scheme is to be implemented
through the state governments and accordingly ` 15.83 crores as 1st Installment of grant for the year
2016-17 (50% of GOI share of grant) and ` 18.62 crores as 1st Installment of grant for the year
2017-18 (62% of total GOI share of grant) have been released to the State Governments for implementing
Ujjawala scheme. The grant could not be released due to pending Statement of expenditure, Utilization
Certification along with Physical progress report from State Governments to release next installment of
grants for both the years 2016-17 and 2017-18 despite multiple letters, DO letters and reminders sent
by this Ministry. The total expenditure under Ujjawala Scheme for the year 2016-17 is ` 20.31 crores
and in year 2017-18 is ` 24.56 crores.
The Scheme is being implemented through the State Governments/UT Administration w.e.f 01.04.2016
for successful and effective implementation. The scheme contains provisions for monitoring of the
projects at Panchayat/Block/District Level, State Level and the Central Level.

14
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
BUDEGATORY ALLOCATION
Observations/Recommendations
1. The Committee finds that in almost all the major schemes/programmes except Maternity Benefit
Programme, ICPS and the Scheme for Adolescent Girls, the allocated funds have remained underutilized.
The Committee observes that on the one hand there is shortage in fund allocations and on the other hand
there is under-utilization of funds in respect of some schemes/programmes of the Ministry. The Committee
feels that there should be optimum utilization of funds under each of the schemes of the Ministry if the
desired goals of various schemes were to be achieved. Since all the schemes of the Ministry are meant
for the development and welfare of children and women, it is of utmost importance that allocated funds
are utilized optimally to cover targeted beneficiaries. The Committee accordingly, recommends that the
factors responsible for under utilization of funds be identified and remedial action taken in a time bound
manner. The Committee further desires that a status note be furnished on the schemes where utilization
of funds has been abysmally low in respect of the budget allocations. (Para 2.10)
Action Taken
Women Welfare (WW)
Out of 236 approved OSC during last three year, 193 such OSCs have become functional in 33
States/UTs. These Centres have provided assistance to over 1.3 lakh women. One OSC will be set up
in every district of the country by 2020 to provide this essential service to women everywhere.
Women helpline has become operational in 30 States/UTs and over 16.5 lakh women have been
assisted by the Women Helplines.
So far as achievement of financial target is concerned, sincere efforts are being made for effective
implementation of the schemes and meetings are also being held with the State Governments from time
to time. Various One Stop Centres have been visited by the officers of the WCD Ministry for inspection
during the month of June and July, 2017 and also during 2018.
Under WWH scheme, 72288 working women have been benefited so far. During the last three
years, 48199 women under Swadhar and 18525 women under ujjwala scheme have been benefited.
National Nutrition Missions (NNM)
As the Government approved setting up of NNM on 30.11.2017, the funds as per approved norms
were released to carry out activities in Q4 of 2017-18 only.
Swadhar Greh
Swadhar Greh Scheme came into effect from 01.01.2016 after the merger of two Schemes i.e.
Short Stay Home and Swadhar as per revised Swadhar Greh guidelines for the year 2017-18 a total grant
of `33.495 crore was released to the State Govts./UTS. for 559 Swadhar Grehs as first installment of
62% of Govt. of India Share for implementation of the Swadhar Greh Scheme. As on 31-3-2018 total
14

15
expenditure for the year 2017-18 was ` 57.20 crore. 2nd installment for the financial year 2017-18 could
not be released to the State Govts./UTs due to non receipt of UCs & SOEs. Reminders are being sent
to them.
Ujjwala
As per revised Ujjawala Scheme guidelines w.e.f. 01.04.2016, the Ujjawala Scheme is to be implemented
through the state governments and accordingly ` 18.62 crores as 1st Installment of grant for the year
2017-18(62% of total GOI share of grant) have been released to the State Governments for implementing
Ujjawala scheme. The further grant could not be released due to pending Statement of expenditure,
Utilization Certification along with Physical Progress Report from State Governments to release next
installment of grants for year 2017-18 despite multiple letters, DO letters and reminders sent by this
Ministry. The total expenditure under Ujjawala Scheme for the year 2017-18 is ` 24.56 crores
Working Women Hostel (WWH)
The Working Women Hostel Scheme ensures safe accommodation for working women away from
their place of residence. After continuous follow up with the State Governments/ UTs the number of
hostels sanctioned by the Ministry in 2017-18 is to 22 as compared to 14 sanctioned during 2016-17.
The Ministry has requested to all State Governments /UTs with revised guidelines vide Ministry's
letter dated 15.12.2017 and 05.05.2018 to invite more and more proposals from implementing agency
to increase and facilitate working women hostel in their States.
Support to Training Employment Programme (STEP)
The STEP Scheme of the Ministry has been dropped and discontinued. No new project sanctioned
during the Financial Year 2017-18. Only past liabilities were being cleared. This resulted in under
achievement of financial and Physical targets.
Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Observations/Recommendations
2. The Committee also observes that under-achievement of financial targets in a number of schemes
is indicative of the fact that physical targets of those schemes also remained under-achieved. The
Committee is fully aware of the fact that various schemes/programmes of the Ministry are implemented
in accordance with the Annual Action Plan. Funds remaining under-utilized are indicative of non-
adherence of the financial norms as well as slow pace of implementation of the schemes/programmes
sending to target beneficiaries not being covered fully. The Committee reiterates that the Ministry should
be more vigilant in realizing its fiscal responsibility. (Para 2.11)
Action Taken
WOMEN WELFARE (WW)
Out of 236 approved OSC during last three year, 193 such OSCs have become functional in 33
States/UTs. These Centres have provided assistance to over 1.3 lakh women. One OSC will be set up
in every district of the country by 2020 to provide this essential service to women everywhere.

16
Women helpline has become operational in 30 States/UTs and over 16.5 lakh women have been
assisted by the Women Helplines.
So far as achievement of financial target is concerned, sincere efforts are being made for effective
implementation of the schemes and meetings are also being held with the State Governments from time
to time. Various One Stop Centres have been visited by the officers of the WCD Ministry for inspection
during the month of June and July, 2017 and also during 2018.
Under WWH scheme, 72288 working women have been benefited so far. During the last three
years, 48199 women under Swadhar and 18525 women under ujjwala scheme have been benefited.
NATIONAL NUTRITION MISSION (NNM)
As the Government approved setting up of NNM on 30.11.2017, the funds as per approved norms
were released to carry out activities in Q4 of 2017-18 only.
Swadhar Greh
Swadhar Greh Scheme came into effect from 01.01.2016 after the merger of two Schemes i.e.
Short Stay Home and Swadhar as per revised Swadhar Greh guidelines for the year 2017-18 a total grant
of `33.495 crore was released to the State Govts./UTS. for 559 Swadhar Grehs as first installment of
62% of Govt., of India Share for implementation of the Swadhar Greh Scheme. As on 31-3-2018 total
expenditure for the year 2017-18 was ` 57.20 crore. 2nd installment for the financial year 2017-18 could
not be released to the State Govts./UTs due to non receipt of UCs & SOEs. Reminders are being sent
to the
Ujjwala
As per revised Ujjawala Scheme guidelines w.e.f. 01.04.2016, the Ujjawala Scheme is to be implemented
through the state governments and accordingly ` 18.62 crores as lst Instalment of grant for the year
2017-18(62% of total GOI share of grant) have been released to the State Governments for implementing
Ujjawala scheme. The further grant could not be released due to pending Statement of expenditure,
Utilization Certification along with Physical Progress Report from State Governments to release next
installment of grants for year 2017-18 despite multiple letters, DO letters and reminders sent by this
Ministry. The total expenditure under Ujjawala Scheme for the year 2017-18 is ` 24.56 crores.
Working Women Hostel (WWH)
The Working Women Hostel Scheme ensures safe accommodation for working women away from
their place of residence. After continuous follow up with the State Governments/ UTs the number of
hostels sanctioned by the Ministry in 2017-18 is to 22 as compared to 14 sanctioned during 2016-17.
The Ministry has requested to all State Governments/UTs with revised guidelines vide Ministry's
letter dated 15.12.2017 and 05.05.2018 to invite more and more proposals from implementing agency
to increase and facilitate working women hostel in their States.
Support to training Employment Programame (STEP)
The STEP Scheme of the Ministry has been dropped and discontinued. No new project sanctioned
during the Financial Year 2017-18. Only past liabilities were being cleared. This resulted in under
achievement of financial and Physical targets.

17
Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Further Comments of the Committee (Paras 2.10 & 2.11)
The Committee notes that the Ministry is planning to set-up One Stop Centres (OSCs) in
each district of the country by 2020. However, as per the data furnished by the Ministry only 193
OSCs have been set up out of 236 sanctioned so far. The Committee would like to know from
the Ministry how it proposes to achieve the target of providing OSC in each district of the
country by 2020. Similarly, pace of implementation of the Scheme of Women Helpline, Swadhar
Greh, Ujjwala and Working Women Hostels needs to be increased. As per the information made
available by the Ministry, during the last three years, only 48199 and 18525 women have benefitted
under Swadhar Greh and Ujjwala Scheme and 72288 women have taken benefit of WWH Scheme.
Perhaps people are not aware of the schemes of the Ministry. The Committee desires that wide
publicity should be given to these schemes so that more and more women in need may take
benefit of the schemes meant for them. The Committee also finds that the second installment
of the grant for the year 2017-18 could not be released to the States/Union Territory Administration
under the Swadhar Greh and Ujjwala Schemes due to non-receipt of utilization certificates and
statement of expenditure from them. The Committee feels that this indicates benefits not
reaching to the intended beneficiaries. Accordingly, the Committee desires that the Ministry
pursue the matter with the States/Union Territory Administrations vigorously so that financial
timelines are adhered to.
Observations/Recommendations
3. The Committee believes that the schemes of children and women are of vital importance and under
achievements of these schemes would necessarily mean that the benefits of the schemes have not reached
the targeted beneficiaries or they have been denied the benefits of welfare schemes. In this context the
Committee feels that problems faced in the achievements of both financial and physical targets should
be identified and addressed for efficacious implementation of the schemes. The Ministry should also take
up the matter of under achievements with the concerned State Governments/UTs for resolving constraints.
(Para 2.12)
Action Taken
It has been observed that there is delay in transfer of funds from State to Implementing Agency.
Accordingly, it has been decided to release the funds to the DC/DM directly in most of the schemes to
expedite the process of implementation of the scheme related to women. Similarly, the document procedure
has been simplified in OSC and WHL scheme.
Further, a Dashboard has been developed to monitor the progress and activities of the schemes
being funded through Nirbhaya Fund.
The Schemes of OSC and WHL are being reviewed by the Ministry from time to time through
meeting, Video Conferencing and visiting, etc. The State Governments/UT Administrations have been
written for proper implementation of the schemes so that maximum women and girls can avail of the
benefits of the schemes.

18
Further Comments of the Committee
The Committee while noting the reply of the Ministry would like to know whether direct
release of funds to the District Magistrates and District Collectors is resulting in better
implementation of the Schemes of the Ministry. The Committee's apprehension is that the
District Magistrates and District Collectors are already overburdened with work, entrusting them
with this additional responsibility may lead to more administrative bottlenecks and delays. The
Committee would like the Ministry to consider this aspect.
INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (ICDS)
Observations/Recommendations
4. From the table, it is evident that the gap between sanctioned and operational Anganwadi Centres
is maximum in the States of Bihar and Jammu & Kashmir with 20 and 7.3 per cent gap in the sanctioned
and operational AWCs. Further, in a number of States such as Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi, the
number of operational AWCs have not increased even by a single unit in the last year. On a specific query
regarding the steps taken by the Ministry in making the sanctioned AWCs operational, it was informed
that the Ministry continuously monitors the implementation of ICDS scheme including the operationalization
of AWCs through reports, returns, field visits and review meetings at the national level. ICDS being a
self selecting scheme, states/UTs have been advised to operationalize the pending ICDS projects and
Anganwadi centres (AWCs) immediately. As for the reasons for delay it was informed that they were
largely administrative, legal and court cases as reported by the States/UTs. The Committee feels that the
constraints in making the sanctioned AWCs operational need to be tackled and remedial steps taken in
an urgent manner as AWCs are the platform from where ICDS Services are rendered to the beneficiaries.
(Para 3.9)
Action Taken
The States/UTs are continuously pursued to operationalise the sanctioned AWCs in a time bound
manner. However, the matter has been noted to achieve effective result in right perspective.
Further Comments of the Committee
The Committee, while noting the reply of the Ministry would like to reiterate that the
constraints in making the sanctioned Anganwadi Centres operational in different States need to
be tackled in an urgent and time bound manner as AWCs are the platform from where ICDS
Services are delivered effectively to the intended beneficiaries.
Observations/Recommendations
5. The Committee notes with serious concern that such massive gaps in the creation of infrastructural
facilities relating to drinking water and toilet facilities are leading to a large scale regional disparities.
The Committee would like the Ministry to take up the issue of infrastructure creation, on priority basis
with the States/UTs which show dismal and slow performance. The Committee would like to reiterate that
all AWCs must be run with proper infrastructure having sufficient facilities if quality services under ICDS
are to be rendered. The Committee views the inadequacy of infrastructural facilities seriously and desires

19
the Ministry to play a more pro-active role in persuading the States/UTs in creating the required infrastructure
facilities in a time bound manner. (Para 3.11 A)
Action Taken
The States/UTs have been requested from time to time to provide drinking water and toilet facilities
at AnganwadiCentres (AWCs) on priority basis by making efforts to leverage funds from other schemes
of the State Government, MPLADS, MLALADS, Rural Infrastructure Development. Under the revised
Anganwadi Services under Umbrella ICDS Scheme, provision for providing toilet facilities in 70,000
Government owned AWCs per annum and drinking water facilities in 20,000 AWCs per annum has been
made. Accordingly, funds for providing toilet facilities in 70,000 AWCs and drinking water facilities in
20,000 AWCs have been released to all States/UTs during 2017-18. Similarly, during the year 2018-19,
this Ministry is in the process of releasing necessary funds to States/UTs for providing toilet facilities
in 70,000 AWCs and drinking water facilities in 20,000 AWCs.
Further Comments of the Committee
The Committee desires to have an updated status note on the proposal of the Ministry to
create toilet facilities in 70,000 AWCs and drinking water facilities in 20,000 AWCs during
2017-18 by convergence of initiatives made by other Ministries.
Observations/Recommendations
6. The Committee in its 289th Report on Demands for Grants 2017-18 had expressed its concern over
the prevalence of underweight children under the age of five years and the problem of anaemia in
pregnant women and lactating mothers in the age group of 15-49 years. The Committee hopes that with
the setting up of National Nutrition Mission these problems will be tackled in right perspective and ICDS
services would result in positive outcomes. (Para 3.14)
Action Taken
National Nutrition Mission aims to achieve improvement in nutritional status of Children, pregnant
women and lactating mothers and reduce anemia among children and women. It strives to reduce the
level of stunting, under-nutrition, anemia and low birth weight babies. Implementation strategy would be
based on intense monitoring and Convergence Action Plan right upto the grass root level. NNM targets
to reduce stunting, under-nutrition, anemia (among young children, women and adolescent girls) and
reduce low birth weight by 2%, 2%, 3% and 2% per annum respectively. Although the target to reduce
Stunting is atleast 2% p.a., Mission would strive to achieve reduction in Stunting from 38.4% (NFHS-
4) to 25% by 2022 (Mission 25 by 2022).
A sum of `584.60 crore were released to the States/UTs under NNM in the fourth quarter of
2017-18. National level meeting, workshop and video Conference have been organised with States/UTs
to ensure effective implementation of NNM.
The National Mission has been constituted to provide policy support and guidance to the States/UTs,
with an empowered structure called the Executive Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Mo-
WCD. The Executive Committee is an Apex body set up for nutrition related activities (for children below
six years age, AGs and PW&LM) providing direction, policy and guidance for implementation of various

20
programmes/schemes under the NNM. The Executive Committee to meet once in every three months
and will report to the National Council on India's Nutrition Challenges.
A National Council on India's Nutrition Challenges has been constituted for (a) policy direction (b)
review; and (c) effective coordination and convergence between Ministries which all will have a sectoral
responsibility for the challenge of nutrition. The Council shall submit report to the Prime Minister every
6 months.The first meeting of the Executive Committee which is the Apex body under NNM has been
conducted on 13.03.2018. Also the first meeting of the National Council on India's Nutritional Challenges
under the Chairmanship of Vice-Chairman, NITI Aayog has been held on 18.04.2018.
Further comments of the Committee
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. However, it reiterates that the
prevalence of underweight children under the age of 5 years and the problem of anemia in
pregnant women and lactating mothers is a persistent problem across the country requiring
focused strategies. The Committee also desires the Ministry to share with it the outcome of the
meeting of the National Council on India's Nutritional challenges held on 18.4.2018 and steps
taken thereafter to address these problems.
PRESCHOOL EDUCATION (PSE) KITS AND MEDICINE KITS
Observations/Recommendations
7. From the information made available to the Committee, it is concluded that very few states/ UTs
have reported increased expenditure on the procurement of PSE and medicine kits. States/UTs of Goa,
Delhi, Puducherry, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep,
Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim have reported negligible expenditure on both the Pre-School Education
(PSE) Kits and Medicine Kits. Further, some States/UTs such as Uttar Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh,
Manipur and Meghalaya have also reported less expenditure in the year 2017-18 on PSE Kits. Similarly,
for medicine kits, the States/UTs of Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Jharkhand, Kerala, Punjab,
Uttar Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur , Meghalaya and Tripura have also reported less expenditure
in 2017-18. The Committee would like to emphasize upon the importance of availability of PSE and
medicine kits in AWCs which introduce young children to non-formal pre-school education through a
variety of activities and teaching and medical kits may prove to be of major help to young children
during their stay in AWCs. The Committee recommends that adequate attention and priority must be given
to this component of the ICDS Scheme. The Ministry should take steps to convince States/UTs about the
importance and availability of both PSE and medical kits for the targeted beneficiaries. (Para 3.18)
Action Taken
In the various Conferences organized by this Ministry from time to time, States/UTs have been
advised to take adequate action/steps for providing both PSE and medical kits in the AWCs for the
targeted beneficiaries.
Also, States/UTs have been emphasized from time to time on the importance and making availability
of both PSE and medical kits for the targeted beneficiaries.

21
Further Comments of the Committee
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific interventions made by the Ministry
in convincing the States/Union Territory Administrations which have not incurred any expenditure
or negligible expenditure on the procurement of Pre-School Education Kits and Medicine Kits.
STAFF AND KEY FUNCTIONS OF ICDS
Observations/Recommendations
8. The Committee while noting the reply of the Ministry observes that ICDS functionaries play an
important role in rendering services to the targeted beneficiaries efficiently. With the expansion and
strengthening of ICDS schemes their role becomes more vital for effective delivery system. If 20 to 30
per cent posts of ICDS functionaries are lying vacant, the Ministry's claim of strengthened and effective
delivery system under ICDS cannot be taken seriously. It is Committee's concerted view that the Ministry
should take up the matter with the State Governments/UTs on priority basis so that vacant posts are filled
up at the earliest. (Para 3.20)
Action Taken
In order to ensure smooth implementation of the Scheme at the AWCs, the Ministry has taken steps
for filling up the vacant posts of AWWs, AWHs, Supervisors, CDPOs and DPOs. The Ministry has also
organized various conferences from time to time wherein the States/UTs have been directed to take
adequate action/steps for removing any hurdles in the implementation of the Scheme. In this regard,
Ministry has recently directed to all States/UTs to delegate the powers of recruit AWWs/AWHs across
the country and Supervisors (against promotion quota) under Anganwadi Services in 115 districts to
District Magistrates/District Collectors to expedite filling up vacancies on priority basis (Annex-II).
Further Comments of the Committee
The Committee, while noting the reply of the Ministry, would like to know whether delegating
the power to recruit AWWs/A WHs and Supervisors (against promotion quota) to the District
Magistrates/District Collectors in 115 districts of the country has led to expeditions filling up of
vacancies of Anganwadi functionaries. If this has resulted in positive outcomes, then, the
Committee suggests that the Ministry should make the same arrangements for other districts
of the country also. The shortage of adequate manpower tends to adversely affect the overall
efficiency and effectiveness of the scheme.
Observations/Recommendations
9. The Committee expresses its serious concern about Ministry's efforts reaching to the ground level.
It is to be noted that AWWs/AWHs play a very important role in the proper implementation of the ICDS
Scheme. Therefore, it is important that these benefits reach to the workers and they are remunerated
properly. The Committee feels that the honorarium being paid to the AWWs and AWHs presently is on
the lower side therefore, the Ministry should make concerted efforts for enhancing the honorarium paid
to the AWWs and AWHs.The Committee also understands the constraints on the part of Union Government
in increasing the amount of honorarium and impressing upon the State/UT Governments or enhancing
their contribution so that ICDS workers get a reasonable honorarium. The Committee desires that the

22
Union Govt. may use its highest offices in persuading the State/UT Governments particularly those which
are paying nominal amount on their behalf. The Committee hopes this may sensitise the respective State/
UT Governments to the needful. (Para 3.23)
Action Taken
The Anganwadi Services envisages the Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) and Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs)
as "honorary workers" from the local community who come forward to render their services, on part-
time basis, in the area of child care and development. They are paid fixed honorarium per month as
decided by the Government from time to time.
Presently, AWWs and AWHs are paid honoraria of `3,000/- per month and ` 1,500/- per month
respectively w.e.f. 01.04.2011. Anganwadi Workers of Mini-AnganwadiCentres are being paid honoraria
of `2,250/- per month w.e.f. 04.07.2013. Apart from these, additional amount of honoraria is also paid
by most of the State Governments /UT Administrations from their own resources.
The Ministry has been requesting the States/UTs from time to time to enhance their additional
honorarium from their own resources. In compliance thereto, most of the States/UTs have enhanced
their part of additional honorarium to AWWs/AWHs. The States/UTs - wise additional honorarium being
paid is given in Annex-III.
Further Comments of the Committee
The Committee understands that the respective States/Union Territory Administrations pay
additional honorarium to the AWWs/AWHs as per their resources. However, it has been noticed
that there is no uniformity in the payment of honorarium by the States/UTs Administrations to
AWWs/AWHs. Some States such as Tamil Nadu and Goa are paying higher amount as honorarium
whereas some States such as Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir and Manipur are paying very nominal
amount as honorarium. The Committee feels that this disparity is demotivating to the AWWs/
AWHs. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates that a uniform minimum amount of honorarium
may be paid to the AWWs/AWHs across States/UT Administrations. The Ministry should make
co-ordinated efforts in this regard and persuade the States/Union Territory Administrations for
the same.
INTGRATED CHILD PROTECTION SCHEME (ICPS)
Observations/Recommendations
10. The Committee, while noting the reply of the Ministry would like to reiterate that the well meaning
laws alone would not make any change at ground level. There is no denying the fact that the living
conditions at most juvenile homes in the country are so worse that they could be termed as violation of
both human and child rights. There are persistent problems of inadequate space, bathrooms, toilets,
cleanliness, lack of recreational activities, life skills and vocational training and staff shortage. Further,
there are reports of children running away from these homes which indicates that living conditions in the
Juvenile homes are such that they drive children out of the Juvenile homes. It may also be that the staff
posted in these homes is not equipped with adequate training to handle juveniles in these homes. The
Committee accordingly, suggests that Ministry should impress upon the States/UTs to ensure that living
conditions of juvenile homes improve. (Para 4.8)

23
Action Taken
In order to strengthen effective mechanisms for ensuring better living conditions and prevention of
abuse and exploitation of the children in the Juvenile Homes, following legislations, guidelines and
measures are in place:
• Section 41 of the JJ Act, 2015 has made registration of homes mandatory. Stringent penalties
have been prescribed in case of non-compliance/non- registration of the homes.
• As per the JJ Act 2015, the Child Care Institutions are to be maintained and monitored by the
State/UT governments. However, to set the minimum standards of facilities and services, the
Ministry has notified the JJ Rules, 2016 under the JJ Act, 2015. The rules provide detailed
guidelines for the standards of care and protection in a Child Care Institution.
• The Ministry has been requesting the State Government/UT Administrations from time to time
to identify and register all CCIs under relevant provisions of JJ Act and set up functional
inspection and other Committees to ensure that children in all the CCIs receive the best of
care, and are not subject to any kind of abuse and Neglect.
• Inspection Committees are to be formed by the State Government for inspection of Child Care
Institutions registered under the JJ Act and such inspection committees shall conduct the visits
of all facilities housing children in the area allocated, at least once in three months and submit
reports of the findings of such visit within a week of their visit to the District Child Protection
Units or State Governments.
• The Ministry of Women and Child Development has developed a manual titled "Living condition
in Institutions for Children in Conflict with Law". The basic objective of the manual is to
provide guidelines to the States/UTs and other stakeholders to establish appropriate institutional
and rehabilitative services to children in conflict with law.
Further Comments of the Committee
The Committee observes that inspite of the legislative and institutional framework to deal
with the juveniles, and the existence of rules and regulations to look after them, the instances
for inmates of child care institutions being subjected to various kinds of exploitations surface
periodically. The Committee feels that there are persistent problems of inadequate and trained
staff, cramped space, lack of basic amenities etc. that make the living conditions in the child care
institutions miserable. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates that besides strengthening
institutional framework, the Ministry should provide for proper space with basic amenities and
training and counseling to the staff to handle children in such homes with care and cautions so
that the aim of mainstreaming these children to society may be achieved.
Scheme For Adolescent Girls
Observations/Recommendations
11. The Committee is happy to note that the scheme for adolescent girls is yielding good results
especially in respect of the nutrition component. It is the non-nutrition component which required

24
strengthening. On a specific query in this regard, the Ministry informed the Committee that non-nutrition
component of the scheme involves convergence with various line Ministries, in addition to the limited
financial resources provisioned for the various Non-nutrition services under the scheme. However, efforts
are being made to strengthen the convergence under the scheme. Revision in the financial norms of Non-
Nutrition has been proposed, the EFC in its meeting held on 30.09.2016 considered the proposal for
umbrella scheme "Integrated Child Development Services" for continuation during Fourteenth Finance
Commission (FFC) period i.e. from 2017-18 to 2019-20 and recommended the following:
Implementation of Scheme for Adolescent Girls for out of school adolescent girls in the age group of
11-14 years with a financial outlays of ` 2400 crore (Gol share) over the Fourteenth Finance Commission
(FFC) period 2017-18 to 2019-20.
(i) In the non nutrition component, an activity may be built-in to motivate out of school girls
to go back to formal schooling or/skill training.
(ii) On-going Kishori Shakti Yojana to be limited to out of school girls in the age group of
11-14 years and would be phased in sync with roll out of Scheme for Adolescent Girls (SAG).
(Para 6.4)
Action Taken
Non Nutrition services under Scheme for Adolescent Girls (SAG) are provided @ ` 1.1 lakh per
project per annum. Non-nutrition component of the scheme involves convergence with Heath for various
health related services viz. IFA supplementation, deworming, Nutrition and Health Education and with
Education for mainstreaming the out of school girls to formal education. In addition, effective convergence
is required with other ministries such as Panchayati raj, Youth Affairs and Sports, and Food and Public
distribution etc. Efforts are being made to strengthen the convergence under the scheme.
Observations/Recommendations
12. The Committee while taking note of the reply of the Ministry observes that it is the non-nutrition
component of the scheme that would lead to overall development and empowerment of Adolescent Girls
and bring them to the mainstream of the society. The Committee hopes that the initiatives of the Ministry
would strengthen this component to benefit the maximum number of Adolescent Girls. (Para 6.6)
Action Taken
Non Nutrition services under SAG are provided @ ` 1.1 lakh per project per annum. Non-nutrition
component of the scheme involves convergence with Heath for various health related services viz. IFA
supplementation, deforming, Nutrition and Health Education and with Education for mainstreaming the
out of school girls to formal education. In addition, effective convergence is required with other ministries
such as Panchayati raj, Youth Affairs and Sports, and Food and Public distribution etc. Efforts are being
made to strengthen the convergence under the scheme.
Further Comments of the Committee (Paras 6.4 & 6.6)
The Committee, while noting the reply of the Ministry would like to be apprised of the
outcome of the convergence under the scheme of other Ministries. The Committee also desires

25
to be apprised whether this convergence has actually strengthened the non-nutrition component
of the Scheme. The Committee strongly feels that it is the non-nutrition component of the
scheme which may prove to be helpful to the adolescent girls in mainstreaming their lives in
society.
Schemes under Nirbhaya Fund
Observations/Recommendations
13. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has taken positive steps in devising the schemes
under the Nirbhaya Fund. As the schemes under Nirbhaya Fund are aimed at enhancing the safety and
security of women in the country, it is of utmost importance that funds allocated under the schemes are
utilized to the full extent. The Committee stresses the need for effective implementation of the schemes.
The Committee, however, finds that the fund utilization under both the One Stop Centre and Women
Helpline schemes has been very low. It is a complete irony that on the one hand, crime against women
have been rising and on the other, funds allocated to enhance the safety and security of women have
remained underutilised. The Committee urges upon the government to ensure that the initiatives under
the Nirbhaya Fund are translated into reality. (Para 11.6)
Action Taken
A Dashboard has been developed to monitor the progress and activities of the schemes being funded
through Nirbhaya Fund. Further, the Empowered Committee from time to time appraises, reviews and
monitors the proposals/projects under Nirbhaya Fund.
As far as low utilisation under One Stop Centre and Women Helpline Scheme is concerned, it is
to state that setting up One Stop Centre, involves a number of activities ranging from identification of
place, identification of land, hiring of personal, etc., hence delay was occurred in expenditure. Similarly,
recruitment of staff also takes long time. Therefore, utilization of funds was very slow. Now most of
the OSCs have appointed separate staff. It is expected that utilization of funds will be increased in future.
So far, 193 OSCs have been set up in 33 States/UTs which have provided assistance to over 1.3
lakh women. In view of encouraging result, it has been decided to set up One Stop Centre in every
district of the country by 2020 to provide this essential service to women everywhere. OSCs are also
being integrated with 181 women helpline and other existing helplines to provide best possible access and
support to women.
Further, the Women Helpline has become operational in 30 States/UTs and over 16.5 lakh women
have been assisted.
PROJECTS FOR WOMEN'S SAFETY UNDER NIRBHAYA FUND TO IMPROVE WOMEN'S SAFETY
(a) Central Forensic Science Lab, Chandigarh
A project worth ` 99.76 Cr for a model Central Forensic Science Lab has been appraised under
the Nirbhaya Fund to be set up at Chandigarh and the Lab has been launched by Hon'ble Minister, WCD.
(b) Integrated Emergency Response Management
The Integrated Emergency Response Management project is being run by Railways. Under this,
CCTVs and monitoring rooms are being installed at 983 major Railway Stations to provide 24x7 security

26
to women passengers at stations and in trains. User Acceptance Test (UA T) was held in Lucknow, UP
from 21st to 27th March, 2018 to test the functioning of the Panic Button in Mobile Phones through
112 App. Further, the UAT was also conducted on 14th May, 2018 in Ghaziabad, UP. The same will be
implemented soon on its successful final testing.
(c) Safe City Project in 8 cities
Under the 'Safe City Project', the Ministry of Women and Child Development has appraised projects
worth ` 2,919.55 Cr. under the Nirbhaya Fund for eight major cities:
City Appraised amount
(` in Crores)
Delhi 663.67
Mumbai 252.00
Chennai 425.06
Ahmedabad 253.00
Kolkata 181.32
Bengaluru 667.00
Hyderabad 282.50
Lucknow 195.00
T
OTAL 2,919.55
(d) Central Victim Compensation Fund
A Central Victim Compensation Fund has been created under Nirbhaya, which is a corpus fund to
support States/UTs for their Victim Compensation Scheme. This is helping ensure adequate and timely
support for women survivors of crime and violence.
(e) Mahila Police V olunteers
Haryana was the first state to operationalise the Mahila Police V olunteer scheme in the districts of
Karnal and Mahendragarh. This is also being implemented in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Mizoram,
Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh. So far, about 6000 MPVs have been appointed.
(f) Chirali Project by Government of Rajasthan
The Rajasthan government has a project titled 'Chirali' which is building a safe environment for girls
and women to move freely and make use of choices, spaces and opportunities in 7 districts of the State.
(g) Abhaya Project by Government of Andhra Pradesh
Andhra Pradesh government is implementing the Abhaya Project for safety of women which has
an integrated system for real time intervention for safety of women in taxis and autos.

27
(h) Project for safety in public transport by Government of Uttar Pradesh
Uttar Pradesh government is running a project for women's safety in public transport which
involves engagement of women conductors, guards and electronic surveillance (GPS, CCTV , Panic
buttons, etc.).
(i) Project for women's safety in public transport by Govenment of Karnataka
The government of Karnataka is implementing a women's safety initiative in their public transport.
They are training women for Heavy Passenger Vehicle licenses, establishing women's lounges at important
railway stations and conducting a campaign on women & safety.
Further Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and would like to assess the status, while
considering the next year's budgetary proposals.
Central Adoption Resource Authority (CARA)
Observations/Recommendations
14. From the details given above it is evident that since 2016-17 both in country and inter-country
adoptions have been going down. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for this
downward trend in both in-country and inter-countr y adoptions and the steps taken by the Ministry/CARA
to check this trend. Further, though the Committee appreciates the streamlining being brought in the
whole process of adoption however the ground realities are still different as indicated by the constraints
faced by both CARA and P APs. The Committee desires the Ministry to address these constraints so that
the entire process of adoption be it in-country or inter-country besides being transparent should be simple,
parent and child friendly and the facilitators of the process should be sensitive to the sentiments and
vulnerability of orphaned or abandoned children and also of prospective parents. (Para 12.4)
Action Taken
The number of adoptions facilitated for orphan, abandoned and surrendered children though its
associated/recognized adoption agencies during the past three years is as follows:
Y ear In-country adoption Inter-country adoptions T otal
2015-16 3011 666 3677
2016-17 3210 578 3788
2017-18 (April '17- 3276 651 3927
March'18)
From the figures tabulated for last three years, it can be observed that the adoption figures have
been gradually increasing after it had dipped on the enactment of the J.J. Act, 2015 and introduction of
CARINGS.

28
For addressing the two main issues leading to the delay in adoption process, the following action
has been undertaken:-
a. For increasing the pool of children who are legally free for adoption, all CCIs have been
registered under the J.J. Act, 2015 and are being linked with SAAs.
b. For mitigating the delay in the Courts, proposal for amending the J.J. Act, 2015 by changing
the provision where in Adoption Order can be finalised by the District Magistrate/District
Collector is under consideration.
Interventions to address and streamline the Adoption Programme:-
(a) In this regard, letter dated 29.09.2017 has been written by the Hon'ble Minister, WCD addressed
to all the Chief Ministers of the respective States seeking their intervention. Matter pursued
for compliance of Constitution of Governing Bodies of SARA and CWCs. SAA-CCI Linkages,
Placement of Cradles for Safe Surrender, addressing the pendency in Adoption Cases in the
Court.
(b) The Ministry has issued an O.M. emphasising on responsibilities of Dist. Magistrate/ Dist.
Collector/Deputy Commissioner in adoption ensuring expansion of adoption programme through
SAA-CCI linkages.
(c) Several interventions are taken at CARA level for streamlining the adoption programme in the
country and addressing the delays at the level of CWCs, Judiciary and on other related
concerns.
(d) Awareness generation and sensitization through media activities and training and development.
(e) Strengthening CARA and expanding the programme base to meet with the vision of ensuring
every Orphaned, Abandoned & Surrendered Child (OAS) the right to a family.
Further Comments of the Committee
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to assess the status of delay while
it consider next year's Demands for Grants.

29
CHAPTER -IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Nil
29

30
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES (ICDS)
The Committee notes that the Ministry is planning to set-up One Stop Centres (OSCs) in
each district of the country by 2020. However, as per the data furnished by the Ministry only 193
OSCs have been set up out of 236 sanctioned so far. The Committee would like to know from
the Ministry how it proposes to achieve, the target of providing OSC in each districts of the
country by 2020. Similarly, pace of implementation of the Scheme of Women Helpline, Swadhar
Greh, Ujjwala and Working Women Hostels needs to be increases. As per the information made
available by the Ministry, during the last three years, only 48199 and 18525 women have benefitted
under Swadhar Greh and Ujjwala Scheme and 72288 women have taken benefit of WWH Scheme.
Perhaps people are not aware of the schemes of the Ministry. The Committee desires that wide
publicity should be given to these schemes so that more and more women in need may take
benefit of the schemes meant for them. The Committee also finds that the second installment
of the grant for the year 2017-18 could not be released to the States/Union Territory Administration
under the Swadhar Greh and Ujjwala Schemes due to non-receipt of utilization certificates and
statement of expenditure from them. The Committee feels that this indicates benefits not
reaching to the intended beneficiaries. Accordingly, the Committee desires that the Ministry
pursue the matter with the States/Union Territory Administrations vigorously so that financial
timelines are adhered to. (Paras 2.10 & 2.11)
The Committee while noting the reply of the Ministry would like to know whether direct
release of funds to the District Magistrates and District Collectors is resulting in better
implementation of the Schemes of the Ministry. The Committee's apprehension is that the
District Magistrates and District Collectors are already overburdened with work, entrusting them
with this additional responsibility may lead to more administrative bottlenecks and delays. The
Committee would like the Ministry to consider this aspect. (Paras 2.12)
INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (ICDS)
The Committee, while noting the reply of the Ministry would like to reiterate that the
constraints in making the sanctioned Anganwadi Centres operational in different States need to
be tackled in an urgent and time bound manner as AWCs are the platform from where ICDS
Services are delivered effectively to the intended beneficiaries. (Para 3.9)
The Committee desires to have an updated status note on the proposal of the Ministry to
create toilet facilities in 70,000 AWCs and drinking water facilities in 20,000 A WCs during
2017-18 by convergence of initiatives made by other Ministries. (Para 3.11A)
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. However, it reiterates that the
prevalence of underweight children under the age of 5 years and the problem of anemia in
pregnant women and lactating mothers is a persistent problem across the country requiring
focused strategies. The Committee also desires the Ministry to share with it the outcome of the
meeting of the National Council on India's Nutritional challenges held on 18.4.2018 and steps
taken thereafter to address these problems. (Para 3.14)
30

31
PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION (PSE) KITS AND MACHINE KITS
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific interventions made by the Ministry
in convincing the States/Union Territory Administrations which have not incurred any expenditure
or negligible expenditure on the procurement of Pre-School Education Kits and Medicine Kits.
(Para 3.18)
STAFF AND KEY FUNCTIONS OF ICDS
The Committee, while noting the reply of the Ministry, would like to know whether delegating
the power to recruit AWWs/A WHs and Supervisors (against promotion quota) to the District
Magistrates/District Collectors in 115 districts of the country has led to expeditions filling up of
vacancies of Anganwadi functionaries. If this has resulted in positive outcomes, then, the
Committee suggests that the Ministry should make the same arrangements for other districts
of the country also. The shortage of adequate manpower tends to adversely affect the overall
efficiency and effectiveness of the scheme. (Para 3.20)
The Committee understands that the respective States/Union Territory Administrations pay
additional honorarium to the AWWs/AWHs as per their resources. However, it has been noticed
that there is no uniformity in the payment of honorarium by the States/UTs Administrations to
AWWs/AWHs. Some States such as Tamil Nadu and Goa are paying higher amount as honorarium
whereas some States such as Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir and Manipur are paying very nominal
amount as honorarium. The Committee feels that this disparity is demotivating to the AWWs/
AWHs. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates that a uniform minimum amount of honorarium
may be paid to the AWWs/AWHs across States/UT Administrations. The Ministry should make
co-ordinated efforts in this regard and persuade the States/Union Territory Administrations for
the same. (Para 3.23)
INTEGRATED CHILD PROTECTION SCHEME (ICPS)
The Committee observes that inspite of the legislative and institutional framework to deal
with the juveniles, and the existence of rules and regulations to look after them, the instances
for inmates of child care institutions being subjected to various kinds of exploitations surface
periodically. The Committee feels that there are persistent problems of inadequate and trained
staff, cramped space, lack of basic amenities etc. that make the living conditions in the child care
institutions miserable. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates that besides strengthening
institutional framework, the Ministry should provide for proper space with basic amenities and
training and counseling to the staff to handle children in such homes with care and cautions so
that the aim of mainstreaming these children to society may be achieved. (Para 4.8)
SCHEME FOR ADOLESCENT GIRLS
The Committee, while noting the reply of the Ministry would like to be apprised of the
outcome of the convergence under the scheme of other Ministries. The Committee also desires
to be apprised whether this convergence has actually strengthened the non-nutrition component
of the Scheme. The Committee strongly feels that it is the non-nutrition component of the

32
scheme which may prove to be helpful to the adolescent girls in mainstreaming their lives in
society. (Paras 6.4 & 6.6)
SCHEMES UNDER NIRBHAYA FUND
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and would like to assess the status, while
considering the next year's budgetary proposals. (Para 11.6)
Central Adoption Resource Authority (CARA)
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to assess the status of delay while
it consider next year's Demands for Grants. (Para 12.4)

33
MINUTES

IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 28th December,
2018 in Committee Room No. '67', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
6. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
7. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
8. Shri N. K. Premachandran
9. Shri K. N. Ramachandran
10. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
11. Shri P. R. Sundaram
12. Shrimati P . K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer
Shrimati Suman Khurana, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt the draft 307 Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Three Hundred and Second Report on the Demands for Grants
2018-19) of the Department of Higher Education and draft 308th Report on Action Taken by the
35

36
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Three Hundred Fourth Report on
the Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development.
2. The Committee discussed the draft 307th Report and raised some issues regarding the comments/
clarification given by the Department of Higher Education on the observations/recommendations of the
Committee. The Committee thereafter adopted the draft 307th report with certain modifications. The
Committee further considered the draft 308th Report and adopted it after some discussion.
3. The Committee, decided to present/lay the 307th and 308th Report to both the Houses of the
Parliament on 31st December, 2018. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence,
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe, Member, Rajya Sabha to present these Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri
Bhairon Prasad Mishra, Member, Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri N. K. Premachandran, Member, Lok
Sabha to lay these Reports in the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.40 A.M.

37
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
(vide para 7.5)
STATEMENT SHOWING STATE/UT-WISE NUMBER OF BENEFICIARIES PAID AND
MATERNITY BENEFIT DISBURSED DURING THE FINANCIAL
YEAR 2017-18 (AS ON 22.04.2018)
Sl. No. State/ UT Beneficiaries Paid Amount Paid
1. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 1,646 48,92,000
2. Andhra Pradesh 1,96,913 54,60,87,000
3. Arunachal Pradesh 219 3,29,000
4. Assam 17,927 1,82,56,000
5. Bihar 57,588 7,09,89,000
6. Chandigarh 3,699 1,06,84,000
7. Chhattisgarh 55,050 8,46,19,000
8. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 880 15,08,000
9. Daman and Diu 191 5,25,000
10. Delhi 17,709 5,28,49,000
11. Goa 2,878 1,02,48,000
12. Gujarat 1,06,644 30,52,62,000
13. Haryana 74,469 22,61,58,000
14. Himachal Pradesh 19,917 5,69,69,000
15. Jammu and Kashmir 10,651 1,44,92,000
16. Jharkhand 64,284 9,52,05,000
17. Karnataka 99,128 27,59,00,000
18. Kerala 79,950 23,76,76,000
19. Lakshadweep 0 0
20. Madhya Pradesh 2,65,648 45,38,20,000
21. Maharashtra 1,45,317 45,74,16,000
22. Manipur 3,483 92,93,000
23. Meghalaya 0 0
24. Mizoram 778 9,28,000
39

40
Sl. No. State/ UT Beneficiaries Paid Amount Paid
25. Nagaland 0 0
26. Odisha 5 15,000
27. Puducherry 1,103 32,57,000
28. Punjab 47,214 10,68,43,000
29. Rajasthan 53,230 12,51,57,000
30. Sikkim 516 7,68,000
31. Tamil Nadu 0 0
32. Teiangana 0 0
33. Tripura 1,170 11,70,000
34. Uttar Pradesh 2,16,398 62,64,97,000
35. Uttarakhand 20,696 5,62,55,000
36. West Bengal 14,400 4,53,49,000
T
OTAL 15,79,701 3,89,94,16,000

41
ANNEXURE-II
(vide para 3.20)
NITI Aayog'30 Ministries pool of MHA 35 LWE T otal
Districts 50 districts Districts
12 3 4 5
Andhra Pradesh 1. Vizainagram 1. Visakhapatnam 3
Andhra Pradesh 2. Cuddapah
Arunachal Pradesh 1. Namsai 1
Assam 1. Darrang 1. Udalgiri 7
Assam 2. Dhubri 2. Hailakandi
Assam 3. Barpeta
Assam 4. Goalpara
Assam 5. Baksa
Bihar 1. Katihar 1. Khagaria 1. Aurangabad 13
Bihar 2. Begusarai 2. Purnia 2. Banka
Bihar 3. Sheikhpura 3. Gaya
Bihar 4. Araria 4. Jamui
Bihar 5. Sitamarhi 5. Muzaffarpur
Bihar 6. Nawada
Chhattisgarh 1. Korba 1. Bastar 10
Chhattisgarh 2. Mahasamund 2. Bijapur
Chhattisgarh 3. Dantewada
Chhattisgarh 4. Kanker
Chhattisgarh 5. Kondagaon
Chhattisgarh 6. Narayanpur
Chhattisgarh 7. Rajnandgaon
Chhattisgarh 8. Sukma
Gujarat 1. Narmada 2
Gujarat 2. Dahod
41

42
12 3 4 5
Haryana 1. Mewat 1
Himachal Pradesh 1. Chamba 1
Jammu and Kashmir 1. Kupwara 2
Jammu anc Kashmir 2. Baramula
Jharkhand 1. Sahebganj 1. Godda 1. Latehar 19
Jharkhand 2. Pakaur 2. Lohardaga
Jharkhand 3. Palamu
Jharkhand 4. Purbi Singhbhum
Jharkhand 5. Ramgarh
Jharkhand 6. Ranchi
Jharkhand 7. Simdega
Jharkhand 8. West Singhbhum
Jharkhand 9. Bokaro
Jharkhand 10. Chatra
Jharkhand 11 . Dumka
Jharkhand 12. Garhwa
Jharkhand 13. Girdih
Jharkhand 14. Gumla
Jharkhand 15. Hazaribagh
Jharkhand 16. Khunti
Karnataka 1. Y adgir 2
Karnataka 2. Raichur
Kerala 1. W ayanad 1
Madhya Pradesh 1. Damoh 1. Chhatarpur 8
Madhya Pradesh 2. Singrauli 2. Rajgarh
Madhya Pradesh 3. Barwani 3. Guna
Madhya Pradesh 4. Vidisha
Madhya Pradesh 5. Khandwa
Maharashtra 1. Nandurbar 1. W ashim 1. Gadchiroli 4
Maharashtra 2. Osmanabad

43
12 3 4 5
Manipur 1. Chandel 1
Meghalaya 1. Ribhoi 1
Mizoram 1. Mamit 1
Nagaland 1. Kiphire 1
Odisha 1. Rayagada 1. Kandhamal 1. Koraput 8
Odisha 2. Kalahandi 2. Gajapati 2. Malkangiri
Odisha 3. Dhenkanal
Odisha 4. Balangir
Punjab 1. Firozpur 2
Punjab 2. Moga
Rajasthan 1. Baran 1. Dholpur 5
Rajasthan 2. Jaisalmer 2. Karauli
Rajasthan 3. Sirohi
Sikkim 1. W est Sikkim 1
Tamil Nadu 1. Ramanathapuram 2
Tamil Nadu 2. Virudhunagar
Telengana 1. Bhoopalpalli 1. Khammam 3
Telengana 2. Asifabad
Tripura 1. Dhalai 1
Uttar Pradesh 1. Chitrakoot 1. Chandauli 8
Uttar Pradesh 2. Balrampur 2. Siddharthnagar
Uttar Pradesh 3. Bahraich 3. Fatehpur
Uttar Pradesh 4. Sonbhadra
Uttar Pradesh 5. Shrawasti
Uttarakhand 1. Haridwar 2
Uttarakhand 2. Udham Singh Nagar
West Bengal 1. Murshidabad 1. Nadia 5
West Bengal 2. Maldah 2. Dakshin Dinajpur
West Bengal 3. Birbhum
T
OTAL 30 50 35 115

44
ANNEXURE-III
(vide para 3.23)
STATEMENT INDICATING ADDITIONAL HONORARIUM GIVEN BY THE STATES/UTs TO
AWWs/AWHs FROM THEIR OWN RESOURCES (AS ON 31.05.2018)
Sl. No. S tates/UTs Additional honorarium given by States/UTs (In `)
Anganwadi Workers Anganwadi Helper
(AWW) (AWH)
1       2 3 4
1. Andaman and Nicobar 3000 2500
2. Andhra Pradesh 1200 700
3. Arunachal Pradesh Nil Nil
4. Assam 1000 500
5. Bihar 750 375
6. Chandigarh 2000 1000
7. Chhattisgarh 1000 500
8. Dadra Nagar Haveli 1000 600
9. Daman and Diu 1000 600
10. Delhi 6678 3339
11. Goa 3062-11937* 3000-6000*
12. Gujarat 1750 900
13. Haryana 2500 2250
14. Himachal Pradesh 1450 600
15. Jammu and Kashmir 600 340
16. Jharkhand 1400 700
17. Karnata ka 3000 2000
18. Kerala 2000 2000
19. Lakshadweep 1600 1000
20. Madhya Pradesh 2000 1000
21. Maharashtra 2000 1000
22. Manipur 100 50
44

45
1       2 3 4
23. Meghalaya Nil Nil
24 Odisha 1000 500
25 Puducherry 600 300
26 Punjab 2600 1300
27 Rajasthan 1724-1736* 1065
28 Sikkim 2225 1500
29 Uttarakhand 3000 1500
30 West Bengal 1300 1300
31 Uttar Pradesh 1000 500
32 Nagaland Nil Nil
33 Mizoram Nil Nil
34 Tamilnadu 6750 (that includes 4275 (that includes
pay-2500, GP-500, pay-1500, GP-400,
& DA-3750) & DA-2375)
35 Telangana 4000 3000
36 Tripura 2865 1924
* Depending on the qualification and number of years of service