PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT

DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02.06.95)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 02.06.95)

Rada जक्ते

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

June, 1995/Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)

K)rs2832


260 ८६ ans athe 00220 wegen
"Dates aR eR cr am 18 ot Wo. Roel

2 कारक हक
$ nochlat)



ComposITiON OF THE COMMITTEE

INTRODUCTION
Cuapter-l

Cuarter-II

Cuarter-IIl

CuaptTer-IV

CuapTer-V

Minutes

CONTENTS

Report.....cccsssccisrscssscesrsccsssererssveatsosseserscsensersrsessneesoneeesons

Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the
Cet) Ts ape OnE cenpen dec scondobt are ignsnearenecgemarorsennncscnrra

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replic:

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee.

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited .............. «-०२--०२-००-०-००६९०००४००

PAGES
6)--0)
(iii)
1—S5

14

15


1.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

Shri_P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

COA ७ ७ + ०

eee ee
Bones

. Dr. M. Aram

. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. I.G. Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15;

Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16.
i.
18.
19.
20.
. Prof. P.J. Kurien

. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

ZSRRXRRRBRR

Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

Dr. Vasant Pawar

Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
. Shri K.T. Vandayar

. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

. Shri Inder Jit

. Shri Anna Joshi

0)

(BK)rs2832


31.
pee
33.
34.
35;
36.
37:
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
Dr. K.D. Jeswani

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

Shri Rambadan

Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

Shri Ramchandra Dome

Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
Shri Suraj Mandal

Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri-P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer.

(i)

"BK)rs2832


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on its
behalf, present this twenty Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in its 6th Report on “Demands for Grants” (1994-95) of
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Youth Affairs and Sports).

2. The Sixth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 18th April, 1994 and laid
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 1994.

Replies of Government on all the recommendations contained in the report, received from
the Deptt. of Youth Affairs and Sports were considered by the Committee and this report
was adopted at its sitting held on 30th May, 1995.

New De.ui; P. UPENDRA
May 30, 1995 Chairman
SS a Committee on Human Resource Development
9th Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)

Gi)


CHAPTER-I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Sixth Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development (Department of Youth Affairs and Sports) for the year
1994-95 which was presented to Rajya Sabha on 18.1.94 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha
on 22.4.94.

2. Action Taken Notes hawe been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:—

(i), Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: Para
6, 7, 11, 12, 34, 15, 18, 19, 2. 22, 32,46, 43, 45,. 48. - pe

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: para 26, 27, 28, 40, 47.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 8, 30, 31, 39, 44, 45, 50. 7

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: Nil.

3. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government of sonie of its
recommendations.

NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME
Recommendation (Para No. 7)

Govt. should evolve some mechanism to secure better cooperation from State Govts. for
operating this scheme.
Ministry’s reply

“In the Youth Ministers conference held in April 1994, and also in January, 1995, the
matter has been taken up for discussion and the State Govts. have been requested to fully
cooperate with the NSS programme. However, some of the State Govts. have still not been
able to release the States’ share.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in this regard. However,
it feels that since it has failed to cut much ice, some alternative measures are required to be
taken to secure full cooperation from the States.

Recommendation (Para No. 8)

Coverage of schools as compared to colleges and Universities under the NSS Scheme, has
been far from satisfactory. Even after 25 years, a sizeable number of youth .remains
uncovered. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a time bound programme should be
framed for this purpose.

Ministry’s Reply

“Due to lack of increase in the provision, it has not been possible to extend the NSS

scheme further than what has been continued.”

‘3K)rs2832


Comments of the Committee

Sowing the seedlings of social service in the susceptible and receptive minds of the
adolescent and youth would yield better results and the lack of resources should not be
allowed to come in the way. Therefore, the Department should, with the help of Planning
Commission, manage to overcome the obstacles and cover more and more schools under the
NSS scheme.

NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SCHEME
Recommendation (Para No. 11)

Adequate representation given to the public representatives, particularly to village and
panchayat level workers, in the district organising committee so that the programmes could
be conducted in a more democratic and meaningful manner.

Ministry’s reply

“The Youth Coordinators have been instructed to involve the people’s representatives in
the programmes.”
Comments of the Committee

The Committee, while appreciating the initiatives taken, feels that were issuance of
instructions should not be construed as compiance and hence it underlines the need to
undertake a study/survey to find out to what extent involvement of people’s representatives
has been effected.

PROMOTION OF ADVENTURE ACTIVITIES

Recommendation (Para No. 18)

The Committee would like to know the factors leading to decline in the number of
beneficiaries and also to discontinuation of provision for non-plan expenditure.
Ministry’s reply

“In order to popularise the adventure activities among the youth, several steps have been
taken by the Deptt. A National Adventure Mela in Chandigarh was funded by the
Department. In the National Youth Festival, held at Bhopal, we organised a sky diving
demonstration by the only woman sky diver which was telecast live. However, the adventure
activities are yet to gain momentum to the desired extent.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee finds that the Department has not given a straight forward reply to the
recommendation of the Committee. However it has been categorically admitted by the-
Department that the scheme is yet to gain momentum to the desired extent. In the given
circumstances, the impression that the Committee gathers is that of lack of seriousness on
the part of the Department in this regard. Therefore, the Committee is of the opinion that
the Department should take all necessary steps to popularise this scheme on a large scale,
particularly in rural and backward areas.

NATIONAL DISCIPLINE SCHEME & NATIONAL FITNESS CORPS
Recommendation (Para No. 30 & 31)

The budget allocation for this scheme is not, in any case, justified and the Committee,
therefore, recommends that urgent necessary steps should be taken to take this scheme out
of the Department’s purview.

The National Fitness Corps replaced the National Discipline Scheme. This Scheme also

BK)rs2832


3

aims at meeting various expenses relating to National Discipline Scheme Instructors. As
suggested earlier, This scheme should also be transferred to the State Governments.

Ministry’s reply

“With a view to take up the case with the Ministry of Finance and to take the scheme
out of the Purview of the Department, certain information was sought from the State
Government. However, despite the best of efforts, the information is not available from
many of the State Governments. In fact it is not a running scheme any more and the
Department is responsible to bear the liability on pay and allowances of such persons who
are earlier recruited under the scheme but later have been adjusted in the State
Governments. As soon as the information is available action will be taken.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee fails to understand the justification of the Central Government bearing
the financial liabilities of an employee who is rendering service to State Government. The
most interesting and ironic thing is that neither the Central Government nor the State
Governments has any final figures of such employees. Department’s comment, “however,
despite the best of effort the information is not available from the State Government” itself
explains the position in its entirety. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that these schemes
be taken out of the purview of the Central Government without any further delay.

SPORTS PROGRAMMES
Recommendation (Para No. 39)

Adequate funds be harnessed for sports promotion and development activities and also
that mechanism should be evolved to make various sports schemes result-oriented. Some

accountability should also be ensured in this regard so that in case of poor performance the
grey area may be easily identified and rectified.

Ministry’s reply

“DYAS has been making efforts to get higher resources for sports promotion and
development. However, the decisions in this regard finally rest with the Ministry of Finance
and Planning Commission.

In a scenario where the performance depends upon the joint effort of the National
Sports Federations, Sports Authority of India, Coaches, Deptt. of Youth Affairs and Sports,
it becomes difficult to bring about accountability. However, we are trying to coordinate with
all the partners and provide the best support to the players.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not convinced by the logic extended by the Department for not fixing
any accountability for poor performance. It. no doubt, depends upon the joint efforts of
various bodies/individuals, but a mechanism should exist to ensure accountability. It cannot
be a no-man’s business. The Committee wants the Department to take necessary steps in
this direction.

NATIONAL SPORTS TALENT CONTEST (NSTC) SCHEME
Recommendation (Para No. 44)

The Committee recommends that traditional and indigenous gamés like Kabaddi, Kho-
Kho etc., may also be included in the list of disciplines under this scheme.


Ministry’s Reply

“Under the STC scheme the Department has been concentrating on discipline which are
of importance in the context of major international events such as Asian/Commonwealth
and Olympic game.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee doés not find it justified that indigenous and popular games in rural
areas should be neglected simply because they do not figure in international sports events. It
is the duty of the Department to give encouragement to such games by talent search and
training. This should be ensured.

SPORTS PROJECT DEVELOPMENT AREA (SPDA) SCHEME
Recommendation (Para No. 45)

The progress of this scheme is very slack, as out of 78 sanctioned centres only 34 centres
have so far been constituted. Even those centres which have been set up are not working
satisfactorily. Therefore, the committee urges upon Government to take necessary corrective
steps in this regard and also recommends that some sort of surveillance committee be
constituted to look after the functioning of the centres.

Ministry’s reply

“The success of this scheme largely depends upon the participation of the State
Governments. The working of the scheme has been evaluated by the Tata Consultancy
Services, and DYA&S is contemplating corrective measures in the’ light of the
recommendations of the evaluation report.”

Comments of the Committee

The Commitcee is highly dissatisfied by the progress made under this scheme which has,
after expiry of eight long years of its inception been able to achieve only half of its target.
Now the Department proposes to shelve this scheme and replace it by sports sub-centres.
The Department should see to it that it works successfully and satisfactorily. All necessary
steps to ensure its effective and early functioning must be taken.

NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
Recommendation (Para No. 48)

The Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, in course of his oral evidence
before the Committee, stated that since sports is a State subject no proper check upon sports
federations could be kept. He further added that plans are also being formulated to ensure
that these federations run well. The Committee strongly recommends that all-out efforts
should be made by Government to tone up the functioning and performance of the Sports
Federations.

Ministry’s reply

“The Constitutional Amendment Bill for including ‘Sports’ in the Concurrent list was
earlier moved before Rajya Sabha. However, further consultation with State Governments is
being undertaken before the Bill is pressed for discussion in the Parliament.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee has recommended toning up of the performance of National Sports
Federations, while endorsing the view of the Secretary, Sports, that sports being a State


5

subject, no proper check upon sports federation could be kept. But the Department has, in
its reply, dwelt entirely on the issue of sports being a State subject and does not refer to its
own role in coming up the functioning of the federations. The Committee, therefore, is of
the view that apart from pursuing the matter of including sports in the Concurrent List,
other remedial measures be initiated by the Department at the earliest.

GRANTS FOR CREATION OF SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE
Recommendation (Para No. 50)

Efforts should be made to ensure that sports infrastructure should be spread all over the
country and the infrastructure created should be properly utilised.
Ministry’s reply

“Excepting the Infrastructure, which has been created in SAI Centres, projects of sports
infrastructure aré taken up by State Governments or non-governmental organisations. State
Governments and voluntary organisations are given matching central assistance depending
upon the viability of the project. Since the proposals are submitted through the State
Governments, the selection of the locations also rests with them.”
Comments of the Committee

Since the Department extends matching grants to the State Governments and non-
governmental organisations for creating sports infrastructure, it could very well impress upon
them to locate/create infrastructure at such places where it does not exists. Optimum
utilization of facilities/infrastructure created at SAI centres must also be ensured.


CHAPTER-II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Para No. Recommendation

Reply

NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME

Para 6 Both plan and non-plan provisions be
increased not only to meet the targets
set but also to make this scheme
result oriented and more effective.

Para 7 Govt. should evolve some mechanism
to secure better cooperation from
State Govts.' for operating this
scheme.

Nehru Yuva Kendra Scheme

Para 11 Adequate representation be given to
the public representatives,
particularly to village and panchayat
level workers, in the district
organising committee so that the
programmes could be conducted in a
more democratic and meaningful
manner.

Para 12. =‘ The working of Nehru Yuva Kendras
be made more democratic and
transparent so that all the youths of
the area may take active part in its
activities and thus, be benefited.

Assistance to Voluntary Organisations

Para 14. There appears considerable
downward trend in the utilisation of
the sanctioned funds. Govt. should
make some arrangements to ensure
proper utilisation of the budget
allocations.

Para 15... The static budget allocation does not
hold much hope.

As the Planning Commission has not
provided for additional resources, it
has not been possible to increase the
provisions under Plan or non-Plan.

In the Youth Ministers conference
held in April 1994 and also in
January, 95, the matter has been
taken up for discussion and the State
Govts. have been requested to fully
cooperate with the NSS programme.
However, some of the State Govts.
have still not been able to release the
State share.

(Committee’s comments on this reply
may be seen in Chapter-I)

The Youth Coordinators have been
instructed to involve the people’s
representatives in the programmes.
(Committee’s comments on this reply
may be seen in Chapter-I)

The observation of the Committee
has been noted for compliance.

During the year 1993-94 and 1994-95,
the budget has been utilised in full.

In the budget for the year 1995-96,
the allocation has been increased


Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

Promotion of Adventure Activities

Para 18

Para 18

The Committee would like to know
the factors leading to decline in the
number of beneficiaries and also to
discontinuation of provision for non-
plan expenditure.

The Committee recommends that
efforts should be made to involve
more youth from rural and backward
areas on a_ large scale, who,
otherwise, cannot afford to take up
such activities on their own.

Scouting and Guiding

Para 19

Para 21

The Department should try to expand
the network of All India Boy Scouts
and involve more and more youth in
this programme and start extending
assistance for the activities related
expenditure of All India Boy Scouts
also.

The Committee is sceptical about the
claims of targets being achieved year
after year and, therefore, re-
commends strongly that a mechanism
be evolved through which this
number could be verified.

An evaluation of this scheme may
also be undertaken in the near
future.

from Rs. 55 lakhs to Rs. 72 lakhs.
Though the increase is considered to
be inadequate, this has been done
without any major increase in the
total allocation for the department.
This has been made possible only by
adjusting within the various Heads of
the Department.

In order to popularise the adventure
activities among the youth, several
steps have been taken by the Deptt.
A National Adventure Mela in
Chandigarh was funded by the Deptt.
In the National Youth Festival held
at Bhopal, we organised a sky diving
demonstration of the only woman sky
diver which was telecast live.
However, the adventure activities are
yet to gain momentum to the desired
extent.

Efforts are now being made to
involve more youth from rural and
backward areas by organisation of
low cost adventure activities through
Nehru Yuva  Kendra-Sangathan,
Bharat Scouts and Guides and the
NSS (National Service Scheme).
(Committee’s comments on this reply
may be seen in Chapter-I).

The Department has written to All
India Boys Scouts offering assistance
for extended activities for All India
Boys Scouts. Five national integration
camps have been sanctioned for them
for the first time.

(ii) & (iii): An evaluation of the
Scheme of Scounting and Guiding has
been undertaken by Indian Institute
of Management, Bangalore at the
instance of the Deptt. and with the
financial assistance. Suitable
mechanism will be evolved on the
basis of the findings and
recommendations of the evaluation
study.



Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

National Service Volunteer Scheme

Para 22

Para 22

The Committee, therefore,
recommends that a publicity
campaign for this scheme be

undertaken in the rural areas of the
country.

The criterion of selection of youth
has not been spelt out in any of the
documents supplied by the Deptt.

In the case of youth hailing from
backward and tribals areas, suitable
relaxations must be given at the time
of selection.

Assistance to Youth Clubs

Para 32

The Committee is of the view that
Govt. should give priority to the
expansion of this scheme.

The Committee recommends that
proper monitoring be done so that
such youth clubs continue to function
properly,

This scheme may be implemented
with the help of suitable voluntary
organisations also and not merely
through Nehru Yuva Kendras.

Youth Development Centres

Para 36

This is a very good scheme and it
should be expanded so as to cover all
the villages throughout the country.
The Committee expresses _ its
disappointment over the slow
progress of the scheme and
recommends that all-out efforts
should be made to implement.

(i), (ii) & (iii): At the moment given
financial allocation of the scheme, we
are not able to meet even the existing
demand. This is particularly because
opening of new Nehru Yuva Kendras
as also pressure from NGOs for
providing additional _ volunteers.
However, the question of publicising
the scheme in remote rural areas will
be taken .up with the State
Governments.

(i) & (ii): The criteria of selection
have been laid down in the scheme
itself and relaxations as applicable
under the existing rules are available.
Relaxation has been provided for
candidates belonging to Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

(i), (ii) & (iii): Due to lack of
financial resources expansion of the
scheme has not been thought of.
Monitoring of youth clubs is being
done by the NYKs (Nehur Yuva
Kendras). For implementing the
Scheme with the help of suitable
voluntary organisation the Scheme is
being revised.

The scheme has been finalised and
the proposals have been received
from NYK which are under
consideration.



Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

Para 43

Para 46

Para 48

NATIONAL SPORTS TALENT CONTEST (NSTC) SCHEME

The network under this programme
should be considerably expanded in
rural, backward and remote areas
where there is no consciousness and
facilities for sports.

Revision of the scheme is under
active consideration in the light of the
recommendations of Tata Consul-
tancy Services report.

SPORTS HOSTEL SCHEME

The progress of this scheme also
appears to be tardy. As against the
target of establishing one hostel in
every State, only 18 hostels have so
far been constructed. Some States
like U.P., Punjab and M.P., which
have vest potentialities for producing
sportsmen, do not have such hostels.
Therefore, the Committee suggests
that construction of youth hostels
may be expedited.

The Secretary, Department of Youth
Affairs & Sports, in course of his oral
evidence before the Committee,
stated that since sports is a State
subject no proper check upon sports
federations could be kept. He further
added that plans are also being
formulated to ensure that these
federations run well. The Committee
strongly recommends that all-out
efforts should be made by
Government to tone up the
functioning and performance of the
Sports Federations.

The Government is considering a
proposal to merge the scheme of
Sports Hostel with those of SPDA
and SAG and to establish a sub-
centre each in a zone of 80 to 100
community development _ blocks
throughout the country.

The Constitutional Amendment Bill
for including ‘Sports’ in the
concurrent list was earlier moved
before Rajya Sabha. However,
further consultation with State
Governments is being undertaken
before the Bill is pressed for
discussion in the Parliament.

(Committee’s comments on this reply
may. be seen in Chapter-I).



CHAPTER-III

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVT.’S REPLIES

Para No.

Recommendation

Youth Hostels

Para 26

Para 27

Para 28

Para 40

To the extent possible there should
be distribution of such hostels all
over the country and prominent
cultural centres should not be left
out.

In the Department’s note it has been
admitted that only 37 youth hostels
have so far been set up whereas the
performance budget gives a figure of
34 hostels. As regard the youth
hostels under construction, the
former presents a figure of 39
whereas the latter of 29. The
Committee is not in the know
whether these hostels have actually
been constructed or are under
construction.

The Committee recommends that the
final decision regarding transfer of
scheme to the States should be
expedited. The Committee,
therefore, would like to know the
reasons for reduction™ in budget
allocations for this scheme over the
year.

(i) A greater number of professionals
be given representation in the
general/governing body of SAI.

10

Reply

The recommendation of the
Committee about distribution of
youth hostels all over the country and
prominent cultural centres have been
noted and are being followed while
sanctioning fresh youth hostels. The
scheme of youth hostel has been
retained in the Central Scheme and
the National Development Council
has approved it. The total number of
youth hostels which have been
constructed is 41 and those under
construction are 28.

Proposal for giving greater
representation to professionals on the
general/governing body of SAI has
been accepted by the Government
and the revised notifications await
approval of the competent authority.


Para No.

१8 |

Recommendation

Para 47

(ii) Reduction in the allocation for Al
is yet another area of concern. As
compared to the Revised Estimates
for the year 1993-94, Plan and non-
Plan allocation this year has come
down to Rs.3913.00 from
Rs. 4,380.00 lakhs.

Apart from the Sports Authority of
India, development and promotion of
sports undertaken by other
organisations/bodies. National Sports
Federations are such bodies which
are getting financial assistance for
furthering various sports disciplines.
For this purpose, sports federations

undertaken such activities as
conducting national championships,
organising coaching camps,
purchasing sports equipment,
participating in International

Tournaments, etc. During the year
1993-94 a total of Rs. 1480.00 lakhs
for plan and Rs. 80.00 lakhs for non-
plan expenditure (which include an
additional allocation of Rs. 1080.00
lakhs for the preparation of Indian
Contingent for Asian Games) was
given to sports federations. But, the
poor performance of teams in
international level games proves that
everything is not going well with the
sports federations. Therefore, the
Committee suggests that while doing
out such huge amounts norms and
conditions fixed should be strictly
adhered to. There should also be
some mechanism for monitoring, to
find out whether the amount js being
properly utilised or not. There must
also be a supervisory body to see that
the sports federations function
smoothly.

Reply

DYA&S has been making efforts to
get an increase in the allocation, both
plan and non-plan, for SAI.
However, Ministry of Finance. is of
the view that SAI should generate its
own resources and not depend on
continued budgetary support from the
Government.

The Guidelines for assisting the
National’ Federations are being
revised after taking into consideration
the | recommendations of the
Rajendran and Pandya Committees.
Government assistance will be given
against an agreed programme for the
development and promotion of each
sport according to its unique
requirements.

It may, however, be mentioned that
the National Sports Federations
resent assuming of any supervisory
tole by the Government.



CHAPTER-IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
NOT ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

Para 8.

Coverage of schools, as compared to
colleges’ and Universities under the
NSS Scheme, has been far from
satisfactory. Even after 25 years, a
sizeable number of youth remains
uncovered. Therefore, a time bound
programme should be framed for this

purpose.

Due to lack of increase in the
provisions, it has not been possible to
extend the NSS Scheme further than
what has been continued.
(Committee’s Comments on this reply
may be seen in Chapter-I)

National Discipline Scheme & National Fitness Corps

Para 30

Para 31

The budget allocation for this scheme
is not, in any case, justified and the
Committee, therefore recommends
that urgent necessary steps should be
taken to take this scheme out of
Department’s purview.

The ‘National Fitness Corps’,
replaced the National Discipline
Scheme. This Scheme also aims at
meeting various expenses relating to
National Discipline Scheme
Instructors. As suggested earlier, this
scheme should also be transferred to
the State Governments.

Sports Programme

Para 39

Adequate funds be harnessed for
sports promotion and development
activities and also that mechanism
should be evolved to make various
sports schemes result oriented. Some
accountability should also be ensured

(i) & (ii) With a view to take up the
case with the Ministry of Finance to
take up the scheme out of the
purview of the Department, certain
information was sought from the
State Governments. However,
despite best of efforts, the
information is not available from
many of the State Governments. In
fact, it is not a running-scheme any
more and the Department is
responsible to bear the liability on
pay and allowances of such persons
who were earlier recruited under the
scheme but later have been adjusted
in the State Governments. As soon as
the information is available, action
will be taken.

(Committee’s Comments on this reply
may be seen in Chapter-I)

DYAS has been making efforts to get
higher resources for sports promotion
and development. However, the
decisions in this regard finally rest
with the Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission.

12


Para No. ;

13

Recommendation

Reply

Para 44

Para 45

Grants for
Para 50.

in this regard so that in case of poor
performance the grey area may be
easily identified and rectified.

The Committee recommends that
traditional and indigenous games like
Kabaddi, Kho Kho etc., may also be
included in the list of disciplines
under this scheme.

The progress of this scheme is very
slack, as out of 78 sanctioned centres
only 34 centres having so far been
constituted. Even those centres which
have been set up are not working
satisfactorily. Therefore, the commit-
tee urges upon Government to take
necessary corrective steps in this re-
gard and also recommends some sort
of surveillance committee be consti-
tuted to look after the functioning of
the centres.

Creation of Sports Infrastructure

Efforts should be made to ensure that
sports infrastructure should be spread
all over the country and the infras-
tructure created should be properly
utilised.

In a scenerio where the perform-
ance depends upon the joint effort of
the National Sports Federation,
Sports Authority of India, Coaches,
Deptt. of Youth Affairs & Sports, it
becomes difficult to bring about ac-
countability. However, we are trying
to coordinate with all the partners
and provide the best support to the
players.

(Committee’s, comments on this reply
may be seen in Chapter-I)

Under the NSTC scheme the Depart-
ment has been concentrating on disci-
plines which are of importance in the
context of major international events
such as Asian/commonwealth and
Olympic games.

(Committee’s comments on this reply
may be seen in Chapter-I)

The success of ‘this’ scheme largely
depends upon the participation of the
State Governments. The working of
the scheme has been evaluated by
TCS, and DYAS is contemplating
corrective measures in the light of the
recommendations of the evaluation
report.

(Committees comments on this reply
may be seen in Chapter-I)

Excepting the Infrastructure which
have been created in SAI Centres,
projects of sports infrastructure are
taken up by State Governments or
non-governmental organisations.
State Governments and voluntary or-
ganisations are given matching central
assistance depending upon the viabili-
ty of the project. Since the proposals
are submitted through the State Gov-
ernments, the selection of the loca-
tions also rest with them.

(Committees comments on this reply
may be seen in Chapter-I)



CHAPTER—V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED

Para No. Recommendation Reply

-Nil-

14


MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

शा
“SEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 30th May, 1995 in Committee Room
No. 67, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra___Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

5. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma

LOK SABHA

7. Dr. Viswantham Kanithi

8. Dr. Vasant Pawar

9. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

12. Shri Anna Joshi

13. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
14. Shri Ramachandra Dome
15. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
16. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

SECRETARIAT

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Twenty-Third and Twenty-Sixth Reports on the
Action Taken by the government on the recommendations made by the Committee in its
Fifth and Sixth Reports on the Demands for Grants 1994-95 of the Departments of
Education and Youth Affairs. After making some modifications the Committee adopted the
same.

3. The Committee, then adjourned at 4.00 p.m. to meet again on 31st May, 1995.

*Minutes of Ist-VIth Meeting relate to matters not included in this report.

1S