PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SIXTY-NINTH REPORT i

ON |

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1998-99 (DEMAND NO. 40)
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 6.7.98) H
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 6.7.98) |

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

JULY, 1998/ASADHA, 1920 (SAKA) i

1483/RS/F—1-A '-



rn



CONTENTS

ComposiTION OF THE COMMITTEE
PREFACE
Report

Minutes

Paces
(ii)
iii)
1—11

13-19



Pees
BNE SCmIAANAWN

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1998-99)

. Shri $, 8. Chavan—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
. Shri Oscar Fernandes ,

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Shri O. Rajagopal

. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

. Dr. ९. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam

. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

. Dr. Sanjay Singh हु
. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

. Shri Ashok Singh

. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
. Shri Ashok Gehlot

. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
. Shri Ajit Jogi

. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

. Shri Laxman Singh

. Shri Shankar Pannu

. Shri Abdul Hamid

. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

. Dr. Shrimati V. Saroja

. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

. Shri H.P. Singh

10)

1483 / RS/F2.4,



. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera

. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
. Shrimati Krishna Bose

» Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

. Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shrimati Varidana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

Gi)



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixty-ninth Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 40) of the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare for the year 1998-99.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard the
Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the said Demands for Grants in its
meeting held on 18th June, 1998.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same. on 2nd July,

1998.

New ऐश का; . $.8. CHAVAN
July 2, 1998 . Chairman,
Wan oan von, Department-related Parliamenta
Asadha 10, 1920 (Saka) eparimene ree : ry

Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development.

(iii)



~ कलाकार ५8०३०५प-नाउनाक( ०१८४९... a जज लत न्‍ पेन अपने ae eaten
ggnenerwereenpemmmmnmnammenrnncommet 6 हर « epee be wuts gen



Pi पक कपलफा ला

be

a 1483/RS/F—3-A

REPORT

I. INTRODUCTION

1.1 The Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is instrumental and responsible
for implementation of various programmes of national importance like family welfare,
primary health care, prevention, control and eradication of major diseases which form the
main plank of our development efforts. Apart from these, the Ministry also takes special
care for preventing the spread of diseases assuming the dimension of epidemic. The
Department of Health, under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, which is
committed to achieve the goal of health for all by the year 2000 A.D. is responsible for |
evolving broad policies for the health sector and provides financial and technical assistance
to State Governments in critical areas through the implementation of important health
programmes.

1.2 Broadly, the objectives of the Department are to undertake National Health
Programmes, to promote education, research and training in various medical disciplines, to
prevent adulteration of food as well as drugs, to provide primary health care at the door
steps of the people, to take steps for better implementation of health care programmes for
tribal and other weaker sections of the society and also to collaborate with member countries
of United Nations and international agencies like WHO, UNICEF, etc. in matters relating
to health promotion and development.

1.3 The Department finances the State and Union Territory Administrations for
Centrally Sponsored Health Schemes being implemented by them and includes national
programmes for prevention control and eradication of diseases. Some of the schemes which
are financed to the tune of 100% by the Central Government are National Schemes for
Prevention of Visual Impairment and Blindness including ‘Trachoma, National Leprosy
Eradication Programme, National Guinea Worm Eradication Programme and National
AIDS Control Programme. While for some other programmes like National Malaria
Eradication Programme (Rural and Urban), National Sexually Transmitted Diseases Control
Programme, National 1.8. Control Programme, Kala-Azar Control Programme it is on a
50:50 basis by the Central and State Governments.

1.4 The Department also finances, wholly or substantially,the following autonomous
institutions engaged in patient care andor research; All India Institute of Medical Sciences
and Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, New Delhi, Post-Graduate
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, All India Institute of Speech and
Hearing, Mysore., Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi.

II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS

2.1. The Department of Health has been allocated Rs. 1122.16 crores on the Plan side
and Rs. 654.52 crores on the Non-Plan side, for the year 1998-99.

2.2 As compared to total outlay of Rs. 920.20 crores in 1997-98 outlay of Rs. 1122.16
crores for medical and public health for 1998-99 shows a quantum jump. Major portion of
the outlay is meant for National Programmes for control of Communicable Diseases and
other diseases implemented through State Governments on the health side. Maximum
allocation has been made for National Malaria Eradication Programme (Rs. 287.00 crores),

1



2

Other programmes for which major allocations have been made are National Aids Control
Programme, National Trachoma and Blindness Control Programme, National Leprosy
Eradication Programme, National TB Control Programme and Kala-Azar Control Prog-
ramme. On the medical side the emphasis is on the development of medical sciences
including medical education, training and research for which an outlay of Rs. 254.01 crores
have been provided during 1998-99.

2.3 Commenting on the budget allocation, the Secretary stated that when compared
with the Eighth Plan figure of Rs. 2,825 crores, the Ninth Plan figure of Rs. 4,995.59 crores
including a foreign aid component of Rs. 1,497 crores, signifies a 75% increase. However, in
real terms, it has increased by 35 per cent only.

2.4 The Secretary informed the Committee that the allocation made to the Department
is insufficient to ¢arry“Oi its activities: With this allocation,” the Secretary stated that the
Department’ may ot be~ able 10 start the programme for testing -hepatitis, for which the
Department would be short by Rs. 68 crores. The Committee feels that testing hepatitis
should be started in a big way and necessary funds may be provided at the RE stage.
Another area which needs immediate attention and the Department may not be able to
attend to, is immunisation for Hepatitis-B as part of immunisation programme for which
there is a need for Rs. 600 crores. The Committee is of thé opinion that immunisation for
Hepatitis-B should be started in a phased manner in view of paucity of funds. Funds will not
be sufficient for setting up a trauma Centre at AIIMS, for which a minimum of Rs. 100
crores is required. The Committee was also informed that there is shortage of funds for
construction of quarters for the faculty of AIIMS.

2.5 The Committee feels that the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance
should take a realistic view of the needs of the Department and try to provide more funds to
attain the goal of Health for All by 2000 A.D.

गा, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME

3.1 The Plan allocation for CGHS was reduced from Rs. 9 crores in BE 1997-98 to
Rs. 5 crores in RE 1997-98. However, it has been stepped up to Rs. 9 crores in BE 1998-99.
When the Department was asked to explain the reason for the increase, the department
stated that the increase is for expansion of CGHS to new cities and for opening of new
Allopathic / Homoeopathic / Ayurvedic / Unani dispensaries and for creation of more posts.

3.2 The Secretary, during the course of the evidence stated that at present C.G.H.S.
caters to about 44 lakh beneficiaries in 18 cities of the country. The Secretary assured the
Committee that action would be taken for expansion of this scheme on receipt of fresh SIU
study of CGHS dispensaries from Ministry of Finance by July, 1998. The Committee
recommends that the expansion of CGHS as envisaged during the year be undertaken.

IV. HOSPITALS

4.1 The Central Government hospitals are suffering from resource crunch which leads to
appalling conditions, sub-standard services, overcrowding, etc. Staff scarcity and lack of
basic amenities are a regular feature in all the hospitals. The Secretary pointed out a number
of difficulties being faced in the smooth functioning of the Central Government Hospitals. In
order to strengthen the casualty of three Central Government Hospitals i.e. Safdarjung,
Lady Harding and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospitals, the Department had planned to
privatise. some of the services. This was duly approved by the Expenditure Finance
Committee in February, 1998. However, there has been a lot of resistance from the Group
‘C’ and ‘D’ Unions against these efforts of privatisation or for even having contract labour.
The Committee feels that the indisciplines approach of all the staff working in these Central

1483/ RS /F_3.5

-- ६.

suiyaes ersten’

|W



i

3 जज

Government Hospitals has to be bandled firmly if timely medical aid to critically ill patients
is to be provided. The Committee was given to understand that the Doctors in these
Hospitals are not regular and desires that steps may be taken to ensure their punctuality and
regularity.

५. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES

5.1 There has been a significant hike in budget allocation for AIIMS in both Plan and
Non-Plan i.e. from Rs. 54 crores (Plan) in BE 1997-98 to Rs. 69.96 crores (Plan) in BE
1998-99 and from Rs. 77 crores (Non-Plan) in 1997-98 to Rs. 98.13 crores (Non-Plan) in
1998-99. When asked to explain, the manner in which this increased allocation would be
utilised, the Department clarified that for 1998-99 AIIMS had projected Rs. 73 crores (Plan)
and Rs. 169.37 (Non-Plan) against which the budget allocation is Rs. 69.96 crores (Plan)-and
Rs. 98.13 crores (Non-Plan). It was further submitted that the hike in budget allocation will
meet only requirements of salaries On account of the Fifth Pay Commission’s recommenda-
tions. As the allocation is considerably less than that projected by the Institute for the Ninth
pik eriod, priorities of activities to be taken up have been redefined, the Committee was

_ told’The Committee feels that any reduction in the financial requirements of the Institute

would have an adverse effect on the functioning which has been set up to conduct
experiments and research on various disciplines of medical services. The Committee
therefore, recommends enhancement of budget allocation ‘for AIIMS at the RE stage.

5.2 The Committee was told that there has been a persistent demand for setting up a
Trauma Centre at the AIIMS. The present allocation would not be sufficient for setting up,
of a Trauma Centre which requires a minimum of Rs. 100 crores. The Committee feels that
the Department should approach the Planning Commission and convince about the need for]
setting up of such centre and to allot the requisite funds.

VI. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL

6.1 The allocation to the hospital has been increased from Rs. 58.35 crores in RE 1997-
98 to Rs. 67 crores in BE 1998-99. Explaining the need for the increase, the Department
stated that the additional Rs. 8.65 crores provided will be utilised for salary Rs. 3.72 crores;
material & supply Rs. 2 crores, and Rs. 1.56 crores for machinery and equipment.

6.2 The Committee was given to understand that for upgradation of Burns and Plastic
Surgery Department of Safdarjung Hospital Rs. 115.86 lakhs for the purchase of equipments
and Rs, 94.56 lakhs for constructioncivil works were sanctioned during 1996-97. The
Committee, however, finds that except for the air-conditioning work, other’ works are
partially completed. Similarly, out of Rs. 115.86 lakhs, allocated for procurement of
equipments, only Rs. 33 lakhs worth equipments have been purchased so far. The
Committee would like to emphasize that every effort should be made by the Department to
expedite the. purchase of equipments and constructiomcivil works.

VIL. DR. R.M.L. HOSPITAL

7.1 There is a marginal increase in the allocation to the hospital i.e. from Rs. 37.13
crores in RE 1997-98 to Rs. 41.60 crores for 1998-99. The Department stated that this
increase will be wi 4 or increase in salaries and for purchase of essential medicines and
other medical suppl The Committee was given to understand that Neurological
Department in the hospital needs to be strengthened, in view of large number of accidents
taking place in the vicinity of the hospital. There is inadequacy of staff and equipment too.



4

The Commitice therefore, feels that necessary allocation as required may be’provided at the i
RE stage for strengthening the Neurological Department of the hospital. The Committee
feels that strict enforcement of the timings in the hospital! may be ensured.

VI. MEDICAL EDUCATION

8.1 The Committee is perturbed to note that the standard of Medical education in both
Government and private medical colleges ca going down. The Committee was given to
understand that there are a large number of colleges where the kind of facilities which are
deemed to be provided are simply not there. The Secretary informed the Committee that
very stringent conditions have been laid down by the Medical Council of India for grant of
recognition to private medical colleges. Not only this, now every medical college is to have
its own building and hospital before it is recognised. The Committee fails to understand how
aré being allowed to function’ The Committee-holds ‘the. Medical Council of

be provided to private colleges for having the infrastructure. The Committee is also of the
view that a number of private bodies are willing to fulfil the norms. The Committee feels
, that they should be allowed to start the colleges.

8.2 Another aspect on which the Committee is worried is that there are medical colleges
where not even 20% of the students have passed. The results of such colleges range between
zero to five percent and zero to ten percent consecutively and they have not shown any
improvement whatsoever. The Committee feels that urgent steps need§ to be taken to arrest
this trend. The Committee would like to have a. detailed State-wise information of such
colleges.

8.3 The Committee is also equally worried about the brain drain that is taking place in
the medical fraternity in the last few years. The Department clarified that a ‘No Objection
Certificate’ is issued by the Ministry when the medical students go abroad and they are
| expected to come back after seven years but normally this dozs not happen. Every year

about 17,000 graduates and 8,000 post graduates come out from medical colleges and NOC
j is given to 1500 to 1700 students each year including renewals. So the figure is not so

alarming. The Secretary further informed that students from rural background aspire to do
' very specialised medicine which is not available to them in the normal specialisation areas of
our Country and this aspect is taken into consideration while issuing the NOC, whereby the
Department stands to benefit. The Secretary also informed that a policy restrictive to
doctors alone would be unfair when restrictions are not there for other professionals. A
policy paper on this aspect has been prepared for Government’s consideration.

8.4 The Committee strongly feels that medical students who go abroad for higher
studies should be made to come back to serve the country, otherwise such student may be
wy usked to give compensation, so that the bencfit of higher Education can be made. available
to some other students at their expense. This condition would be fully justified in view of the
fact that medical education in our country is provided at highly subsidised rates.

IX. CANCER RESEARCH

9.1 For cancer research, the allocation has been increased from Rs. 20 crores in
BE 1997-98 to Rs. 30 crores in BE 1998-99. The Department stated that the proposed
allocation of Rs. 30 crores will be spent on Regional Cancer Centre (Rs. 16 crores) setting
up of Cobalt Theropy Unit (Rs. 8 crores), Development of Oncolgy wing (Rs. 4 crores),
Voluntary Organisation Scheme (Rs. 1 crore) and District Project (Rs. 1 crore). The
Department also stated that at present there is no proposal to open more regonal cancer

]

i

ly Yesponsible “for this. The-Committee-also-feels-that-a-reasonable.time. should _..



5

centres. The Committee desires that wherever there is a need for such a centre, funds should
be provided without hesitation.

9.2 The Secretary, informed the Committee, that in view of the increasing number of
Cancer cases being reported, it is necessary to give more emphasis on preventive measures.
Although there has been an increase of Rs. 10 crores when compared to provision made in
1997-98, this is hardly sufficient for carrying on cancer control activities. Not oniy the
equipments are very costly, their maintenance also needs a lot of money. He, therefore,
pleaded that if some meaningful activity has to take place than there is a need for
appreciable jump in the allocation.

9.3, Considering the fact that a large number of new cases occur in the country every
year and the facilities at the grass root level are not available at all, the Committee
recommends that the Department should take necessary steps to providé requisite funds for
establishing regional cancer centres. The Committee also feel that the departments should
take steps to establish Diagnositic Centres for preliminary screening of caricer at the district
hospitals. है

X. NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME

10.1 T.B. continues to be a major health problem in the country. It affects mainly
people in their most productive years of life and is commonly associated with poverty,
overcrowding and malnutrition. Lack of education, environmental pollution and poor
sanitation compound the problem. The Secretary informed the Committee that the
Department is seized of the magnitude of the problem of T.B. morbidity and mortality in
the country. The Committee was informed that the Prevalence rate of T.B. is around 1.5.%
i.e. about 1.5 crores T.B. patients are presently there in the whole of the country. Control of
’T.B. has become all the more important due to the emerging dangers from HIV/TB co-
- infection. The Secretary further informed that the department is presently adopting revised
DOT Strategy (Directly Observed Treatment Short-Course Chemotherapy) to fight against
T.B. under a World Bank funded project which has been implemented in 102 districts in the
Country and already 42,741 cases have been treated under the project till 31st March, 1998.
Apart from this; support from World Bank to 203 other districts is also being given for
strengthening of State T.B. Cells/Training and Demonstration Centres/Labs as well as
training and for IEC. For the remaining 154 district of the country, the project intervention
is in the form of strengthening of State TRB Cell/Training and Demonstration Centre and
supply of conventional drugs.

10.2 This year the allocation for the programme has been substantially raised :
Rs. 90 crores BE 1997-98 to Rs. 125 crores in BE 1998-99. However, the Committee would
like to point out, that inspite of a well planned strategy for control of T.B., financial targets
could not be achieved in the entire Eighth Plan period. Not only this, in 1997-98, only
Rs.32.05 crores could be utilised against the allocation of Rs.90 crores in BE 1997-98. This
has been mainly due to delay in the delivery services as a result of lengthy World Bank
procedures. All these procedures have now been streamlined and also supply of drugs ‘has
also been decentralised, the Department clarified. The Committee recommends that th
Department should take effective steps for full utilisation of allocated funds.

XI. NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME

11.1 This programme is implemented with the aim to achieve elimination of leprosy by
the year 2000 A.D. The Committee was informed by the Secretary that it is one of the most
successful programme and it is due to the effect of the recent drugs which have entered in

1483/RS/F—-A


the market. States like U.P, Bihar and Orissa where the Prevalence rate is high also took active
part in the programme. Recently, Tamil Nadu has launched a new programme, the modified
Leprosy Programme, where identification squads are sent to bring out the hidden cases which
are not reported due to several reasons. The same procedure was followed in the States of U.P.,
Bihar and Orissa and about 3,70,000 hidden cases were identified, the Secretary added.
However, some States like West Bengal, Rajasthan have so far not followed this procedure.

1 While appreciating the steps taken by the Department so far, the Committee is constrained to

note that out of Rs. 75 crores allocated for this programme in 1997-98, only Rs.57.60 crores
could be utilised. Not only this, there was shortfall in the achievement of physical targets as well
during 1997-98. The Committee feels that Identification squads should be made compulsory for
all the States. The Committee also desires that programme should be implemented with greater
vigour so as to achieve elimination of leprosy by the year 2000 A.D.

XII. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS

12.1 The Programme.was launched by the Government in 1976 to reduce the blindness

“from 1.4% to.0.3%. by-2000-A.D. The Committee was informed by the Secretary that a World

Bank Assisted Cataract Blindness Control Project is being implemented since April 1994 in
seven States where prevalence rate is very high (i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan). The Secretary informed that in the last four years
6.6 million cataract operations have been performed against the target of 11 million operations
over a period of seven years.

12.2 Delay in creation of posts in the various eye-care facilities, slow progress of civil

constructions work in District hospitals, PHCs etc., delay in procurement of drugs/consumables,

of stock level in the States funded under the World Bank Project were the main reasons cited by
the Department for under utilisation of funds under the Programme. The Committee
recommends that the Departni€at should take effective steps for streamlining the procedural
delays.

12.3 The Committee was also informed that the stress is now on 101, surgeries and there is

a shortage of surgeons to perform this surgery. The Committee feels that when the stress is on ~

quality more number of surgeons should be given training for performing IOL surgery.

12.4 The Committee also notes that in 1997-98 against the target of 30,18,000, cataract
operations, upto November, 1997, 11,76,000 cataract operations have been performed but by
March, 1998 the number has risen to 30,11,000. (Provisional). The Committee wonders how so
many operations have been performed within the short span of time when the stress is on
quality. The Committee desires that the reported figures be. verified thoroughly.

XIII. NATIONAL MALARIA ERADICATION PROGRAMME

13.1 Out of the total allocation of Rs. 297 crores for Malaria Control in BE 1998-99, Rs.137
crores have been earmarked for National Malaria Eradication Programme. The allocation for
Kala-azar Control is Rs. 10 crores and under Externally Aided Component (EAC) for the
Enhanced Malaria Control Project with World Bank support, Rs.150 crores have been
allocated. Thus, it would be seen that as against Rs.140 crores in 1997-98, during the current
year, allocation for NMEP has been reduced by Rs.3 crores, While the provision for Kala-azar
Control Programme has been retained at the same level as in 1997-98 there has been substantial
increase in the budgetary allocations under Enhanced Malaria Control Project with World Bank
support from Rs.50 crores in 1997-98 to Rs.150 crores, in 1998-99. Out of this, the Committee
was told, Rs.105 crores have been kept for Insecticides, Larvicidés, Drugs Material and
Equipments.

13.2 Keeping in view the rising incidence.of Malaria and focal outbreaks in some parts of



{
1

7

the country as well as the vectors of malaria to the conventional insecticides, integrated
approach of Malaria Control under the National Programme has been taken up.

13.3 The Department further informed the Committee that in order to intensify the
Malaria Control activities, an Enhanced Malaria Control Project with World Bank support
to essentially cover 100 Districts in 7 Peninsular States namely Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Rajasthan as well as 19 Towns/cities has
been launched during 1997-98. The Committee desires that the Department should explore
the possibility of including Terai areas of U.P. under the World Bank Project.

13.4, The Committee is happy to note that the Department has initiated a programme
for observance of Anti-Malaria Month in June every year from 1997 for creating public
awareness and involving the community in the prevention and control of Malaria. However,
the Committee finds that targets for spray coverage of population could not be achieved
during the last two years :—

(in million)

Year Population targeted for spray coverage Achievements
1996-97 161.51 77.59
1997-98 164.78 55.21

13.5 The Committee therefore feels that intensive Programmes to create ‘more
awareness about stagnant water collections, problem of open drains, garbage lifting and also
timely spray of insecticides should receive more emphasis.

XIV. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME

14.1 In order to prevent and control the HIV infection and to reduce its impact the
Government of India launched a scheme on September 23rd, 1992 at an estimated cost of
Rs. 267.88 crores during Eighth Plan period with assistance from International Development
Association and technical support from World Health Organisation.

14.2 The expected outcome of National AIDS Control Programme are:—

Reduction of HIV transmission and better clinical care and management of
HIV/AIDS patients.

Elaborating on the programme, the Secretary stated that as per the projections made by
WHO, India has the largest number of HIV cases in the world. Recently, a Nation wide
survey was conducted all over the country except Bihar in the month of February and March
1998. The results gave a mixed picture. The prevalent rate of the disease is different in
different States in varying forms. The most affected part of the country is the Southern and
the Western region. There is no State in India which has not reported HIV/AIDS. The
Department is working with each individual State to provide, the management capability,
strengthening the delivery system and for proper execution of the programme.

14.3 Blood safety, production of safe blood, control of sexually transmitted diseases and
large scale information campaign are the measures through which efforts are being made to
contain the disease. The Department informed about 1850 Blood Banks have been
modernised in pursuance of Supreme Court directions in this regard.

14.4 Under the Supreme Court direction, a National Blood Transfusion Council has
been formed. Not only this, a draft Blood Policy has been announced and it will be brought
before the Cabinet very soon, Prevention of Human Rights of the people who are already



8

infected, is an important aspect of the policy. Control of Sexually Transmitted Diseases is a
very important component of AIDS Control Programme as it increases the risk of
transmission by almost ten times. Information, education and communication was another
important aspect of the programme, the Secretary added.

14.5 The Committee was also informed that the awareness level in urban areas is
something like 62% and in the rural areas it is 30% to 35%. The Committee feels that to
improve the awareness level in the rural areas, a training programme for Anganwadi and
Other Health Workers should be started.

14.6 The Secretary also informed that as far as the delivery systems are concerned the
funds provided get locked up in States and stated that the States have been requested to form

गा | “a State AIDS Control Society and the funds will be provided directly'f6 them. So far sixteen

States have forme such societies. The Committee is of the opinion that the rest of the States
should also be pursuaded to form such societies.

14.7 The Secretary also stated that efforts are being made to bring in a convergence of
TB and AIDS Control Programme. It has been established that TB and AIDS are very closely
related as 60% of AIDS patients ultimately die due to TB

14.8 Another aspect which was highlighted by the Secretary was about the involvement
of the other Central Government Departments which deal with large sections of people as well
as the labour force which is migratory in nature, to develop their own programme packages
and capabilities within their own organisations. The Committee feels that the Department
should write to all the Departments to take up this issue seriously

14.9 For the programme, Rs. 111 crores has been allotted this year. But the Committee
observes that there is large scale under utilisation of funds under the Eighth Plan period in the
programme. The Committee feels that simply by allocating funds the programme will not
progress unless steps are taken to utilise fully the funds allocated. Poor infrastructure at the
State, level and blocking of funds by the Finance Departments of the State Governments
released for NACO to take care of their own ways and means have been cited as the main
constraints in the successful implementation of the programme. The Committee would like to
emphasise that remedial measures in this regard should be initiated by the Department. The
Committee feels that the department should stress upon the States to utilise the funds
earmarked for AIDS be spent only on AIDS and if any diversion takes place, proportionate
reduction in central assistance should be affected.

XV. DISEASE SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM

15.1 The Department initiated a pilot project in 1997-98 for strengthening the disease
surveillance system in the country. The Committee was informed that the main objective of
the programme is to develop and strengthen surveillance activities to promote early detection
of outbreaks and appropriate field action for prevention and control of outbreaks by capacity
building at district and State level. It was also informed that the Surveillance System is being
strengthened through training of medical and para-medical personnel, upgradation of
laboratories, communication and data processing system. The programme is being
implemented by the State Health Authorities with districts as the focal points. It is being
implemented in 11 States,.i.e. 2 districts in each State have been selected for the purpose.

15.2 The programme envisages to develop IEC material for use by community leaders at
sub-district levels (especially Gram. Panchayat) for facilitating their active support in disease
surveillance activities, For Ninth, Year: Plan an amount'of Rs. 30.00 crores have been
earmarked for the programme, the Committee was informed out of which Rs. 2.90 crores and
Rs. 4.55 crores have been allocated in 1997-98 and 1998-99 respectively.

डा



9

15.3 The Committee was also infromed by the Secretary that the World-Bank is very
responsive to the ide2 and WHO has in fact given some funds for the purpose. The
Committee welcomes the idea at the first instance. The Committee is of the opinion that
priority should be given to the districts where there is frequent recurrence of outbreaks
under the Comprehensive Disease Surveillance System and steps should be taken to expand
this system aff over the country.

XVI. HOSPIPAL WASTE MANAGEMENT

16.1 Hospital Waste is one of the biggest health hazards that is being faced by every
citizen of this country. The Committee points out that all the projects of the Department are
envisaged and implemented to cure disease, but it will remain a dream if abundant caution is
not taken to dispose of the waste while curing the disease.

16.2 Explaining the subject the Secretary informed that in the wake of a Supreme Court
judgement that all the hospitalgin Delhi having more than fifty beds would have to have an
incinerator in accordance with the specifications of Central Pollution Control Board, the
Ministry of Environment and Forests has brought out the Draft Biomedical Waste Rules
inviting objections from the public. These rules would be made applicable to every hospital
having more than 50 number of beds. This would be monitored by the Central Pollution
Control Board.

16.3 The Committee is of the opinion that although responsibility is not of the
Department of Health alone, it should take some initiative and evolve a comprehensive
approach to waste management in consultation with the Ministries of Urban Affairs, Rural
Development and Water Resources etc. The Committee feels that strengthening of
preventive aspects in respect of water borne and masquito-borne diseases like Dengue,
malaria, plague etc. is very essential as the origin of all such diseases is waste.

16.4 The Committee feels that considering the enormity of the problem, the Bio-
medical Waste rules must be brought into force without further delay. The Committee is
also of the opinion that the issue of Hospital waste should not be restricted to Delhi alone
Steps should be taken for gradual coverage of Hospitals all over the country.

XVII, ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND SANITATION

17.1 The Committee feels that lack of sanitation, absence of hygienic habits and
accumulation of garbage and filth leads to frequent epidemic outbreaks in the Country.

17.2 The Committee was given to understand that in the wake of plague in 1994, a
Committee of four Ministries namely Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of’ Rural
Development, Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Ministry of Health under the
convenorship of Health Secretary was set up to look into this problem. The report spelling
out what should be done in the area of environmental health and sanitation was submitted
and the proposal contained in the report was to be included in the Ninth Plan Projections of
the individual Ministries. The Department of Health took the view that a Technology
Mission on environmental health and sanitation should be set up in collaboration with
concerned Ministries. However nothing concrete has emerged so far.

17.3 The Committee feels that the Department in co-ordination with the concerned
Ministries should make all efforts to form a Technology Mission on the issue. Local bodies
should also be alert on this important, aspect.

|
|
|

\

\



10

XVIII. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF BIOLOGICAL STANDARDISATION AND QUALITY
CONTROL, NEW DELHI

18.1 For the year 1998-99, the institute has been given an allocation of Rs. 35 crores on
the Plan side. Elaborating on the need for such an institute, the Secretary stated that the
institute attends to the need of a high standard quality control of biologicals in the country.
The institute will also look into the areas of blood products etc. The Secretary informed that
the project is a tripartite project and is being funded by the US aid, OEC of Japan and the
Government of India. The Committee was also informed that as the Government will not be
able to give the kind of attention the project requires at présent it has been reviewed. by a

|. Governing Body consisting of eminent scientists. Since, the quality:is‘not be compromised,

the Department is taking the help of the Department of Biotechnology, major laboratories
and heads of various institutions. The Committee hopes that the Institute will be constituted/
constructed as per the schedule.

XIX. CENTRAL DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL ORGANISATION

19.1 Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation was provided Rs. 11.71 crores on the
Plan side in BE 1998-99 which was drastically reduced to Rs. 2.10 crores at the RE stage.
For the current year, there is a provision of Rs. 6.00 crores.

19.2 Justifying the decrease, the Department stated that under BE 1997-98, CDSCO
was given an allocation of Rs. 11.71 crores, of which Rs. 9.51 crores was provided as
external component for Capacity Building Project to be implemented both at the State and
Central Jevels with support from the World Bank. The Capacity Building Project, inter-alia,
seeks to strengthen the Drug Administration at the State and Central level with a view to
improve quality control. Since the Capacity Building Project, which was envisaged to
commence in 1997-98, did not materialise as scheduled, the entire external component of

~ Rs. 9.51 crores was reduced from the Budget allocation:

19.3 The Department further stated that in 1997-98, Rs. 2.20 crores was provided in the
general component for meeting the recurring cost on projects initiated in the Eighth Plan
The Ministry of Finance had advised that this component be continued during the Ninth
Plan as part of the Plan Component. Accordingly, in 1998-99 Rs. 6.00 crores have been
provided in the general component. Of this allocation, Rs. 2.30 crores will again be utilised
for meeting the recurring cost on the Eighth Plan component in the current financial year
while Rs. 0.70 crores has been provided for expansion of enforcement machinery of CDSCO
at the Head Quarters, Zone and Sub-Zone levels. For this purpose approval of EFC is
proposed to be sought. Based on the approval received, further requests for funds will be
sought if so required.

19.4 The Committee is of the opinion that the drug enforcement machinery both at the
Central and State level requires strengthening because of the large availability of spurious
drugs in the market. The Committee, therefore, feels that the EFC approval should be
sought early so that enforcement machinery could be strengthened.

XX. PRIMARY HEALTH CENTRES

20.1 The functioning of Primary Health Centres in the rural areas is a matter of grave
concern for the Committee. The Committee was given to understand that the Department
provides facilities to the PHCs initially after which it is the responsibility of the State
Government. The Committee feels that it,should not be the case. Responsibility of the
Department does nvt end with mere allocation of funds. The Department has to ensure that
PHCs in rural areas should also attend to the medical needs of public in real sense. The

+

id]



ll

Committee is happy to note that some concrete steps have been initiated by the Department
for monitoring of PHCs. The Committee finds that inspection of PHC is being carried out by
a team consisting of two officials from the Department, two individuals alongwith the. State
officials. The Committee desires that local MLAsMPs may also be associated with the
+ inspection team. The Committee feels that better assessment would be made if PHCs
showing both good and bad performance are inspected. A tribal area where the conditions
are worse should also be made a part of this inspection. The Committee is of the view that
the new methodology of joint inspection team would lead to better functioning of PHCs.
Taking into account the overall condition of PHCs, the Committee desires that a one-time
grant be given by the Government of India, for all PHCs to bring them into a working
condition. हु
XXI. COMMITTED LIABILITY

21.1 The Committee in its 60th Report had recommended that the Department should
make a thorough review of the schemes and identify the committed liability. In this matter,
the Committee considered the Report of the Tenth Finance Commission. The Tenth Finance
Commission have ‘observed as under:

“Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in
deciding the cut-off date for transfer of committed liability on account of plan scheme,
the incremental liabilities that would arise in 1997-98 on account of Eighth Plan scheme
completed in the next two financial years would have to be provided for. The
Commission are, therefore, of the view that the Planning Commission may consider
providing for the maintenance of such schemes till 1999-2000 in the Plan itself as was
done for the schemes of the two Annual Plans of 1990-91 and 1991-92.”

21.2 The Committee in this connection heard the views of the Secretary, Department of
Expenditure last year to clarify the position. He informed the Committee that even though
communications were sent to various Ministries, the Ministries could not identify the
Committee expenditure on time. Accordingly a lumpsum amount has been provided under
Demand No. 31. The Secretary also assured that if required more funds for this purpose will
be provided at the RE stage. He also stated that the Departments may approach the
Department of Expenditure for their share.

21.3 The Department has informed that it proposed to transfer Rs. 87.75 crores from
Plan to Non-Plan as committed expenditure. The information relating to the committed
expenditure was furnished to the Ministry of Finance and revised information was also
furnished by the Department thereafter. However, it had been made clear by the Ministry of
Finance that there was no case of either transfer of committed expenditure from Plan to
Non-Plan or for additional provision for committed expenditure in the Bydget Estimates
1997-98. The committed expenditure proposed to be provided is already built into the BE
1997-98 (Plan), it was 1010, Even the transfer of committed expenditure from Plan to Non-
Plan would lead to double counting of the estimates as the next year’s Plan allocations will
be based on the Budget Estimates for 1997-98 and not on the reduced figures for RE
1997-98. In view of this, the Ministry of Finance did not agree to provide any funds on
account of committed expenditure from Plan to Non-Plan under BE/RE 1997-98.

21.4 The Committee views with concern that the Finance Ministry has not honoured
such clear cut commitment made before the Parliamentary Committee. As the’
recommendations of the Tenth Finance Commission have been accepted by the
Government, it is the commitment of Government too. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department of Health should get the assurance implemented without
any: delay.



MINUTES



वित्तीय ज्ञापन

& A जाए

gaa a f ने
2. खंड 13 का otaRST, MERTIING और Ya

न। उ१युक्‍तों की सहायता

«ab लिए 121 कल i & लिए उपबंध करता है, जो
The पा gt ae I A.M, 1 i ted 998 ४0क- mittee Room
‘A’ Ground Floor) Paillang Al oy he elhi. et , .

SrA 9 ७ + ७ 3

3. सूचना आयुक्त, सूचना waged six आयोग के अन्य अधिकारियों और
PRESENT: MRMBERG पर एक करोड़ छियासी लाख रूपए का अनुमानित आवर्ती व्यय

. Shri SBS CREA, |

RAJYA SABRAS® प्रक्रम पर, आयोग द्वारा अपेक्षित कार्यालय स्थान, वाहनों, टेलीफोनों और

Shri Ba naa Seo से संबंधित सारभूत संसाधनों पर उपगत होने वाले व्यय
den

° ey 1

. Shri Oscar Fernandes नहीं है ater

. Shri Rajnath SSifQy siege अन्य आवर्ती या अनावर्ती व्यय अंतवर्लिंत नहीं है ।
- Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav

Shri M. P. Abdussamad Samadani

. Dr. ९. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

* Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

. Shri Chinmayanand Swami __

. Dr. Sanjay Singh

. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
- Shri Shankar Pannu

. Shri Abdul Hamid _ ही]
[a Shri Samik Lahiri

+ Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja

. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

. Shri H.P. Singh हि

Shri Chandu [8] Ajmeera

. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

+ Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
- Shri S. Arumugham



16

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary

Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
2. * * .
Bec seg ogee eae te पी ome one Serhlningegumemee i ie .
4. The Chairman, then, informed about the schedule of the Meetings of the Committee
-in connection with the examination of the Demands for Grants 1998-99 of the Ministry of

* * * Health and Family Welfare and invited suggestions from the Members on the
general working of the Departments which are under the purview of the Committee.

5. The Members made some suggestions pertaining to most of the Departments under
the two Ministries. The Chairman, then informed that the issues may be discussed in detail
when the Secretaries of the concerned Departments appear before the Committee.

6, The Committee, then adjourned at 12.15 p.m. to meet again on 18th June, 1998.

***Relates to other matters.



I
SECOND MEETING |

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. off TRuRay, the 18th June, 1998 in Committee

Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New D :
. 4. खंड 12 का उपर ) और उपखंड (2) ox Te का गठन
PRESENT MEMBERS तधिक उत्तने

1. Shri SB Chara Chairman
RAJYA SABEEE 19 का उपसंड (7) सूचना आयुक्त और सूचना उपायुक्‍तां की सहायता
के लिए ऐसे अधिकारियों और कर्मचारियों की नियुक्ति के लिए उपबंध करता है, जो

* Shri Ose FEE ARES उनके कृत्यों के दक्षतापूर्ण अनुपालन के लिए आवश्यक हों |
है ee rae es as) ४ चना उपायुकतों और आयोग के अन्य अधिकारियों और
हु ५ १80) पर Rive करोड़ छियासी लाख रूपए का अनुमानित आवर्ती व्यय

. Shri ५ ।
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
. Chaudhary4 Hanan Bi ie all हिल स्थान, me cart ot
A aK संबंधित सारभूत संसाधनों पर उपगत वाले व्यय

i 10:

LOK SABHA aaa में कोई अन्य आवर्ती या अनावर्ती व्यय अंत्वर्लित नहीं है ।
_ 9. Shri Sartaj Singh

10. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

11. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

12. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

13. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

14. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil

15. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

16. Shri Abdul Hamid

17. Shri Samik Lahiri

18. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Lahiri

19. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

20. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

21. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES /
I. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health)

ई० 3 ० (० # ७ ७

. Shri K.K. Baksi, Secretary ©

. Smt. Shailja Chandra, Additional Secretary डा
Shri K.V.R. Prashada Rao, Additional Secretary

Dr. S.P. Aggarwal, Director General of Health Services
Prof. N.K. Ganguly, D.G., ICMR

Dr. S.K. Dava, Director, AIIMS

. Shri Alok Perti, Joint Secretary

. Smt. Sunita Basant, Joint Secretary

. Miss Sujata Rao, Joint Secretary

WCHONANDMNARWNHE

17
25


10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18

Shri. Vijay Singh, Joint Secretary

Dr.
Dr.
Dr.
Dr.
Dr.
Dr.
Dr.

I.

P. Das Gupta, Drug Controller General of India
Shiv Lal, Director (NMEP)

Ira Ray, Additional DG

Jose, DDG

Dharmshakti, DDG

Khatri, DDG

P.K. Bhattacharya, Director, CGHS

* के *

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

" Shrimati -Vandana Garg, ‘Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the
Department of Health *** in connection with the, examination of Demands for Grants for
the year 1998-99.

3: A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee than adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

***Relates to other matters.



:
i

unmittee Room
St

fad ज्ञापन
, __ SIXTH MERTING
_ 4 SS 12 का उपखंड (1) और seeds (2) केन्द्रीय
The Committee met Jamar Seen Ney hurgday he 20 ly, 199
No. 63, FirstyBloogaResiament Mouse, Ney अंश समले जाए ।
PRESENTE. NEMBERSc cis (7) सूचना आयुक्त और सूचना उपायुक्तों की सहायता
1, Shri 040 0३4८८ Sua ll की नियुक्ति के लिए उपबंध करता है, जो
अधिनियम के अधीन उनके कृत्यों के दक्षतापूर्ण अनुपालन के लिए आवश्यक
RAJYA SABHA कृ BATT . _लन के लिए आवश्यक हों i .
हु 3. anand il आयुक्त, सूचना उपायुकतों और आयोग के अन्य अधिकारियों और
2. Shri ; aGURS करोड़ छियासी लाख रूपए का अनुमानित आवर्ती व्यय
3. Shri QseamFermagdesy है |
» Shri 0. Rajago) >pal,
" Ralag Bi mn आयोग द्वारा अपेक्षित कार्यालय स्थान, वाहनों, टेलीफोनों और
LOKsi6A Bitar Reet से संबंधित सारभूत संसाधनों पर उपगत होने वाले व्यय के
5. Shri शी केश ता Seed |
6. Shrimati क पिभरेंक्त Mahajan आवर्ती या अनावर्ती व्यय अंतवर्लित नहीं है |
7. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
8. Shri Indrajeet Mishra,
9. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
10. Shri V.M. Sudheeran
11. Shri Abdul Hamid -
12. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
13. Prof. S,P. Singh Baghel
14. Shri H.P. Singh
15. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
16. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
17. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja _
18. Shri S. Arumugham
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on Demands for Grants for 1998-99
of the Department of Health (Demand No. 40)***. The Committee after some discussions,
adopted the Reports with some modifications. :

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and-in his absence Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati
Ray and Shri Oscar Fernandes to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Sumitra
Mahajan and Shri Ajit Jogi to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha of the Ministries of Human
Resource Development on 3rd July,and Health and Family Welfare on 6th July, 1998.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.30 a.m.

a  रर॒स्‍ञअघऑअक्‍ऑझआ+/#£#/#/#ऑऑ ऑफ फतसत््चच्ब्ल्‍स्‍क्‍ल्‍क्‍क्‍््ल्‍क्‍्फक्‍ल्‍क्‍्क्‍खक्‍खक्‍कफतफतखफक्‍फउस्‍उस्‍ऊस्‍ऊञऊञ1ख1ञ7ञ३़
*Minites of the ३९ to 5% meetings of the Committee relate to other matters.
***Relates to other matters. 25

योग का गठन log