PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SIXTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE CONSTITUTION (EIGHTY-THIRD
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1997

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24.11.1997)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24.11.97)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 1997/Kartik 1918 (Saka)

4541/RS/F—1-A


ae
PaaS



CONTENTS



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(1997-98)
1, Shri S.B. Chavan —— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Dr. B.B. Dutta

4, Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik
5. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh
7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
8. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
9. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

10. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

11. Shri R. Margabandu

12. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

13. Dr. Mohan Babu

14. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

15. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

16. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
17. Shri Sartaj Singh

18. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
19. Shri Jai Prakash (Hardoi)
20. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
21. Maharani Divya Singh
22. Shri Mahant Abedyanath
23. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
24. Chaudhary Paragi Lal
25. Dr.C. Silvera

26. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda

27. Shri Dutta Meghe

28. Shri I.G. Sanadi

29. Shrimati Krishna Bose

30. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

31. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy

32. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

33. Shri Pawan Diwan

34. Shri Krishna

35. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi

36. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

37. Shri Samik Lahiri

38. Shri S.K. Kaarvendhan

39. Shri Mukhtar Anis

40. Dr. M. Jagannath

41. Dr. BaliRam

42. Shri Ranen Barman

43. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

44. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

0)
4541/RS/F—2-A


*ै आंटी



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee, on its behalf, present this report of
the Committee on the Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Bill, 1997.

2. The Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Bill, 1997 which was introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on the 28th July, 1997 provides for compulsory education of children as a
Fundamental Right. A copy of the Bill as introduced in Rajya Sabha is enclosed
(Annexure-I).

3. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred the Bill to the Committee for examination
and report.

4. A press communique inviting suggestions/views from individuals, organisations
and institutions, interested in the subject matter of the Bill, was issued on the 18th August,
1997 (Annexure-II). Several memoranda containing views/opinions on the Bill were received
by the Committee. A list of persons who submitted memoranda is at (Annexure-III).

5. The Committee considered the Bill in its four sittings held on 4th August, 4th and
21st October and the 4th November, 1997 and heard the oral evidence of some of the eminent
educationists, the Secretary, Department of Education, Union Ministry of Human Resource
Development, Secretary, Union Ministry of Law, Justice-and-Company Affairs. A list of
witnesses, who appeared before the Committee, is at Annexure-IV.

6. The Committee, in its meeting held on 4th November, 1997 considered the Draft
Report on the Bill and adopted the same for presentation/laying in both the Houses of
Parliament.

New DELHI; S.B.CHAVAN,
November 4, 1997 Chairman,
Kartik 16, 1918 (Saka) Committee on Human Resource Development,

Gi)


REPORT

1. In India, Universalisation of Elementary Education (UEE) has been recognised as. a
crucial input for nation building since independence. The founding fathers of our Constitution
had given a prominent place to educational endeavours when they made a provision for free
and compulsory education for children upto 14 years of age within a period of 10 years in the
Directive Principles of State Policy. However, this goal has proved elusive so far. Our inability
to achieve this goal 36 years after the target date has been a cause for serious concern within
the country and in international fora. Our failure to achieve UEE has resulted in a number of
interconnected problems like the population explosion, prevalence of unacceptable levels of
poverty, unemployment and disease; one of the largest adult illiterate populations in the
world; and lack of adequate skilled manpower to achieve our economic goals.

2. According to the Department of Education, the proposal to amend the Constitution
to make the right to free education, a Fundamental Right and provision of opportunities for
education for children upto 14 years of age a fundamental duty of the citizens of India, is
expected to provide the desired momentum to the efforts being made in the country to
achieve UEE by 2000 A.D. It is expected to stimulate Central and State Governments to meet
the special needs of under-served and unserved populations and regions.

3. The Department of Education have stated that the thrust of the Central and State
Governments in Universalisation of Elementary Education (UEE) has been on universal
access, universal participation, universal retention and universal achievement. The Committee
is, however, constrained to note that notwithstanding these achievements, the task of UEE
is far from complete. There are several gender, regional, sectional and caste disparities in
provision of elementary education, Even after 50 years of Independence, a very large segment
of children of school-going age still remains out of school. It is a tragic state of affairs that
only two-third of those who join school complete primary schooling and only half complete
upper primary schooling. A significant proportion of children drop-out from school before
completing their studies due to socio-economic and cultural factors. Lack of basic amenities,
shortage and absenteeism of teachers, non-availability of teaching learning materials and a
curriculum which is not fully related to local needs are equally responsible for the ever
increasing drop-out problem. Not only this, studies have revealed low achievement levels in
primary school even in States which are considered educationally advanced.

4. The Department in the written note stated that the Supreme Court in its judgement
in Unni Krishnan J.P. Vs. Andhra Pradesh, 1993, has held that children of this country have
a Fundamental Right to free education until they complete the age of 14 years. According to
the Supreme Court, this right flows from Article 21 relating to protection of life and personal
liberty and its contents and parameters have to be determined in the light of Article 41 which
provides for right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases and
Article 45 which provides for free and compulsory education to children up to the age of 14
years. The apex court has observed that the obligation created by these Articles of the
Constitution can be discharged by the State either by establishing institutions of its own or
by aiding, recognising and granting affiliation to educational institutions. It was further
stated that the Saikia Committee recommended that the Constitution of India should be
amended to make the right to free elementary education upto 14 years of age a Fundamental
Right.

5. Many people and experts in education who have submitted written memoranda to
the Committee, have welcomed the proposal of the Government. They are, however, against
deletion of Article 45. They felt that there could be a simple fundamental right in the proposed
Article 21 (A) and Article 45 can be retained. On these doubts expressed by several
educational experis as to whether it is wise to delete Article 45, the Secretary, Education
stated that the Law Ministry advised that after it is converted into Fundamental Right,
Article 45 becomes redundant, and they went by the advice of the Law Ministry.

6. Article 45, lays down that every child up to the age of 14 years shall receive free and
compulsory education. The proposed Article 21(A) lays down that the State shall provide
free and compulsory education to all citizens of the age of 6-14 years. Many people in the

1
4541/RS/F—3-A.


2

written memoranda have opposed the proposal of restricting the age limit for providing free
compulsory education between 6 to 14 years of age. According to them Article 45 which is
sought to be deleted, was framed by the founding fathers to provide education to children
upto the age of 14 years without mention of a lower limit and deletion of Article 45 without
simultaneously making a provision for the education of children under 6 years will be
tantamount to taking away the rights sought to be given to this age group by the founding
fathers.

7. As regards limiting the age at 14 years also, many representationists expressed the
view that it should be increased from 14 to either 16 or 18. The general feeling was that at the
time of framing of Article 45, the formal certification of school education was at standard 7th
and the founding fathers had set the limits of free and compulsory education for the child
one year beyond the age at which standard 7th could be completed. However in the present
scenario, a child can finish education up to standard 8th within the age of 6-14 years and no
more. The current educational pattern have no formal certification of completion of school
studies until the successful completion of standard 10th. This means that the child who
cannot afford education except when it is free will have to discontinue her/his education
before formal certification. This closes further avenues of learning or employment. It was,
therefore, prayed that the age limit should be increased upto 16 years. On this the Secretary,
Education stated that the Department, after agonising over this issue for a very long time,
thought that though this issue could not be ignored, but while coming to a situation where
it becomes as justiciable fundamental right, what is possibly enforceable is the age-group
i.e., after 6 years when one enters into a formal system. Prior to that, it is very essential, very
necessary, but it is entirely a different evercise and a big problem as to how it can be
converted into a structure, pattern under which it can be enforced as a fundamental right.

8. It was informed by the Department of Education to the Committee that the
Constitutional amendments to make elementary education a Fundamental Right enforceable
against the State and a Fundamental Duty of parents would need to be backed by suitable
statutory measures for making elementary education compulsory. At present there is no
Central Legislation making elementary education compulsory. About having a Central
Legislation, the Secretary stated that the question was debated extensively by the Committee
of Ministers. The Committee of Ministers, after some discussions, came to the conclusion
that in this land of enormous diversity, it would be, perhaps, undesirable to go in for a Central
Legislation which may not be able to take care of the requirements and specific needs of the
States. The consensus was clearly in favour of State legislation, he added.

9. Most of the experts were of the view that the term ‘free’ needs to be clearly defined.
They felt that it should not mean a mere non-payment of fees but should also include one
meal, books notebooks/slates, medical assistance, transport where needed and above all
guaranteed presence of a teacher and a school. The Committee was given to understand that
free education, so far, has been equated with the exemption of tuition fees which is negligible
in the case of students in primary and upper primary schools run by Government and local
bodies, the consensus which emerged was that there should be, at least, free tuition up to the
primary stage, for both boys and girls. If certain States are in a position to provide additional
incentives, they can do it. But in so far as the common understanding is concerned, the
minimum is, up to the primary level, free tuition and free books, he added. As regards the
question of providing free stationery, he clarified that there was no clear consensus.

10. One of the main apprehensions voiced by the eminent educationists was that the
State cannot provide a fundamental right to compulsory education. Only a right to education
can be provided. The wording free and compulsory education is in consonance with the
spirit of directive principles but while shifting this article to the fundamental rights, this
compulsion does not go well with the concept of right. the Secretary Education clarified that
the compulsion more or less, is being looked at as compulsion of the State Government to
provide basic facilities which the Government must provide.

11. Clause (3) of the proposed Article 21 provides that the State shall not make any
law for free and compulsory education under Clause (2), in relation to the educational

4541/RS/F—3-B


institutions not maintained by the State or not receiving aid out of State funds. However,

" strong apprehensions were voiced about clause (3) of the proposed new Article 21A. Many
of the people in the written memoranda and also educational experts in the oral evidence
have expressed displeasure over keeping the private educational institutions outside the
purview of the fundamental right to be given to the children. The Secretary, stated that the
Supreme Court in the Unnikrishnan judgement said that wherever the State is not providing
any aid to any institution, such an institution need not provide free education. The Department
took into account the Supreme Court judgement in the Unnikrishnan case which laid down
that no private institution, can be compelled to provide free services. Therefore, they provided
in the Constitutional amendment that this concept of free education need not be extended to
schools or institutions-which are not aided by the Government, the Secretary added. He,
however, stated that there was no intention, to exclude them from the overall responsibility
to provide education.

12. The total additional financial requirement estimated to be incurred is Rs. 7,200.00
crore per annum in case the fundamental right to elementary education is operationalised.
Some educationists felt that the amount may increase. But they suggested that if all irrelevant
and non-priority wasteful expenditure on elementary education can be done away with, it will
be possible to fulfil the commitment.

13. The eminent Educationists felt that the Bill is silent on the Quality of Education.
They suggested that there should be a reference to quality of education in the Bill. The
Secretary, Education agreed that the quality aspect also has to be seen. Education definitely
must mean quality education and anything less than that should not be called edutation.
Therefore, the emphasis would be through strengthening the teacher education content, the
Secretary stated.

14. The proposed insertion of Article 51A, provides for a fundamental duty of every
citizen who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to all children upto
14 years of age. Apprehensions have been expressed by the educationists that compulsion
on parents as a result of this Article. would pose major problem, particularly for those
parents who ostensibly cannot afford to send their children to school. Defaulting parents
would be subject to considerable harassment resulting in widespread resentment among the
general population. The Secretary, Education, on being asked to cotnment on this, informed
the Committee that the Constitutional amendment as such is not talking about penalising the
parents. But there are already certain existing State legislations in different States which do
have penal provision. When this issue came up before the Saikia Committee, they took the
view that the emphasis should be on the motivation of parents. But, in an extreme case,
where there are aberrations, a penalty should be resorted to as a last resort. But, there again,
the Saikia Committee felt that instead of bringing it under the provisions of the Indian Penal
Code, it should be taken to the court of society, the Secretary added.

15. OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

15.1. The Committee welcomes the initiative of the Government to make the right to
free elementary education a Fundamental Right. It is indeed a welcome step. Inspite of a large
number of schemes taken up for universalisation of elementary education since independence,
it is unfortunate that the country is still languishing with a sizeable number of illiterates. The
high drop-out rate has resulted in total disarray in the implementation of the education
programmes. Reasons for high drop-out rates are varied-social, economic, quality, lack of
interest and jack of attraction can be cited as a few examples. It is unfortunate that the drop-
out rate in 1996-97 in class I to V was as high as 39.37%. This explains the state of affairs
obtaining in the country. The Committee hopes that the amendment of the Constitution to
provide free education to children as a fundamental right would motivate both Governmental
as well as non-Governmental sectors to take necessary measures so as to achieve
universalisation of elementary education, the ultimate goal of the country. The Committee
welcomes the spirit behind the amendment and welcomes it in principle.


15.2. However, the Committee feels that in the enthusiasm to provide this fundamental
right, the quality of education should not be ignored. The education that is provided should
be able to create attraction and interest among the children. The Committee understands that
the National Policy on Education makes a reference to ‘education of satisfactory quality’.
Quality is the most important aspect of education which should not be ignored. The Committee
strongly feels that quality aspect has been totally forgotten and children who can afford are
compelled to go to private institutions for better and quality education. There is, therefore, a
necessity of improving the quality. For this, there is an urgent necessity to improve teacher
training. In regard to the point as to whether there should be a reference to ‘Quality’ in the
proposed amendment, the Committee feels it appropriate to leave it to the Government to
either make a reference to quality aspect in the proposed amendment or not. The Committee,
however, strongly recommends that all efforts should be directed towards providing quality
education. Teacher training programmes are not very much oriented for effective utilisation
of human resources. They do not give stress on techniques and activities that make learning
joyful for students. Lack of follow up measures make them forget and not utilise whatever
they had learnt during their pre-service training programmes. Without primary level teaching
or research experience, particularly on rural school, teacher educators are poorly prepared to
educate. Most of the teacher educators imparting training in elementary teacher training
institutions do not have primary level teaching/research experience. This affects the quality
of training imparted by them. The methods of transaction of theory classes of these teacher
educators are generally devoid of active teaching learning approaches. There is no specific
teacher educator preparation programmes. Teacher educators also need continued assistance
for their professional development. The UGC provides assistance for professional
development of teacher educators in teacher training colleges and departments of education
of universities. But such facilities are at present not available for elementary level teacher
educators. The Committee accordingly recommends that teacher training should be given
sufficient importance and emphasis should be laid on improving the training component.

15.3. The Committee takes note of the fact that the words compulsion and enforcement
as proposed in Article 21A do not go with the theme and spirit of the Fundamental Right. A
right is not given in a spirit of enforcement. The Secretary's clarification that the compulsion
is being looked at as compulsion on the part of the State Government, is an acceptable
proposition. But it should be made amply clear in the proposed amendment to clear all
doubts.

15.4. The Committee understands it well that with elementary education becoming a
justiciable Fundamental Right, the possibility of increased litigation cannot be denied. The
citizens wor! # have every right to go the courts of law if their fundamental right is violated.
The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government to find out ways and means to face
this challenge.

15.5. The current education pattern has formal certification after the successful
completion of standard 10th only. This, therefore, means that the children who cannot get
education except when it is free, will have to discontinue their studies before formal
certification, thus closing their further avenues of earning and employment. Thus suggestions
received by Committee were either to extend the age-limit upto 16 years or certification may
be issued at the end of Eighth standard. The Committee, however, feels that increasing the
age limit may not be a viable proposition because of enormous resources that are required
and due to other compulsions of the Government. The Members discussed this at length.
Many Members were of the opinion that it would not be appropriate to put such a heavy
burden on the Government. However, a child should be able to receive some sort of certificate
soas to easily get a gainful employment. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Government
may introduce formal certification at the end of standard 8th to enable the children who come
out of the school after 8th to join some gainful employment or pursue some technical vocational
courses with the help of the certificate. Several Members, however, felt that it may not be
advisable to introduce another Public examination.


5

15.6. As regards follow-up legislation, there are divergent views. Some Members of the
Committee felt that there should be a separate central legislation providing for the basic
structure and the details could be made out by the respective States. Whereas the others did
not feel the necessity of a central legislation. The Secretary, stated that the central legislation
may not be able to take care of the requirements and specific needs of the States. After a
thorough discussion in the matter, the Committee feels that the Centre should not leave
everything to the States. The Centre could make one simple legislation with some skeletal
framework which may also indicate the Central share in the financial burden. The details can
be formulated by the respective States according to their requirements. The Central
Government may, therefore, consider working out the necessary legislation.

15.7. Imposition of penalties on parents is one aspect which has agitated the minds of
the Members. The Committee agrees that the penal provision would lead to harassment of
the parents. It is true that the proposed amendment does not talk of any penalty, but many
States in their existing legislations have made penal provisions. Accordingly, the new follow
up legislations may also have similar provisions. After considering the pros and cons of this,
the Committee strongly desires that such penal provisions on the parents should be avoided
in the follow up legislation to be made. The Centre may make necessary provision to this
effect either in the follow up legislation or in the guidelines that may be issued to the States.
The Committee feels that compulsion should be on State Governments to provide for essential
facilities for UEE rather than on the parents, majority of whom are struggling for their survival.

15.8. Providing free education is another important aspect in the proposed Article 21
A(1). On this, the Committee takes note of the fact that the bill does not define free education.
The Committee understands that there is confusion over the provision of free education.
Many States are already providing free education, but the components vary from State to
State. The Committee has noted that there is a general feeling that free education means
exemption from payment of fees. The Members were, however, unanimous that free education
should not confine just to exemption from payment of fees. The Committee desires that free
education should also include various other components such as text-books, stationery,
uniform, one meal and transportation wherever necessary etc. The Government may consider
including all these components in the free education.

15.9. Financial implications is another important aspect of the Bill. In the Financial
memorandum, the Committee has noted that the estimated financial expenditure to implement
the obligation is forty thousand crores rupees every year. The Committee is constrained to
note that the allocations, made to education every year have so far been very insufficient.
From such a situation to go upto Rs. 40,000 crores, in the Ninth Plan is a gigantic task. The
Committee strongly recommends that the required amount should be allocated to achieve
the goal. Unless this is done, a mere constitutional amendment and providing a fundamental
right is not going to serve the purpose. Besides increasing the allocation, Government may
also take steps to reduce unnecessary expenditure to reduce unnecessary burden on the
State's exchequer.

15.10. The Committee feels that financial burden may be shared by both the Centre
and the States. Administrative responsibility should be left to states for implementation
according to their convenience.

15.11. The proposed Article 21A (1) provides that the State shall provide free and
compulsory education to all citizens of the age of six to fourteen years. The Committee
understands that there is a lot of controversy over the restriction of age limit of the children
between 6-14 years of age. It is true that this provision seeks to take away the rights of the
children in the age group 0-6 years. The Committee is, however, aware that an infant's
education in the age group 0-6 is an enormously complicated one. Much of the education
imparted in this age group is non-formal through the mother and it is difficult to standardise
it. It is all the more difficult to make it a justiciable Fundamental Right. The Committee is also
aware that the Departments of Women & Child Development and Family Welfare are already
working to take care of the requirements of the children in this age group. The controversy
in this regard has arisen because Article 45 does not make any mention of age restriction

प,्5॥॥७६॥-+#


whereas Article 21A (1) seeks to restrict the age to 6-14 years. The proposal also includes
deletion of Article 45, As regards deletion of Article 45, the Committee deals with it in the
succeeding paragraph. Coming to Article 21 A(1), the Committee takes note of the fact that
it is propoged to be included in the chapter III, which provides fundamental right. Due to
various practical difficylties, the provision in the present Article may be allowed, providing
for free education to children of 6 to 14 years in the fundamental right. But Directive Principles
should be followed wherever possible.

15,12, Now, the Committee will deal with the proposal to delete Article 45, The
Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Secretary, Education, that this has been done
on the advice of the Law Ministry that after it is made a fundamental right, Article 45 becomes
redundant, The Directive Principles, of which Article 45 is a part, were incorporated in the
Constitution with an objective of seeking to achieve the ideal of a democratic welfare state
set out in the preamble. This also embodies the object of the state. They are directed towards
the ideals of building a true welfare State,

15,13, Therefore the Committee feels that by providing a fundamental right, the very
philosophy of the Constitution which is embodied in the Directive Principle (Article 45)
should not be removed. The purpose of a fundamental right is different from that of the
Directive Principle. The Directive Principle is not merely a moral precept but is a positive
mandate to the State, Article 45 provides a directive on the State to endeavour to provide free
and compulsory education, No conflict should be seen between the Fundamental Right and
Directive Principle, Both are complementary to each other, Similarly, proposed Article 21A
seeks to provide Fundamental right to free and compulsory education to the citizens in the
age group 6-14 at present, However, Article 45 seeks to provide free education to all upto the
age of 14 years without any age restriction, Therefore, Article 45, besides, giving a directive
on the state to provide free education and explain the object and philosophy of the
Constitution, also takes care of the children in the age group 0-6 as well, In view of the
forgoing conclusions, the Committee feels that Article 45 is required to be retained in the
Constitution. The Government may, therefore, reconsider its proposal to delete Article 45,

15.14. Clause (3) of the proposed Article 21(A) prohibits the State from making any
law for free and compulsory education in relation to educational institutions not maintained
by the State or not receiving aid out of state funds. This issue was discussed by the Members
of the Committee at length. The Members were in agreement that even though the so called
private institutions do not receive any financial aid, the children studying in those institutions
should not be deprived of their fundamental right. As regards the interpretation as to whether
the private institutions should provide free education or not, the Committee is aware of the
Supreme Court Judgement given in the Unni Krishnan case. This judgement provides the
rule for application and interpretation. In view of the judgement, it is not necessary to make
aclause in the Constitution. It would be appropriate to leave the interpretation to the courts
instead of making a specific provision in black and white. Some Members, however, felt that
the private institutions which do not get any financial aid, provide quality education. Therefore,
it would be inappropriate to bring such institutions under the purview of free education. Those
members, accordingly, felt that Clause (3) should not be deleted.

15.15. The Committee, however, after a thorough discussion feels that this provision
need not be there. The Committee recommends that clause (3) of the proposed Article 21 (A)
may be deleted. Smt. Hedwig Michael Rego, M.P., a Member of the Committee gave a Minute
of Dissent. It is appended to the report.

15.16. The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed subject to the
recommendations made in the preceding paragraphs.

USHIRIPH-B


MINUTE OF DISSENT

I vehemently oppose the State wanting to introduce free and compulsory education
in private, unaided schools.

Clause 21 A (3) must be inserted as I do not wish the State to make laws regarding free
and compulsory education in relation to educational institutions not maintained by the State
or not receiving aid out of State funds.

A-Committee of State Education Ministers have already considered the issue in view
of the Unni Krishnan case, and found it not feasible to bring unaided private educational
institutions within the purview of the Bill.

Hence, I state once again that the proposed Clause "21A (3)" must be inserted in the
Bill.

Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(SMT. HEDWIG MICHAEL REGO)


=)
व
i}
4
z
<



As INTRODUCED IN THE RasyA SABHA
On THE 28TH JuLy, 1997

Bill No. XXXIX of 1997

THE CONSTITUTION (EIGHTY-THIRD AMENDMENT) BILL, 1997
A

Bil
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Bgitenacted by Parliament in the Forty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Act,
1997.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
5. inthe Official Gazette, appoint.

2. After article 21 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

“214A. (1) The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all citizens
of the age of six to fourteen years.

10 (2) The right to free and compulsory education referred to in clause (1)shall be
enforced in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.

11

Short title and
commence-
ment.

Insertion of
new article
21A.

Right to

education.


12

(3) The State shall not make any law, for free and compulsory education under
clause (2), in relation to the educational institutions not maintained by the State or

not receiving aid out of State funds.”.
Amendment 3. Article 35 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (1) of that article and
of article 35... after clause (1) as so renumbered and before the Explanation, the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—

“(2) The competent legislature shall make the law for the enforcement of right to
free and compulsory education referred to in clause (1) of article 21A within one year
from the commencement of the Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Act, 1997:

Provided that a provision of any law relating to free and compulsory education
in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Eighty-
third Amendment) Act, 1997 which is inconsistent with the provisions of article 21A,
shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent legislature or
other competent authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement,

whichever is earlier.
Omission of 4. Article 45 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
article 45.
Amendment 5. In article 51A of the Constitution, after clause (j), the following clause shall be

of article SIA. added, namely:—

“(k) to provide opportunities for education to a child between the age of six and
fourteen years of whom such citizen is a parent or guardian.”

10

1S


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The founding fathers of our Constitution made a provision imposing an obligation,
under article 45 in Part IV relating to the Directive Principles of State Policy, upon the State to
endeavour to provide within a period of ten years from the commencement of the Constitution,
for free and compulsory education for children up to fourteen years of age. However, this
goal has proved elusive so far. Our inability to achieve this goal 37 years after the target
period has been a cause for serious concern. Reiterating the constitutional directive, the
National Policy on Education (NPE), 1986, as modified in 1992, states that free and compulsory
elementary education of satisfactory quality shall be provided to all children up to the age of
fourteen years before we enter the 21st century. The Supreme Court in its judgment in Unni
Krishnan J.P. vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. 1993 S.C. 2178, has held that children of
this country have a fundamental right to free education until they complete the age of
fourteen years. The Common Minimum Programme of the United Front Government, resolves
to make right to free and compulsory elementary education a fundamental right and to
enforce it through suitable statutory measures.

2. The Committee of Education Ministers which was set up to examine the implications
of the aforesaid resolution have recommended that the Constitution be amended to make the
Right to Free and Compulsory Education from six to fourteen years of age as a fundamental
right and to make a fundamental duty of parents to provide opportunities for education to
their children of this age group. Consequent thereupon, provision in the nature of compulsory
and free education as a Directive Principles of State Policy under article 45 is no more
required. States and Union territories would be required to enact laws for the enforcement of
free and compulsory education within one year from the commencement of the Constitution
(Eighty-third Amendment) Act, 1997.

3. The amendment of the Constitution to provide for compulsory education of children
as a fundamental right would demonstrate the necessary political will and administrative
resolve of the country to achieve Universalisation of elementary education and to eradicate
illiteracy. This historical amendment of the Constitution in the 50th year of our independence
should inspire the Nation to meet the daunting challenge of achieving the goal of education
for all by 2000 AD.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deu; : S.R. BOMMAL
The 9th July, 1997.

13


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new article 21A in the Constitution of India to
provide that the State shall provide free and compuslory education to all citizens of the age
of six to fourteen years.

2. The estimated financial expenditure to implement the aforesaid obligation is forty
thousand crore rupees during the next five years. The estimated annual expenditure will be
eight thousand crore rupees. The said expenditure shall be shared by the Union and the
States on the basis of sharing arrangements to be determined by a group of experts constituted
for the purpose by the Ministry of Human Resource Development.

3. No other recurring or non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

14


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *

45. The State shall endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years from the Feeriobe for
commencement of this Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all children compulsory
until they complete the age of fourteen years. education for

children,

* * . . .

PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A. It shall be the duty to every citizen of India— Area

* * * . .


ANNEXURE-II
PRESS RELEASE

Committee on Human Resource Development Invites Suggestions on
the Constitution (Eighty-Third Amendment) Bill, 1997

The Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Bill, 1997, as introduced in the Rajya
Sabha on the 28th July, 1997, has been referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, headed by Shri S.B. Chavan, M.P., for examination and
report. The proposed Bill seeks to provide free and compulsory education to all citizens of
the age of six to fourteen years.

2. Article 45 in Part IV of the Constitution imposes an obligation, upon the State to
endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years, from the commencement of the Constitution,
free and compulsory education for children up to the age of fourteen years. The National
Policy on Education (NPE), 1986, as modified in 1992 also states that free and compulsory
elementary education of satisfactory quality shall be provided to all children up to the age of
fourteen years before the 21st century. The Supreme Court in its judgement in Unni Krishnan
IP. vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, A.LR. 1993 S.C. 2178, has held that children of this country
have a fundamental right to free education until they complete the age of fourteen years.

3. Hence, the Bill seeks to achieve Universalisation of elementary education and
eradication of illiteracy by making the right to education a Fundamental Right through
inserting an Article in the List of Fundamental Rights and deleting Article 45 from the List of
Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution of India.

4. In this connection, it has been decided to invite memoranda, containing the views
of individuals, organisations, institutions, etc. interested in the subject matter of the Bill. All
the interested persons, organisations, institutions, etc., can obtain, on requisition, the copies
of the Bill from and send their views to Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary (HRD)
Rajya Sabha Seerertariat, Parliament House Annexe, (Room No. 128), New Delhi-110001
(Telephone: 3034158) by 15th September, 1997.

16


ANNEXURE-II
List of Persons/Institutions who submitted Memoranda on the Bill

1. Pratham Mumbai Education Initiative
2. Yashwant Rao Chavan Pratishthan, Mumbai
3. National Institute for the Mentally Handicapped
4, Dr. 5. 5. Rajagopalan
5. Dr. Rabinarayan Moharana
6. Rajasthan Elementary Eduction Service Association, Jaipur
7. Dr. Janaki Rajan
8. National Council of Educational Research and Training
9, (Dr. Ajaya Kumar Mishra) Sankalp
10. Choudhury Mojibul Haque
11. Manisha M. Yeolekar
12. All India Qaumi Ekta Committee
13. Shri VL. Desai
14. People's Welfare Council
15. Shri R.K. Sachdeva
16. Janakalyan Kshudra Prakalpa
17. Sudhakar V. Lele
18. Justice G.N. Vaidya Memorial Committee
19. Shri Avinash Bhakhri
20. Grow Handwriting Consultants
21. Shri Yogendra Upadhyay
22. Padmanabh R. Merchant
23. Anonymous
24. Prof. S. Mahadevan
25. Shri S.K. Banerji
26. Shri Ramesh Chandra Vithaldas Sheth
27. Shri A. 8. Vajpayee
28. Dr. B.S. Chauhan
29. Late Rajiv Gandhi Shikshan Sanstha, Amaravati
30. Shri Mahesh Kumar
31. Shri TF. D'SA
32. Shri Som Raj Mazari
33. Shri Raj Dev
34. Shri Vijay Kumar Dwivedi
35. Shri Rajesh Kumar
36. Bihar State SC/ST Youth Organisation
37. Shri Ramesh Chandra Mishra
38. Shri Ramesh Chandra Sharma
39. All India Association for Christian Higher Education
40. Shri Vineet Garg
41. Shri B. Shreenivasa Murthy
42. Shri Devesh Bhatt
43. Shri A.K. Ghosh
44. Shri B.R. Sood
45. Anonymous
46. Shri 0.8. Changalrao
47. Shri B.H. Varada Raju
48. Shri Naveen Dimri
49. Shri S.P. Paramashivaiya
50. Shri Saroj Kumar Sahoo
51. ShriOm Parkash
52. Shri Anant Kumar Barman

17


71. Shri Manik Chandra Ray

72. Shri Sudhir Kumar Acharya

73. Chapra Sankhyalaghu Kalyan Samity
74, Shri Omkar Nath Das

7S. Shri S. Ranganna

76. Sou Sharada B. Kalerkar

वा. Shri C.G. Reddy

1 78. Anonymous


ANNEXURE-IV

LIST OF WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education)
1. Shri PR. Dasgupta, Secretary
2. Shri M.S. Satyawadi, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Abhimanyu Singh, Joint Secretary
4. Shri R.S. Pandey, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Anil Gulati, Deputy Secretary
IL Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Department of Legal Affairs)
1. Shri V.K. Agarwal, Secretary (Legal Affairs)
2. Shri N.K. Karhail, Additional (Legal Advisor)

WITNESSES
I. Eminent Educationists
1, Prof. Yashpal, Former Chairman, U.G.C.
2 Prof. N.K. Ambasht, NCERT.
3. Shri Anil Bordia, Chairman, Lok Jumbish Project, Jaipur.
4, Prof. Anil Sadgopal, Co-ordinator, Maulana Azad Centre for Elementary and Social
Education (MACESE), University of Delhi.
5. Prof. Najma Sidiqqui, Co-ordinator of IASE, University of Delhi.
6. Prof. Krishna Kumar, C.LE., University of Delhi.
7. Dr. Jayshree Mathur, C.LE., University of Delhi.
8. Mrs. Farida Lambay, Pratham Mumbai Education Initiative.
9. Shri SagharajD.Rupvate -do-
10. ShriC.V.Madhukar, -do-
11. Shri Ajaya Kumar Mishra, Chairman, Sankalp.
12. Shri Anil Kumar, Programme Co-ordinator, -do-
13. Shri Lalita Ramdas, President, Yakshi Trustee.


eli)



MINUTES


$ 154 ee

4०0८ 26 anew



I
FIRSTMEETING

The Committee met at 3.30P.M. on Monday, the 4th August 1997 in Committee Room
‘C’ First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. B.B. Dutta
3. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
4. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
5. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
6. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
8. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
9. Shri Sartaj Singh
10. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
11. Shrimati Krishna Bose
12. Shri Krishna
13. Dr. BaliRam
14, Shri Ranen Barman
15. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
2. * * *

3: * * *

4. The Chairman then informed the Committee, that the Constitution (Eighty-third
Amendment) Bill, 1997 as introduced and pending in Rajya Sabha has been referred to the
Committee for examination and report. The Committee then decided to issue a press release
inviting suggestions from individuals, organisations, institutions, etc. interested in the subject
matter of the Bill for the consideration of the Committee. The Committee also decided to
obtain a detailed Background Note on the proposed Bill from the Department of Education.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

***Relates to other matters.


भा
Third Meeting
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Monday, the 4th October, 1997 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr.B.B. Dutta
3. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik
4, Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
5. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
6. Shri R. Margabandu
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
8. Shri Sartaj Singh
9. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
10. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
11. Chaudhary Paragi Lal
12. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
13. Shri LG. Sanadi
4. Shrimati Krishna Bose
15. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi
16. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
17. Shri Samik Lahiri
18. Dr. BaliRam
19. Shri Ranen Barman
20. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego
WITNESSES
1, Eminent Educationists
1. Prof. Yashpal, Former Chairman, U.G.C.
2. Prof. N.K. Ambasht, NCERT
3. Shri Anil Bordia, Chairman, Lok Jumbish Project, Jaipur.

4, Prof. Anil Sadgopal, Co-ordinator, Maulana Azad Centre for Elementary and Social
Education (MACESE), University of Delhi.

5. Prof. Najma Sidiqqui, Co-ordinator of IASE, University of Delhi.
6. Prof. Krishna Kumar, C.LE., University of Delhi.
7. Dr. Jayshree Mathur, C.LE., University of Delhi.
8. Mrs. Farida Lambay, Pratham Mumbai Education Initiative.
9. Shri Sagharaj D. Rupavate -do-
10. ShriC.V.Madhukar, -do-
11. Shri Ajaya Kumar Mishra, Chairman, Sankalp.

*Minutes of second meeting relate to matters not included in the report.

24


25
12. Shri Anil Kumar, Programme Co-ordinator, -do-
13. Shri Lalita Ramdas, President, Yakshi Trustee.
वा. Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education)
1. Shri PR. Dasgupta, Secretary
2. Shri M.S. Satyawadi, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Abhimanyu Singh, Joint Secretary
4, Shri R.S. Pandey, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Anil Gulati, Deputy Secretary
IIL Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri N.K. Karhail, Additional Legal Advisor
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses on the
Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Bill. 1997.
2.1. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.05 p.m.


IV
Fourth Meeting
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 21st October, 1997 in Committee
Room 'B' Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.8. Chavan——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2 Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
4. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
5. Prof. Ram Baksh Singh Varma
6. Shri R. Margabandu
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
8. Shri Sartaj Singh
9. Shri Jai Prakash (Hardoi)
10. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
11. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
12, Chaudhary Paragi Lal
13. Dr.C. Silvera
14, Shri LG. Sanadi
15. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
16. Shri Krishna
17. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
18. Shri Samik Lahiri
19. Shri Ranen Barman
20. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego
‘WITNESSES
I Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education)
1. Shri PR. Dasgupta, Secretary
2. Shri M.S. Satyawadi, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Abhimanyu Singh, Joint Secretary
4, Shri R.S. Pandey, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Anil Gulati, Deputy Secretary
IL Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Department of Legal Affairs)
1. Shri V.K. Agarwal, Secretary (Legal Affairs)
2. Shri N.K. Karhail, Additional (Legal Advisor)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri PPK. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

26


27
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses on the
Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Bill, 1997.
2.1. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

3. The Chairman, thereafter, discussed about the Bill mentioned above and gave
guidelines to the Secretariat to prepare Draft Report on the Bill.
4. * * *

5 * * *

6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 p.m.

***Relate to other matters.


v
Fifth Meeting

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 4th November 1997 in Committee
Room 'A' Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
4. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
6. Shri Sartaj Singh
7. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
8. Chaudhary Paragi Lal
9. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
10. Shri I.G. Sanadi
11. Shrimati Krishna Bose
12. Shri Krishna
13. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
14, Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
15. Shri Samik Lahiri
16. Shri Ranen Barman
17. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the draft Sixty-Third and ***Reports on the Constitution
(Eighty-Third Amendment) Bill, 1997 and ***and adopted the same with certain modifications.
Smt. Hedwig Michael Rego gave a note of dissent on the 67th report of the Committee on the
Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Bill, 1997, in respect of the proposal of the Committee
to delete the proposed clause (3) of Article 21A. The Committee decided that the note of
Dissent may be appended to the Report of the Committee.

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman to finalise the date of presentation of the
reports as and when the Hindi version reports would be made available and the names of
Members of present the reports.

vs * * *

5. The Committee then, adjourned at 12.30 p.m.

***Relates to some other matter.