ह PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
‘ RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT
. ON
» DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1998-99 (DEMAND NO. 54)
THE DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

a

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3RD JULY, 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH JULY, 1998)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT .
NEW DELHI

JULY, 1998/ASADHA, 1920 (SAKA)



CONTENTS

ComposiTION OF THE COMMITTEE

erp Pr

PAGEs
(i)-Gi)
(iii)
1-9
11—18


Aven

BRE Soe

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (1998-99)

Shri S.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri, Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Oscar Fernandes

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Shri O. Rajagopal

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam -
Shri Sartaj Singh

Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

Shri Chinmayanand Swami

Dr. Sanjay Singh

Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

Shri Indrajeet Mishra

Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

Shri Ashok Singh :

Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
Shri Ashok Gehlot

Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
Shri Ajit Jogi

Shri V.M. Sudheeran

Shri Laxman Singh

" Shri Shankar Pannu

Shri Abdul Hamid

Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Samik Lahiri

Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja
Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

Shri H.P. Singh

6)



39.

41.
42.
43.

(ii)

Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera

Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy

Shrimati Krishna Bose

Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer



PREFACE

: I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
fF: Human Resource Development, having been ‘authorised by the Committee to present the
; Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixty-sixth Report of the Committee on the
f Demands for Grants (Demand No. 51) of the Department of Women. and Child
Development, Ministry of Human Resource Development for the year 1998-99.

- 2, The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the
Department of Women and Child Development, Ministry of Human Resource Development
and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Department on ‘the said Demands
for Grants in its meeting held on 19th June, 1998. ¥

: 2 The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the
Ast July, 1998. है

है S.B. CHAVAN
i ह New [8 था; Chairman,
4 July 1, 1998 _ _ Department-Related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on
“Asadha 10, 1920 (Saka) Human Resource Development.


REPORT

1. INTRODUCTION

1.1 The Department of Women and Child Development is engaged in the Welfare and
Development of Women and Child Development. The Department is responsible for
safeguarding certain provisions of Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State
Policy with reference to Women and Children.

1.2 The Department, in its nodal capacity, formulates plans, policies and programmes;
enacts/amends legislations; guides and coordinates the efforts of both Governmental and
non-Governmental organisations, working in the field of Women and Child Development.
For a holistic child development, the Department implements the Integrated Child
Development Services (ICDS). The ICDS provides an integrated package of services
F comprising supplementary nutrition, immunisation, health check-up and pre-school and non-

“ formal education and health and nutrition education for women.

1.3 The other major schemes implemented by the Department include funding of
Hostels for working women, Support, Training and Employment Programme, scheme of
: Training-cum-Employment-cum Production Centres (NORAD), Socio-Economic Prog-
tamme, the Programme of Condensed Courses of Education and Vocational Training etc.
. Most of the programmes of the Department are run through non-Governmental
f. organisations. ,

, Il. EIGHTH FIVE YEAR PLAN

2.1 The total approved outlay of the Department for 8th Plan is Rs. 2010.00 crores. As
. against this, the Plan allocations made during all the annual platis in BE from 1992-93 to
|. 1996-97 was Rs. 3260.16 crores. The actual expenditure made, however, was far ahead of
this ie. Rs. 3377.91 crores, showing a quantum jump from original plan outlay and
* allocations made in BEs. Similarly on Non-Plan side also the actual expenditure has
exceeded the Budget Estimates in all the annual plans during the 8th Plan period excepting
the year 1995-96 during which there was a slight shortfall of Rs. 69 crores.

2.2 The Committee has noted that there was a shortfall in the achievement of physical
targets in some of the schemes. In the schemesof (i) Training of Anganwadi Workers,
(ii) Rashtriya MahiJa Kosh, (iii) Mahila Samriddhi Yojana, (iv) Socio-economic
Programmes, the achievement of physical targets set for 8th Plan was far below. In fact in
Mahila Samriddhi Yojana, the number of accounts opened were only 36.7 per cent of the
targets fixed. Reviewing the performance of the Department and various schemes under thé

significant shift in the approach towards the well-being of women and children from ‘Welfare

of the view that all those objectives are inter-related and Government should not give wrong
signals either by curtailing or discontinuing some of those schemes. It was also felt that
human resource development, being one of the major thrust areas in the 8th Plan, all the
developmental efforts were directed to empower both women and children besides
4 mainstreaming them into the national development on equal footing alongwith their

Department, the Approach Paper to the 9th Five Year Plan observed that there has been a ‘

during 50s’ to ‘Development during 70s’ and ‘Empowerment during 90s’. The Committee is:



2

counterparts. The approach paper also observed that while the main thrust in respect of
children was to ensure their survival, protection and development, with a special focus on ‘
the girl child and adolescent girl, the emphasis in respect of women was to make them q
economically independent and self-reliant. The Committee, however, feels that there is a 1
long way to go to feel that the goals ‘of welfare, development and empowerment of women 3
are fully achieved. The Government should not be complacent with whatever that has been 3
done/is being done.

II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION .

3. The Department’s annual plan outlay for 1997-98 was Rs. 900.00 crores*which was 7 2
enhanced to Rs. 1025.95 crores at the RE stage. The Committee was informed that the |
minimum requirement of the Department just to continue the programmes worked out to be .; 0!
Rs. 1820.52 crores for 1997-98. This drastic reduction was apprehended to adversely affect 7 b
almost all the schemes and programmes of the Department. The Committee, however, finds § .
that the Department could not utilise the funds under Plan in 1997-98, as its expenditure was - i
Rs 897.05 crores during that year. For 1998-99, the Department has been allocated Rs. <1 t!
1225.95 crores on plan side and on non-plan side Rs. 48.24 crores. It would thus be seen °
that as compared to BE of 1997-98 which was Rs. 948.10 crores, there is a jump of Rs. §

326.13 crores. However, as compared to RE 1997-98 which was Rs. 1074.07 crores, there is s
an increase of only Rs. 200.16 crores. Keeping in view the non-utilisation of funds allocated ... 4
in BE. 1997-98, even though it was much below the minimum requirement, the Committee fr
recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts to स्का fully utilise the sc
allocation of Rs. 1225.95 crores under plan side during 1998-99. Here the Committee would «
also like to impress upon that once the allocations have been approved by the Parliament, bv
the reduction in allocation by the Ministry of Finance at a later stage should be brought to th
the notice of Parliament. R
IV. OBJECTIVES AND APPROACH OF THE NINTH PLAN th

4. The Approach Paper to 9th Five Year Plan while laying emphasis on empowering 1
women, under scored harmonization of various efforts on different fronts, i.e., social §
economic, legal and political. The Approach Paper also emphasises the need to make 32
reservation of seats for women in the Parliament and State Legislatures, to fulfil the goal of R:
education for women equality, to adopt a life cycle approach to women’s health. As regards pr
child development, the Approach paper proposes to take the convention of child’s rights | St
ratified in 1992 as the guiding principle and would like to review the national policy for © ne
children. In order to promote a community based approach action will be initiated to : B:
decentralise women and child programme involving Panchayati Raj Institutions and local - EK
women’s self-help groups. The Committee feels that the objectives are laudable. However, , EI
unless dedicated efforts are made to achieve these objectives, they will remain mere - pr
objectives only. The Committee hopes that efforts would be made in the right perspective the
for better delivery of services to the target groups. is
V. INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES tm

5.1 The allocation made for I§DS during 1997-98 was Rs. 600.00 crores at the RE stage पे
and in 1998-99 it is Rs. 603.14 crores. The Department was asked whether the amount Ba
allocated for 1998-99 would be adequate and how many ICDS projects are likely to be made Ex
operational during 1998-99. To this, the Department has submitted that it had proposed an Pr
amount of Rs. 875.44 crores for the year 1998-99. However, a sum of Rs. 603.14 crores was the
agreed to by the Planning Commission, out of which grants-in-aid to State Governments is fin:
to the tune of Rs. 591.64 crores. The Department also informed that while agreeing to cot

enhancement of honoraria for Anganwadi workers and helpers, the Ministry of Finance put


oa coe INS

ese eee tie

3

a ban on further operationlisation of ICDS projects during 1997-98. The Committee is -*
pained to note that many States who had taken timely action towards implementation of new
projects, had to be requested to stop the operationalisation. The Committee takes a serious
note of the fact that due to the instructions of the Ministry of Finance, nearly 1400 projects
suffered a setback affecting lakhs of children in much needed areas of the country. The
Department submitted that further operationalisation of ICDS projects can be done only
after the Ministry of Finance lifts the ban. The Department also submitted that it proposes
to request the Ministry of Finance to permit operationalisation of 210 projects during 1998-
99. The Committee is constrained to note that the Department has not been able to
convince the Ministry of Finance about the desirability of not putting a ban on further
operationalisation of ICDS projects. In the event of the Ministry of Finance not agreeing to
the request of the Department, there will be a total shortfall in financial terms which will not
be a healthy sign so far as the performance of the Department is concerned. The Committee
in this connection would strongly recommend that the issue of coverage and outreach of
ICDS projects should be given top priority in the Deparment and in attaining this goal, if
there is any problem or hurdle, matter should be taken up at higher level.

5.2 It was pointed out that there has been a sharp increase in allocation of funds for
social security and welfare, especially under ICDS from Rs. 2 crores in BE 1997-98 to Rs.
4.5 crores in BE 1998-99. The Department explained that the increase in allocation of funds
from Rs. 2 crores 10 Rs. 4.5 crores is due to allocation of funds for evaluation of ICDS
scheme by NCAER. The Committee feels that allocation.of funds for evaluation of ICDS
scheme by NCAER in this year’s budget is a clear indication that this work is not likely to
be completed by May, 1998 as informed by the Department in its ATR to 59th Report of
the Committee. However, as per the Annual Report 1997-98 of the Department, the draft
Report of the nationwide survey is likely to be submitted by October, 1998. The Committee, -
therefore, recommends that Department should make concerted efforts so that evaluation of
ICDS is completed without further delay and remedial action taken thereon.

5.3 As regards World Bank assisted ICDS projects, the allocation for BE 1998-99 is Rs.
331.95 crores as compared to Rs. 214.50 crores in BE 1997-98, entailinga quantum jump of
Rs. 117.45 crores. The increase in budget estimate as compared to; 1997-98 is towards the
proposed ICDS वा proect, which would be implemented during the current year in the
States of Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Tamilnadu and Kerala after getting
necessary approval of CCEA. The budget estimates also include provision for another World
Bank assisted ICDS project in Andhra Pradesh as a component of Andhra Pradesh
Economic Restructuring Programme. The proposal for the budget is being placed before
EFC for its consideration. Moreover, the budget provision will also meet cost of ICDS II
project in Bihar and Madhya Pradesh. The Committee is concerned over the fact that
though ICDS III-project in respect of 5 States has not been approved so far by the CCEA, it
is not clear as to what will be done in case the approval is not received from the CCEA.
‘This points towards the faulty planning by the Department. The Committee desires that the
Department while making projections should make realistic and practical planning so that
the scope of shortfall could be avoided. The Department further submitted that the World
Bank assisted ICDS projects are implemented as per the approved norms and guidelines of
Expenditure Finance Committee and CCEA and the Development Credit Agreement/
Project Agreement signed with the World Bank. The Committee would like to impress upon
the Department that while negotiating with the World Bank or similar other International
financing agencies, they must ensure that the autonomy and sovereignty of the country is not
compromised.

[sss ae



4

5.4 When asked to give details about money spent on additional component for World
Bank assisted ICDS projects during 1997-98, the Department submitted that for the ICDS II
project presently operational in Madhya Pradesh and Bihar, expenditure during 1997-98 on
the additional component was about Rs.91 crores which mainly pertains to construction of
Anganwadi Centres, CDPO offices-cum-godowns and ‘adolescent girls scheme. The
Committee feels that there is a need for sustained emphasis on the additional components as
also on achieving the physical and financial targets.

5.5 An allocation of Rs.40 crores was made in BE 1997-98 for training programme
under ICDS, which was reduced to Rs.20 crores at RE stage. However, Rs. 40 crores have
again been allocated in the BE 1998-99. The Department has stated that in BE 1997-98,
Rs.40 crores, were provided in anticipation of Government's approval to enhance financial
norms. The Department has also informed that since the EFC meeting for the same was
‘held only in May, 1998, the:-same provision has. been kept for 1998-99. The Committee is
however, constrained to point out that things are being done in ad hoc manner and lack of
proper planning continues to plague the department. This is evident from the number of
Anganwadi Workers Training centres opened in different States e.g. where as 42 such
centres have been opened in J & K, there are only one centre in each of the States like
Punjab, West Bengal, Bihar and two centres each in Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. The
Committee feels that so much of disparity is not desirable and the States should be treated
equitably to the extent possible. The Committee notes with satisfaction that honorarium of
Anganwadi Workers and Helpers has been revised by 25% to 30% respectively with effect
from 16.5.97.

VI. BALWADI NUTRITION PROGRAMME
6. The allocation for Balwadi Nutrition Programme in BE 1997-98 was Rs.9.72 crores,

which was reduced to Rs.5.54 crores at RE stage. It has now been fixed at Rs. 6.17 crores हि

for BE 1998-99. The Department has explained that the allocation was brought down from
BE 1997-98 to RE 1997-98 due to the fact that from 1997-98 this scheme is being
implemented only in non-ICDS areas. Explaining further, .the Department has submitted
that the reason for marginal increase in allocation as compared to RE 1997-98 is that the
department has allowed the NGOs to shift their Balwadi Centres from ICDS areas to non-
ICDS areas wherever possible as the ICDS has not been universalised as yet. The
Department has also requested the State Governments to intimate the non-ICDS areas so
that the NGOs may shift the Centres to nan-ICDS areas where necessary. Department has
stated that the expenditure will be more during 1998-99. The Committee feels that the
NGOs cannot be a’substitute for the Department in non-ICDS areas. The Committee would
like to recommend that a time frame be worked out for phasing out Balwadi Centres. The
Committee had last year expressed and again expresses hope that the activities undertaken
by the programme would be adequately taken care of by ICDS in all the projects.

शा. DAY CARE CENTRES

7. The Committee finds that the allocation made for Day Care Centres in BE 1997-98
was Rs.23.05 crores and it continues to be the same for the BE 1998-99 also. The
Committee feels that with more and more women coming out for jobs, there is a greater
need for extending the network of Creches and Day Care Centres so as to facilitate the
working women and to mitigate their problems. The Committee is of the view that this is the
area where there is a strong need for expansion of activities of the Department and more
attention to the task. The Committee hopes that with the given allocation the Department
will be in a position to meet the requirement of working women. In case, more funds are
required the same may be considered at the RE stage.

vu

edt
nor
rec
int
Th
199
tot:
wo!
Soc
Coi
bot
ma

Ix.


5
शा. CONDENSED COURSES FOR WOMEN EDUCATION ‘

8. The Department has submitted that the scheme is designed to provide relevant
educational qualifictions and skills to needy women of 15+age group through residential and
non-residential courses. The State Social Welfare Advisory Boards forward
recommendations to the Central Social Welfare Board for sanction of grants to NGOs
interested in running primary/middle/high school to the higher secondary level courses.
There is no change in the allocation of funds for condensed courses for women education in
1997-98 as well as in 1998-99, the allocation has been Rs.9 crores constant. Buring 1997-98 a
total of 582 NGOs were sanctioned grant under the programme to benefit about 15,000
women against the target of: 29,000 beneficiaries. Rs.5.60 crores were released to Central
Social Welfare. Board during 1997-98 against the allocation of Rs. 9.00 crores. The
Committee is constrained to note the dismal performance of the schemes in achievement of
both physical and financial targets. The Committee recommends that the Department should
make concerted efforts for successful implementation of this scheme.

IX. HOSTELS FOR WORKING WOMEN

9. The Provision for hostels for working women remains constant at Rs.7.75 crores at
BE and RE 1997-98 and BE 1998-99. The Department has stated that 23 additional hostels
for 2269 working women was sanctioned during 1997-98 and it is proposed to sanction 25
additional hostels for 2500 women. during 1998-99. The Committee fails to understand as to
how with the same amount of money the increased number of hostels for increased number
of working women can be constructed in view of the escalation in cost and intervening
inflation. ‘Certainly, there seems.to be no proper planning and the role of the Department
does not appear to be satisfactory.

हु. MAHILA SAMRIDDHI YOJANA

10. Mahila Samriddhi Yojana was contemplated as a tool for economic empowerment of
tural women by inculcating the habit of savings in them.There has been no increase in the
allocation for this scheme in BE 1997-98 and BE 1998-99 i.e. Rs. 40 crores. The Department
has informed that though the scheme has ‘been implemented in all the States/Union
Territories in the country, it has been more successful in the States of Madhya Pradesh,
Goa, Tamil Nadu, Mizoram, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Punjab, Gujarat,
Himachal Pradesh and Union Territories of Chandigarh, Pondicherry, Lakshadweep and
Daman & Diu. The Department has also informed that after two years of implementation of .
the scheme the Programme Evaluation Organisation of the Planning Commission took up its *
review in 1996 through evaluation study. A“high powered Committee .constituted by the.
Planning Commission recommended that the opening of new accounts under the scheme'be
discontinued from 31.3.97 because of its high operational costs to be paid to the Department
of Posts. The Committee does not agree with this view and desires’ that the Scheme should
not be discontinued and the outstanding problems with the Department of Posts be resolved.
The Committee is of the view that since the scheme was a right step in the direction of
economic empowerment of rural women and that there is still great shortfall in the”
achievement of physical targets, it is imperative that the Department should make urgent
and vigorous efforts to revamp the scheme.



- total lack of proper planning at the time of formulating the proposals. The Committee, 4

XI. SOCIO-ECONOMIC PROGRAMME

11. The Committee has observed that an allocation of Rs. 15.99 crores was made in 8
1997-98, which was reduced to Rs.10 crores at RE stage. Now, the allocation for BE 1998-
is Rs. 9 crores. Thus, there is a declining trend in the allocations. The Department ha
admitted that although there have been several efforts at the national and State levels to
encourage entrepreneurship activities among women many such ventures floundered due t
problems like lack of adequate marketing, tie-ups etc. The Department also informed that J
the allocation was reduced to Rs.10 crores at RE stage 1997-98 as sufficient number of |
suitable proposals were not received from the State Women Development Corporations. As 4
the allocation has been kept at Rs.9 crores for the current year, it may be difficult for the 4
Central Social Welfare Board to absorb/sanction higher quantum of funding under the:
programme at present stage. The Committee is constrained to remark that there has been a 3

therefore, recommends that the Department should pay proper attention to the problems
coming in the way of successful implementation of the scheme and be in a position to utilise 4
the funds allocated 4

XII. CENTRAL SOCIAL WELFARE BOARD

12. The allocation for Central Social Welfare Board has been hiked from Rs. 7.01 ¥
crores in BE 1997-98 to Rs. 14 crores in BE 1998-99. The Department has submitted that 4
the funds are being utilised to meet the expenditure of Central Social Welfare Board on ३
account of establishment expenses, project cost on the Border Area projects, expenditure on
the Demonstration Project Centres and grants to NGOs under schemes of Family-4
Counselling Centres and Hostels for working women. The Department has further submitted j
that the allocation of Rs. 7.01 crores in 1997-98 insufficient to meet the total committed '
requirement of the Central Social Welfare Board. And the Board was not able to expand its
progranimes. The Committee is aware that the performance of the Central Social Welfare 4
Board has not been fully satisfactory in‘ the past. It, however, trusts that all-out efforts will 4
be made to achieve the targets in physical and financial terms. ४

जा, SHORT STAY HOMES
t

13. There has been a steep hike in plan allocation for*short stay homes from Rs. 2.75 :
crores in BE 1997-98 to Rs. 10-crores in BE 1998-99 on plan side and from Rs. 4.75 crores |
to Rs. 12 crores in totak The Department has informed that approximately 300 short stay
homes are being run out of the sanctioned 361 SSHs till 1996-97. During the year 1997-98 3
new short stay homes were not sanctioned as it was decided to first undertake the evaluation |
study of the existing homes. About 80 proposals for setting up of new short stay homes have 4
been received on the recommendations of the State Governments during’ the years 1997-98 ,
and 1998-99, out of which at least 30 new short stay homes will be sanctioned on. the ’
assumption that the revised norms will be approved this: year. The Department has further |
submitted that the plan allocation has been increased to meet the additional costs due to.;
revised norms as also the need for sanctioning new short stay homes this year. The
Committee finds that the Department has given justification for the enhanced allocation, but 4
the Committee would also sincerely desire that the targets be achieved in real.terms. 4


XIV. INDIRA MAHILA YOJANA

‘14. The allocation for indira Mahila Yojana in the Revised Budget Expenditure has
been put at Rs. 10 crores for the BE 1998-99. It seems that the Department is intending to
undertake large scale activities in this field. The Committee takes it as an encouraging trend.
In its Action Taken Report on the 59th report of the Committee, the Department had
submitted that a joint evaluation of Indira Mahila Yojana by the Department of Women and
Child Development and Planning Commission in the States of Goa, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal has been
completed, The draft report has been finalised. Based on the study report, appropriate
decision fex issues concerning IMY will be taken. The Department had further submitted
that as far as the issues like registration of Indira Mahila Block Society (IMBS), release of
funds, meetings of State level Steering Committees, District level Co-ordination Committees,
Expansion of IMY, Excess to other sources are concerned, the State Governments have
been directed to take immediate action. The Department has now informed that a rapid
evaluation of Indira Mahila Yojana had been carried out jointly by the Department of
Women and Child Development and Planning Commission and the report is likely to be
finalised soon. The Committee desires that the scheme be implemented with full enthusiasm
and vigour and the physical and financial achievements must catch the targets.

XV. RASHTRIYA MAHILA KOSH

15. In respect of Rashtriya Mahila Kosh, the Department has submitted that it extends
credit through its partner NGOs to women! below poverty: line to undertake smatfl income
generating activities. The loan ceiling have been revised from Rs. 2500 under short term and
Rs. 5000 under medium term to Rs. 4000 and Rs. 6000 respectively with effect from 16.9.96.
The loans are given for animal husbandry such as goatery, sheep rearing, milch-cow, small
agricultural activities, tailoring, petty shop keeping, small trade and handicrafts. It is
apparent that the sum being given to women under the kosh is a paltry sum and no-
meaningful activity can be undertaken with this nominal amount. The Committee also feels
that @wseas£ 2,17,846 women who have been benefited under the kosh and who have on an
average been given Rs. 1858 have not been able to undertake any fruitful job. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that since this kosh can go a long way in ameliorating
the condition of rural and tribal women the sum to be given per head may be increased

“ substantially, and the department should pay more attention to this scheme.

XVI. BALIKA SAMRIDDHI YOJANA

16. The Committee finds that in the RE 1997-98 a provision of Rs. 60 crores was made
for Balika Samriddhi Yojana and a provision of the equal amount has been made for BE
1998-99 also. The Department has informed that during the year 1997-98 an amount of
Rs. 60 crores was sanctioned to States/Union Territories under the scheme. The Department
has’ also submitted that the amount provided is inadequate. The Committee feels, that the
scheme can go a long way in bettering the lot of girl child and therefore deserves special
attention. The Committee is inclined to agree with the view of the Department that the
amount provided is inadequate and recommends that significant increase be made in the
allocation for this purpose.


XVII. NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN

17. The Committee finds that an amount of Rs. 2.50 crores has been earmarked for BE
1998-99 as against Rs. 2 crores for BE 1997-98. The Commission has been given important
mandate as far as prevention of atrocities on women and girl child is concerned. The
Commission is also expected to make recommendations to the Central Government on all
che important issues pertaining to upliftment of women and safeguarding their interests.

During the evidence of the Department a discussion took place as to the efficacy of the ,

Commission in the prevention of atrocities on women. The Commission submitted that
‘hough it makes very useful recommendations every year in the absence of mandatory
power, the Commission finds itself handicapped in enforcing its recommendations. The
Commission desired that it may be legally equipped sufficiently to enforce its
recommendations and decisions. ‘The Committee is inclined to recommend that the
recommendations of the Commission ‘be taken seriously and the Commission be allowed to
play a. greater and meaningful role in the interests of women and girl child. The Committee
is also inclined to recommend that if need be sufficient legal and legislative measures may be
taken to see that the Commissjon plays its role effectively. The Committee feels that the
allocation made for the Commission deserves to be enhanced in order to expect real»
contribution by the Commission in the field assigned to it.

XVII. WELFARE OF TRIBALS

18. Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the unusually high number of deaths
of infants and children in the tribal areas of Maharashtra in recent years. The Committee in
its ealier report had also taken note of the. horrifying reports of a large number of children
dying because of mal-nutrition in tribal areas. During the discussions with the Secretary of
the Department, the Committee enquired about the steps taken by the Government in this
regard. The Department has enumerated a number of steps taken by the Central
Government and the State Government of Maharashtra to alleviate the sufferings of the
people. The Committee, however, finds that 1477 deaths took place in 1996, 1118 in 1997
and 417 in first five months of 1998 in tribal areas of Amravati and Dhule districts. The
Committee apprehends that this might be happening in other parts of the country also, The
Tommittee is not satisfied with the results of the steps taken by the Central Government and
he State Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate adequate
neasures be taken to control the deaths of children in tribal areas of the country including
Maharashtra.

XIX. COMMITTED LIABILITY

19.1 The Committee in its 59th Report had recommended that the Department should
make a thorough review of the schemes and identify the committed liability. In this matter,
the Committee considered the Report of the Tenth Finance Commission. The Tenth Finance
Commission have observed as under:

“Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in
deciding the cut-off date for transfer of committed liability on account of plan scheme,
the incremental liabilities that would arise in 1997-98 on account of 8th Plan scheme
completed in the next two financial years would have to be provided for. The
Commission are, therefore, of the view that the Planning Commission may consider
providing for the maintenance of such schemes till 1999-2000 in the Plan itself as was
done for the schemes of the two Annual Plans of 199%91 and 1991-92.”

५
19.2 The Committee in this connection heard the views of the Secretary, Department of

‘Expe

comr
comr
Dem
be p
Dep:

and}
nota
the 1

1
such
recor
Gove
recor
assur



9

Expenditure last year to clarify the position. He informed the Committee that even though
communications were sent to various Ministries, the Ministries could not identify the
committed expenditure on time. Accordingly a lumpsum amount has been provided under
Demand No. 31. The Secretary also assured that if required more funds for this purpose will
be provided at the RE stage. He also stated that the Departments may approach the
Department of Expenditure for their share.

19.3 The Committee notes that as desired by the Committee the Department reviewed
and undertook the issue of transfer of committed liability to Non-Plan. The Committee is
not aware whether the Department approached the Ministry of Finance and its responsé in
the matter.

19.4 The Committee views with concern that the Finance Ministry has not honoured
such clear cut commitment made before the Parliamentary Committee. As the
recommendations of the Tenth Finance Commission have been accepted by the
Government, it is the commitment of Government too. ‘The Committee, therefore, :
recommends that the Department of Women and Child Development should: get the
assurance implemented without any delay.



nN
=
2
ट
=



I
FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 16th June, 1998 in Committee Room
‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS

. Shri S.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

. Shri Oscar Fernandes

. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
LOK SABHA

. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Shanker -Prasad Jaiswal

. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

. Dr. Sanjay Singh हे

. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri *

. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil

. Shri Shankar, Pannu

. Shri Abdul Hamid

. Shri Samik Lahiri :

. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja

. Shri Aijt Kumar Mehta

. Shri H.P. Singh

. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera

. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

. Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary

Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

. * *

. * *

» 4, The Chairman, then, informed about the schedule of the Meetings of the Committee in

Relates to other matters.



14

connection with the examination of the Demands for grants 1998-99 of the Ministry of
Human Resource development ° * * and invited suggestions from the Members on the
general working of the Departments which are under the purview of the Committee

5. The Members made some suggestions pertaining to most of the Departments under the
two Ministries. The Chairman, then, informed that the issues may be discussed in detail
when the Secretaries of the concerned Departments appear before the Committee

6. The Committee, then adjourned at 12.15 p.m. to meet again on 18th June, 1998.

***Relates to other matters.



शा
THIRD MEETING

The Committeg met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 19th June, 1998 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
3. Shri Oscar Fernandes
4. Shri O. Rajagopal
5. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’ *«
6.
7
8

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

LOK SABHA
9. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
10. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
11. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
12, Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
13. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
14. Shri Ashok Gehlot
15. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa -
16. Shri V.M. Sudheeran
17. Shri Shankar Pannu
18. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
19. Shri Samik Lahiri
20. Dr. (Shrimati) V. Saroja
21. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
22. Shri H.P. Singh
23. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
24. Shrimati Krishna Bose
25. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
26. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES

L* * *

II. Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Women and Child
Development)

1. Shrimati Asha Das, Secretary .

2, Dr. (Shrimati) Rekha Bhargava, Joint Secretary

3. Shri A.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary

‘Minutes of the 2nd meeting of the Committee relates to other matters.
Relates to other matters.



16

Shrimati Sarojini G. Thakur, Joint Secretary
Shrimati C.R. Chhibber, Joint Secretary

Shrimati B. Sen, Member-Secretary (N.C.W.)
Shri Vivek Mehrotra, Financial Advisor

Shri 5. Josi, Chief Controller of Accounts
Shrimati Indira Mishra, Director (RML)

10. Shri R.N. Ghosh, Director (F)

11. Shri Gopal Krishan, Director a
12. Shri T.M. Vijay Bhaskar, Deputy Secretary

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary +
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary हु
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary

Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

CON 9 ०१ #*+

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the. -
rtments of *** and Women and Child Development in connection with the examination :

Depa
of Demands for Grants for the year 1998-99.

2.1. A verbatim. record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15. p.m.

***Relates to other matters.

-
&
LR AMD ७०५५३ ८५0

the 7
Com:



"Vv

FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the Ist July, 1998 in Main Committee ,
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman
_ RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
3. Shri Oscar Fernandes
4. Shri O. Rajagopal
5. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
LOK SABHA है
7, Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
8. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
9. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
10. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
11. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
12. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
13. Shri Ashok Gehlot
14. Shri Ajit Jogi
15. Shri Abdul Hamid
16. Shri Samik Lahiri
17. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
18. Shri Aijt Kumar Mehta
19. Shri.H.P. Singh
20. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
21. Shrimati Krishna Bose
22. Shri S. Arumugham
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on Demands for Grants for 1998-99 of
the Departments of ** ** Women and Child Development (Demand No. 51), * * *. The
Committee after some discussions, adopted the Reports with some modifications.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m.

# ‘Minutes of the Fourth meeting of the Committee relates to other matters.

2. *** Relates to other matters.

17



VI
SIXTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 2nd July, 1998 in Committee Room

No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS .

1. Shri S.B. Chavan — Chairman .
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
Shri Oscar Fernandes
Shri O. Rajagopal
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
6. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
7. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
8
9

YN

Shri Indrajeet Mishra
. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
10. Shri V.M. Sudheeran
11. Shri Abdul Hamid
12. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
13. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
14. Shri H.P. Singh
15. Shri Aijt Kumar Mehta
16. Shri Chandu Lal Ajmeera
17. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
18. Shri S. Arumugham
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shyimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
2. * * *
3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati
Ray and Shri Oscar Fernandes to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Sumitra
Mahajan and Shri Ajit Jogi to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha of the Ministries of Human
Resource Development on 3rd' July and Health and Family Welfare on 6th July, 1998.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.30 a.m.

***Relates to other matters.