PARLIAMENT
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CH
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
  March
 
THREE HUNDRED
 
The National 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SP
 
 
  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2022 /Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) 
  
HUNDRED AND FORTIETH REPORT
The National Anti-Doping Bill, 2021 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd March, 2022)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23rd March, 2022)
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
REPORT NO. 
340 
REPORT 
March, 2022) 
arch, 2022) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN,
THREE HUNDRED AND 
The National Anti
(Presented to the Rajya 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2022 /
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
The National Anti-Doping Bill, 2021 
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd March, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23rd March, 2022) 
 
  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2022 /Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also 
available 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
SPORTS 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …..............................................       (i) 
2.        PREFACE………...........................................................................................(ii)-(iii) 
3.  ACRONYMS...................................................................................................(iv) 
4.        REPORT..........................................................................................................1-25 
         
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS-AT A GLANCE.................26-31 
 
6. MINUTES............................................................................................   32-43 
7. THE NATIONAL ANTI-DOPING BILL, 2021 
(as introduced in Lok Sabha)... ...... ............................................................ 
  
  

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th   September, 2021) 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri R. S. Bharathi  
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. * Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad  
7. Shri K. C. Ramamurthy  
8. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
9. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
17. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
18. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
19. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
20. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
21.  Shri Balak Nath 
22.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
23.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
24.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
25.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
26. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
29. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. ** Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
---------------------------------- 
* Nominated w.e.f. 27.09.2021 
** Nominated w.e.f. 07.02.2022 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sunil Dutt Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri A.K.Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
 
 
 
(i) 
  

 
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Fortieth Report on 
The National Anti -Doping Bill, 2021(Annexure) pertaining to the Department of Sports, 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports. . 
2. The National Anti -Doping Bill, 2021 was introduced in the  Lok Sabha on 17 th 
December, 2021. The Chairman,  Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
referred the said Bill, to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and sports on 25 th December, 2021  for examination and 
report..    
3. The National Anti-Doping Bill, 2021 intends to provide a statutory framework for the 
operation of the National Anti -Doping Agency, the National Dope Testing Laboratory and 
other dope testing laboratories and for cre ation of a National Board for Anti -Doping in Sports 
to strengthen anti -doping activities in sport, and to comply with the provisions of the the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization International Convention 
against doping in spor t, and compliance of such other obligations and commitments there 
under and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
4. The Committee held extensive deliberations on the Bill with the stakeholders which 
included Secretary, Department of Spor ts and other Senior officials of the Department and 
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice, NADA and NDTL and various Sports 
Federations.  In addition to the views of the Government, the Committee decided to seek the 
views/ suggestions of public  in general, experts/ stakeholders/ organizations. Accordingly, 
the Committee issued an Advertisement in prominent newspapers on 3 rd February, 2022 and 
also through the Website, seeking the views of the people on the Bill. The Committee also 
invited prominent sportspersons, who have been found guilty of an anti -dope violation so as 
to gain their perspective on the issue. Views of the stakeholders and comments of the 
Department were taken note of while formulating the observations and recommendations of 
the Committee.  
5. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and officers of the 
Department of Sports, NADA and NDTL as well as Federations, Organizations and 
individuals for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the requisite informa tion in 
connection with the examination of the Bill.  
(ii) 

6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its mee ting held on 22 nd March, 
2022. 
7. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
22ndMarch,2022                                                                                                           
Chaitra 1,1944 (Saka ) 
                                                                                   
  
 
 Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on  Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

ACRONYMS 
ABP Athlete Biological Passport 
ADRV Anti-Doping Rule Violations 
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
FSSAI Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
IIIM Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine 
ISL International Standards for Laboratories 
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
NADA National Anti-Doping Agency 
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing & Calibration Laboratories 
NCOE National Centres  of Excellence 
NDTL National Doping Testing Laboratory 
NIPER National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research 
R&D Research and Development 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
TUE Therapeutic Use Exemption 
UK United Kingdom 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UPES University of Petroleum and Energy Studies 
USA United States of America 
WADA World Anti-Doping Agency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

1 
 
Report 
1. The National Anti -Doping Bill, 2021 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 17 th 
December, 2021. The Chairman,  Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
referred the said Bill to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports on 25 th December, 2021 for examinatio n and 
report within a period of three months. The National Anti -Doping Bill, 2021 seeks to provide 
for the constitution of a National Board for Anti -Doping in Sports for regulating anti -doping 
activities in sport in India and to give effect to the United N ations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) International Convention against Doping in Sport, and 
compliance of such other obligations and commitments there under and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
2. The Statement of Objects and Reasons as mentioned in the Bill is as under:  
“The Government of India was one of the Members of Foundation Board of the World Anti -
Doping Agency from 1999 to 2002. It has signed the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural  Organisation International Convention against Doping in Sport in 2005 and 
ratified it in November 2007. Pursuant to the ratification of the said Convention, the 
Government of India has established the National Dope Testing Laboratory in 2008 and the 
National Anti-Doping Agency in 2009 to fulfill the commitments of India thereunder. The said 
Convention aims to promote the prevention of, and the fight against, doping in sport for its 
elimination. To achieve the objectives of the Convention, each State Party undertakes to adopt 
appropriate measures that may include legislation, regulation, policies or administrative 
practices and to commit themselves to the principles of the World Anti -Doping Code as the 
basis for the measures provided in the said Convention.  
2. It is intended to provide a statutory framework for the operation of the National Anti -
Doping Agency, the National Dope Testing Laboratory and other dope testing laboratories 
and for creation of a National Board for Anti -Doping in Sports to strengthen anti-doping 
activities in sport, and to comply with the provisions of the said Convention.  
3. The National Anti -Doping Bill, 2021, inter alia, seeks to — (i) establish a National Board 
for Anti-Doping in Sport and provides for its composition, powers and f unctions; (ii) establish 
the National Anti -Doping Agency to be headed by a Director General, and provides for the 
powers and functions of the said Agency, including the powers of investigation, levying 
sanctions for Anti -Doping Rule Violations, the discipl inary procedures to be adopted and the 
powers of inspection, sample collection and sharing and free flow of information; (iii) 
establish National Dope Testing Laboratory and other dope testing laboratories; (iv) 
strengthen the framework and mechanisms for carrying out the doping control programme in 
sports to ensure dope-free sport in India. “   
3. The Committee held two meetings, on 19 th January, 2022 and 7 th March, 2022 to 
deliberate on the Bill in which the Committee heard the Secretary and other senior officials of 
the Department of Sports, various Sports Federations, prominent sportspersons and 
organizations/individuals who had given suggestions on the Bil l. For Clause by Clause 

2 
 
deliberations, the Committee invited Senior Officials from the Legislative Department, 
Ministry of Law & Justice besides officials of the Department of Sports. 
4. The Secretary, Department of Sports in her presentation outlined the 
need/objectives/details of the Bill with the purpose of strengthening the Anti -Doping 
framework in the country. She mentioned that the Bill would strengthen compliance of 
UNESCO International Convention against Doping in Sport, 2005 and the World Anti -
Doping Code, 2021. She stated that the regulatory framework would comprise of setting up 
of the National Board for Anti -Doping in Sports along with a Disciplinary Panel and an 
Appeal Panel, incorporation of the National Anti -Doping Agency (NADA) and the Nation al 
Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL).Therefore, the Bill envisages to achieve the following: 
(a) To establish National Anti -Doping Agency (NADA), headed by a Director General, 
and lays down the powers and functions of the NADA; 
(b) To provide for establishment of Nat ional Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL) and 
other Anti-Doping Laboratories, recognition of the other Laboratories to strengthen 
the Dope Testing functions and related activities; 
(c) To establish a National Board for Anti -Doping in Sports and lay down its 
composition and powers and functions, including oversight of the activities of the 
NADA;  
(d) To enable meeting the various commitments under the Convention and the Code 
including the standards defined therein; 
(e) To provide the desired autonomy and empowerment to make the rules and 
regulations for clean sports ecosystem; 
(f) Empowerment to work with all regulators in the fight against doping; 
(g) Establishment of more Dope Testing Laboratories in the country; 
(h) Strengthening anti-doping research facilities and related fields; 
(i) Creating capacity and capabilities to meet requirements for hosting major sporting 
events in India; 
(j) Addressing the Articles of UNESCO Convention and its  
(i) Model framework 2021 and  
(ii) World Anti-Doping Code and various mandatory standards of the WADA.  
 

3 
 
 
5. Giving a background of the international commitment of the Government of India in 
this regard, the Department informed that the Copenhagen Declaration on Anti -Doping in 
Sport was agreed to by the Government of India in March 2003, as the first step towards t he 
preparation of the UNESCO International Convention against Doping in Sport. Through this 
political document,  the Government signalled its intention to formally recognize and 
implement the World Anti -Doping Code brought out by the World Anti -Doping Agency 
(WADA) which was established in 1999 and is headquartered in Montreal, Canada as a 
regulatory body responsible  for development of rules/standards and monitoring the 
implementation of anti -doping programme globally. India is a signatory to the International 
Convention against Doping in Sport, also known as the “UNESCO Convention”, which was 
signed on 19 October 200 5. The purpose of the Convention is to promote the prevention of 
and the fight against doping in sports, with a view to its elimination.  Article 4 of the 
UNESCO Convention mentions that State Parties commit themselves to the principles of the 
World Anti -Doping Code as the basis for the measures provided for in Article 5 where it 
requires the signatory countries to adopt appropriate measures. Such measures may include 
legislation, regulation, policies or administrative practices to achieve the objectives of  the 
Convention.  In order to comply with the Convention, the national authorities concerned with 
the anti -doping activities related to sports, require requisite legal authority. Therefore, 
countries such as USA, UK, Australia, Japan, Germany and France ha ve enacted legislations 
to enable provisions for anti -doping activities. Hence, it has become imperative for India to 
provide a statutory framework in the form of legislation for strengthening the functioning and 
operations of National Anti -Doping Agency a nd National Dope Testing Laboratory in India 
to carry out anti -doping activities in sport, and complying with the provisions of the 
UNESCO Convention and the WADA Code. This legislative structure will enable the 
building of a strong independent regulatory framework to strengthen India‟s position in the 
international sports arena. It has also been submitted that the present Bill will strengthen the 
anti-doping programme to enable cooperation and collaboration among national and 
international stakeholders.  Thus, it becomes imperative for the Government to introduce this 
Bill to provide a clean sports ecosystem and to strengthen capabilities to host major sporting 
events in the country in future.  
6. As a signatory to the Convention, the WADA Code (the Code) i s a document for 
implementation of anti-doping programme by all the participating stakeholders. Article 22 of 
the WADA Code, 2021 relates to Involvement of Governments and it states,  "Each 
Government’s commitment to the Code will be evidenced by its signin g the Copenhagen 

4 
 
Declaration on Anti -Doping in Sports dated 3rd March 2003, and by ratifying, accepting, 
approving or acceding to the UNESCO Convention”. In this context, it has been informed 
that the Indian Olympic Association and all the National Sports Federations for whose 
corresponding international bodies are signatory to the WADA, as well as NADA and NDTL 
are signatories. As the WADA is going to harmonize all the playing conditions, the rules and 
the disciplinary action to be imposed on the player, t hey have requested that while drafting or 
bringing out legislation, there are certain elements which are defined in this Code which 
needs to find place in the legislation. 
7. The National Anti -Doping Agency (NADA) and National Dope Testing Laboratory 
(NDTL) were established as the autonomous bodies under the Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports.  In commitment to the Convention and the World Anti -Doping Code, the National 
Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL) was established in 2008 and the National Anti -Doping 
Agency (NADA) set up in 2009 by executive order as a regulatory body registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860. NDTL was established with the objectives of analyzing the 
dope samples collected from athletes and to carryout research in anti -doping science and 
related fields. NADA is functioning to implement or enforce the National Anti -Doping Rules 
which are in the form of executive rules, first notified in 2008 in line with World Anti -
Doping Code and revised in 2009, 2015 and 2021. The stakeholder s are all recognized sports 
federations who are members of International Olympic Committee, International Paralympic 
Committee, International Federations, National Olympic and Paralympic Committees, major 
event organizations and other relevant sports disci plines under the Code. The primary 
objectives of NADA are: 
 a. to adopt and implement the anti-doping rules and policies in compliance to the 
 World Anti-Doping Code; 
 b. to regulate the dope control programme as per applicable International 
 Standards by conducting dope sample collection of athletes; 
 c. to manage dope samples, result of positive/negative cases (adverse 
 analytical/non-analytical findings) and imposing sanctions/ ban on athletes/ athlete 
 support personnel who have violated anti -doping rul es in accordance to the 
 International Standards; 
 d. to promote education and research and creating awareness about doping and 
 its ill effects. 

5 
 
8. In respect of the agencies to come under the purview of the Act, the Department 
submitted that they will be  fully funded by the Central Government to meet all the expenses 
incurred on administrative and operational requirements of the Bodies established under this 
Act. However, keeping in view the expansion of scope of activities of the NADA, the NDTL 
and for t he creation of a Board, annual financial implication of Rs.50 crores is envisaged.  
Elaborating on the powers and functions of the National Board for Anti-Doping in Sports, the 
Secretary highlighted that its major role would be to oversee the activities of NADA, advise 
Central Government and constitution of Anti -Doping Panels.  The Board would have a 
Chairperson with two Members, all having a three year term or till they attain 65 years of age 
with a cooling off period of one year. She also highlighted some key features of NADA, such 
as implementation of commitments of UNESCO Convention, adopting Anti -Doping rules 
which conform to the World Anti -Doping Code, powers and functions of NADA such as 
result management, power of entry/search and seizure in matters r elating to anti-doping rules 
violations and carrying out Anti -Doping education and awareness programmes for athletes 
and other major stakeholders.  
9. The Director, NDTL in his presentation, stated that the Bill has a provision for 
establishing and recogni zing more Dope Testing Laboratories to boost the capability of 
country to host mega sport events. It also intends to achieve goals for „Atmanirbhar Bharat‟ 
and in becoming a world leader in Anti -Doping science. He also enlightened the Committee 
with some recent developments in dope -testing such as detection of Gene -Doping, improved 
detection methods, introduction of artificial intelligence, Athlete Biological Passport (ABP) 
and development of new Biomarkers.   
10. On a query expressing concern over the increasing use of dietary supplements without 
any regulation, the Secretary informed that in order to track and regulate them, a process of 
engagement with the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) , which is under 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been initiated and  lab testing of these 
supplements is being made mandatory from April, 2022 . Rules in this regard have already 
been framed and FSSAI is in the process of rolling them out.  She also  mentioned that the 
Department realizes the need for creating awareness about anti-doping issues and will be 
taking due efforts in th is respect. Further , she informed that the puni shment/ penalities are 
based on the international anti-doping provisions and it has been kept in mind that severe  
criminal law provisions  are not  introduced in the Bill.  This is in alignment with the idea of 
making this a preventive legislation, rather than a criminal legislation. The Secretary  
emphasized that, with the coming into force of the statute, NDTL and NADA which are at 
present Societies/ autonomous bodies will be able to expand their vision and work  and would 

6 
 
gain the backing of law to carry out all activities deemed necessary to implement the Anti -
Doping Rules. It was mentioned that they are also getting challenges in courts of law, that the 
NADA is imposing sanctions without the backing of the relevant Act of the country in that 
aspect and thus, through this Bill that legal vacuum is sought to be filled. 
11. During the deposition of the Officials, it was  stated that the Department realizes that 
the rank of the country is quite high in terms the positivity rate of athletes and therefore they 
want to bring out clear -cut Rules in the Act. Further, it was informed that as per the World 
Anti-Doping Code, count ries can define an international -level athlete, national -level athlete 
and sub-national athlete. However, since India has been lacking such an Act or Rules, they 
have not defined these categories of athletes with clarity, whereas the developed countries 
like the USA or Canada have clearly brought this out in their Acts by defining an 
international athlete and a national athlete and thus are able to make a clear categorization of 
the positive results that are required to be reported to WADA in their Annual Report.  Thus, 
with clarity on these aspects, the database that is shared with WADA, etc. would ge t suitably 
modified and that will automatically bring down the positivity rate.  It was also informed that 
in the year 2021, WADA brought about mandatory International Standard for Education 
which has been incorporated in the Bill, and it has been made com pulsory on the part of 
NADA to undertake and increase the flow of 'Information, education and awareness' at all 
levels.  It was further informed that the Bill would strengthen NADA in respect of the 
manpower resources, which at present are only seven perso ns.   Also, there are only 65 Dope 
Control Officers on rolls, whereas other countries, much smaller in size and magnitude than 
India have far higher numbers of Officials to handle the activities of testing, control and 
imparting of education/dissemination of information about anti -doping activities. It was 
submitted that at present about 50 educational programmes, basically at the level of elite 
athletes who are participating in the Olympics, Asian Games and the Commonwealth Games 
are being conducted. With the strengthening of bodies provided through the Bill, the 
education and communication programmes at all levels will increase manifold, with 
awareness/ educational programmes being conducted in association with the Federations and 
going down to the level o f school children, universities, educational institutions and sports 
institutions,.    
12. Regarding the genesis of the Bill, the Department of Sports submitted that the current 
Bill took shape somewhere in 2017 and 2018.  It was thought of by two eminent judges who 
were with the National Anti-Doping Agency led by Late Justice Gopi Chand Baruka and then 
followed by a Committee chaired by Justice Mukul Mudgal.   

7 
 
13. The Department has informed that pre -legislative consultations in respect of the Bill 
were undertaken with the related Ministries, sports bodies and Federations and their views / 
comments had been sought on the various clauses of the Bill , which were considered and 
suitably incorporated in the Bill before its introduction in Parliament.  
14. It was also submitted that while drafting this Bill, the Department had placed it in the 
public domain on its website and there were a lot of comments from all the National Sports 
Federations and the public entities. Further, the draft Bill was circulated to ab out 16 -17 
stakeholder Ministries. All the comments received were duly examined and whatever was 
relevant has been incorporated in the Bill. It was further informed that while drafting the Bill, 
comments of the WADA were also sought and their comments have also  been integrated. It 
has also been informed that after the Bill was introduced in the Parliament on 17 th December, 
2021 and thereafter placed on the public domain, the WADA had assessed that public 
document, the Bill in its current shape, clause by clause,  and they have forwarded about 70 
suggestions which have been examined and it has been noticed that most of them stand 
incorporated in the Bill.  
15. The Committee also invited various Federations to hear their views on the Bill. 
Representatives of the Fed erations deposed before the Committee in its two meetings. Their 
views and suggestions are outlined in the succeeding paras.  
16. Shri Adille J. Sumariwala, President, Athletics Federation of India  stated that by 
establishing the National Board for Anti Doping in Sports, which would oversee the 
functioning of three agencies, namely NADA, NDTL and an independent hearing panel , the 
Bill would help in efficient working of the NDTL and NADA. He expressed the view that the 
Bill will also help all stakeholders and athletes because it provides for education. 
Additionally, the provision for searches and seizures is very important and will give teeth to 
the NADA. . 
17. Shri Ajay Singh, President, Boxing Federation of India said that though the Bill  does 
touch upon education, there is a need for greater emphasis on sensitization, training, on 
building awareness, considering that many sportspersons come from the lower income 
category who do not have adequate knowledge about doping and its consequences . He also 
stated the fact that many sportpersons do not even know what is being imbibed and they 
believe that they are having proteins, but actually it could be some performance -enhancement 
substance which could hamper their performance and health severely . He concluded his 
deposition by mentioning that effort should be towards building an informed and positive 
environment and encouraging people to follow the law rather than inflicting punishment as it 

8 
 
can be misused and abused. The provision of search and seizure required careful analysis and 
implementation because along with it arose issue about safeguarding privacy rights of the 
athletes.  
18. Shri Jagmander Singh, Dronacharya Awardee and Chief Coach of Indian Wrestling 
Team; Shri Mahabir Prasad, Dronacha rya Awardee, Chief Coach, NC OE; and Shri S.B. 
Prasad, Assistant Coach deposed before the Committee stating that more education and 
sensitization programmes be conducted with regard to Anti -Doping in sports in India, 
especially for the new sportspersons who come from rural/ different backgrounds having little 
knowledge of banned/prohibited consumable substances/food etc. The representatives also 
sought better coordination between the Sports federations and NADA to conduct regular 
classes on doping besides me asures for periodic surveys of athletes' health and fitness. They 
also mentioned that Coaches try to make the sportspersons aware of the dangers of doping 
and its consequences.  On a query as to whether there is any requirement for a sportspersons‟ 
comprehensive examination, including use of any prohibited substance, prior to his being 
placed under a Coach, it was informed that, at present there is no such provision. It was 
further informed that in their training/ exams for Coaching, adequate information ab out anti-
doping is being provided. However, there is no proper mechanism for disseminating authentic 
and updated information about various prohibited salts or supplements, and the sportspersons 
or Coaches have to keep track of these on their own.   
19. Shri Gursharan Singh, Secretary General, Paralympic Committee of India submitted 
that strict action be taken against anyone found indulging in doping including the 
sportspersons, Coaches and support personnel. There should be no leniency based on the 
ignorance of law or on grounds of “unwillingly commission of mistake”.  He also mentioned 
that awareness campaign and regular workshops are necessary to check the menace of 
doping.  
20. Shri Sahdev Yadav, President and Shri Arnab Das, Chief Executive Officer, Indian 
Weightlifting Federation in their deposition stated that instances of doping in Weightlifting 
are much more as compared to other sports as it is a power game and sportspersons many 
time look for easy way to push ahead. It was also mentioned that the re is easy access to 
prohibited supplements at medical stores and there is a need to check their sale and use. It 
was also pointed out that apart from the sportspersons who are caught, no action is taken 
against the doctor who may have prescribed the medic ine, coaches or shops which are selling 
supplements with prohibited substances etc and the sportsperson alone has to bear all the 
consequences , if found positive. Prohibited supplements are also being brought from abroad 

9 
 
and some kind of check must be put  on them too. They stressed on the need for bigger 
deterrent for anyone found complicit in doping.  
21. In addition to the views of the Government, the Committee decided to seek the views/ 
suggestions of public in general, experts/ stakeholders/ organizati ons. Accordingly, the 
Committee issued an Advertisement in prominent newspapers on 3 rd February, 2022 and also 
through the Website, seeking the views of the people on the Bill. The Committee received 
certain suggestions on various provisions of the Bill. T he Committee invited the following 
non-official witnesses to hear their suggestions on the Bill: Dr. M.R. Madhavan, President, 
PRS Legislative Research; Shri Abhishek Sinha, Convenor-Centre for School of Law, UPES 
University and Shri Parth Kalke, Sports Ma nagement Professional, Mumbai. Their views/ 
suggestions on the various provisions of the Bill have been incorporated in the succeeding 
paragraphs.  
22. Shri Abhishek Sinha highlighted that in Clause 3(1) of the Bill, there is a mention of 
the term 'other p ersons' as this Clause stipulates that no athlete, athlete support personnel or 
other persons shall indulge in doping in sport.  Thus, from a clarity perspective, by using the 
term 'other persons', it is not clear who is being included in this term 'other persons'. He 
mentioned that the draft should be absolutely clear as this is the charging provision wherein it 
has been stated that no person should indulge in doping. He also mentioned that as per the 
definition of the athlete in the Bill, there is no dist inction being made between minor athletes 
and major athletes. He added that there are different provisions and considerations for minor 
athletes in many Western jurisdictions. He also mentioned that as per the WADA Code, there 
is a specific reference that the constitution of the national agency should not have 
nominations from the Central Government; however, the Bill does not take that into 
consideration for the reconstituted NADA. 
23. Shri Parth Kalke mentioned that there is a need for including Sports Management 
Courses as part of the physical education subject in Schools. He also highlighted the need for 
creating awareness and education using technological platforms for providing doping related 
information/ data/ updates to both professionals in  sports and even those who play sports as a 
recreation. 
24. Dr. M.R.Madhavan in his deposition mentioned that a Bill to provide statutory 
backing to NADA is necessary, as under the current system, NADA imposes penalties on 
sportspersons who violate the WADA guidelines on doping control and they can also suspend 
their participation in events.  But the power to impose penalties does not have statutory 
backing and this becomes an issue, as there is currently no law which is giving NADA that 

10 
 
power and this Bill  fills that gap. He further stated that the Bill broadly conforms to the 
scheme provided by the World Anti -Doping Agency (WADA) to the extent that there will be 
a Board which oversees NADA and that Board creates Hearing and Appeals Panel. Thus 
there will be a layer between the executing agencies i.e. NADA and the Government, which 
will provide a degree of operational independence, as per the WADA recommendation. 
Further, he pointed out three issues for consideration. He stated that the first issue relates t o 
the independence of the Director General of the NADA.  The guideline on operational 
independence which has been published by WADA, requires National Anti -Doping 
Organisations to be able to act independently of the Government. This is guideline 2.2 in 
accordance with Article 20.5.1 of the WADA Code.  Those guidelines further make 
recommendations related to the appointment and early removal of the executive head of the 
National Anti Doping Organisations. These are included under Guideline 10, which states, 
"Clearly define the process to appoint the executive (operational) head of NADO, which 
should be transparent, apolitical, timely and based on qualifications and experience. ” It 
further states that “Clearly define the appointment criteria (e.g. relevant exp erience, 
professional qualifications, good reputation, no conflicts of interest, etc.)" and "Clearly define 
the grounds for dismissal (including objective grounds for early dismissal in line with 
applicable national law, e.g., only in case of serious misco nduct or non -compliance with 
appointment conditions), and effective judicial review process to challenge the dismissal.". 
He mentioned that these provisions are from the guidelines issued by the World Anti Doping 
Agency.  He mentioned that Clause 15 (1) of  the Bill states that "The Director General shall 
be appointed by the Central Government from among persons of integrity and outstanding 
ability possessing such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed."  There is no 
selection process given. Ther e is no Selection Committee which various other laws have 
which will identify people, etc.  It is entirely up to the discretion of the Government and there 
is no clear specification of the required qualification and experience given in the Bill itself.  It 
says that qualifications and experience will be prescribed through rules.  So that is the gap.  
The second issue pointed out was the early removal clause in light of clear WADA 
Guidelines that define the rule for dismissal.  In the Bill, Clause 15 (8) sta tes "The Central 
Government may remove the Director General at any time before the expiry of his term of 
office on the ground of proven misbehavior or incapacity or such other ground, after giving 
him a reasonable opportunity."  The wording of "or such other ground" gives the power to the 
Central Government to add new grounds for dismissal, any such ground which is not defined 
in the Bill. He also mentioned about the qualifications of the Disciplinary Panel and the 
Appeals Panel stating that Article 8 of th e WADA code states that an athlete or any other 

11 
 
person formally charged with anti -doping rules violation is entitled to a fair and timely 
hearing within a reasonable time and before a fair, impartial and operationally independent 
hearing panel.  Under this , the Hearing Panel is set up and there is an Appeals Panel. The 
WADA Guidelines for International Standard for Results Management state that, "Members 
of Hearing Panel must have anti -doping experience and may include individuals with legal, 
sports and/or scientific expertise." Clauses 11(2) and Clause 12(2) of the Bill are about the 
composition of the Hearing Panel and Appeals Panel. They consist of persons with legal, 
medical and sports administrative experience and retired eminent sportsmen, but there is  no 
requirement of anti -doping experience.  It does not mention that such a person should be 
included in the panel. On being enquired as how he would define “anti dope experience”, he 
submitted that it refers to someone who has been involved in those areas .  He further 
submitted that Clause 11(4) of the Bill states that "If a member of Disciplinary Panel dies or 
resigns, or is otherwise removed from the Panel by the Board on such grounds as may be 
specified by regulations, the Board may appoint a suitable p erson to fill the vacancy." 
Similarly, Clause 12 (4) deals with Appeal Panel, is almost very similarly worded clause. So 
this implies that Board can issue regulations to specify grounds to remove members of these 
panels.  These grounds are not specified in  the Bill or the Act when it comes in the Principal 
Act but the power to specify them will lie with the Board.  He pointed out that this raises the 
question as to whether such delegation of powers to the Board affects the operational 
independence of the panels or should they be written in the Act itself. He also mentioned that 
Clause 11 requires the Board to create a disciplinary panel.  Clause 11(2)(b) specifies that this 
panel shall have four Vice -Chairpersons.  Clause 11(5) states that in the absence of the 
Chairperson, Hearing Panel shall be constituted by the Vice-Chairperson.  He pointed out that 
which of the four Vice-Chairpersons is being referred to is not clearly specified, which seems 
to be some drafting error.  
25. On a query regarding whether an y comparison has been made by the PRS Legislative 
Research of this proposed legislation with similar legislations of different countries, it was 
submitted that no such comparative study has been conducted  till date. Shri Abhishek Sinha , 
on this aspect, men tioned that the y have compared it with USADA ( U.S. Anti –Doping 
Agency) legislation and two differences have been noted. One is with respect to having strict 
liability for anti -doping and the second is with respect of minors. He clarified that he had  
pointed out the issue of minors , as in the Indian laws, the approach has been preventive 
towards any crime committed by minors; however that can be handled through sensitization 
and spreading awareness. On queries regarding the binding nature of the WADA c ode, it was 
submitted that though WADA does not have statutory status but most International 

12 
 
Federations to which the Indian Federations are affiliated have signed up to WADA Code and 
not doing so may lead to Indian athletes not being allowed to participat e in events or even 
blacklisting. In respect of the query re lated to willful versus non -willful action by a 
sportsperson, it was submitted that WADA code does not make a distinction between the two 
in its decision making on the penalties to be imposed.  
26. Besides the depositions the Committee also notes the written submissions made by Dr 
Malav Shroff, a doctor, an Olympian (Athens 2004) and currently on the Mission Olympic 
Cell of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports that, as per the provisions in the  Bill, the 
Central Government appoints the National Board for Anti Doping and the Director and 
officials of the National Anti-Doping Agency and National Dope Testing Laboratory, besides 
the National Board appointing the National Anti -Doping Disciplinary Pa nel and National 
Anti-Doping Appeals Panel. Since the agencies executing the Anti -Doping Programs and the 
Disciplinary and Appeals Panel are appointed by the same Authority, an athlete who has 
grievances may not get a fair hearing in some cases due to conf lict of interest. Thus, the 
Appointing Authorities of these different bodies be different, especially for the Disciplinary 
and Appeals Panel so that the appearance of conflict is removed. 
27. The Committee decided to hear the views of prominent Indian spor tspersons, who 
have been found guilty of an anti -dope violation so as to gain their perspective on the issue.  
The sportspersons who deposed before the Committee in its meeting held on 7 th March, 2022 
were Shri Sumit Sangwan and Shri Amit Panghal, both fro m boxing; Shri K. Ravi Kumar 
from weightlifting and Shri Narsingh Pancham Yadav from wrestling. In their deposition, 
they highlighted the issues of low awareness about anti -doping rules as well as the use of 
prohibited substances and their side effects amo ngst even elite Indian athletes and the need 
for concrete measures to address this issue. They also mentioned about NADA not doing 
enough to make information about various salts , intake of which would constitute an anti 
doping violation, available to all a thletes. Athletes have little or no knowledge about banned 
salts, ingredients of various medicines which they may have to take for routine sickness or in 
times of illness. It was pointed out that even Medical practitioners/ General physicians are not 
aware of the prohibited substances/ salts while prescribing medicines to sportspersons. They 
also highlighted the requirement of providing legal assistance to  sportspersons who get 
caught in a doping violation to present their case before the disciplinary pane ls, quantum of 
ban being decided arbitrarily by NADA without paying much attention to the individual 
specifics of the case, need of some mechanism to check sabotage allegations, various 
supplements containing prohibited substances being available over the counter leading to 
their use by sportspersons without knowing the consequences. It was also stated that there is a 

13 
 
policy of not giving any national award/ recognition to Sportspersons who get caught in 
doping, even when the period of their penalty/ punish ment gets over and they resume their 
career and bring laurels to the country.   It was also highlighted that only the athlete is left to 
bear all the consequences of a doping violation without any reference to his/ her coaches, 
support system, doctors etc.  
28. The Committee during its examination of the Bill deliberated on various clauses of 
the Bill. Some provisions in the Clauses drew the attention of the Committee , which have 
been dealt with along with the points raised by Federations, witnesses and stakeholders, in 
the succeeding paragraphs.  
29. The Committee notes that Clause 2(d) defines an “athlete” to mean any person who 
competes in any sport at the national level or international level or participates in any 
competition or event to which this Act applies. The Committee also notes that in respect of 
this definition, point has been raised  that there is no distinction being made between minor 
athletes and major athletes.  On this aspect, the Department has informed that the WADA 
Code in its Appendix, allows that depending on the specification of the athlete, limited testing 
may be done and they have defined a protected class of athletes, which means athletes who 
are below 16 years etc.  So, if an athlete is below 16 years etc. then, there is a provision 
available in the WADA Code for limited sample or he/she may be given a lesser amount of 
reprimand or sanction. However, this is a matter to be dealt with in rules  by classifying an 
athlete to which the full menu of tests and the full menu of sanctions are to apply or not. It 
was further informed that there is also a provision for 'protected' or 'minor' athlete to which a 
lesser degree or a warning or something like that may serve the purpose and in this regard it 
is informed that only the details of national and international athletes go to the WADA; 
details of minor, domestic, and protected c lass of athletes do not go to the WADA.  The 
Committee suggests that such a distinction should be made while formulating the rules 
so that a protective mechanism is available to the minor athletes.  
30. The Committee notes that Clauses 2(b) defines the “An ti-Doping Rule Violation” and 
the Department has informed that it d efines that athletes or the other person who violates the 
National Anti-Doping Rules as notified under this Act shall constitute an Anti -Doping Rule 
Violation, which is specified in the Wor ld Anti-Doping Code. Further it is clarified that the 
term violation is in the context that any athlete whose dope sample collected by the NADA, if 
reported to have the presence of prohibited/banned substances is termed as an anti -doping 
rule violation.  A lso in addition, the possession, trafficking of these prohibited/banned 
substances shall also constitute an Anti-doping Rule V iolation (ADRV). It is noted that this 

14 
 
definition of Anti -Doping Rule Violation is in line with World Anti -Doping Code to ensure 
the participation of Indian elite athletes in all international events at par with any other 
athletes.  It is also informed that International rules and regulations in Anti -Doping matters 
are dynamic in nature, and the Bill has enabling provisions to make r ules to sustain the 
framework. The Committee is of the view that the explanation should be included in the 
Rules so as to provide clarity in respect of what constitutes an Ant i-Doping Rule 
Violation (ADRV).  
31. The Committee notes that the Clauses (d) and (e) relate to definition of an “athlete” 
and “athlete support personnel”. The Department has informed that an “athlete” is a sports 
person who is a member of any Sports Federations/ Sports Board/Affiliated clubs and 
participates in any competitions/ events or any event at national level or international level in 
any sports and this definition has been adopted from the UNESCO Convention and World 
Anti-Doping Agency and covers all level of athletes participating in any sporting event in the 
country. Further, it has been informed that an “athlete support personnel” is a person who is 
associated with the any part of Sports or Sports Federations or the event in any capacity i.e 
any coach, trainer, manager , agent, team staff, official,  medical or p aramedical personnel. 
The Committee notes that the definition of an “athlete support personnel” mentions “or 
such other person” besides the specified persons.  It is also noted that the same has been 
used in Clauses 3(1) and 3(2) also. It is also noted that witnesses appearing before the 
Committee had also pointed this out and suggested that clarity be provided on this 
aspect. Officials from the Department of Sports and Legislative Department, Ministry 
of Law& Justice clarified in reference to clause 2(e), that the term "athlete  support 
personnel" involves everyone who is working for sports, in any capacity.  Whether a 
person is working as a masseur, physiotherapist or any kind of support personnel who 
is directly working with the team, they would all be covered in the definition  of "athlete 
support personnel".  This is a general definition and that is why the definition of 'or 
such other person' has been given. The Committee noted the clarification and 
recommends that clarity in respect of “or such other person” be provided in th e Rules 
to be framed as subordinate legislation so that there is no ambiguity in understanding as 
to who are covered  in its ambit.   
32. The Committee notes that Clause 2(h) defines “Code” to mean the World Anti -
Doping Code adopted and amended from time t o time by the World Anti -Doping Agency. 
The Department has informed that “Code ” is  defined as the fundamental and universal 
document upon which the World Anti -Doping Programme in Sport is based and defines all 
procedures and processes to be adopted by all the signatories towards implementation of anti-

15 
 
doping program. Further, it is informed that this Code provides an equal opportunity for all 
players and the anti-doping programs seek to protect the health of Athletes and to provide the 
opportunity for Athle tes to pursue human excellence without the Use of Prohibited 
Substances and Prohibited Methods. It is also submitted that in addition to the Code, there are 
eight mandatory international standards required to be implemented to comply with the Code. 
The Committee recommends that since a number of definitions and provisions in the 
Bill are aligned with the World Anti -Doping Code and are guided by its provisions, in 
order to avoid selective or alternative interpretation of the Clauses or their application, 
the relevant  WADA Code provisions and their applicability be appropriately  reflected 
in the regulations, that will follow,  so that the correct import of any provision of the Bill 
is made clear for all concerned.  
33. Clause 2 (za) mentions the “Prohibited List”. The Department submitted that while 
formulating the Bill , it was suggested that the List of 'prohibited substance' be mentioned in 
the Bill and not left for the Regulations. However, since the List of prohibite d substances is 
prepared by WADA and it gets periodically revised, based on its findings and research, hence 
it was decided that it will not be appropriate to place the list of prohibited substances in the 
Bill. The Committee notes and agrees with the clar ification; however the Committee 
recommends that in order to make information about the prohibited list easily accessible 
to all, besides including it in the regulations, a mechanism be developed like an App or 
dynamic website, where not only such a list b e readily available but also information 
about various supplements,  medicines with their ingredients,  be made available so that 
based on such information, the cases of unwilful consumption of a prohibited substance 
can be curtailed/avoided.  
34. Clause 3 of the Bill explains the Anti Doping Rules Violations (ADRVs) under the 
Code and the applicability of the Code includes all participating athletes or other person 
associated in Sports. Also, as per Clause 3(5), every athlete and athlete support personnel and 
other persons shall will be responsible for knowing what constitutes Anti -Doping Rule 
Violations and the restrictions on the use of prohibited substances and the prohibited methods 
which are included in the Prohibited List. The Committee observes that this provision 
squarely places the onus of responsibility on the athlete/ athlete support personnel in 
respect of ADRVs, restrictions on use of prohibited substances and prohibited methods.   
The Committee is of the view that, in order for athletes/ athlet e support personnel to 
ably adhere to the responsibility entrusted , the onus towards creating awareness on 
these aspects falls on the Department of Sports, SAI, the Federations , NADA and other 
stakeholders and they must come up with substantive measures to address the issue.  

16 
 
35. The Committee also notes that the quantum of penalty (monetary or otherwise) or kind 
of sanction that can be imposed for the violation of ADRVs has not been provided in the Bill 
itself and has been left to be prescribed through subordinate legislation. The Department has 
submitted that the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the case of Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. 
Birla Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Delhi [1968 AIR 1232] has observed that „Power to 
make subordinate or ancillary legislation may undoubtedly be conferred upon a delegate, bu t 
the Legislature must in conferring that power disclose the policy, principles or standards 
which are to govern the delegate in the exercise of that power so as to set out a guidance‟. 
Therefore, as a measure of guidance, it may be appropriate to only pro vide the maximum limit 
of sanction and the type of sanction and allow the Disciplinary Panel to determine the actual 
sanction on a case to case basis. The requirement of specifying the sanction for each type of 
Anti-Doping Rule Violation may not be necessa ry as the Supreme Court has observed that the 
Act may specify the guidelines on which Regulations may be provided.  In this regard, it has 
been further submitted that Clause 6 of the Bill specifies the various types of 
consequences/penalties that may be im posed on establishing an Anti -Doping Rules violation. 
Details of the consequences/ penalties and their quantum will be in consonance with the 
provisions of the Code and same will be incorporated by specific regulation as per relevant 
Sections incorporated in the Bill. The Committee notes the position and observes that since 
the provisions, in their application, will commence only after the formulation of the 
relevant rules/ regulations, the Department may expeditiously undertake the exercise of 
their detail ed and unambiguous formulation so that the Doping issues in  sports which 
are sought to be addressed through the Bill do not get entangled, t hus delaying the 
impact of the legislation.  
36. The Committee notes that the Bill is quiet on the governance and pr ocedure in the 
case where a foreign athlete is found to be guilty of committing an ADRV in international  
sporting events held on the Indian soil.  Upon a query in this regard, it has been informed that 
in such cases, NADA will inform WADA and suitable action as per its Code will be initiated. 
Moreover, WADA is present in all international events and there are clear defined guidelines 
to be followed in such cases. The Committee noted the position.  
37. The Department has informed that the Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities (Divyangjan), Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment in their comments had 
mentioned that those athletes with disabilities such as multiple sclerosis or athletes with 
blood disorders etc. who are dependent on medication containing substances under Anti -
Doping law may be exempted from the purview of Anti -Doping law. The Department further 
informs that t he WADA Webpage on Therapeutic Use Exemption (TUE) provides that  

17 
 
“athletes may have illnesses or conditions that require them to take particular medications. 
If the medication an athlete is required to take to treat an illness or condition happens to fall 
under the  Prohibited List , a Therapeutic Use Exemption (TUE) may give that athlete the 
authorization to take the needed medicine”. Further Clause 4.4.1 of the WADA Code 2021 
regarding TUEs,  provides that the presence of a Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or 
Markers, and/or the Use or Attempted Use, Possession or Administration or Attempted 
Administration of a Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method shall not be considered an 
Anti-Doping Rule Violation if it is consistent with the provisio ns of a TUE granted in 
accordance with the International Standard for Therapeutic Use Exemptions. The Department 
submits that these concerns have been addressed through Clause 5 of the Bill which relates to 
Therapeutic Use Exemptions. The Committee notes t hat the concerns raised are genuine 
and agrees with the inclusion of the Therapeutic Use Exemption Clause to facilitate 
such athletes. The Committee recommends that international practices and convention 
on the subject may be kept in perspective while prov iding such exceptions and also a 
detailed Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) in this regard may be prepared so that 
deserving athletes do not face any difficulty in being granted such exemptions. The 
Committee also suggests that the Department in coordinat ion with NADA should also 
undertake a study to evaluate if any ingredients, routinely used  in Indian dietary 
preferences contain any WADA prohibited substances , so that such points can be 
brought to their notice and remedial exemptions sought.  
38. The Committee notes that Clause 6 deals with the consequences of Anti -Doping Rule 
Violations by an athlete or an athlete support personnel and lays that such an action may result 
in various actions including disqualification of results with all consequence s including 
forfeiture of medals, points and prizes, in such manner as may be specified by the Agency by 
regulations. The Committee notes that once the penalty imposed on an athlete is over, the 
athlete is able to participate in events, and win prizes brin ging laurels to the country.  It has 
however been pointed out in deposition by prominent athletes that dope tainted athletes, even 
if their penalty period is over and have resumed their sporting career , are not considered for 
any national awards. The Comm ittee recommends that since this is a policy decision, 
Government may examine the issue to provide relief to athletes who have served their 
penalty and have been selected to participate in national/international events and have 
excelled therein.  While noti ng that the quantum of penalties for an Anti -Doping Rule 
Violation by an athlete is determined as per the provisions of the defined Code, the 
Committee recommends that since an athlete’s sporting career is limited to a span of few 

18 
 
years, there is a need to  ensure that the quantum of penalties imposed are proportional 
to the extent/degree of the proven doping violation.   
39. Clause 7 of the Bill is concerned with establishment and constitution of National Board 
for Anti-Doping in Sports.  The Clause states that the Board shall have a Chairperson and two 
Members to be appointed by the Central Government.  Chairperson or Member appointed in 
the Board by the Government should not have any representation in International Federation, 
National Sports Federation, M ajor Event Organization, National Olympic Committee, 
National Paralympic Committee or be in the Government department with responsibility for 
sport or anti-doping. It has been informed that in the present setup in NADA, the management 
and the affairs of NA DA vest with the Governing Body comprising of Minister for Youth 
Affairs & Sports as its Chairman, Secretary (Sports), its Vice -Chairman with other Members 
from outside , i.e. eminent athletes, retired judge as legal expert and a Director General of 
NADA as Member Secretary. The General Body and Executive Body looks after the financial 
proposal for operation activities and meetings of these Committee are held quarterly or half 
yearly. Proposed Board in the Bill, shall look after all the issues of the Code co mpliance 
smoothly as they will be regularly monitoring the activities of the Agency, panels, committees 
and problem areas may be brought to the knowledge of the Government to be compliant with 
the WADA Code and the Convention. Also, the Chairperson appoint ed by the Central 
Government should have twenty years‟ experience in the field of general administration, sport 
administration or be a retired eminent athlete and the members appointed in the Board by the 
Central Government should have fifteen years‟ exper ience in the field of general 
administration, medical sciences or Law or be retired eminent athletes. It is submitted that the 
provisions with the eligibility condition prescribed in the Bill will help in monitoring the 
compliance to Convention and Code an d other operational issues to ensure the clean sports 
system in the country. The person with the requisite experience appointed for the purpose 
would be able to deliver the outcomes as mentioned in the regulations and recommend to the 
government to take appropriate measures in the fight against doping and to protect the interest 
of the athletes.  Also, the basis for term of the three years of the Board Chairperson and the 
Members is to ensure that the programme is continuously monitored and implemented in 
compliance to the Convention. The provision states that appointed Members shall not accept 
position in any organization to maintain the confidentiality of the Board, or the Agency. As 
these measures would need consultation from the respective stakeholders, it is important for 
the Board to interact with the stakeholders at regular interval s. The rules of procedure for such 
meetings will be brought out in the corresponding rules and regulations. The provision 
prescribes three months of advance notice for resig nation by Chairperson/Members to ensure 

19 
 
substitute may be appointed in time by the Government and work may not get hampered due 
to absence of quorum of the Board for whatsoever reason. The salaries, allowance and other 
details will be brought out in the ru les and regulations of this Act. The Committee notes the 
provisions and recommends that a Committee/ mechanism / process to be followed for 
selection and appointment of the Chairperson or Members of the Board may be laid 
down to ensure proper vetting of th e person(s) who are sought to be appointed by the 
Government.   
40. Clauses 11 and 12 of the Bill relate to constitution of the National Anti -Doping 
Disciplinary Panel and the National Anti -Doping Appeal Panel by the National Board for 
anti-Doping in Sports. It has been informed that these will be independent Panels which will  
adjudicate the matters in relation to Anti -Doping Rule Violations under the National Anti -
Doping Rules. National Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel will be the first instance body to hear 
the matters of facts submitted by both parties (NADA and the Athlete/other person) to 
determine the consequences and decide the matter.  Similar types of mechanism are available 
for athletes/other person in other countries to ensure fair, impartial and t imely hearing of the 
anti-doping matters.  The Committee pointed out that a point was raised that as per the 
provisions in the Bill, the Government appoints the National Board for Anti Doping and the 
Director and officials of the National Anti -Doping Agenc y and National Dope Testing 
Laboratory, besides the National Board appointing the National Anti -Doping Disciplinary 
Panel and National Anti -Doping Appeals Panel. Since the agencies executing the Anti -
Doping Programmes and the Disciplinary and Appeals Panel  are appointed by the same 
Authority, an athlete who has grievances may not get a fair hearing in some cases due to 
conflict of interest. Thus, the Appointing Authorities of these different bodies be different, 
especially for the Disciplinary and Appeals P anel so that the appearance of conflict is 
removed. The Committee notes that at present, Anti -Doping Disciplinary and Appeal 
panels are provided within the administrative structure of the NADA. Thus, there is a 
need that the prosecuting agency (NADA) and t he Anti -Doping Panels be separated 
both functionally and administratively. In view of this, the Anti -Doping Panels are to be 
constituted, monitored and administered by the Board to ensure fair, impartial and 
timely hearing process.  It has been further inf ormed that the qualifications of the 
appointed chairpersons and members of the panels are as per the stipulated guidelines 
of the WADA and all the relevant rules for the functioning of the panels will be based 
on the prevailing international standards of t he anti-doping program. The details of the 
qualifications, experience, honorarium, discharge of duties and responsibilities for such 
panel chairperson, members, timelines for listings and case disposal shall be brought 

20 
 
out under the rules and regulations. The Committee is of the view that any 
apprehension on this count, at this point of time, seems farfetched and notes that the  
proposed mechanism seems to be proper and in agreement with the requirements.  
41.  The Committee also deliberated on the matter o f grounds for removal of members of 
the Disciplinary and hearing panels without being given an opportunity to present their case, 
and notes that Clause 11(4) and Clause 12(4) stipulate that the grounds for removal will be as 
may be specified by regulations . Thus, the Committee is of the view that such issues will 
be taken care of while formulating the regulations and any concern at this point of time 
on this issue is unfounded.  
42. Clause 11(5) provides that for the purposes of hearing and determining cons equences 
of Anti -Doping Rule Violations, a hearing panel of three members shall be formed by the 
Chairperson of the Disciplinary Panel or in his absence, by the Vice -Chairperson; and each 
such panel shall consist of the Chairperson or the Vice -Chairperson as its Chairperson, one 
member who is a medical practitioner and other member who is a sports administrator or 
retired eminent athlete. The Committee notes that it has been pointed out that the Disciplinary 
Panel consists of four Vice Chairpersons and the Bill refers to “the Vice Chairperson” to 
chair the Disciplinary Panel in the absence of the Chairperson. This does not provide clarity 
as to which of the four Vice -Chairpersons will be responsible for forming the hearing panels 
in the absence of the Chairp erson. The Department on this aspect has submitted that the 
NADA is in operation through an executive order since the year, 2009 and there is already an 
Appeals Panel and a Disciplinary Panel in operation and all cases are being heard. As of now, 
there is very little pendency as the intent is to expedite the hearings and complete the hearings 
within a matter of 1 -4 days so that th e case does not linger for long , in which case the 
sportsperson or the athlete unnecessarily suffers. In this context, it is submitted that there has 
to be a flexibility  as to who should be a vice -Chairperson in case the Chairperson is not 
present, etc. and the current extant arrangemen t in the NADA, in practice for the last many 
years, is already working fine with that flexibility and it is practically serving the purpose. By 
making it too specific, it may restrict the freedom and the operational mobility in the hearing 
for athletes. The Committee agrees with the submission made by the Department and is 
of the view that the flexibility in the formulation of the Clause will be helpful to address 
the practical difficulties that may arise in seeking to define a single Vice -Chairperson in 
the absence of the Chairperson to chair the Disciplinary panel, based on any specified 
parameters of seniority or age or any other criteria.  
 

21 
 
43. The Committee notes that Clause 19 of the Bill provides for the power of entry, 
search and seizure by any person authorised by the Agency for the purpose of determining 
if any Anti -Doping Rule Violation has been committed and the procedure to be adopted 
shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Also, 
sub-clause 1(k) of Cl ause 31, which deals with power to make regulations by Agency,  
states that the procedure for search and seizure of premises, collection of samples, and 
collection of information and whereabouts data, and consequences for wilful delay, 
obstruction, destruction or provision of false information by any person in relation to any 
exercise of power by an empowered person under this Act shall be laid.It has been 
submitted by the Department that Clause 19 defines the power of the Agency to conduct 
procedures in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to 
perform entry, search and seizure in matters of anti-doping cases related to possession and 
trafficking of prohibited substances and methods and suspicious doping at sport facilities 
and training camps to deal with the matters. The power of the Agency will be specified 
under the regulations to coordinate, conduct investigations and sharing anti -doping 
information and evidence amongst the public authorities/agencies in the fight against 
doping in sport. It has further been stated that as per the commitments of the UNESCO 
Convention, the responsibilities of governments are to undertake appropriate measures 
including legislation, regulation, policies or administrative practices to regulate 
manufacturing, trafficking, possession and to restrict availability of prohibited substances 
and methods in the fight against doping in sport. Further, it is informed that many 
countries have their own Anti -Doping Laws like France, US, Italy, Australia, Germany  
etc. wherein it allows their agency to perform investigation and to gather intelligence in 
matters relating to anti -doping rule violations. The Committee deliberated on the issue 
and is of the view that such a power will help in strengthening the anti -doping measures 
and will also be a deterrent for any athlete or support personnel to indulge in doping 
activities. The Committee, however suggests that while laying down the procedure in 
respect of entry, search and seizure and initiating any action in accord ance with the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, due safeguards may be 
provided to protect the rights of athletes and to address the issues of privacy.   
 
44. Clause 26 relates to National Dope Testing Laboratory, established and 
functioning as such and recognizing or establishing more dope testing laboratories. In this 
regard, it has been submitted that the National Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL) was 
established as an autonomous body under the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports,  

22 
 
Government of India in October, 2008. It was registered under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 in order to keep the Laboratory independent and to avoid any conflict of 
interest on testing of the samples of sportspersons and handling of test results .  It is 
accredited by the National Accreditation Board for Testing & Calibration Laboratories 
(NABL) for ISO/IEC: 17025 and the World Anti -Doping Agency (WADA) for testing of 
urine and blood samples from human sports.    The Laboratory is located within precincts 
of the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium Complex and has the state -of-the-art facilities for testing 
of dope samples as per the requirements of WADA and for undertaking research 
activities. As per the WADA International Standards for Laboratories (ISLs), the 
Laboratory is required to spend 10% of its annual budget on research and development 
(R&D). The basic objectives of the National Dope Testing Laboratory are: 
 To establish and maintain World Anti -Doping Agency (WADA) accredited Dope 
Control Laboratory in India; 
 To cooperate with other relevant national/international Anti-Doping organisations; 
 To encourage reciprocal testing between national anti-doping organization; 
 To promote anti-doping research in the country; 
 To maintain quality control systems as per latest version of ISO/IEC: 17025 and 
International Standards of Laboratories of WADA; 
 To conduct testing for In -competition and out -of-competition dope tests on 
sportspersons; 
 To have some international cooperation with other anti -doping labs/organizations  in 
terms of research, training and sharing of knowledge; 
 To perform all things as are incidental or conducive to the attainment of the above 
objectives or any of them which may be conveniently done along with or as 
subsidiary to the objects; 
 To frame rules and develop procedures as per the WADA guidelines. 
It has also been informed that there are a total of 29 WADA -accredited laboratories in the 
world and out of which six are in Asia. The NDTL is one of the six laboratories in Asia 
accredited by WADA. The  other laboratories in Asia are in China, Japan, Korea, Doha and 
Thailand. 
45. The Committee notes that it had undertaken a visit to NDTL to see the facilities and to 
understand the processes being followed in dope testing.  The Committee, in its interacti on 
with Director, NDTL and other Officials was informed that the accreditation of WADA is 
granted on yearly basis and is based on the evaluation of the proficiency testing participation 
results for the particular year.  Also as per the latest WADA ISL Art.  4.4.2.4, a WADA -

23 
 
accredited Laboratory is required to be administratively and operationally independent from 
any Organization that could exert undue pressure on the laboratory and affect the impartial 
execution of its tasks and operations. Further, as per WADA Art.4.6.4.2, noncompliance with 
or failure to establish and/or maintain administrative and operational independence as 
described above in Art. 4.4.2.4, may lead to Analytical Testing Restriction or Suspension of 
the laboratory. The Committee is happy to note that NDTL has met the above WADA ISL 
specifications  and is administratively and operationally independent, and therefore NDTL by 
virtue of its WADA -accreditation, is the principal anti -doping laboratory in the country. It is 
also noted that at pre sent, NDTL is the sole dope testing laboratory in the country which is 
receiving dope samples forwarded by the Testing Authorities from all parts of the country and 
also from neighbouring countries. It has also been informed that the Bill has provision for  
establishment of more number of Dope Testing Laboratories in  addition to NDTL. The 
Committee notes that the NDTL has a number of international client countries making use of 
its facilities like Singapore, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Indonesia  and Nepal. 
Besides that, NDTL is also undertaking research collaborations with National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER ) - Guwahati and CSIR - Indian Institute of 
Integrative Medicine (IIIM), Jammu  and also collaborating with Intern ational laboratories. It 
has also been pointed out that a dedicated  Research Institute for strengthening the Anti -
Doping Science and Education in India  will go a long way in spreading awareness and 
research in the field of doping. The Committee is of the v iew that large scale awareness, 
education and information is  much needed for athletes, coaches, support personnel, 
medical practitioners etc to check and eliminate the menace of doping in sports and to 
maintain the pristine spirit of sports which has been defined as “ the ethical pursuit of 
human excellence through  the dedicated perfection of each Athlete’s natural talents”. 
Towards this pursuit, the Committee recommends that a dedicated institute to undertake 
research and awareness initiatives, develop educational content, run courses 
(Diploma/Degree) needs to be s et upto propagate and promote the vision outlined in the 
Bill for anti -doping measures. The Committee also emphasizes on the need for opening 
more Dope Testing Laboratories in the country, preferably one in each state , to cater to 
the need of the country and to also become a leader in South East Asia region in the 
areas of Anti-Doping Science and Education. 
 
46. The Committee also recommends the following measures to improve and 
strengthen the anti-doping ecosystem in the country:  

24 
 
(i) boosting education, regular counselling and awareness -raising measures  
from grass root level, with specific programmes for different target groups, 
in order to spread positive messages on clean sport and anti-doping work; 
(ii) strengthening the physical resources, in terms of available manpower, for the 
anti-doping bodies such as NADA and NDTL, which are at present greatly 
short-staffed;  
(iii) giving a focused thrust towards starting more sports science and sports 
medicine courses in  various medical colleges/Universities to address the lack 
of qualified personnel in these fields in the country;  
(iv) improving consequential awareness amongst elite athletes, regulation of 
availability of supplements, availability of trained athlete support personnel 
and accessible reference material;  
(v) motivating the athletes to focus on training, natural food diet and proper 
recovery rather than resorting to any unethical means to improve 
performance; 
(vi) enforcing regulatory action towards proper labelling of a nd use of dope -free 
certified supplements. Also, ensuring “Dope -free” certification by 
independent bodies should be made mandatory for supplements or 
nutraceuticals which are regularly consumed by athletes and these should 
only be prescribed by the team physicians or sports physicians, to avoid cases 
of accidental consumption. In addition, establishment of designated shops all 
over the country having certified 'prohibited substance free medicines' and 
supplements for benefit of athletes; 
(vii) putting in place an early detection mechanism for doping at all sports camps 
which are organized for training of athletes so that the efforts of athletes do  
not go in vain, as generally d oping tests are undertaken  just before the 
competition or during the competition, wher eas athletes spend months and 
years preparing for a major event unaware of any accidental consumption of 
any prohibited substance that may have happened earlier;  
(viii) enforcement of a slew of  measures in the various sport camps organized by 
SAI/Sports Federations/other bodies to prevent instances of doping by athletes 
and also to check allegations of foul play. Such measures should include the 
formulation of guidelines for standardization of the protein intake of the 
athletes, strict monitoring of all types of  food/ liquid intake of the selected 
athletes, and in cases of athletes being found guilty for doping through cooked 

25 
 
food in camps, the cooks and food providers in such camps should also be held 
responsible and strict action be taken against them;  
(ix) mandatory provision for having at least one certified sports medicine doctor 
to advise and treat the athletes in every sports  camp. Also, concerted efforts 
be made to declare and ensure the training camps as 'No -Syringe zones', and 
in order to check entry of any  banned/prohibited substances/supplements, 
strict access control measures and baggage x -ray scanning mechanisms of the 
visitors be put in place; 
(x) enforcing athletes' responsibility towards protection of the integrity of sports 
by ensuring the proper complia nce of the “whereabouts guidelines”, under 
which providing accurate and up -to-date “whereabouts” promotes clean 
sports. Thus, the Department/ SAI need to take pro -active steps to publicize 
the whereabouts guidelines/responsibilities and the consequences in  case of 
default by an athlete, for the benefit of athletes/ coaches/ trainers/ support 
personnel;  
(xi) putting in place a mechanism for legal aid to athletes to present their point of 
view before the authorities/ panels;  
(xii) increasing cooperation and coordinati on with fitness centres and gyms so as 
to bring them onboard and  involve them in the fight against doping in 
sports; and 
(xiii) encouraging athletes and other persons to speak out against doping, acting as 
whistleblowers, while protecting them and the privileged  information, and 
also ensuring that such information is used appropriately. 
 
47. The Committee endorses the Bill in its present form. The suggestions/ 
recommendations given by the Committee may however be taken into account at 
appropriate stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
The Committee suggests that such a distinction should be made while 
formulating the rules so that a protective mechanism is available to the minor athletes.
                        (Para 29) 
The Committee is of the v iew that the explanation should be included in the 
Rules so as to provide clarity in respect of what constitutes an Anti -Doping Rule 
Violation (ADRV).            (Para 30) 
The Committee notes that the definition of an “athlete support personnel” 
mentions “or such other person” besides the specified persons.  It is also noted that the 
same has been used in Clauses 3(1) and 3(2) also. It is also noted that witnesses 
appearing before the Committee had also pointed this out and suggested that clarity be 
provided on this aspect. Officials from the Department of Sports and Legislative 
Department, Ministry of Law& Justice clarified in reference to clause 2(e), that the 
term "athlete support personnel" involves everyone who is working for sports, in any 
capacity.  Whether a person is working as a masseur, physiotherapist or any kind of 
support personnel who is directly working with the team, they would all be covered in 
the definition of "athlete support personnel". This is a general definition and that is 
why the d efinition of 'or such other person' has been given. The Committee noted the 
clarification and recommends that clarity in respect of “or such other person” be 
provided in the Rules to be framed as subordinate legislation so that there is no 
ambiguity in understanding as to who are covered in its ambit.                           (Para 31) 
 The Committee recommends that since a number of definitions and provisions in 
the Bill are aligned with the World Anti -Doping Code and are guided by its provisions, 
in orde r to avoid selective or alternative interpretation of the Clauses or their 
application, the relevant  WADA Code provisions and their applicability be 
appropriately  reflected in the regulations, that will follow,  so that the correct import of 
any provision of the Bill is made clear for all concerned.                 (Para 32) 
 The Committee notes and agrees with the clarification; however the Committee 
recommends that in order to make information about the prohibited list easily accessible 
to all, besides including it in the regulations, a mechanism be developed like an App or 
dynamic website, where not only such a list be readily available but also information 
about various supplements,  medicines with their ingredients,  be made available so that 

27 
 
based on such information, the cases of unwilful consumption of a prohibited substance 
can be curtailed/avoided.                       (Para 33) 
The Committee observes that this provision squarely places the onus of 
responsibility on the athlete/ athlete support personnel in respect of ADRVs, restrictions 
on use of prohibited substances and prohibited methods.   The Committee is of the view 
that, in order for athletes/ athlete support personnel to ably adhere to the responsibility 
entrusted , the onus towards cr eating awareness on these aspects falls on the 
Department of Sports, SAI, the Federations , NADA and other stakeholders and they 
must come up with substantive measures to address the issue.     (Para 34) 
The Committee notes the position and observes that s ince the provisions, in their 
application, will commence only after the formulation of the relevant rules/ regulations, 
the Department may expeditiously undertake the exercise of their detailed and 
unambiguous formulation so that the Doping issues in sport s which are sought to be 
addressed through the Bill do not get entangled, thus delaying the impact of the 
legislation.               (Para 35) 
The Committee notes that the concerns raised are genuine and agrees with the 
inclusion of the Therapeutic Use Exemption Clause to facilitate such athletes.  The 
Committee recommends that international practices and convention on the subject may 
be kept in perspective while providing such exceptions and also a detailed Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) in this rega rd may be prepared so that deserving athletes 
do not face any difficulty in being granted such exemptions. The Committee also 
suggests that the Department in coordination with NADA should also undertake a study 
to evaluate if any ingredients, routinely use d in Indian dietary preferences contain any 
WADA prohibited substances, so that such points can be brought to their notice and 
remedial exemptions sought.         (Para 37) 
The Committee recommends that since this is a policy decision, Government may 
examine the issue to provide relief to athletes who have served their penalty and have 
been selected to participate in national/international events and have excelled therein.  
While noting that the quantum of penalties for an Anti -Doping Rule Violation by an 
athlete is determined as per the provisions of the defined Code, the Committee 
recommends that since an athlete’s sporting career is limited to a span of few years, 
there is a need to ensure that the quantum of penalties imposed are proportional to the 
extent/degree of the proven doping violation.           (Para 38) 

28 
 
The Committee notes the provisions and recommends that a Committee/ 
mechanism / process to be followed for selection and appointment of the Chairperson or 
Members of the Board may be laid down to ensure proper vetting of the person(s) who 
are sought to be appointed by the Government.         (Para 39) 
The Committee notes that at present, Anti -Doping Disciplinary and Appeal 
panels are provided within the administrative structure of the NADA. Thus, there is a 
need that the prosecuting agency (NADA) and the Anti -Doping Panels be separated 
both functionally and administratively. In view of this, the Anti -Doping Panels are to be 
constituted, monitored and administered by the Board to ensure fair, impartial and 
timely hearing process.  It has been further informed that the qualifications of the 
appointed chairpersons and members of the panels are as per the stipulated gu idelines 
of the WADA and all the relevant rules for the functioning of the panels will be based 
on the prevailing international standards of the anti -doping program. The details of the 
qualifications, experience, honorarium, discharge of duties and respons ibilities for such 
panel chairperson, members, timelines for listings and case disposal shall be brought 
out under the rules and regulations. The Committee is of the view that any 
apprehension on this count, at this point of time, seems farfetched and note s that the  
proposed mechanism seems to be proper and in agreement with the requirements.  
(Para 40) 
 Thus, the Committee is of the view that such issues will be taken care of while 
formulating the regulations and any concern at this point of time on this issue is 
unfounded.                        (Para 41) 
The Committee agrees with the submission made by the Department and is of 
the view that the flexibility in the formulation of the Clause will be helpful to address 
the practical difficulties that may arise in seeking to define a single Vice -Chairperson in 
the absence of the Chairperson to chair the Disciplinary panel, based on any specified 
parameters of seniority or age or any other criteria.       (Para 42) 
 
The Committee , however suggests that while l aying down the procedure in 
respect of entry, search and seizure and initiating any action in accordance with the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, due safeguards may be provided to 
protect the rights of athletes and to address the issues of privacy.       (Para 43) 

29 
 
The Committee is of the view that large scale awareness, education and 
information is much needed for athletes, coaches, support personnel, medical 
practitioners etc to check and eliminate the menace of doping in sports and to maintain 
the pristine spirit of sports which has been defined as “ the ethical pursuit of human 
excellence through the dedicated perfection of each Athlete’s natural talents”. Towards 
this pursuit, the Committee recommends that a dedicated institute to undertake research 
and awareness  initiatives, develop educational content, run courses (Diploma/Degree) 
needs to be set upto propagate and promote the vision outlined in the Bill for anti -doping 
measures. The Committee also emphasizes on the need for opening more Dope Testing 
Laboratories in the country, preferably one in each state , to cater to the need of the 
country and to also become a leader in South East Asia region in the areas of Anti -
Doping Science and Education.           (Para 44) 
 
The Committee also recommends the following measures to improve and strengthen 
the anti-doping ecosystem in the country:  
(i) boosting education, regular counselling and awareness -raising measures  
from grass root level, with specific programmes for different target groups, 
in order to spread positive messages on clean sport and anti-doping work; 
(ii) strengthening the physical resources, in terms of available manpower, for the 
anti-doping bodies such as NADA and NDTL, which are at present greatly 
short-staffed;  
(iii) giving a focused thrust towards starting more sports science and sports 
medicine courses in various medical colleges/Universities to address the lack 
of qualified personnel in these fields in the country;  
(iv) improving consequential awareness amongst elite athl etes, regulation of 
availability of supplements, availability of trained athlete support personnel 
and accessible reference material;  
(v) motivating the athletes to focus on training, natural food diet and proper 
recovery rather than resorting to any unethical means to improve 
performance; 
(vi) enforcing regulatory action towards proper labelling of and use of dope -free 
certified supplements. Also, ensuring “Dope -free” certification by 
independent bodies should be made mandatory for supplements or 
nutraceuticals which are regularly consumed by athletes and these should 
only be prescribed by the team physicians or sports physicians, to avoid cases 

30 
 
of accidental consumption. In addition, establishment of designated shops all 
over the country having certified ' prohibited substance free medicines' and 
supplements for benefit of athletes; 
(vii) putting in place an early detection mechanism for doping at all sports camps 
which are organized for training of athletes so that the efforts of athletes do  
not go in vain, as g enerally d oping tests are undertaken  just before the 
competition or during the competition, whereas athletes spend months and 
years preparing for a major event unaware of any accidental consumption of 
any prohibited substance that may have happened earlier;  
(viii) enforcement of a slew of  measures in the various sport camps organized by 
SAI/Sports Federations/other bodies to prevent instances of doping by athletes 
and also to check allegations of foul play. Such measures should include the 
formulation of guidel ines for standardization of the protein intake of the 
athletes, strict monitoring of all types of food/ liquid intake of the selected 
athletes, and in cases of athletes being found guilty for doping through cooked 
food in camps, the cooks and food providers in such camps should also be held 
responsible and strict action be taken against them;  
(ix) mandatory provision for having at least one certified sports medicine doctor 
to advise and treat the athletes in every sports  camp. Also, concerted efforts 
be made t o declare and ensure the training camps as 'No -Syringe zones', and 
in order to check entry of any banned/prohibited substances/supplements, 
strict access control measures and baggage x -ray scanning mechanisms of the 
visitors be put in place; 
(x) enforcing athletes' responsibility towards protection of the integrity of sports 
by ensuring the proper compliance of the “whereabouts guidelines”, under 
which providing accurate and up -to-date “whereabouts” promotes clean 
sports. Thus, the Department/ SAI need to take pro-active steps to publicize 
the whereabouts guidelines/responsibilities and the consequences in case of 
default by an athlete, for the benefit of athletes/ coaches/ trainers/ support 
personnel;  
(xi) putting in place a mechanism for legal aid to athletes to p resent their point of 
view before the authorities/ panels;  
(xii) increasing cooperation and coordination with fitness centres and gyms so as 
to bring them onboard and  involve them in the fight against doping in 
sports; and 

31 
 
(xiii) encouraging athletes and other persons to speak out against doping, acting as 
whistleblowers, while protecting them and the privileged information, and 
also ensuring that such information is used appropriately. 
 (Para 46) 
 
The Committee endorses the Bill in its present form. The suggestions/ 
recommendations given by the Committee may however be taken into account at 
appropriate stage.                         (Para 47) 
 
 

32 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, 
WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 
10:30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 19th January, 2022 in Committee Room-‘A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2. Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7. Shr Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
8.  Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
9. Shri Balak Nath 
10. Shri T.N. Prathapan 
11. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
12. Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.D. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3.  Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
5. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
 
  

33 
 
I. DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS, MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS 
AND SPORTS 
1. Smt. Sujata Chaturvedi, Secretary 
2. Shri L.S. Singh, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Puran Lal Sahu, Director, NDTL 
4. Shri S. Perumal, SPO, NADA 
5. Cmde.  (Retd.) Pushpendra Kumar Garg, CEO (TOPS) 
   
 II.      SPORTS FEDERATIONS 
1. Shri Adille J. Sumariwala, President, Athletics Federation of India 
2. Shri Ajay Singh, President, Boxing Federation of India 
3. Shri Jagmander Singh, Dronacharya Awardee – Chief Coach of 
Indian Team  
4. Shri Mahabir Prasad, Dronacharya Awardee – Chief Coach, NCEO 
5. Shri S.B. Prasad, Assistant Coach 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman  informed that the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha in consultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha has referred two Bills, 
namely “The Prohibition of Child Marriage (Amendment) Bill, 2021” and “The 
National Anti-Doping Bill, 2021”, as introduced and pending in the Lok Sabha, to 
the Committee for examination and report within three months. He further 
informed that the Committee is starting its deliberations on "The National Anti-
Doping Bill, 2021” and shall be hearing the views of the Secretary, Department of 
Sports on the Bill in the meeting. He also informed that representatives from the 
Sports Authority of India and certain sports federations such as Athletics 
Federation of India, Boxing Federation of India and Wrestling Federation of India 
have also been invited to present their views on the “The National Anti-Doping 
Bill, 2021”. 
3. The Chairman mentioned that “The National Anti-Doping Bill, 2021” is in 
compliance with the objectives of the UNESCO International Convention Against 
Doping in Sport which calls for suitable legislation to be enacted by every State 
Party. The Bill would facilitate putting in place a statutory framework for the 
independent operations of National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA), the National 

34 
 
Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL) and other dope testing laboratories, and for 
creation of the National Board for Anti-Doping in Sports to carry out anti-doping 
activities and ensure dope-free sport in India.  
4. With these remarks, the Chairman asked the Secretary, Department of Sports 
to present her views on the Bill before the Committee, followed by other Officers 
from the Department.   
Oral Evidence of Secretary, Department of Sports 
5. The Secretary (Department of Sports) made a presentation before the 
Committee outlining the need/objectives/details of the Bill with the purpose of 
strengthening the Anti-Doping framework in the country. She mentioned that the 
Bill would strengthen compliance of UNESCO Convention against Doping in 
Sport, 2005 and the World Anti-Doping Code, 2021. She stated that the regulatory 
framework would comprise of setting up of the National Board for Anti-Doping in 
Sports along with a Disciplinary Panel and an Appeal Panel,  incorporation of the 
National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA) and the National Doping Testing 
Laboratory (NDTL). 
6. Elaborating on the powers and functions of the National Board for Anti-
Doping in Sports, she highlighted that its major role is to oversee the activities of 
NADA, advise Central Government and constitution of Anti-Doping Panels.  The 
Board would have a Chairperson with 2 Members, all having a 3 year term or till 
they attain 65 years of age with a cooling period of one year. She also highlighted 
some key features of NADA such as implementation of commitments of UNESCO 
Convention, adopting Anti-Doping rules which conform to the World Anti-Doping 
Code, powers and functions of NADA such as result management, power of 
entry/search and seizure in matters relating to anti-doping rules violations and 

35 
 
carrying out Anti-Doping education and awareness programmes for athletes and 
other major stakeholders.  
7. The Director, NDTL mentioned that the Bill has a provision for establishing 
and recognizing more Dope Testing Laboratories to boost the capability of country 
to host mega sport events. It also intends to achieve goals for ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ 
and in becoming world leader in Anti-Doping science. He also enlightened the 
Committee with some recent developments in Anti-Doping such as Gene-Doping, 
improving detection methods, introduction of artificial intelligence, Athlete 
Biological Passport (ABP) and development of new Biomarkers.   
8. The Members raised various queries and expressed their views on the 
subject. Some of the queries raised by the Members were responded to by the 
Secretary and Joint Secretary, Department of Sports. Secretary also mentioned that 
the Department of Sports would send responses to the queries raised by the 
Members.   
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
Oral Evidence of representatives of Sport Federations 
9.  Shri Adille J. Sumariwala, President, Athletics Federation of India said that 
the Bill is very important for sports in India as it would establish the National 
Board for Anti Doping in Sports which would oversee the functioning of three 
agencies, namely NADA, NDTL and an independent hearing panel. It would help 
in efficient working of the NDTL and NADA. He also highlighted the fact that the 
Bill will also help all stakeholders and athletes because it provides for education 
and provision for searches and seizures which is very important and will give teeth 
to the NADA.    

36 
 
10. Shri Ajay Singh, President, Boxing Federation of India said that though the 
Bill does touch upon education but there is a need for greater emphasis on 
sensitization and on training, considering that many sportsperson come from lower 
income category who do not have adequate knowledge about doping. He also 
stated the fact that many sports persons do not even know what is being imbibed 
and they think that they are having proteins, but actually it could be some 
performance-enhancement substance which could hamper their performance and 
health severely. He concluded his deposition by mentioning that effort should be 
towards building an informed and positive environment and encouraging people to 
follow the law rather than inflicting punishment as it can be misused and abused. 
11. Cmde. (Retd.) Pushpendra Kumar Garg, CEO, (TOPS) informed that though 
at present NADA rules govern anti-doping, with the Bill becoming a law and  
available as a statute, it will lead to better application of measures to curb doping. 
He also mentioned that the law will be able to control dilution of rules and 
regulations by respective authorities, which happens when sportspersons file Court 
cases. On a specific query as to whether TOPS (Target Olympic Podium Scheme) 
was consulted, he mentioned that views of the Sports Authority of India (SAI) 
were taken while formulating the Bill.  
12. Shri Jagmander Singh, Dronacharya Awardee and Chief Coach of Indian 
Wrestling Team; Shri Mahabir Prasad, Dronacharya Awardee, Chief Coach, 
NCEO; and Shri S.B. Prasad, Assistant Coach deposed before the Committee 
stating that more education and sensitization programmes be conducted with 
regard to Anti-Doping in sports in India, especially for the new sportspersons who 
come from rural/ different backgrounds having little knowledge of 
banned/prohibited consumable substances/food etc. The representatives also 
sought better coordination with the Sport federations and NADA to conduct 
regular classes on doping besides measures for periodic surveys of athletes' health 

37 
 
and fitness. They also mentioned that Coaches try to make  the sportspersons 
aware of the dangers of doping and its consequences.   
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
13.  Chairman mentioned that the Committee will continue discussing the various 
provisions of the Bill in its forthcoming meetings also.   
14. The meeting adjourned at 12:48 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,            A.K. Mallick       
19th January, 2022                   Director 
                                                                                                

38 
 
    
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, 
CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 10:30 A.M. 
on Monday, the 7th March, 2022 in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2. Ms. Sushmita Dev  
3.  Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
4. Shri K. C. Ramamurthy 
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
6. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
8. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
9. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
10. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
11. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
12. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
13. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
14. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
15. Shri Dharambir Singh 
16. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.D. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3.  Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
  
I. DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS 
 
i. Shri L. S. Singh    Joint Secretary 
ii. Shri Arun Kumar Yadav   Director 
iii. Dr. Puran Lal Sahu    Director, NDTL 
iv. Dr. S. Perumal    SPO, NDTL 
v. Shri B.J. Verma    Assistant Project Officer, NADA 
vi. Shri Ajeet Singh    AAO, NADA   
 

39 
 
II. MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
i. Ms. Veena Kothavale  Joint Secretary & Legislative Council 
ii.  Shri Prashant Singh  Deputy Legislative Council 
 
III. PARALYMPIC COMMITTEE OF INDIA 
i. Shri Gursharan Singh  Secretary General 
 
IV. INDIAN WEIGHTLIFTING FEDERATION 
i. Mr. Sahdev Yadav  President 
ii. Mr. Arnab Das   Chief Executive Officer 
 
IV. SPORTSPERSON AFFECTED BY DOPING 
 
i. Mr. Sumit Sangwan (Boxing) 
ii.           Mr. Amit Panghal (Boxing) 
 
 
iii. Mr. K. Ravi Kumar (Weightlifting)   
iv. Shri Narsingh Pancham Yadav (Wrestling) 
 
VI. NON-OFFICIALS WITNESSES 
 
i. Shri Abhishek Sinha  Convenor- Centre for School of Law, UPES University 
ii. Dr. M.R. Madhavan   President, PRS Legislative Research 
iii. Ms. Prachee Mishra   PRS Legislative Research 
iv. Shri Parth Kalke   Sports Management Professional, Mumbai 
 
2.        At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Hon’ble Members and stated that this full 
day meeting has been scheduled to further deliberate on the National Anti-Doping Bill, 2021, 
which has been referred to the Committee. He recalled that the Committee had already held 
one meeting on the Bill on 19th January, 2022 wherein the Committee heard the views of the 
Secretary, Department of Sports and the representatives from Sports Authority of India and 
three Sports Federations namely, Athletics Federation of India, Boxing Federation of India 
and Wrestling Federation of India on the Bill. He informed that in today’s meeting the 
Committee will be hearing the views of some prominent sportspersons, who have had Anti-
Doping Rule Violations against them, as well as representatives of two more Sports 
Federations namely, Indian Weightlifting Federation and Paralympics Committee of India as 
regarding their perspective on the Bill. Thereafter, the Committee will hear the depositions of 
a few stakeholders who have given their suggestions on the Bill.  
3. Chairman also informed that the Committee will undertake clause-by-clause 
consideration of the Bill towards which Officials from the Department of Sports and the 
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice have been invited. It was further informed 
that after concluding these the Committee will undertake a visit to National Dope Testing 
Laboratory (NDTL), New Delhi to have a first-hand account of how the dope-testing is done 
and what facilities are available with the lab. 

40 
 
4.  The invited sportspersons then presented their views on the subject before the 
Committee and pointed out various minor and major issues to the Committee such as lack of 
anti-doping awareness among the young sport persons and low awareness about the 
consumption of various nutrition/ health based supplements and their effects on health. They 
also suggested for providing some legal aid to the sportspersons charged under doping 
offence, to present their case before the authorities.  
(The sportspersons then withdrew) 
5.       Shri Gursharan Singh, Secretary General, Paralympic Committee of India submitted 
that strict action be taken against anyone found indulging in doping including the 
sportspersons, Coaches and support personnel. There should be no leniency based on the 
ignorance of law or on grounds of “unwillingly commission of mistake”.  He also mentioned 
that awareness campaign and regular workshops are necessary to check the menace of 
doping.  
6.     Shri Sahdev Yadav, President and Shri Arnab Das, Chief Executive Officer, Indian 
Weightlifting Federation stated that instances of doping in Weightlifting are much more as 
compared to other sports as it is a power game and sportspersons many time look for easy 
way to push ahead. It was also mentioned that there is easy access to prohibited supplements 
at medical stores and there is a need to check their sale and use. It was also pointed out that 
apart from the sportspersons who are caught, no action is taken against the doctor who may 
have prescribed the medicine, coaches or shops which are selling supplements with 
prohibited substances etc and the sportsperson alone has to bear all the consequences , if 
found positive. Prohibited supplements are also being brought from abroad and some kind of 
check must be put on them too. They stressed on the need for bigger deterrent for anyone 
found complicit in doping.  
 (The representatives from Indian Weightlifting Federation and Paralympic Committee of 
India then withdrew) 
7.        The non-official witnesses highlighted some clauses of the Bill which in their 
perspective needed clarity and suggested the changes to be incorporated in the Bill. They also 
emphasized upon conduction of awareness campaigns, training and regular workshops with 
an educational perspective. 
(The non-official witnesses then withdrew) 

41 
 
8.       The Committee thereafter under took Clause by Clause deliberations on the Bill. 
Officers of Department of Sports and Legislative Department in their depositions addressed 
various issues raised by the Chairman and Members in respect of the Bill and gave the 
necessary clarifications. Officers from Department of sports, NADA and NDTL also outlined 
the need/objectives/details of the Bill with the purpose of strengthening the Anti-Doping 
framework in the country.   
(The representatives from Department of Sports and Legislative Department then withdrew) 
9.        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
10.    The meeting adjourned at 1:55 P.M. 
 New Delhi,                                                                                                            A.K. Mallick 
 7th March, 2022                                                                                                       Director 

42 
 
    
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, 
CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 3:00 P.M. 
on Tuesday, the 22nd March, 2022 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2. Ms. Sushmita Dev  
3.  Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
4. Shri K. C. Ramamurthy 
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
6. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
7. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
8. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
9. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
11. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
12. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
13. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
14. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
15. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
16. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
17. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
18. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
19. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
20. Shri Dharambir Singh 
21. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3.  Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He then informed that the agenda for the meeting was to deliberate upon the draft 
Report in connection with the examination of ‘The National Anti-Doping Bill, 2021’. 

43 
 
2. The Chairman suggested some more recommendations which were agreed to by the 
Committee. The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Report and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with suggested recommendations. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament 
during the ongoing Session of the Parliament, preferably on 23rd March, 2022. The 
Committee, accordingly, authorized Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe, Chairman of the 
Committee and in his absence, Shri Gopal Narayan Singh, M.P. to present the Reports in the 
Rajya Sabha. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Anubhav Mohanty, M.P. 
were authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
4. The Chairman also informed that in response to the Advertisement that was issued in 
newspapers on 23rd January, 2022 in connection with “The Prohibition of Child Marriage 
(Amendment), Bill, 2021”, approximately one lakh suggestions have been received from the 
public and the Secretariat is going through them to cull out substantive suggestions. As the 
time for examination of this Bill was three months which is ending on 24th March, 2022, he 
had requested Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for granting extension by three months for 
concluding the deliberations and for presentation of the Report to which he has consented. 
So, in the coming days, the Committee will be deliberating on that Bill in our future 
meetings.  
5. A verbatim record of the meeting was kept. 
6.    The meeting adjourned at 3:20 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                A.K. Mallick  
22nd March, 2022                                                                                            Director 
 

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 160 of 2021
THE NATIONAL ANTI-DOPING BILL, 2021
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
PROHIBITION OF DOPING IN SPORT AND ANTI-DOPING RULE VIOLA TIONS
3. Prohibition of doping in sport.
4. Anti-Doping Rule Violations.
5. Therapeutic use exemptions.
6. Consequences of Anti-Doping Rule Violations.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL BOARD FOR ANTI-DOPING IN SPORTS
7. Establishment and constitution of National Board for Anti-Doping in Sports.
8. Meetings of Board.
9. Officers and employees of Board.
10. Powers and functions of Board.
11. Disciplinary Panel.
12. Appeal Panel.
13. Annual report.
CHAPTER IV
N
ATIONAL ANTI-DOPING AGENCY
14. Incorporation of National Anti-Doping Agency.
15. Director General.
16. Powers and functions of Agency.
17. Power to constitute committees.
18. Constitution of investigation teams and engagement of experts and professionals
by Agency.
CHAPTER V
D
OPING CONTROL PROCESS
19. Power of entry, search and seizure.
20. Power of collecting samples and testing.

(ii)
21. Result Management process.
22. Hearing by Disciplinary Panel and determination of consequences thereof.
23. Hearing of appeal by Appeal Panel.
CHAPTER VI
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS
24. Grants by Central Government.
25. Accounts and audit.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
26. Dope testing laboratories.
27. Data of athletes and maintenance of database.
28. Application of Act, rules and regulations to others athletes and sports bodies, etc.
29. Power to make rules.
30. Power to make regulations by Agency.
31. Power to make regulations by Board.
32. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
33. Power to remove difficulties.
34. Transitional provisions.
(ii)
CLAUSES

1
Bill No. 160 of 2021
THE NATIONAL ANTI-DOPING BILL, 2021
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the National Anti-Doping Agency for regulating
anti-doping activities in sports and to give effect to the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation International Convention against doping in
sport, and compliance of such other obligations and commitments thereunder and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS India is a signatory to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation International Convention against doping in sport;
AND  WHEREAS  India has ratified the said Convention on the 7th day of
November, 2007;
AND WHEREAS it is considered expedient to maintain highest standards of integrity
while participating and preparing for sports competition domestically and internationally, to
regulate anti-doping activities in sports and to meet obligations of India under the said
Convention.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Anti-Doping Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Agency" means the National Anti-Doping Agency incorporated and
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 14;
(b) "Anti-Doping Rule Violation" means the circumstance, act or conduct
specified in section 4 which constitutes violation of anti-doping rules as laid down
under the Code;
(c) "Appeal panel" means the National Anti-Doping Appeal panel constituted
under section 12;
(d) "athlete" means any person who competes in any sport at the national level
or international level or participates in any competition or event to which this Act
applies;
(e) "athlete support personnel" means any coach, trainer, manager, agent, team
staff, official, medical or paramedical personnel or such other person working with or
treating or assisting an athlete who is participating in, or preparing for, a competition or
event at the national level or international level or to which this Act applies;
(f) "Board" means the National Board for Anti-Doping in Sports established
under sub-section (1) of section 7;
(g) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under
sub-section (2) of section 7;
(h) "Code" means the World Anti-Doping Code adopted and amended from time
to time by the World Anti-Doping Agency;
(i) "competition" means a single race, match, game or singular contest;
(j) "Convention" means the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation International Convention against doping in sport;
(k) "Director General" means the Director General appointed under
sub-section (3) of section 14;
(l) "Disciplinary Panel" means the National Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 11;
(m) "dope testing laboratory" means a laboratory established or recognised
under section 26;
(n) "doping Control" includes all steps and processes from test distribution
planning up to the disposal of any appeal and enforcement of consequences, including
all steps and processes in between, including but not limited to, testing, investigation,
whereabouts, Therapeutic Use Exemptions, sample collection and handling, laboratory
analysis, Results Management, hearings and appeals, and investigations or proceedings
relating to an Anti-doping Rule Violation;
(o) "doping in sport" means the occurrence of any Anti-Doping Rule Violations
specified in section 4;
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(p) "event" means a series of individual competitions conducted together under
any one ruling body, such as Olympic Games, World Championships of an International
Federation and such other event;
(q) "In-competition Testing" means collection of sample for testing from an
athlete who is participating in a competition where such collection is made at any time
during the period commencing at 11:59 p.m. on the day before the competition in which
such athlete is scheduled to participate till the end of such competition;
(r) "international event" means an event or competition where the International
Olympic Committee, the International Paralympic Committee, an International
Federation, a major event organisation or another international sport organisation is
the governing body for such event or appoints the technical officials for the event;
(s) "International Federation" means the international governing body for a
particular sport;
(t) "Member" means a Member of the Board appointed under sub-section (2) of
section 7 and includes the Chairperson thereof;
(u) "national event" means a sport event or competition involving international
level or national level athletes which is not an international event;
(v) "National Sports Federation" means any recognised body governing a
particular sport to which the Code is applicable;
(w) "Other Anti-Doping Organisations" means organisations which are
responsible for adopting anti-doping rules for initiating, implementing or enforcing
any part of the doping control process and include the World Anti-Doping Agency,
the International Olympic Committee, the International Paralympic Committee, other
major event organisations that conduct testing at their events and International
Federations, but does not include the Agency;
(x) "Out-of-competition Testing" means sample collection during any period
other than the period specified for in-competition testing;
(y) "person" means a natural person or an Organisation or other entity;
(z) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(za) "Prohibited List" means the list of prohibited substances and prohibited
methods specified by the Agency by regulations;
(zb) "prohibited method" means any method listed in the Prohibited List;
(zc) "prohibited substance" means any substance listed in the Prohibited List;
(zd) "regulations" means regulations made by the Board or the Agency, as the
case may be;
(ze) "sample" means any biological material collected from an athlete for the
purpose of doping control under this Act;
(zf) "Society" means the National Anti-Doping Agency or the National Dope
Testing Laboratory, as the case may be, registered as a society under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 and functioning as such immediately before the commencement
of this Act;
(zg) "testing" means the parts of the doping control process involving test
distribution planning, sample collection, sample handling, sample transport to the
laboratory and testing of samples;
(zh) "use" means the application, ingestion, injection or consumption by any
means whatsoever of any prohibited substance or prohibited method;
21 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(zi) "World Anti-Doping Agency" means an international agency established
on 10th November, 1999 in Switzerland which adopts and amends the Code for giving
effect to anti-doping policies and international standards.
CHAPTER II
P
ROHIBITION OF DOPING IN SPORT AND ANTI-DOPING RULE VIOLATIONS
3. (1) No athlete, athlete support personnel or other persons shall indulge in doping in
sport.
(2) Every athlete, athlete support personnel or other persons shall ensure that there is
no occurrence of any Anti-Doping Rule Violation as specified in section 4.
(3) Every athlete shall participate in a sport competition at all levels with highest
standards of integrity and ethics and in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the
rules and regulations made thereunder.
(4) Every athlete and athlete support personnel participating in a sport competition
shall accept the anti-doping rules as a condition of such participation or involvement and be
bound by the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder.
(5) Every athlete, athlete support personnel and other persons shall be responsible for
knowing what constitutes Anti-Doping Rule Violations and the restrictions on the use of
prohibited substances and the prohibited methods which are included in the Prohibited List.
4. Any one or more of the following circumstances or acts conduct by an athlete or
athlete support personnel or other persons shall constitute Anti-Doping Rule Violation for
the purposes of this Act, namely:—
(a) the presence of a prohibited substance or its metabolites or markers in an
athlete's sample;
(b) use or attempted use of any prohibited substance or a prohibited method,
unless such use is exempted by the Agency under section 5;
(c) refusing or failing without compelling justification, to submit sample   collection
after  notification  as  authorised  in  applicable  anti-doping  rules or otherwise evading
sample collection;
(d) whereabouts failure.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the term "whereabouts failure"
means—
(i) filing failure, that is to say, the athlete has failed to submit his
whereabouts information before the required deadline or to update the same
after change in circumstances or if submitted on time, has submitted incomplete,
inaccurate or insufficient information to locate him for testing; or
(ii) missed test, that is to say, though the athlete has filed his whereabouts
information, he is not available at the location for testing; or
(iii) such other omissions or failures as may be specified by the Agency
by regulations;
(e) tampering, or attempting to tamper, with any part of doping control;
(f) possession of prohibited substances or prohibited methods;
(g) trafficking or attempted trafficking in any prohibited substance or prohibited
method;
(h) administration or attempted administration of a prohibited substance or
prohibited method to any athlete or to an athlete out of competition;
Prohibition of
doping in
sport.
Anti-Doping
Rule
Violations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(i) assisting, encouraging, aiding, abetting, conspiring, covering up or any other
type of complicity involving an Anti-Doping Rule Violation or any attempted
Anti-Doping Rule Violation or violation of the prohibition against participation during
ineligibility or provisional suspension;
(j) prohibited association with such athlete support personnel as may be specified
by the Agency by regulations;
(k) discouraging or retaliating against reporting to authorities;
(l) such other circumstances, or engaging in such other acts or conduct, which
amounts to Anti-Doping Rule Violation, as may be specified by the Agency by
regulations.
5. (1) Where any substance or method is included in the Prohibited List and such
prohibited substance or prohibited method is required for use by any athlete on the ground
of medical conditions, such athlete may make an application to the Agency for granting
therapeutic use exemption in respect of such prohibited substance or prohibited method.
(2) The Agency may consider the application received by it under sub-section (1) in
such manner and after taking into consideration such criteria as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The Agency shall, either grant or refuse to grant therapeutic use exemptions in
respect of the application received under sub-section (1), in such manner as may be specified
by regulations.
(4) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Agency under sub-section ( 3) may
prefer an appeal to the Appeal Panel.
6. (1) The consequences of Anti-Doping Rule Violations by an individual athlete or
athlete support personnel may result in one or more of the following, namely:—
 (a) disqualification of results with all consequences including forfeiture of
medals, points and prizes, in such manner as may be specified by the Agency by
regulations;
(b) ineligibility to participate in any competition or event or other activity or
funding, for such period and in such manner, as may be specified by the Agency by
regulations;
(c) provisional suspension from participating in any competition or activity prior
to the decision in appeal under section 23 in such manner as may be specified by the
Agency by regulations;
(d) imposition of financial sanction including proportionate recovery of costs, in
such manner as may be specified by the Agency by regulations;
(e) such other consequences as may be specified by the Agency by regulations.
(2) The consequences of Anti-Doping Rule Violations for team sports shall be such as
may be specified by regulations.
CHAPTER III
N
A TIONAL BOARD FOR ANTI-DOPING IN SPORTS
7. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established, for the purposes of this
Act, a Board to be called the National Board for Anti-Doping in Sports.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and two Members to be appointed by the
Central Government:
Provided that no person shall be appointed as the Chairperson or Member of the
Board, or continue to hold such position, if such person is involved in the management or
operation of any International Federation, National Sports Federation, Major Event
Consequences
of Anti-
Doping Rule
Violations.
Establishment
and
constitution of
National
Board for
Anti-Doping
in Sports.
Therapeutic
use
exemptions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
Organisation, National Olympic Committee, National Paralympic Committee or is in the
Government department with responsibility for sport or anti-doping.
(3) The Chairperson shall be a person of ability, integrity and standing who has
knowledge and experience of not less than twenty years in the field of general administration,
sport administration or is a retired eminent athlete.
(4) A Member shall be a person of ability, integrity and standing who has knowledge
and experience of not less than fifteen years in the field of general administration, medical
sciences, law or is a retired eminent athlete.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the term "eminent athlete" means
a sportsperson who has been conferred with a national sports award or Padma award for his
outstanding contribution to the development of national sports in terms of medals won in
international events.
(5) The term of office of the Chairperson and members shall be three years or till they
attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.
(6) In the event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or
Member by reason of death, resignation or otherwise, or, when the Chairperson or Member
is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Central
Government may assign temporary charge of such office to any person who fulfils the
requisite qualification and experience as provided in section 7, and such person shall discharge
the functions of the Chairperson or  Member, as the case may be, until a new Chairperson or
Member, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters
upon his office, or until the date on which the Chairperson or Member resumes the charge of
his functions.
(7) The Chairperson or a Member shall not accept, either during his term of office or for
a period of one year from the date on which he ceases to hold office, any employment, in any
capacity whatsoever, with any International Federation or National Sports Federation or
with any organisation, body or entity whose matter has been dealt with, directly or indirectly,
by such Chairperson or Member:
Provided that nothing contained herein shall be construed as preventing such person
from accepting an employment in a body or institution controlled or maintained by the
Central Government or a State Government.
(8) The Chairperson or a Member may—
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government, a notice
of not less than three months; or
(b) be removed from his office by the Central Government, if he—
 (i) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(ii) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(iii) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or
(iv) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a Member; or
(v) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest:
Provided that no person shall be so removed from his office under
sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause ( v) of clause ( b), unless such person has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(9) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of, the
Chairperson and members shall be such as may be as prescribed.
8. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe such procedure
with regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at such
meetings) as may be provided by regulations made by the Board.
(2) Every decision of the Board shall, as far as possible, be on the basis of a simple
majority.
(3) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidated merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board;
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the
case.
9. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Board with such officers and employees
as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of, officers
and other employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
10. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall be responsible for ensuring
implementation of the provisions of the Convention and monitoring the compliance thereof.
(2) The Board shall advise the Central Government and make recommendations relating
to regulating anti-doping in sports and compliance with the Convention.
(3) The Board shall oversee the activities of the Agency and may call for such
information and reports from the Agency as may be required for ensuring compliance with
the provisions of the Convention and the Code, including reports on—
(a) the activities of Agency towards ensuring compliance with the anti-doping
rules and standards laid down by the World Anti-Doping Agency;
(b) matters of integrity and fair play in sports;
(c) implementation of the notified or adopted anti-doping measures or policies;
(d) strategic planning of its anti-doping activities for the forthcoming years;
(e) any other matter which the Board may deem expedient for fulfilling the objective
of eliminating doping in Sports.
(4) The Board may issue such directions to the Agency as may be necessary for
effective and timely implementation of the Convention and the Code.
(5) The Board may call for such information from the Disciplinary Panel and the Appeal
Panel on its operations and issue such directions, as may be necessary, for the effective and
timely discharge of their functions with respect to Anti-Doping Rule Violations under this
Act:
Provided that such directions shall be limited to procedural efficiency of the Disciplinary
Panel and the Appeal Panel and shall not, in any case, interfere with their decision making
process.
11. (1) The Board shall, for the purpose of determining the consequences of
Anti-Doping Rule Violations under this Act, constitute a National Anti-Doping Disciplinary
Panel, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Disciplinary Panel shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, who is a legal expert, having not less than ten years of standing
as legal practitioner;
Meetings of
Board.
Officers and
employees of
Board.
Powers and
functions of
Board.
Disciplinary
Panel.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(b) four Vice-Chairpersons, who are legal experts, having not less than seven
years of standing as legal practitioners;
(c) five members, who are registered medical practitioners, having not less than
five years of standing;
(d) five members, who are sports administrators for not less than five years or
retired eminent athlete.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Disciplinary Panel
shall be appointed by the Board for a term of two years, in such manner and subject to such
conditions, as may be specified by regulations:
 Provided that each member shall be eligible for reappointment.
(4) If a member of Disciplinary Panel dies or resigns, or is otherwise removed from the
Panel by the Board on such grounds as may be specified by regulations, the Board may
appoint a suitable person to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the term of the member in
whose place such person is appointed.
(5) For the purposes of hearing and determining consequences of Anti-Doping Rule
Violations under this Act, a hearing panel of three members shall be formed by the Chairperson
of the Disciplinary Panel or in his absence, by the Vice-Chairperson; and each such panel
shall consist of the Chairperson or the Vice-Chairperson as its Chairperson, one member who
is a medical practitioner and other member who is a sports administrator or retired eminent
athlete.
12. (1) For the purposes of hearing of appeals under this Act, the Board shall constitute
a National Anti-Doping Appeal Panel, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Appeal Panel shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, who is a retired Judge of a High Court;
(b) a Vice-Chairperson, who is a legal expert, having not less than ten years of
standing as legal practitioner;
(c) two members, who are registered medical practitioners, having not less than
ten years of standing;
(d) two members, who are, or have been, retired eminent athletes or sports
administrators for not less than ten years.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Appeal Panel shall be
appointed by the Board for a term of two years, in such manner and subject to such conditions,
as may be specified by regulations:
Provided that each member shall be eligible for reappointment.
(4) If a Panel member dies or resigns, or is otherwise removed from the Panel by the
Board on such grounds as may be specified by regulations, the Board may appoint a suitable
person to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the term of the member in whose place such
person is appointed.
(5) For the purposes of hearing of appeals under this Act, a panel of three members
shall be formed by the Chairperson of the Appeal Panel or in his absence, by the
Vice-Chairperson; and each such panel shall consist of the Chairperson or the Vice-Chairperson
as its Chairperson, one member who is a medical practitioner and other member who is a
sports administrator or retired eminent athlete.
13. (1) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government an annual report containing
such details of the steps taken, proposals made, researches undertaken and other measures
undertaken by it in pursuance of its functions under section 10, in such form and manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report furnished under
sub-section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Appeal Panel.
Annual
report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
CHAPTER IV
NATIONAL ANTI-DOPING AGENCY
14. (1) The National Anti-Doping Agency, established as a society and functioning as
such, prior to the coming into force of this Act, is hereby constituted a body corporate by the
same name, and as such body corporate, it shall have perpetual succession and a common
seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by that name, sue and be
sued.
(2) The Head Office of the Agency shall be at New Delhi.
(3) The Agency shall be headed by an officer designated as the Director General to be
appointed by the Central Government:
Provided that the Director General appointed prior to the commencement of this Act
and holding the office as such, shall be deemed to have been appointed as the Director
General under this Act.
(4) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Board, determine the number,
nature and categories of officers and other staff required to assist the Agency in the discharge
of its function and provide the Agency with such officers and employees as it may deem fit.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of, the Director General, officers, and other staff of the Agency shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(6) The power to oversee the activities of the Agency shall vest in the Board.
15. (1) The Director General shall be appointed by the Central Government from amongst
persons of integrity and outstanding ability possessing such qualifications and experience
as may be prescribed.
(2) The Director General shall hold office on full-time basis for a period of three years,
which may be extended to such further period, as the Central Government deems fit.
(3) The Director General shall be responsible for the execution of the powers and
functions of the Agency specified in section 16.
(4) The Board may assign such responsibilities to the Director General from time to
time as it may deem expedient for fulfilling the objective of eliminating doping in sport.
(5) In the event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of the Director General by
reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Central Government may appoint any other
person to discharge the functions of the Director General until a new Director General is
appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy.
(6) When the Director General is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence,
illness or any other cause, the Central Government may appoint any other person to act as
the Director General until the date on which the Director General resumes the charge of his
functions.
(7) The Director General may relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central
Government a notice of not less than three months:
Provided that such resignation shall be effective from the date when it is accepted by
the Central Government.
(8) The Central Government may remove the Director General at any time before the
expiry of his term of office on the ground of proven misbehavior or incapacity or such other
ground, after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against any such charge.
(9) The Director General shall have administrative control over the officers and other
staff of the Agency.
Incorporation
of National
Anti-Doping
Agency.
Director
General.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
16. (1) The Agency shall be responsible for adopting and implementing anti-doping
rules and policies which conform with the Code and for promoting, coordinating, and
monitoring the doping control programme in sports to ensure dope-free sport in India.
(2) The Agency shall have the primary responsibility to implement the provisions of
this Act and may direct the collection of samples, manage test results and conduct results
management at the national level.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Agency shall
perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) the planning, co-ordination, implementation and monitoring of anti-doping
activities, including effective testing and whereabouts management;
(b) taking measures to prevent Anti-Doping Rule Violations;
(c) undertaking anti-doping sensitisation and advocacy measures;
(d) carrying out investigation and conducting results management of any
Anti-Doping Rule Violations;
(e) adopting and implementing anti-doping rules and policies which conform
with the Code and the international standards and perform its functions in accordance
with such rules and policies;
(f) implementing the Convention in accordance with the Act;
(g) enforcing anti-doping rules by exercising authority over athletes, athlete
support personnel and other persons, including National Sports Federations and other
sports organisations;
(h) promoting anti-doping research;
(i) coordinating and cooperating with the World Anti-Doping Agency, Other
Anti-Doping Organisations, National Sports Federations and International Federations;
(j) coordinate and collaborate with concerned authorities and stakeholders in
matters relating to establishment of best practices in the marketing and distribution of
nutritional supplements including information regarding their analytical composition
and quality assurance;
(k) facilitating sharing and free flow of information relating to the use of doping
substances, doping practices or any Anti-Doping Rule Violation between sports bodies,
officials conducting competition or event, Other Anti-Doping Organisations and the
Agency;
(l) establishing code of conduct for officers and employees of the Agency and
for such other persons or agencies engaged by the Agency;
(m) establishing standards for the manufacturing of nutritional supplements for
sport in India;
(n) undertaking any other activity specified by regulations by the Board that
may be expedient for fulfilling the objective of eliminating doping in sport.
(4) The Agency may make such regulations, as it deems necessary, for the effective
discharge of its functions.
17. The Agency may constitute such committees, as it deems fit, for the discharge of
its function under this Act, including Therapeutic Exemption Committee, Investigation
Committee, Sample Collection and Testing Committee, Result Management Committee,
Education Committee and Sanction Committee, in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
Powers and
functions of
Agency.
Power to
constitute
committees.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
18. (1) Where the Agency considers it necessary so to do, it may constitute one or
more investigation teams, consisting of such officers or such persons, as it thinks necessary,
for the purposes of carrying out its functions under this Act.
(2) The Agency may engage such number of experts and professionals, having such
qualifications and experience, and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations, to
assist the Agency in the discharge of its functions under this Act.
CHAPTER V
D
OPING CONTROL PROCESS
19. (1) Where the Agency has reasons to believe that an athlete or athlete support
personnel or any other person to whom this Act applies has committed an Anti-Doping Rule
Violation, any person authorised by the Agency may, in accordance with the provisions of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,—
(a) enter any place, at all reasonable times, with such assistance as is considered
necessary, for the purpose of inspecting, examining and determining if any Anti-Doping
Rule Violation has been committed or is being committed;
(b) search any premises in which the officer has reason to believe that any
Anti-Doping Rule Violation has been, or is being, or is about to be, committed;
(c) seize any equipment, device, substance, record, register, document or
other material object, if such officer believes that it may furnish evidence of such
Anti-Doping Rule Violation or that seizure is necessary to prevent or mitigate any
Anti-Doping Rule Violation.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the procedure for investigation or taking
any other action under this section shall be such as may be specified by regulations.
20. Where the Agency has reasons to believe that an athlete has committed an
Anti-Doping Rule Violation, it shall require such athlete to submit samples for testing, in
accordance with such procedure and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations.
21. ( 1) After receiving an adverse report from a dope testing laboratory showing
presence of any prohibited substance in the sample of an athlete, the Agency shall carry out
initial examination of the report in such manner as may be specified by regulations, and verify
if Therapeutic Use Exemption has been granted to such athlete in respect of such substance.
(2) Where, after examination and verification under sub-section ( 1), the Agency is
satisfied that no Therapeutic Use Exemption has been granted to the athlete, it shall take
such actions and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
22. (1) After the issuance of a notice by the Agency to the athlete or other person
asserting the commission of Anti-Doping Rule Violation under this Act, if such athlete or the
other person does not waive his right of hearing in the manner specified by regulations, the
Agency shall refer such matter to the Disciplinary Panel for hearing and determination of
consequences of such Anti-Doping Rule Violation.
(2) The Disciplinary Panel shall hear and determine all issues arising from any matter
which is referred to it, and determine the consequences of Anti-Doping Rule Violations.
(3) Every party shall have a right to be represented, and to have an interpreter, at their
own cost.
(4) The Disciplinary Panel shall have power, at its own discretion, to appoint an expert
to assist or advice it on such matters as it may require.
(5) Subject to such regulations as may be made by the Board, the Disciplinary Panel
shall have power to regulate its own procedure.
Constitution
of
investigation
teams and
engagement of
experts and
professionals
by Agency.
Power of
entry, search
and seizure.
2 of 1974.
Power of
collecting
samples and
testing.
Result
management
process.
Hearing by
Disciplinary
Panel and
determination
of
consequences
thereof.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(6) Each party to the proceedings shall have right to present the evidence, including
the right to call and question witnesses, subject to the discretion of the Disciplinary Panel.
(7) The parties to the proceedings may submit written submissions with all documents
relied upon, in such manner and within such time, as may be specified by regulations.
(8) The Disciplinary Panel shall after hearing all parties and after considering all evidence
placed before it, by an order in writing made unanimously or by majority, determine the
consequences of Anti-Doping Rule Violations in accordance with the provisions of
section 6 and the regulations made thereunder.
(9) The decision of the Disciplinary Panel shall be communicated in such manner, as
may be specified by regulations.
23. (1) Any person who is aggrieved by any decision under this Act, including—
(a) a refusal to grant Therapeutic Use Exemption under section 5; or
(b) imposition of consequences for an Anti-Doping  Rule Violation under
section 6;
(c) such other decision as may be specified by regulations,
may prefer an appeal to the Appeal Panel in such form, within such time, and in such manner,
as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Subject to such regulations as may be made by the Board, the Appeal Panel shall
have power to regulate its own procedures.
(3) The Appeal Panel shall have power, at its own discretion, to appoint an expert to
assist or advice it on such matters as it may require.
(4) Every party shall have a right to be represented, and to have an interpreter, at their
own cost.
(5) Each party to the proceedings shall have right to present relevant evidence, to call
and examine witnesses and to submit written and oral submissions.
(6) The Appeal Panel shall complete hearing as expeditiously as possible, and endeavour
shall be made to dispose of such appeal within three months of the date of order of the
Disciplinary Panel.
(7) The Appeal Panel shall, after hearing all parties and considering all evidences
placed before it, by an order in writing, made unanimously or by majority, either confirm or
vary or set aside the order of the Disciplinary Panel.
(8) The decision of the Appeal Panel shall be communicated to the parties concerned,
in such manner, as may be specified by regulations.
(9) Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Panel may prefer an
appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, in accordance with such rules as may be provided
by the Court of Arbitration for Sport and the Code.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "Court of Arbitration for Sport"
means an international body established in 1984 to settle disputes related to sport through
arbitration whose headquarter is in Lausanne, Switzerland.
CHAPTER VI
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS
24. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, grant such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for
being utilised for the purposes of this Act and to comply with its commitments under the
Convention, and such funds shall be utilised to meet all the expenses incurred on
administrative and operational requirements of the Board, the Agency and the National
Hearing of
appeal by
Appeal Panel.
Grants by
Central
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
Dope Testing Laboratory established under sub-section ( 1), or under clause ( b) of
sub-section (2), of section 26 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the concerned bodies),
in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
25. (1) The concerned bodies shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the concerned bodies shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the concerned bodies to the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the concerned bodies shall have the same rights
and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts
and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers  and to inspect any of the offices of the concerned
bodies.
(4) The accounts of the concerned bodies as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with
the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the
concerned bodies and the Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon
as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
26. (1) The National Dope Testing Laboratory, established and functioning as such
prior to the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the principal dope testing
laboratory established under this Act and shall continue to function for the purposes of this
Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government may,—
(a) recognise one or more laboratories or institutes located within India as dope
testing laboratories to carry out the functions entrusted to a dope testing laboratory
under this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder;
(b) establish one or more National Dope Testing Laboratories, including
laboratories for undertaking research in anti-doping science and related fields:
Provided that every dope testing laboratory recognised or established under
this section may, if required, obtain the accreditation of the World Anti-Doping Agency
or of such other accrediting bodies, and shall maintain the requisite accreditations as
a condition for continuation as a dope testing laboratory under this Act.
(3) Every National Dope Testing Laboratory and other dope testing laboratories
established or recognised under this section shall have the authority to—
(i) test the sample for any sports federation or sports event not recognised by
the International Olympic Committee or the Central Government;
(ii) undertake sample analysis of sports other than any national or international
event;
(iii) undertake any other tests or samples analysis as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government may make rules to provide for—
(a) the qualifications and experience for appointment as technical and
non-technical staff of the National Dope Testing Laboratory;
Accounts and
audit.
Dope testing
laboratories.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(b)  the salaries and allowances  payable to, and other conditions of service of,
the technical and non-technical staff of the National Dope Testing Laboratory;
(c) the standards for establishment, recognition, maintenance and operation of a
dope testing laboratory and the manner of granting recognition to such dope testing
laboratory;
(d) the functions of the dope testing laboratory, the procedure for submission to
the said laboratory of samples for analysis or tests and other standard operative
procedures.
27. (1) The Agency shall have the power to collect, use and process the following
personal data for the purposes of implementation the objectives of the Act and in accordance
with applicable data privacy regulations, including the International Standard for the Protection
of Privacy and Personal Information, namely:—
(a) sex or gender of the athlete;
(b) list of Anti-Doping Violations committed by an athlete under the Act and the
details of such violation;
(c) medical history of the athlete;
(d) whereabouts information of the athlete;
(e) any other personal data as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Agency may make regulations to govern the procedure for collection, usage,
processing and disclosure of the personal data specified in sub-section ( 1).
(3) The Agency shall establish and maintain a database to record all the sanctions
awarded by the Agency, the Disciplinary Panel and the Appeal Panel and such other details
of the sanctions, in such manner, as may be specified by regulations.
(4) The Agency shall publicly disclose the disposition of the anti-doping matter,
including the sport, the anti-doping rule violated, the name of the athlete or other person
committing the Anti-Doting Rule Violation, the prohibited substance or prohibited method
involved (if any) and the consequences imposed, in accordance with such procedure as may
be specified by regulations.
28. (1) The provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder shall
apply to such other athletes or sport bodies, or to competition or event at such other level,
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(2) Every person to whom this Act is made applicable under sub-section (1), shall be
bound by, and have the obligation to comply with, the provisions of this Act and the rules
and regulations made thereunder.
29. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of,
the Chairperson and members of the Board under sub-section (9) of section 7;
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of,
officers and other employees of the Board under sub-section (2) of section 9;
(c) the form and the manner in which an annual report shall be furnished under
sub-section (1) of section 13;
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to and other conditions of service of, the
Director General, officers, and other staff of the Agency under sub-section ( 5) of
section 14;
Data of
athletes and
maintenance
of database.
Application of
Act, rules and
regulations to
others athletes
and sports
bodies, etc.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(e) the qualifications and experience for appointment as Director General under
sub-section (1) of section 15;
(f) the form in which annual statement of accounts shall be prepared under
sub-section (1) of section 25;
(g) the manner in which the National Dope Testing Laboratory shall be carry out
its functions, under sub-section (1) of section 26;
(h) the manner of undertaking other tests or samples analysis under clause (iii)
of sub-section (3) of section 26;
(i) the qualifications and experience for appointment as technical and
non-technical staff of the National Dope Testing Laboratory, under clause ( a) of
sub-section (4) of section 26;
(j) the salaries and allowances  payable to and other conditions of service of the
technical and non-technical staff of the National Dope Testing Laboratory, under
clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 26;
(k) the standards for establishment, recognition, maintenance and operation of
dope testing laboratories and the manner of granting recognition to such laboratories,
under clause (c) of sub-section (4) of section 26;
(l) the functions of the dope testing laboratory and the procedure for the
submission to the said laboratory of samples for analysis or tests, under clause (d) of
sub-section (4) of section 26;
(m) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed, for fulfilling
obligations of the country under the Convention.
30. (1) The Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,  for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the times and places for meetings and the procedure for transaction of
business at meetings of the Board ( including the quorum), under sub-section ( 1) of
section 8;
(b) the manner of constituting a Disciplinary Panel under sub-section ( 1) of
section 11;
(c) the manner of appointment of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson and
other members of the Disciplinary Panel and the conditions subject to which such
appointments shall be made under sub-section (3) of section 11;
(d) the grounds on which a member of Disciplinary Panel may be removed under
sub-section (4) of section 11;
 (
e) the manner of constituting an Appeal Panel under sub-section ( 1) of
section 12;
(f) the manner of appointment of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson and
other members of the Appeal Panel and the conditions subject to which such
appointments shall be made under sub-section (3) of section 12;
(g) the grounds on which a member of Appeal Panel may be removed under
sub-section (4) of section 12;
 (h) the other activities to be undertaken by the Agency for eliminating doping in
sport under clause (n) of sub-section (3) of section 16;
 (i) the procedure to be followed by the Disciplinary Panel under sub-section (5)
of section 22;
(j) the manner in which, and the time within which,  written submissions may be
submitted under sub-section (7) of section 22;
Power to make
regulations by
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(k) the manner of communicating the decision of the Disciplinary Panel under
sub-section (9) of section 22;
(l) the other decisions against which appeal may be filed, and the form and
manner in which and the time within which appeal may be filed, under sub-section (1)
of section 23;
(m) the procedure to be followed by the Appeal Panel under sub-section (2) of
section 23;
(n) the manner of communicating the decision of the Appeal Panel under
sub-section (8) of section 23;
(o) the manner in which the funds may be utilised by the Board and the Agency
under section 24;
(p) any other matter which has to be, or may be, specified by regulations, for
giving effect to the provisions of this Act or for fulfilling obligations under the
Convention, except on matters for which the Agency has power to make regulations
under section 31.
31. (1) The Agency may for giving effect to the Code and for complying with the
requirements of the international standards, make regulations on the following matters:—
(a) the procedure, methods and standards for testing and analysis and sample
collection based on the Code and the international standard for testing and
investigation as issued by the World Anti-Doping Agency;
(b) the procedure and standards for collection, storage and retention of samples
and results management in relation to samples;
(c) the procedure for investigation and determination of Anti-Doping Rule
Violations and imposition of sanctions for an Anti-Doping Rule Violation;
(d) the procedures for negative analytical findings and adverse analytical
findings, and principles governing the provisional suspension of an athlete or other
person alleged to have committed an Anti-Doping Rule Violation;
(e) the procedures, methods and standards for assessing and granting therapeutic
use exemptions;
(f) the procedure for re-entry of a banned athlete;
(g) the procedure to be followed for in-competition testing of athletes,
methodology for testing and any matters pertaining to in-competition testing of athletes;
(h) the procedure for qualifying athletes for out-of-competition testing and
procedure for undertaking out-of-competition testing of athletes, collection of
whereabouts data of such athletes and any matters pertaining to out-of-competition
testing of athletes;
(i) the measures for promotion of research and advocacy in relation to sports
doping and testing and methods for sensitising athletes, athlete support personnel,
other persons and other concerned stakeholders in relation to the ills of doping;
(j) the manner of implementing anti-doping control activities and anti-doping
education, training and sensitisation programmes to provide updated and accurate
information on the harm of doping to the ethical values of sport and the health
consequences of doping; and
(k) the procedure for search and seizure of premises, collection of samples, and
collection of information and whereabouts data, and consequences for wilful delay,
obstruction, destruction or provision of false information by any person in relation to
any exercise of power by an empowered person under this Act;
Power to
make
regulations by
Agency.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(l) the manner of taking measures for eradicating doping in sports;
(m) the manner in which the sports bodies, officials conducting competition or
event and other Anti-Doping Organisations may share information relating to the use
of doping substances, doping practices or any Anti-Doping Rule Violation with the
Agency;
(n) the manner in which the recommendations made by the Board may be
considered by the Agency.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the
Agency may make regulations, for giving effect to the provisions of the Act, on all or any of
the following matters:—
(a) the prohibited substances and prohibited methods in the Prohibited List
under clause (za) of section 2;
(b) the other omissions or failures under clause ( iii) of the Explanation to
clause (d) of section 4;
(c) the prohibited association with athlete support personnel under clause (j) of
section 4;
(d) the other circumstances, or engaging in other acts or conduct, which amounts
to Anti-Doping Rule Violation, under clause (l) of section 4;
(e) the manner of considering the application and the criteria to be taken into
consideration under sub-section (2) of section 5;
(f) the manner of granting or refusing to grant Therapeutic Use Exemptions
under sub-section (3) of section 5;
(g) the manner of imposing disqualification of results under clause ( a) of
sub-section (1) of section 6;
(h) the manner of imposing ineligibility to participate in any competition or event
or other activity or funding, and the period of such ineligibility, under clause ( b) of
sub-section (1) of section 6;
(i) the manner of imposing provisional suspension from participating in any
competition or activity under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 6;
(j) the manner of imposing financial sanction including proportionate recovery
of costs under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 6;
(k) other consequences under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 6;
(l) the consequences of Anti-Doping Rule Violations for team sports under
sub-section (2
) of section 6;
(m) the code of conduct for officers and employees of the Agency and for such
other persons or agencies engaged by the Agency, under clause (l) of sub-section (3)
of section 16;
(n) the effective discharge of functions of the agency under sub-section ( 4) of
section 16;
(o) the manner of constituting committees under section 17;
(p) the number of experts and professionals to be engaged by the agency,  the
qualifications and experience to be possessed by them, and the manner in which they
may be engaged,  under sub-section (2) of section 18;
 ( q) the procedure for investigation or taking any other action, under
sub-section (2) of section 19;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
(r) the procedure and the manner for submitting samples for testing under
section 20;
 (s) the manner of carrying out the initial examination of the report of a dope
testing laboratory under sub-section (1) of section 21;
(t) the actions to be taken, and the manner in which such actions may be taken,
under sub-section (2) of section 21;
 (u) the manner of waiving right of hearing under sub-section (1) of section 22;
(v) other personal data under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 27;
(w) the procedure for collection, usage, processing and disclosure of the personal
data under sub-section (2) of section 27;
(x) the other details of the sanctions, and the manner of establishing and
maintaining a database under sub-section (3) of section 27;
(y) the procedure for making public disclosure under sub-section ( 4) of
section 27;
(z) any other matter which has to be, or may be, specified by regulations, for
giving effect to the Code and for complying with international standards.
32.  Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or both
Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
33. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
  Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
34. On and from the commencement of this Act,—
(a) the Societies, namely, the National Anti-Doping Agency and the National
Dope Testing Laboratory shall stand dissolved;
(b) any reference to the Society in any contract or other instrument shall be
deemed as a reference to the National Anti-Doping  Agency or the National Dope
Testing Laboratory, as the case may be, established under this Act;
(c) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the Society shall
vest in the National Anti-Doping  Agency or the National Dope Testing Laboratory, as
the case may be, established under this Act;
(d) all the rights and liabilities of the Society shall be transferred to, and be the
rights and liabilities of, the National Anti-Doping  Agency or the National Dope Testing
Laboratory, as the case may be, established under this Act;
 ( e) every person employed by the Society, immediately before such
commencement, shall hold office in the National Anti-Doping  Agency or the National
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Transitional
provisions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
Dope Testing Laboratory, as the case may be, by the same tenure, at the same
remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and
privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would
have held the same if this Act had not been enacted, and shall continue to be so unless
and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms
and conditions are duly altered by any regulations made under this Act:
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his
employment may be terminated by the National Anti-Doping  Agency or the National
Dope Testing Laboratory, as the case may be, in accordance with the terms of the
contract with the employee or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment,
to him by the National Anti-Doping  Agency or the National Dope Testing Laboratory,
as the case may be, of compensation equivalent to three months' remuneration in case
of permanent employees and one month's remuneration in the case of other employees;
(f) if there are any pending proceedings, including any disciplinary, arbitration,
appeal or other legal proceedings, of whatever nature, by or against the Society, the
same shall not get abated or discontinued by reason of the incorporation of the Society
under this Act, but such proceedings may be continued or enforced by or against the
National Anti-Doping  Agency or the National Dope Testing Laboratory, as the case
may be, in the same manner and to the same extent as it would or may have been
continued or enforced by or against the society, if this Act had not been enacted;
(g) any rules and regulations made prior to such commencement, shall, in so far
as they are consistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to be applicable till new
rules and regulations are made under this Act.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Government of India was one of the Members of Foundation Board of the World
Anti-Doping Agency from 1999 to 2002. It has signed the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation International Convention against Doping in Sport in
2005 and ratified it in November 2007. Pursuant to the ratification of the said Convention, the
Government of India has established the National Dope Testing Laboratory in 2008 and the
National Anti-Doping Agency in 2009 to fulfil the commitments of India thereunder. The said
Convention aims to promote the prevention of, and the fight against, doping in sport for its
elimination. To achieve the objectives of the Convention, each State Party undertakes to
adopt appropriate measures that may include legislation, regulation, policies or administrative
practices and to commit themselves to the principles of the World Anti-Doping Code as the
basis for the measures provided in the said Convention.
2. It is intended to provide a statutory framework for the operation of the National
Anti-Doping Agency, the National Dope Testing Laboratory and other dope testing
laboratories and for creation of a National Board for Anti-Doping in Sports to strengthen
anti-doping activities in sport, and to comply with the provisions of the said Convention.
3. The National Anti-Doping Bill, 2021, inter alia, seeks to—
(i) establish a National Board for Anti-Doping in Sport and provides for its
composition, powers and functions;
(ii) establish the National Anti-Doping Agency to be headed by a Director
General, and provides for the powers and functions of the said Agency, including the
powers of investigation, levying sanctions for Anti-Doping Rule Violations, the
disciplinary procedures to be adopted and the powers of inspection, sample collection
and sharing and free flow of information;
(iii) establish National Dope Testing Laboratory and other dope testing
laboratories;
(iv)  strengthen the framework and mechanisms for carrying out the doping
control programme in sports to ensure dope-free sport in India.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR.
The 10th December, 2021.
20

Notes on Clauses
Clause 2 of the Bill defines various terms and expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for prohibition of doping in sport.
Clause 4 of the Bill provides fro the circumstances, acts or conduct by an athlete or
athlete support personnel or other persons which constitutes Anti-Doping Rule Violations.
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for granting Therapeutic Use Exemption in respect of
prohibited substance or prohibited method.
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for consequences of Anti-Doping Rule Violations by
athletes.
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for establishment and constitution of national Board for
Anti-Doping in Sports.
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for Meetings of Board and that every decisions of the
Board shall, as far as possible, be on the basis of a simple majority.
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the officers and employees of the Board and for their
conditions of service.
Clause 10 of the Bill provides for the powers and functions of the Board.
Clause 11 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Anti-Doping Disciplinary
Panel.
Clause 12 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Anti-Doping Appeal
Panel.
Clause 13 of the Bill provides for furnishing of annual report by the Board.
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for incorporation of the National Anti-Doping Agency,
for appointment of a Director General who shall head the Agency and provides that the Head
Quarter of the Agency shall be in New Delhi.
Clause 15 of the Bill provides for appointment, qualification and duties of the Director
General.
Clause 16 of the Bill provides for powers and functions of National Anti-Doping
Agency.
Clause 17 of the Bill provides for the power of Agency to constitute various Committees.
Clause 18 of the Bill provides for the Constitution of investigation teams and
engagement of experts and professionals by the Agency.
Clause 19 of the Bill providesfor the power of entry, search and seizure by any person
authorised by the Agency for the purpose of determining if any Anti-Doping rule Violation
has been committed and the procedure to be adopted shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Clause 20 of the Bill provides for the power to collect samples for the purpose of
dope-testing.
Clause 21 of the Bill provides for Result Management process which includes action
to be taken on receiving adverse report from the dope testing laboratory including examination
and verification of Therapeutic Use Exemption.
Clause 22 of the Bill provides for hearing and determination of consequences of
Anti-Doping Rule Violation by the National Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel.
21

22
Clause 23 of the Bill provides for hearing of appeal by the National Anti-Doping
Appeal Panel.
Clause 24 of the Bill provides for grants by the Central Government.
Clause 25 of the Bill provides for accounts and audit of the Board, the Agency and the
National Dope Testing Laboratory by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
Clause 26 of the Bill provides for establishment of National Dope Testing Laboratories
and other dope testing laboratories.
Clause 27 of the Bill provides for collection of data of athletes and maintenance of
database for this purpose.
Clause 28 of the Bill provides that the provisions of the Act and the rules and regulations
made there under shall apply to such other athletes or sport bodies, or to competition or
event at such other level, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify.
Clause 29 of the Bill provides for the power to make rules by the Central Government.
Clause 30 of the Bill provides for the power of the Board to make regulations.
Clause 31 of the Bill provides for the power of the Agency to make regulations for
effectively complying with the Code as per the requirements of the International Standards.
Clause 32 of the Bill provides for laying of rules and regulations before the Parliament.
Clause 33 of the Bill provides for the power of the Central Government to remove
difficulties.
Clause 34 of the Bill provides for transitional provisions, including continued
application of the rules and regulations made prior to the commencement of the Act, in so far
as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 7 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Board
for Anti-Doping in Sports and sub-clause (9) thereof provides for the salaries and allowances
payable to, and other conditions of service of, the Chairperson and members of the Board.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 9 of the Bill provides for the salaries and allowances payable
to, and other conditions of service of, officers and other employees of the Board.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 11 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National
Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel consisting of a Chairperson, four Vice-Chairpersons and ten
members.
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 12 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National
Anti-Doping Appeal Panel consisting of a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson and four members.
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 14 of the Bill provides for establishment of National
Anti-Doping Agency and for appointment of a Director General. Sub-clause ( 5) thereof
provides for the salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of, the
Director General, officers, and other staff of the Agency.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 18 of the Bill provides for the constitution of one or more
investigation teams, consisting of such officers or such persons, as the Agency deems
necessary. Sub-clause ( 2) thereof provides for the engagement by the Agency of such
number of experts and professionals, having such qualifications and experience, and in such
manner, as may be specified by regulations, to assist the Agency in the discharge of its
functions.
Clause 24 of the Bill provides for the grants by the Central Government to comply with
its commitments under the Convention, and the utilization of such funds to meet all the
expenses incurred on administrative and operational requirements of the Board, the Agency
and the National Dope Testing Laboratory.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 26 of the Bill provides for incorporation of National Dope
Testing Laboratory. Item (b) of sub-clause (2) of said clause provides for establishing one or
more National Dope Testing Laboratories, including laboratories for undertaking research in
anti-doping science and related fields.
2. Annual financial implication of  `50 crore of recurring nature is envisaged towards
expansion of scope of activities of the Agency, National Dope Testing Laboratories and for
the creation of the Board.
3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
23

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules, inter alia, in
respect of matters relating to—(a) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions
of service of, the Chairperson and members of the Board; ( b) the salaries and allowances
payable to, and other conditions of service of, officers and other employees of the Board; (c)
the form and the manner in which an annual report shall be furnished; ( d) the salaries and
allowances payable to and other conditions of service of, the Director General, officers, and
other staff of the Agency; (e) the qualifications and experience for appointment as Director
General; (f) the form in which annual statement of accounts shall be prepared; (g) the manner
in which the National Dope Testing Laboratory shall be carry out its functions; ( h) the
qualifications and experience for appointment as technical and non-technical staff of the
National Dope Testing Laboratory; ( i) the salaries and allowances payable to and other
conditions of service of the technical and non-technical staff of the National Dope Testing
Laboratory; (j) the standards for establishment, recognition, maintenance and operation of
dope testing laboratories and the manner of granting recognition to such laboratories;
(k) the functions of the dope testing laboratory and the procedure for the submission to the
said laboratory of samples for analysis or tests; (1) any other matter which has to be, or may
be, prescribed, for fulfilling obligations of the country under the Convention.
Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Board to make regulations, inter alia, in respect of
matters relating to— (a) the times and places for meetings and the procedure for transaction
of business at meetings of the Board (including the quorum); (b) the manner of constituting
a Disciplinary Panel; (c) the manner of appointment of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
and other members of the Disciliplinary Panel and the conditions subject to which such
appoints shall be made; (d) the grounds on which a member of Disciplinary Panel may be
removed; (e) the manner of constituting an Appeal Panel; (f) the manner of appointment of
the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Appeal Panel and the
conditions subject to which such appointments shall be made; ( g) the grounds on which a
member of Appeal Panel may be removed; (h) the other activities to be undertaken by the
Agency for eliminating doping in sport; (i) the procedure to be followed by the Disciplinary
Panel; (j) the manner in which, and the time within which, written submissions may be
submitted; (k) the manner of communicating the decision of the Disciplinary Panel; (l) the
other decisions against which appeal may be filed, and the form and manner in which and the
time within which appeal may be filed; (m) the procedure to the followed by the Appeal Panel;
(n) the manner of communicating the decision of the Appeal Panel; (o) the manner in which
the funds may be utilised by the Board and the Agency; (p) the manner of undertaking other
tests or samples analysis; ( q) any other matter which has to be, or may be, specified by
regulations, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act or for fulfilling obligations under
the Convention, except on matters for which the Agency has power to make regulations.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Agency to make regulations for
giving effect to the Code and the complying with the requirements of the international
standards, inter alia, in respect of matters relating to—( a
) the procedure, methods and
standards for testing and analysis and sample collection based on the Code and the
International Standard for testing and investigation as issued by the World Anti-Doping
Agency; (b) the procedure and standards for collection, storage and retention of samples
and results management in relating to samples; ( c) the procedure for investigation and
determination of Anti-Doping Rule Violations and imposition of sanctions for an Anti-Doping
Rule Violation; (d) the procedures for negative analytical findings and adverse analytical
findings, and principles governing the provisional suspension of an athlete or other person
alleged to have committed an Anti-Doping Rule Violation; (e) the procedures, methods and
standards for assessing and granting therapeutic use exemptions; ( f) the procedure for
24

25
re-entry of a banned athlete; (g) the procedure to the followed for in-competition testing of
athletes, methodology for testing and any matters pertaining to in-competition testing of
athletes; (h) the procedure for qualifying athletes for out-of-competition testing and procedure
for undertaking out-of-competion testing of athletes, collection of whereabouts data of such
athletes and any matters pertaining to out-of competition testing of athletes; (i) the measures
for promotion of research and advocacy in relation to sports doping and testing and methods
for sensitising athletes, athlete support personnel, other persons and other concerned
stakeholders in relation to the ills of doping; ( j) the manner of implementing anti-doping
control activities and anti-doping education, training and sensitisation programmes to provide
updated and accurate information on the harm of doping to the ethical values of sport and
the health consequences of doping; and (k) the procedure for search and seizure of premises,
collection of samples, and collection of information and whereabouts data, and consequences
for wilful delay, obstruction, destruction or provision of false information by any person in
relation to any exercise of power by an empowered person under this Act; (l) the manner of
taking measures for eradicating doping in sports; (m) the manner in which the sports bodies,
officals conducting competition or event and other Anti-Doping Organizations may share
information relating to the use of doping substances, doping practices or any Anti-Doping
Rule Violation with the Agency; (n) the manner in which the recommendations made by the
Board may be considered by the Agency.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Agency to make regulations, inter
alia, in respect of matters relating to—(a) the prohibited substances and prohibited methods
in the Prohibited List; (b) the other omissions or failures; (c) the prohibited association with
athlete support personnel; (d) the other circumstances, or engaging in other acts or conduct,
which amounts to Anti-Doping Rule Violation; (e) the manner of considering the application
and the criteria to be taken into consideration; (f) the manner of granting or refusing to grant
Therapeutic Use Exemptions; (g) the manner of imposing disqualification of results; (h) the
manner of imposing ineligibility to participate in any competition or event or other activity or
funding, and the period of such ineligibility; (i) the manner of imposing provisional suspension
from participating in any competition or activity; (j) the manner of imposing financial sanction
including proportionate recovery of costs; (k) other consequences; (l) the consequences of
Anti-Doping Rule Violations for team sports; ( m) the code of conduct for officers and
employees of the Agency and for such other persons or agencies engaged by the Agency;
(n) the effective discharge of functions of the agency; ( o) the manner of constituting
committees; (p) the number of experts and professionals to be engaged by the agency, the
qualifications and experience to be possessed by them, and the manner in which they may be
engaged; (q) the procedure for investigation or taking any other action; ( r) the procedure
and the manner for submitting samples for testing; (s) the manner of carrying out the initial
examination of the report of a dope testing laboratory; ( t) the actions to be taken, and the
manner in which such actions may be taken; (u) the manner of waiving right to hearing; (v)
other personal data; ( w) the procedure for collection, usage, processing and disclosure of
the personal date; (x) the other details of the sanctions, and the manner of establishing and
maintaining a database; (y) the procedure for making public disclosure; (
z) any other matter
which as to be, or may be, specified by regulations, for giving effect to the Code and for
complying with international standards.
The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made are matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the National Anti-Doping Agency for regulating
anti-doping activities in sports and to give effect to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation International
Convention against doping in sport, and compliance of such
other obligations and commitments thereunder and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Anurag Singh Thakur, Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports)
MGIPMRND—1562LS(S3)—13.12.2021.

 
 
LOK SABHA 
------  
 
CORRIGENDA 
 
to 
 
 THE NATIONAL ANTI-DOPING BILL, 2021 
 
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha] 
 
S. No. Page No. 
 
Line(s) No. For Read 
1.  (ii) In Arrangement of 
Clauses,  
against Clause 30 
 
 “by Agency” 
 
 
“by Board” 
 
2.  (ii) In Arrangement of 
Clauses, 
against Clause 31 
 
“by Board” 
 
 
“by Agency” 
3.  3 8 “(r,)” 
 
“(r)” 
 
4.  4 29 “whereabouts failure.” “whereabouts failure;” 
 
5.  8 6 “eminent athlete” 
 
“eminent athletes” 
 
6.  10 9 “planning,  
co-ordination,” 
 
“planning, coordination” 
 
 
7.  14 44 “officers, and” 
 
“officers and” 
 
8.  16 43 “doping; and” 
 
“doping;” 
 
9.  21 4 
 
provides fro provides for 
10.  23 30 
 
2. Annual financial Annual financial 
11.  23 33 3. The Bill The Bill 
 
12.  25 1 to the followed to be followed 
 
13.  25 11 and (k) (k) 
 
14.  25 16 Organizations may 
 
Organisations may 
15.  25 41 personal date personal data 
 
  
NEW DELHI; 
 
December 14, 2021            
Agrahayana 23, 1943 (Saka) 