PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON :
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH
AND NEURO SCIENCES, BANGALORE

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25.2.97)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25.2.97)

aa

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 1997/Phalguna, 1918 (Saka)


ast)
200,
ue

hai



CONTENTS

1, Composition oF THE COMMITTEE
2. PREFACE
3. Report

15

Il.
Il.
Iv.
Vi
VI.
VIL.
शा,
IX.
x.
XI.
XI.
XII.

Introduction

Objectives

Equipments

Collaboration with Foreign Universities
Manpower Development

Staff Position

Research

Drug Dependence Unit

National Strategy for Treatment of Epilepsy
Patient Care

Public Awareness

Ayurveda Centre

Budgetary Provisions

4, ANNEXURE
5. Minutes

Paces
0)--0)
(iii)
1-5

पे »
SFP 4 (० KWHWHWNH NYE KF के

fue


"

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(1996-97)

. Shri $.B. Chavan—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra $. Deo

Dr. B.B. Dutta
Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar

. Shri Raj Nath. Singh

. Shri’ Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yaday

. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr. Mohan Babu

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shri Jai Prakash

. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Shrimati Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

. Dr..Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

. Dr. C, Silvera

. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
. Shri Dutta Meghe

. Shri 1.0, Sanadi

. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Pawan Diwan

. Shri Krishna

. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

. Shri Mukhtar Anees

. Dr. M. Jagannath

. Dr. Bali Ram

. Shri Ranen Barman

. Shri Surender Singh

. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

(i)


(ii)
SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty-fourth Report of the Committee on the
National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, Bangalore under the Department
of Health, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.

2. A Study Group of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development visited the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro
Sciences, Bangalore on 14th November, 1996 to make an on the spot Study and also to get
first hand information about the functioning of the National Institute of Mental Health and
Neuro Sciences, Bangalore. A list of Members who visited the National Institute of Mental
Health and Neuro Sciences is enclosed as Annexure-I.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the 16th
January, 1997.

New Deut; S.B. CHAVAN
16th January, 1997 Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary

26, Pausa, 1918 (Saka) Standing Committee

on Human Resource Development.

(iii)


|

t

REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION

1. National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, popularly known as
NIMHANS is a premier research and training centre in the field of mental health and neuro
sciences. The University Grants Commission declared the Institute as a Deemed University in
1994. The important activities carried out in the Institute are manrower development, patient
care and research.

1.1 The Institute is the core centre for developing a national mental health policy, and to
propagate and monitor its implementation in the country. Efforts are made at all levels to
directly link the activities of the institute with the national health policies and goals. The
emphasis has been to evolve models of hospital and community based treatment programmes
not only in the area of mental health but also in respect of neurological disorders where such
community based programmes are feasible with special emphasis towards prevention.

Il. OBJECTIVES .
2. The main objectives of the Institute are as under:
1, To promote the growth and development of mental health and neuro sciences;

2. To develop the~institute into an advanced service, Post-graduate training and
research centre;

3. To provide and assist in the activities of research, evaluation, training, consultation
and guidance related to mental health including biological, psychological,
sociological and clinical aspects; i

4. To conduct experiments and develop patterns of teaching in under-graudate
education in all branches of mental health and neurological sciences by opening
training centres and instituting innovative schemes;

5. To develop courses and curricula in all branches of mental health and neuro-sciences
for under-graduate and post-graduate teaching and to attain self-sufficiency in post-
- graduate education in all branches of mental: health and neuro-sciences, in India;

6.:To develop community mental health models and programmes of services,
-demonstration, training and research in both urban and rural areas; and

7..To educate the public in mental health and neuro-sciences.
: EQUIPMENTS

3.:When the Committee sought to know as to whether the institute is equipped with latest
technology and sufficient equipments in all the departments, the Director stated that efforts
have always been made to equip all the departments with the advanced technology and
equipments. However, due to lack of funds they are not able to keep pace with latest
improvements in technology, he added. The committee was also informed that if a special
grant issmade available to the Institute then it would be possible to acquire the necessary
equipments. The Committee feels that the Institute is in need of sophisticated equipments for
diagnosis,.treatment & research and the department of Health may consider making available
sufficient:funds for the purpose.



IV. COLLABORATION WITH FOREIGN UNIVERSITIES

4. The Committee has noted that the Institute propose to have collaboration with foreign
universities and when asked as to how far they are able to finalise the proposals, the Director
informed the Committee that it has already developed collaboration with a renowned
University and for making further efforts in this direction the active support of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development is required. The Committee feels that it is a premier institute
of its kind, in the country and collaboration with eminent and renowned foreign universities
would further strengthen the Institute. The Committee therefore recommends that the
Department of Health should take up the matter with the Ministry of HRD in this regard.

ए. MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT

5. One of the three important objectives of the Institute is manpower development in the
field of mental health and neuro sciences. The Committee notes that the Institute offers Post
graduate courses including M.Phil. Post-certificate courses in nursing i.e. (Diploma in
Psychiatric Nusring DPN and Diploma in Neurological Nursing DNN) are also offered in the
Institute. Facilities to pursue Ph. D. Programmes are also available, it was added,

5.1. The Committee was informed by the Director that the courses conducted by the
Institute are always in great demand due to the limited in take capacity of the Institute. When
asked to explain the steps taken to meet the Demand, the director replied that recently it has
been proposed to increase the number of seat in the following courses:

MD — Psychiatry 8 to 14 seats
DM — Neurology 4 to 6 seats
M.CH Neurosurgery 4 to 6 seats
M.Phil Clin. Psychology 12 to 15 seats
M.Phil in PSW 12 to 15 seats

5.2. The Committee desires that this proposal may be finalised as early as possible. For
increasing the seats, the staff strength is also required to be increased. Necessary steps may,
therefore, be taken to sanction additional posts.

VI. STAFF POSITION

6. The Committee has noted that the Staff Position in the-Institute is as under:

Sanctioned Working Vacant
Teaching 143 122 21
Non-teaching 830 737 5

As regards the vacanies on teaching side it was stated that for five faculty posts inteviews
were already held. It was also stated that 14 posts are reserved for SCST and recruitment is
under process undes special recruitment drive, Action is being taken to fill up the remaining
posts, it was added. The Committee recommends that immediate steps may be taken to fill up
the posts reserved for SCSTs. The Committee also desires that the vacancies on the
non-teaching side also may be filled up ut the earliest. The Director also informed the
Committee that some posts have to be kept vacant due to paucity of funds. The Committee
views this with concern and strengly recommends that in future no posts should



—

be kept vacant just because of paucity of funds. The funds aspect has been dealt with
separately later in para 13.

VII. RESEARCH

7, Research activity encompass a large spectrum from cellular mechanisms to social
systems associated with various neurological and behavioural disorders. However, the
Committee learnt that it has not been possible to spend adequate time for research in the
neuro-Surgery Department. When the Committee sought to know the reasons for this, it was
stated that the Department's faculty are fully occupied with the operations and the follow up
of the neuro-surgical patients leaving them with very little time for research. This gap can be
bridged by increasing the staff strength, it was added. Neuro-Surgery Department is a very
important Department and research needs to be developed. The Department of Health may
take necessary action to ensure that research activities are not hampered in the Neuro-
Surgery Department.

VIII. DRUG DEPENDENCE UNIT

8. The Committee has learnt that a sixty bedded drug dependence unit is functioning in
the institute and funds are not being given for this by the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare while similar centres established in PGI Chandigarh, AIIMS Delhi etc. are funded
by the Govt. of India under the National Drug De-Addiction programme. The unique
feature of the Centre in this Institute is, it has been started with community based activity.
The Committee was also informed that the Ministry has been approached for providing
additional funds for De-Addiction programme. The Committee, however, feels that the
Institute should not over-burden itself with the Drug De-Addiction Programme particularly
when sufficient funds are not being received.

IX. NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

9. The Committee has noted that a survey conducted on more than one lakh population
on neurological disorders, showed that approximately 31 people out of 1000 suffer from
neurological disorders, the commonest being headache and epilepsy. Considering the gravity
of the situation, the Committee feels that there is need for evolving a national strategy on
epilepsy and other neurological disorders.

9.1 The Committee also learnt that basic research studies on Yoga have helped in the
application of Kriya Yoga in the successful treatment of patients with depression. Since
Yoga treatment does not require any medicines and is free from side effects, it needs to be
extensively used. The Committee therefore, recommends that steps should be taken by the
Institute to involve more Yoga experts in treating the patients who suffer from depression. *
The Yoga unit may be further developed.

X. PATIENT CARE

10. The Institute caters to the needs of Patients suffering from Psychiatric and
neurological disorders. The Institute has a bed capacity of 805. Besides this, the institute
also offers a combined neuro psychiatric out-patient service to impart better co-ordinated
patient care. When the Committee sought to know as to whether the bed capacity is
proposed to be increased, it was stated that they propose to increase the beds in casualty
unit by 50 beds. They also propose to increase bed capacity in head injury unit and stroke
unit, it was added. The Committee desires that necessary steps may be taken to increase the
beds at the earliest.

10.1. The Committee also learnt that people with even small accidents come from long



distances for treatment in the hospital. This would only increase the burden of the institute.
For this, some kind of screening should be done at the the local level General Hospital from
where a case should be referred to NIMHANS only if it requires specialised treatment: For
this, the Committee feels that the matter should be taken up with the State Governments
| requesting them to issue necessary circular to the General Hospitals stating that whenever
head injury cases come, they have to examine and admit unless it needs ४ special neuro-
surgical intervention. The Director assured the Committee that needful would be done in the
matter, The Committee desires that it should be pursued by the institute at regular intervals.

10.2. To save a number of lives from head injuries the Director apprised the Committee
that by making wearing of helmets compulsory for two wheeler drivers all over the country,
this problem can be solved to a large extent. The Committee feels that the suggestion is
good and it should be looked into.

10.3. The Committee has noted that the institute does not get sufficient kits for HIV
testing. The Director informed that National Aids Control Organisation (NACO) has been
requested to increase the number of HIV Kits supplied. That Committee feels that the
Institute is in need of HIV Kits and NACO may increase the supply of HIV Kits. The
Committee is, however, of the view that the Institute should not over burden itself with
treating HIV cases.

XI, PUBLIC AWARENESS

11. To overcome the problems occuring due to accidents and epilepsy, prevention is
\ required for which public awarness is essential. To a question as to whether the institute is
publishing any literature for the awareness of the common public on the mental health
related problems, the Director of the institute responded that they are planning in this
direction. One of the faculty members of the institute has published nearly forty books in
Kannada. The institute is also planning to publish them in the regional languages, he added.
The Director also stated that the health education bureau in the institute is working on it.
He also stated that the Institute is in a position to supply posters on mental health in case
any State is in need of it. The Committee is of the opinion that there is a need to publish
the materials about mental health and related problems in all the regional languages so that
people of all the regions/States can be benefited. Necessary steps may be taken in this
direction. The Department should take the responsibility of publishing the material in
various regional languages in a time bound manner.

XII. AYURVEDA CENTRE

12. There is a small unit under the control of Central Council of Ayurveda functioning in
the Institute which is not a part of NIMHANS. The Committee was informed by the
Director that there is a proposal to establish an udvanced centre of Ayurveda in the
Institute. The Committee is, however of the opinion that the opening of advanced centre of
Ayurveda is an additional burden for the Institute. Such a centre could be located elsewhere
in an Ayurvedic Institute and the patients requiring treatment in Ayurveda could be referred
there.

a XIII. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS

13. The Committee noted that NIMHANS has been provided with Rs. 21.08 crores for
1996-97. On being asked as to whether this amount is sufficient to meet the requirements of
the Institute, it was stated that a minimum of Rs. 30 crores was required. The Director also
informed the Committee that the main problem faced by the Institute is the lack of funds for
development. The Institute needs special grants for this purpose, he stated. Presently, the


हट

institute is not getting any grants from UGC and the Director requested that since it is a
Deemed University it may also be given development funds on the pattern of other
Universities. The Committee recommends that this may be considered. He further explained
that in the routine grants, every year 10% growth is there and due to escalation of costs,
they are not able to meet the demand. While the number of patients are increasing every
year, the non-plan expenditure is kept at the same level of 10% increase as per the
Government norms. Due to this, the Committee was told, the Institute has to keep some
posts vacant to have’some non-plan money to spend for patient care. The Committee is also
constrained to note that in view of this, it would be difficult to fill up all the posts and if all
the posts are filled up, there is no money for food for patients, drugs and other hospital
managements. The Committee a y.that this would only hamper the activities of the
Institute from doing good workéThe Committee, therefore, recommends that the full
requirements of the Institute may be taken care of by the Department of Health. The
Committee feels that NIMHANS, being the only National Institute of its kind, should not
starve for want of funds. The Ministry should plead the case properly with the Finance
Ministry and Planning Commission for providing adequate funds. at

fe The Committee was also informed that aid for development plans is received from
many foreign countries such as Germany, Japan, U.S.A etc. The Director pleaded that such
aid should be made available to NIMHANS also. The Committee recommends that the
Department of Health may look into the matter.

13.2 The Committee was surprised to find that different methods were being followed in
the case of committed expenditure of the previous plan. According to the understanding of
the Committee, committed expenditure will not get reflected in any shape or form in the
subsequent plan. What is termed as a non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan becomes
relevant only to the expenditure of new non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan period.
This applies in the case of both autonomous as well as deemed university institutions. In
order to get further clarification in the matter the Secretary and the Financial Adviser of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare were specially called to clarify as to whether this
view of the Committee is correct or not. The Secretary could not come because of illness.
The Financial Adviser appeared before the Chairman and he confirmed that the non-plan
committed expenditure of the previous plan should not get reflected into the non-plan
expenditure of the subsequent plan. He also confirmed that they are not making any
distinction between the Government institution and other autonomous and deemed
university institutions which naturally means that the confusion which is prevailing in some
of institutions in treating committed expenditure as part of the new non-plan expenditure
should be clarified by the department concerned to all the institutions in the country so that
there should be uniformity in matters of procedure of not including the committed non-plan
expenditure in the subsequent plan’s non-plan expenditure.

13.3 The Committee also noticed that in some of the institutions where vacancies were
available, they were utilising the funds’ meant for vacancies, for the purpose of non-plan
expenditure, which according to the Committee is not a desirable feature. Plan money can
not be diverted for non-plan side or even the non-plan expenditure should not have any
element of the scheme provided under the plan. All the vacancies prevailing in different
institutions will have to be filled in against the non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan
as the burden of the expenditure will not be there.



ANNEXURE

NAME OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE WHO VISITED NATIONAL
INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND NEURO SCIENCE, BANGALORE ON
15th NOVEMBER, 1996

. Shri $.B. Chavan

. Dr. B.B. Dutta

. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Shri R. Margabandu

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Shri 1.G. Sanadi

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Dr. M. Jagannath

. Dr. Bali Ram

CONAAUNHAYWNE

Bee Pe ee
AaARONRES


MINUTES



“SEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m on Wednesday, the 11th September 1996 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan —— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
. Dr. 8.8. Dutta
Dr. M. Aram
Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
. Shri M.P, Abdussamad Samadani
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
12. Shri Sartaj Singh
13. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
14. Dr. 0. Silvera
15. Shri I.G. Sanadi
16. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
17. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
18. Shri Krishna
19. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
20. Shri Samik Lahiri
. Dr. M. Jagannath
. Dr. Bali Ram
. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal
SECRETARIAT
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

७9०: ०७ ४ + ०

rey
S

BRE

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary

2. The Committee at the first instance discussed about its future programme. After son
discussion, the Committee identified the following items, which, the Committee fee

require detailed examination:—

शा

*Minutes of Ist to VIth meeting relate to matters not provided in this report.

11


12

MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
. :

* *
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
Me * *
B. Department of Health
* * *

2. Functioning of:—

(i) National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore.

ig *

The Committee has, however, decided to take up the following initially:
1. Value based education.
2. Vocational education.
3. The problem of drop-outs.
4. Functioning of National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta.
5. Functioning of National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.

3. The Committee then decided to visit Calcutta and Jaipur to make an on the spot visit
to the National Institute of Homoeopathy at Calcutta and the National Institute of Ayurveda
at Jaipur and also to make a detailed examination of the issue of value based education.
During the visits, the Committee decided to visit some of the reputed Voluntary

Drganisations and to hold discussions with them and State Governments on the issue of
‘alué based education.

4. The Committee further decided to visit Indian Museum, National Library and Netaji
femorial Museum at Calcutta and to visit the project sites of Lok Jumbish and Sikhsakarmi
rojects at Jaipur and also to hold discussions with them. The Committee formed two Study
iroups, one for visiting Calcutta and the other for Jaipur and Mount Abu. The Chairman of

16 Committee directed that the consent of the Members may be taken for finalising the
cudy Groups.

5. The Committee decided that the Study Group visiting Calcutta should undertake the
sit from the 8th to 11th October, 1996 and the Study Group visiting Jaipur and Mount Abu
ould visit there from 4th to 8th November, 1996. The Committee authorised its Chairman
finalise the details of the tour programmes and to approach Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya

bha, for his permission for the visits of the Study Groups to Calcutta, Jaipur and Mount
vu. x

j. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

Relate to other matters.



x
“TENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 16th January, 1997 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS

1. Shri $.B. Chavan —— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo

3. Dr. M. Aram

4. Shri Raj Nath Singh

5. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

7. Dr. Mohan Babu

LOK SABHA

Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

10. Shri Jai Prakash

11. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

13. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

14. Dr. ९. Silvera

15. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda

16. Shri 1.0, Sanadi

17. Shrimati Krishna Bose

18. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy

19. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

20. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi

21. Shri Samik Lahiri

22. Dr. Bali Ram

23. Shri Ranen Barman

24. Shri Surender Singh

25. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports on the National Instit:

Ov 08

=

‘Minutes of VIIIth & IXth meetings relate to matters provided in this report.

13


14

Ayurveda, Jaipur, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, Bangalore and
All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore. After some discussion the Committee
adopted the Reports with some modifications.

3. The Committee then authorised its Chairman to decide the names of the members for

presentation/laying of the Reports in both Houses of the Parliament during the ensuing
Session.

452 * * *
ree * * *
62" * * *

7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 Noon.

***Relate to other matters.

Nog
Nu