 
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARON EDUCATION, WOMEN,
Dec
THREE HUNDRED Research based Education and Science(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
 
 PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA  RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND      Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi December, 2023/Agrahayana 1945 (Saka)      
HUNDRED AND FIFTY EIGHTH REPORTON Research based Education and Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and related fields  Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2023)(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2023) Y STANDING COMMITTEE  CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS Report No 358 
REPORT Anusandhan scenario in December, 2023) December, 2023) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in  

  DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARON EDUCATION, WOMEN,THREE HUNDRED Research based Education and Anusandhan scenario in (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
Dec  
   PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA   RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND   HUNDRED AND FIFTY EIGHTH REPORTON  Research based Education and Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and related fields  Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2023)(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2023)       
 
  Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi December, 2023 /Agrahayana 1945 (Saka)      
Hindi version of this publication is also availableY STANDING COMMITTEE  CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS REPORT Research based Education and Anusandhan scenario in  December, 2023) December, 2023) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
     PAGES 
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …............................................. .....       (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS..................................................................................................         (iii)-(viii) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................ 1-60 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................... 60-68  
6. MINUTES.....................................................................................................           69-88 
7.         ANNEXURES...............................................................................................      89-97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13thSeptember, 2023) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur   Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
6. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
7. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
8. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
9. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
10. * Shri Harbhajan Singh  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri Gangasandra Siddappa Basavaraj  
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Sangam Lal Kadedin Gupta 
15. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
16. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
17. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
18. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
19. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
20. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
21. **Vacant 
22. Dr. T.R.Paarivendhar 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
28. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
29.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
31. Shri S. Venkatesan  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
(i) 
 
*Nominated w.e.f. 26. 09.2023 
**Vacant w.e.f  07.12.2023 

 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Fifty Eighth Report of 
the Committee on "Research based Education and Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and related 
fields". 
2. The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports, has been examining the subject in light of National Education Policy 
(NEP) 2020 and the current Report is on promoting research based education and reviewing the 
Anusandhan scenario in the Higher Education Sector and its related fields. The Committee wishes 
to place on record its gratitude to the representatives of the Departments of Higher Education, 
Ministry of Education, Department of Science & Technology, Department of scientific & 
Industrial Research, Department of Biotechnology, National Research Foundation, ICMR, 
Department of Health Research, UGC, AICTE, various IITs, IISc, Central University of South 
Bihar, Assam University, Delhi Technological University, University of Delhi, NCAER, National 
Institute of Virology and Niti Ayog  for making submissions, furnishing necessary 
information/documents and rendering valuable assistance to the Committee in its deliberations.   
3. For the facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations of the Committee have 
been presented in bold letters at the end of the Report. 
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
the 12th December, 2023.  
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
NEW DELHI 
12 December, 2023                                                                                                          
Agrahayana 21, 1945 (Saka)
  
 
 
Shri Vivek Thakur 
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
ACRONMYS 
 
ABHIM Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission 
AcSIR Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research 
ADF AICTE Doctoral Fellowship 
AI Artificial Intelligence  
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
AIDS Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome  
AIFs Analytical Instrumentation Facilities 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AMR Anti Microbial Resistance 
ANRF Anusandhan National Research Foundation 
APCTT Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology 
AR Atmospheric Rivers 
ARIIA Atal Ranking of Institutions on Innovation 
Achievements 
ATL Atal Tinkering Labs 
BIRAC Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council 
BIRD-CRF Building Industrial Research & Development and 
Common Research Facility 
CAD Computer-Aided Design 
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education 
CDRI Central Drug Research Institute 
CCC Collaboration & Community Committee 
CCFUP Curriculum and Credit Framework for Undergraduate 
Programmes 
CEL Central Electronics Limited 
CII Confederation of Indian Industry 
C-MInDS Centre for Machine Intelligence and Data Science 
CNA Central Nodal Agency 
CoE Centres of Excellence 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CoRE Centre for Renewable Energy 

 
 
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
CU Central Universities 
CUET Common University Entrance Test 
CTEP Conference, Trave Exhibition and Popular Lectures 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
DD Dual Degree 
DHR Department of Health and Research 
DoE Department of Expenditure 
DOS Department of Space 
DRDO Defence Research and Development Organization 
DSIR Department for Scientific and Industrial Research 
DST Department of Science and Technology 
DT Digital Twin 
DTU Delhi Technological University 
EUA Emergency Use Authorisation 
EWS Economically Weaker Section 
FSER Fund for Science and Engineering Research 
FIC Finance & Infrastructure Committee 
FIST Fund for Improvement of S&T Infrastructure 
FY Financial Year 
GATE Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GERD Gross Expenditure on Research and Development 
GFR General Financial Rules 
GoI Government of India 
GPU Graphics Processing Unit 
GRI Globalink Research Internship 
GSCoE Global Sanitation Centre of Excellence 
HECI Higher Education Commission of India 
HEFA Higher Education Financing Agency 
HEIs Higher Educational Institutions 
IA Innovation Ambassador 

 
 
ICSSR Indian Council of Social Science Research 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IDEA Idea Development, Evaluation & Application 
I&E Innovation & Engineering 
IICs Institution’s Innovation Councils 
IIEST Industrial Incubation of Entrepreneurship and Skill 
Training Federation 
IISER Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research 
IMPRESS Impactful Policy Research in Social Science 
IMPRINT IMPacting Research INnovation and Technology 
IP Intellectual Property 
IRD Industrial Research & Development 
IISc Indian Institute of Science 
IIST Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IoT Internet of Things 
IRDPP Industrial Research & Development Promotion Program 
ISM Institute for Supply Management 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
JPL Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
JRF Junior Research Fellowship 
MHRD Ministry of Human Resource Development 
MIC Ministry’s Innovation Cell 
MITCAS Mathematics of Information Technology and Complex 
Systems 
ML Machine Learning 
MoE Ministry of Education 
MSME Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NGS Next Generation Sequencing 
NEHU North-Eastern Hill University 
NEP National Education Policy 
NET National Eligibility Test 

 
 
NIDHI National Initiative for Development and Harnessing 
Innovations 
NIELIT National Institute of Electronics and Information 
Technology 
NIRF National Institutional Ranking Framework 
NISP National Innovation and Start-up Policy 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NRDC National Research Development Corporation 
NRF National Research Foundation 
NQM National Quantum Mission 
OELP Open Ended Lab Projects 
OSMoSys Online Submission and Monitoring System 
PACE Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research & 
Technology Development 
PDC Product Development, Monitoring and 
Commercialization Committee 
PFRI Public Funded Research Institutions 
PMSTIAC Prime Minister’s Science, Technology and Innovation 
Advisory Council 
PG Post-Graduate 
PSLV Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle 
PRISM Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and 
MSMEs 
PURSE Promotion of University Research and Scientific 
Excellence 
QuIST Quantum Information Science and Technology 
QIP Quality Improvement Program 
R&D Research and Development 
RDC Research and Development Cell 
RMRC Regional Medical Research Centres 
RPC Research Program, Policy Development Committee 

 
 
RPS Research Promotion Scheme 
SAIF Sophisticated Analytical Instrument Facilities 
SATHI Sophisticated Analytical & Technical Help Institutes 
SC Scheduled Caste 
SDG Sustainable Development Goals 
SERB Science and Engineering Research Board 
SHAPE Space and High Altitude-Platform Based Emerging 
SIH Smart India Hackathon 
SIRO Scientific and Industrial Research Organizations 
SPARC Scheme for Promotion of Academic and Research 
Collaborations 
SPF Special Purpose Fund 
SRA Senior Research Associateship 
SRF Senior Research Fellowships 
S&T Science and Technology  
ST Scheduled Tribes 
STARS Scheme for Transformational and Advanced Research in 
Sciences 
STEM Science, Technology Engineering, and Mathematics 
STIC Sophisticated Test and Instrumentation Centre 
SUPREME Support for Upgradation Preventive Repair and 
Maintenance of Equipment 
TMT Thermo Mechanically Treated 
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
UAY Uchhatar Avishkar Yojana 
UG Under Graduate 
UGC University Grants Commission 
UGCF Undergraduate Curricular Framework 
UK United Kingdom 
UN-ESCAP United Nations Economic and Social Commission for 
Asia and Pacific 
USA United States of America 

 
 
UT Union Territory 
WHO World Health Organization 
 
 

1
Report1. Provisions of NEP-2020 relating to Research based Education1.1 NEP, 2020 recognizes that the world is undergoing rapid changes in the knowledgelandscape. With various dramatic scientific and technological advances, climate change,increasing pollution, depleting natural resources, emergence of epidemics and pandemics etc.I n d i a  will need skilled manpower with multidisciplinary abilities in different sectors. Accordingly, it recognizes the need for education system to move towards less content and more towards learning about how to think critically and solve problems, how to be creative and multidisciplinary, and how to innovate, adapt and how to absorb new material in novel andchanging fields.1.2 NEP 2020 is the first education policy of the 21stcentury and aims to address the many development imperatives of our country. The policy proposes the revision and revamp of all aspects of the education structure, including its regulation and governance to create a neweducation system that is aligned with the aspirational goals of the 21stcentury including SDG-4, value system. It also stipulates outstanding researchas co-requisite for outstanding education and development.1.3 NEP, 2020 envisages several transformative initiatives in higher education. It lays great emphasis on the promotion of quality research. Research and innovation are important aspects of enhancing quality education in Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). The societal challenges ofour country can only be addressed by having a strong and vibrant higher education ecosystem with an emphasis on research, innovation and technology development.1.4 Para 11.12 of NEP stipulates that Higher Education Institutes (HEIs) will focus on research and innovation by setting up start-up incubation centres; technology developmentcentres; centres in frontier areas of research; greater industry-academic linkages; andinterdisciplinary research including humanities and social sciences research. Given thescenario of epidemics and pandemics, it is critical that HEIs take the lead to undertake research in areas of infectious diseases, epidemiology, virology, diagnostics, instrumentation,vaccinology and other relevant areas. HEIs will develop specific handholding mechanisms andcompetitions for promoting innovation among student communities. The National Research 

2
Foundation (NRF) will function to enable and support such a vibrant research and innovation culture across HEIs, research labs, and other research organizations.1.5 NEP 2020 in para17.8 envisions a comprehensive approach to transforming the quality and quantity of research in India. This includes definitive shifts in school education to a more play and discovery- based style of learning with emphasis on the scientific method and criticalthinking. This includes career counseling in schools towards identifying student's interests andtalents, promoting research in universities, the multidisciplinary nature of all HEIs and theemphasis on holistic education, the inclusion of research and internships in the undergraduatecurriculum, faculty career management systems that give due weightage to research, thegovernance and regulatory changes that encourage an environment of research and innovation. All of these aspects are extremely critical for developing a research mindset in the country.1.6 To build on these elements in a synergistic manner, and to thereby truly grow and catalyze quality research in the nation, the Department of Higher Education in its submissions before the Committee has informed that this policy envisions the establishment of a National Research Foundation (NRF). The NRF will competitively fund research in all disciplines. Successful research will be recognized, and where relevant, implemented through close linkages with governmental agencies as well as with industry and private/philanthropicorganizations. Para 2.9 of the NEP states that NRF will fund quality research in Indian languages, comparative literature, creative writing, arts, music, philosophy. Research foroutstanding work in areas like Classical Languages and literatures, Indian arts, art history, andIndology will also be supported by the NRF. In the context of AI, NRF may consider a three-pronged approach: (a) advancing core AI research, (b) developing and deploying application-based research, and advancing international research efforts to address global challenges in areas such as healthcare, agriculture, and climate change using AI. Accordingly, in order to seed, grow and promote Research and Development (R&D) and foster a culture of researchand innovation throughoutuniversities, colleges, research institutions, and R&Dlaboratories, National Research Foundation (NRF) has been established with total cost ofRs.50,000 crore during five years (2023-28).1.7 It has been further informed that in the recently concluded G20 deliberations under theIndia Presidency, G20 Education Ministerial Meeting emphasized need for interdisciplinaryresearch. It also recognized integration of three sides of the Knowledge Triangle: Education, Research and Innovation. It aims to promote collaborations among higher education 

3
institutions in G20 member states and invited countries to facilitate joint academic andresearch initiatives in education and training. It encouraged the countries to promote inter-sectoral collaborations within their respective countries by strengthening industry-academia-government linkages to promote multidisciplinary research and innovation. The G20 NewDelhiDeclaration recognized the importance of investment in supporting human capital development inter-alia by re affirming commitment to promote open, equitable andsecure scientific collaboration and encourage mobility of students, scholars, researchers, andscientist across research and HEIs. The declaration recognizes the need for research in various sectors of economy such as climate resilient and nutritious crops and other aspects of agriculture sector, infection prevention control; disease control; clean, sustainable, justaffordable and inclusive energy etc.2. Schemes to Promote Research and Development in the Higher EducationalInstitutes (HEIs) and major initiatives by UGC, AICTE2.1 The Department of Higher Education has informed that the Government has launched various schemes to promote research and development in the Higher Educational Institutes (HEIs) of the Country. Some of the schemes are highlighted below:2.1.1IMPacting Research INnovation and Technology (IMPRINT): It aims at addressing and providing solutions to the most relevant engineering challenges faced by the nation by translating knowledge into viable technology (products or processes) in various technology domains. IMPRINT-II is currently being implemented through Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) (a body under the Department of Science and Technology).2.1.2UCHHATAR AVISHKAR YOJANA (UAY): It was launched with a view to promoting innovation of a higher order that directly impacts the needs of the Industry and thereby improves the competitive edge of Indian manufacturing.2.1.3Establishment of Research Parks: The Government had sanctioned establishment of Research Parks at IIT Madras, IIT Bombay, IIT Kharagpur, IIT Kanpur, IIT Delhi, IIT Guwahati, IIT Hyderabad, IIT Gandhinagar and IISc Bangalore to augment the research ecosystem in the country. The main objectives of these Research Parks are to have research collaboration with top-rated industries, to enable entrepreneurship and incubation of students and building strong 

4
academic linkages for the same, to increase outreach of academic content to industry and enabling industry to add value to academic programme through close collaborations etc.2.1.4Scheme for Transformational and Advanced Research in Sciences (STARS):The Scheme was launched with objective to provide extra mural funding to faculty of higher education institutions for research projects in basic sciences which are inter-disciplinary andtranslational in outcomes. The projects also need to be India-centric and focused on socially relevant research. The basic thrust domains of the Scheme include Physics, Chemistry, Biological Sciences, NanoSciences. The scheme also has a provision to encourage projects from talented researchers from eligible institutions in Tier-II cities and below.2.2 It has also been submitted that the University Grants Commission in line with the vision of NEP 2020 has taken pivotal steps to strengthen research in HEIs. The various UGC initiatives are outlined below: 2.2.1 Guidelines for Establishment of Research & Development Cell in Higher Education Institutions: UGChas developed guidelines for the establishment of a Research & Development Cell in Higher Education Institutions with a vision to put in place a robust mechanism for developing and strengthening the research ecosystem within HEIs, aligned with the provisions of NEP-2020.2.2.2 UGC (Minimum Standards and Procedure for the Award of Ph.D.) Regulations, 2022 : The UGC Regulations, which set the minimum standards and procedure for the award of Ph.D., have been revised according to the recommendations of the National Education Policy, 2020. These Regulations have been framed to encourage research scholars to become well-trained researchers and inquisitive explorers.  The regulations allow part-time Ph.D. and provide a relaxation of 5% marks in eligibility for admissions for the EWS category. 2.2.3 Guidelines for Higher Education Institutions to offer Internship / Apprenticeship Embedded Degree Programme: UGC has also introduced Guidelines for Higher Education Institutions to offer Internship / Apprenticeship Embedded Degree Programme. As per these Guidelines, any UG degree programme in all disciplines is eligible 

5
to embed apprenticeship/internship into thefor skill-based education emphasizes developing a skilled workforce with vocational education, this emphasis on Apprenticeship is to improve the employability of students in the general stream vis-à-vis the technology or service stream. These guidelines will enable the apprenticeship-embedded Degree programme in the general stream, with the cooperation of stakeholders in industry and Academia.2.2.4 Draft UGC Guidelines for Internship/Research internship for Undergraduate Students: These guidelines have been formulated as part of the NEP-2020 implementation, to create a robust mechanism for internships/research internships for undergraduate students in HEIs to enhance employability and develop the research aptitude of an individual. With this objective, the guidelines for internships/research internships for undergraduate students in view of the Curriculum and Credit Framework for Undergraduate Programmes (CCFUP) have been developed. The Commission has sought suggestions from stakeholders on the draft guidelines.2.2.5 Draft Guidelines on Sustainable and Vibrant University-Industry Linkage System for Indian UniversitiesThe significance of University-Industry linkages has become an important agenda of higher education on the policy-making front. There are many areas of collaboration between universities and industries which are mutually beneficial. The guidelines are aimed at fostering collaboration between academia and industry, to develop a robust ecosystem for research, innovation and knowledge transfer. The Commission has sought suggestions from stakeholders on the draft guidelines.2.2.6 Skilled Manpower- Advanced Research and Training Facility: UGC advised the Higher Educational Institutions (HEIs) to encourage students/faculties/researchers to utilize the Virtual Prototyping Lab of the Government of India, set up by the National Institute of Electronics and Information Technology (NIELIT). 2.2.7 Advising the HEIs on the National Quantum Mission (NQM): UGC advised all Higher Educational Institutions (HEIs) to disseminate the information about the National Quantum Mission (NQM) among the faculty, researchers and students so as to acquire benefit from this mission. 

6
2.3 Further AICTE has submitted that to promote and facilitate research based education, Ministry of Education along with All India Council of Technical Education has taken several steps including:-2.3.1AICTE- IDEA (Idea Development, Evaluation & Application) Lab Scheme: AICTE IDEA Lab (Idea Development Evaluation and Application Lab) is an initiative of the AICTE to promote innovation and ideation among students and faculty members of technical institutions in India. 42 institutions spread over 11 states/UTs were selected to establish AICTE IDEA Lab in the financial year 2022-23, which has increased the total count of AICTE IDEA Lab to 106. Out of the 106 IDEA Labs 31 are Self-Financed where AICTE provides mentorship.2.3.2AICTE Doctoral Fellowship (ADF):AICTE took significant steps to promote research and innovation in technical education. It provide AICTE Doctoral Fellowships to meritorious students for pursuing Ph.D in its designated research centres. It provided funding for innovative projects, and encouraged faculty to contribute to the knowledge base.2.3.3AICTE-MITACS Globalink Research Internship (GRI) Scheme:A MoU was signed between MITACS (Mathematics of Information Technology and Complex Systems), Canada and AICTE on 23.02.2018 for implementing the AICTE- MITACS GRI Scheme tofoster cross-border partnerships, focused on creating a platform for collaborative research between Canada and India to a pool of student talent in India, for a period of five years, from 2018 to 2023.2.3.4Industry Collaboration: AICTE actively fostered partnerships between educational institutions and industries to align technical education with industry requirements. These collaborations also facilitated research and development projects that addressed industry challenges.2.3.5Promotion of National Innovation & Startup in HEIs:3200+ HEIs have adopted National Innovation and Startup Policy (NISP). More than 100 innovation projects have been funded (Rs 10 lakh each) for incubations and startups by AICTE (2018-Innovation Cell (MIC) & AICTE organizes theme based national and international hackathons to crowd source ideas from students of HEIs to generate innovative problem 

7
solutionsaddressing real-world challenges. It develops innovation, problem solving and entrepreneurship among the students. Smart India Hackathon (SIH) commenced in 2017 and series of SIH has been organized. 2.3.6:Ministry of Education, Govt. of ystematically fostering the culture of Innovation in all Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) across the country. The objective of the cell is to foster the culture of Innovation in HEIs and schools through series of policy interventions and handholding supports and further enabling ecosystem development in educational institutions to support from idea generation to pre-incubation support, generating strong pipeline of quality innovations and early-stage start-ups for the incubation industry for further support. 2.3.7Benchmarking I&E Ecosystem in HEIs through NIRF-Innovation (Atal Ranking of Institutions on Innovation Achievements):NIRF Innovation ranking (earlier named as ARIIA - Atal Ranking of Institutions on Innovation Achievements) Framework, which is objectively define and measure the innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem developed in educational ecosystem. Furthermore, it benchmarks the I&E performance and practices in HEIs and sets directions for achievements. ARIIA framework came into action in 2019 and so far three editions of Atal Ranking exercises have been completed to rank all major HEIs based on their innovation and startup ecosystem development efforts and achievements. 2.3.8Building a vibrant network of Institution's Innovation Councils (IICs) in HEIs:An approach to institutionalizing innovation and startup culture in HEIs and further to create,Council model is in practice since 2018. So far, more than 7400+ IICs have been established in all major HEIs spread across states and UTs. These IICs in HEIs are leading in driving the innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem both at institute and community level. IICs are also providing mentorship support to ATLs across India.2.3.9 Faculty Innovation Ambassador (IA) Training Program in HEIs and Schools:Innovation Ambassadors (IA) program is to strengthen the in-house mentoring capacity of faculty members in HEIs and School by providing training and upgrading their skills on 

8
innovation and entrepreneurship and enabling them to mentor, nurture, and handhold ideas from students and faculty enthusiastic. So far 22000+ faculty members from HEIs and 25000+ teachers from schools have been trained and deployed as Innovation Ambassadors to drive campus I&E ecosystems in educational institutions. Deploying them as Innovation Ambassador (IA) as on ground change agent and post-training engagement of IAs in promotion and support of I&E in HEIs, schools, community and receiving guidance for their effective post-training engagement and performance.IIC Institutions are required to nominate up to 10 faculty members who are part of the Institution's Innovation Council (IIC) established in your campus to undergo the basic level e-training (self-pace mode) comprising of 17 modules on innovation, IP, startup, and management of incubation and technology transfer facilities. Those who have completed BASIC can proceed to ADVANCE-level training in the IA portal and are required to undertake prescribed activities every year they are required to undergo RESKILLING and UPSKILLING by enrolling and completing at least 35 contact hours of trainings offered by various national and international agencies. This will help them to hone their I&E skills and to retain the IA tag. 2.4 Some other initiatives that UGC and AICTE have taken in recent past, that have been informed, are as under: UGCa) UGC (Promotion of Academic Integrity and Prevention of Plagiarism in Higher Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2018 - These Regulations aim to put a check on plagiarism and recommend institutional mechanisms to eliminate plagiarism and related issues in higher education. b) INFLIBNET, an IUC of UGC has provided Higher Educational Institutions with plagiarism detection software.c) UGC issued a letter against Self-plagiarism to ensure credibility and quality in research. The letter draws the attention of the academic community on various aspects of self-plagiarism and advises all/any experts involved in academic performance/evaluation and assessment to ensure that decisions in the case of promotions, selections, credit allotment, award of research degrees must be based 

9
on an evaluation of the applicant's published work to ensure that the work being submitted for promotion/selection is not self-plagiarized. d) UGC-CARE - an initiative of the University Grants Commission with the main objective of fostering quality research, academic integrity and publication ethics in Indian universities. The UGC-CARE initiative is aimed at eliminating predatory journals and bad publishing practices. Journals are selected as per the journal analysis protocols approved by the Empowered Committee of UGC-CARE.e)good practices across the research lifecycle for quality, impact and ethical research.f) The Ph.D. Regulations mandate including a two credit course on Research and Publication Ethics as notified by UGC vide D.O. No. F.1- 1/2018(Journal/CARE) in 2019 for Ph.D. Scholars as part of the Credit requirement for the Ph.D. coursework.g) UGC issued a letter to all Higher Educational Institutions for uploading of full text of Ph.D. theses on Shodhganga, a repository of full text theses and dissertations. The initiative aims to facilitate deriving authentic data on number of Ph.D. students graduated. It also aims to help in making a formidable resource of research conducted in India. The online availability of electronic theses through centrally maintained digital repositories aims to not only ensure easy access and archiving on Indian doctoral theses but would also help in raising the quality of research. UGC mandated submission of Ph.D. theses on Shodhgangathrough its Regulations.h) The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 envisages the promotion of quality research within the Higher Education system. Research and innovation are important aspects to enhance quality education by the Higher Education Institutions (HEls). Societal challenges of our country can only be addressed by having a strong and vibrant higher education ecosystem with an emphasis on 

10
research, innovation, and technology development. UGC has developed guidelines for establishment of Research & Development Cell in Higher Education Institutions with a vision to put in place a robust mechanism for developing and strengthening the research ecosystem within HEls, aligned with the provisions of NEP-2020 and with a mission:To create a conducive environment for enhanced research productivity. To encourage collaboration across industry, government, community- based organizations and agencies at the local, national, and international levels. To facilitate greater access to research through mobilization of resources and funding.Various schemes of AICTE to promote quality research: i.Research Promotion Scheme (RPS)a. Create research ambience by promoting research in technical disciplines and innovations in core and emerging technologies. b. Research and development activities are considered as an essential component of higher education because of their role in creating new knowledge, insight and imparting enthusiasm and vitality to the educational process, as well as make them need based in view of the national requirements. c. Two new schemes under Research Promotion Scheme have been launched specifically for North-East Region and for National Doctoral Fellow Centres (NFC).ii.Quality Improvement Program (QIP)a. One of the main objectives of the programme is to upgrade the expertise and capabilities of the faculty members of the degree and diploma level institutions in the country. b. The programme is implemented and monitored by All India Council for Technical Educteachers are eligible for admission to both Master & Doctoral Degree Programme with the aim to enable the teachers to acquire Master & Doctoral degrees and imbibe in them a culture of research and better teaching educational capabilities by exposing them to the environment of the institute of study.iii. The Scheme for Promotion of Academic and Research Collaboration (SPARC)is an initiative of Ministry of Education to promote joint research and collaboration. 

11
The scheme became functional with effect from 28thOctober, 2018. It aims at supporting joint research proposals and facilitating academic and research collaborations between Indian Institutions and the best foreign institutions from 28 selected nations (USA, UK, Germany, Australia, Austria, Denmark, France, Canada, Italy, China & Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, Russia, Israel, Switzerland, Sweden, Netherlands, South Africa, South Korea, Norway, Portugal, New Zealand, Taiwan, Belgium, Spain, Brazil, and Finland). The scheme envisages that culmination of joint research proposals would lead the direction of solving problems of national and/or international relevance.2.5 Secretary, Department of Higher Education during its meeting held on 9thNovember, 2023 had apprised that the Government has taken numerous efforts to enhance theResearch & Development (R&D) expenditure and create adequate opportunities for the researchers. It has also taken various steps to increase opportunities for research students pursuing Ph.D. and postdoctoral research and its efforts is visible through its globalposition in scientific publications, number of Ph.Ds., number of start-ups, resident patentfiling, Global Innovation Index, etc. during the last three years. India occupies 3rdrank in terms of number of scientific publications, number of Ph.Ds. awarded and number of start-ups. India is ranked at 7thposition in terms of resident patent filing activity. The Committee was also apprised that India has witnessed a massive jump in its Global Innovation Index (GII) ranking from 52ndin the year 2019 to 40thin 2023 among 132 economies of theworld. Also, its international research collaboration, especially in themes related to SDG07(Affordable and Clean Energy) from 16% in 2018 to 26% in 2022. As per the latest available R&D statistics, the national spending on Research and Development (R&D)measured in terms of Gross Expenditure on Research and Development (GERD) has increased over the years and more than doubled from Rs.60,196.75 crore in2010-11 toRs.127,380.96 crore in 2020-21.3. Submissions of various stakeholders  During the meeting of the Committee held on 13thOctober, 2023, the Committee heard Directors of Indian Institute of Technology of Bombay, Gandhinagar and Indore; Vice-Chancellors of Central Universities of South Bihar (Gaya) and Assam; Directors of Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology, 

12
Thiruvananthapuram, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Mohali on the subject. Brief submissions by them are as under: 3.1 Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bombay: 3.1.1 The Committee was informed that over the last three decades, IIT Bombay has focusedincreasingly on Research and Development in the cutting-edge areas of science and technology. With a solid background in basic research, in recent years IIT Bombay has been spending more efforts on research impact, both at the national and international level. These efforts includesetting up a number of centres of excellence in research, setting up technology incubators (SINE, TIH-IOT, Betic), setting up of research park, Rs 500 crores of Institute of Eminence Funds usedto set up world class R&D facilities, etc.3.1.2Centres of Excellence:It was submitted that recognizing that most modern technologies which require collaborative efforts from scientists and engineers from multiple disciplines, IITBombay has set up multiple interdisciplinary research Centres of Excellence (CoE) with state-of-the-art experimental and computing facilities. These CoEs bring students, faculty from differentdepartments, and industry partners together to address problems in a holistic manner. These centers work at multiple levels: running post-graduate and doctoral programs, carry theirindustrial R&D projects and train industry professionals through outreach programs.3.1.3 The Committee was also informed that the some of the major focus areas at IIT, Bombay include Artificial Intelligence/ Machine Learning (AI/ML) technologies for a variety of applications, Industry 4.0 technologies, including Technology Innovation Hub in IoT/IoE,Security technologies, including blockchain, cryptography, research in health care technologies spanning biosciences and engineering/AIML, and research in sustainabilityincluding climate change, photovoltaic, battery technology, green hydrogen, etc. Anothersuch centre set-up recently in the cutting edge area is CoE for Quantum Information Science and Technology (QuIST).3.1.4 Further, the Centre for Machine Intelligence and Data Science (C-MInDS) at IITBombay has been setup in February, 2020.There search in AI and ML theory and applications at IIT Bombay ranges from Computer Vision, Medical Image Analysis, Speech Processing, Database, Data Mining, Natural Language Processing, Information Retrieval, Agent-based Learning, Advanced Control, Optimization, Logistics and Supply Chains,Molecular Computing, AI in Biological and Chemical Sciences, Statistics, to name a few.In addition, multiple sponsored research laboratories have been developed, such as Techno-craft Centre for Applied Artificial Intelligence, to undertake focused R&D projects on theapplication of AI/ML technologies in defence, healthcare, financial and banking sectors. The 

13
overall vision is threefold: develop novel applications and products using AI/ML technologies, train manpower needed to sustain the industrial growth in this sector, and be anucleus of societal transformation through locally relevant AI/ML applications.3.1.5 The Committee was further informed that IITB has extensive facilities for rapid manufacturing, automation, etc, in addition to the technology Incubation Hub on Internet of Things/Everything, which is working on technology that is revolutionizing many areas from industry to agriculture. IIT Bombay has also set up a Trust Lab, which deals with security, cryptography, and more generally trust. Blockchains are a major focus area for the lab, toensure immutability (security) of data.3.1.6 While making submissions, Acting Director, IIT, Bombay, highlighted various significant research areas and initiatives undertaken by the institution, which are as under:AI Research:The institute has 85 faculty members working on AI, with a focus onhealthcare, fintech data analytics, and Indian language and speech technology.Language Translation and NEP:Efforts are being made to aid the New Education Policy by translating technical books into regional languages, utilizing AI for faster and more accurate translations.Digital Health and Epidemiology:Collaboration with the government on projects like the Koita Centre for Digital Health, aiming for seamless sharing of medical data between doctors and predictive analytics in epidemiology.Blockchain and Cyber security:The Trust Lab works on blockchain technology, focusing on security and cryptography, collaborating with the Indian military for cryptographic projects.Technology Innovation Hub (TIH):TIH concentrates on various applications, notably in agriculture, developing technologies for efficient farming practices.Quantum Information Science and Technology:A center was established to explore quantum technology's potential, particularly in securing information.Biosciences and Biomedical Incubators:The institute's success in biosciences includes advancements in cancer therapies and the establishment of biomedical incubators fostering collaborations between engineers and doctors.Rapid Manufacturing and IoT:The institute focuses on advanced manufacturing techniques and IoT applications for monitoring air quality and industrial parameters.Energy Research:IIT Bombay has made strides in solar photovoltaic research and battery technology, exploring alternatives like sodium-ion batteries for energy storage.

14
Green Technologies:A new research center is being set up for green hydrogen generation and storage, aligning with the government's emphasis on sustainability.3.1.7 There were queries about the dependence on certain raw materials critical for chip-making and ongoing efforts to develop alternatives, including the development of gallium nitride at Indian Institute of Science. The Committee noted the IIT Bombay's multifaceted research initiatives and collaborations across diverse fields, aiming for technological advancements and practical applications.3.2 Indian Institute of Technology (IIT),Gandhinagar3.2.1 Director, IIT, Gandhinagar informed that since its establishment in 2008, it hasconsistently strived to redefine the paradigms of teaching, research and development, andinnovation. With its strong focus on interdisciplinary research and industry collaborations, IITGN has produced numerous R&D innovations with applications in defense and aerospaceengineering; green energy, power, and sustainable development; Med.Tech and Therapeutics;AI/ML/ Blockchain. Some notable achievements include the discovery and scalable synthesis of novel boron Nano sheets that can transform existing technologies in energy generation andstorage. One research group has completed proof of concept studies, established test rigs, anddevelop devices to demonstrate the real-world application of demand-side energymanagement programs.3.2.2 The Committee was also informed that researchers are also using AI and IoTs to efficiently operate water and electricity infrastructure and also harnessing the power ofAI/ML/Blockchain, advanced digital technologies for heritage site restoration, deep learning, game development, etc. Further, an innovative novel 3D concrete printing technology collaboration with the Indian Army. Through this partnership, they created permanent defense bunkers for them and formulated avenues to test high-platform weapons and with guidance from the faculty mentor, the studentcapitalized on the novel technology by establishing a successful start-up, MiCoB.3.2.3 The Committee was further informed that the research and education milestones have been rewarded at the local and national levels, most recently with the Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize to Prof. Vimal Mishra in the Earth, Atmosphere, Ocean, and Planetary Sciences category. On the education front, the Center for Creative Learning has been anintegral part of curriculum development. Their collaborations with CBSE and various StateGovernments have helped integrate curiosity-driven learning of STEM concepts in rural and 

15
urban schools. IITGN is also leveraging emerging technologies such as BlockChain, AI/ML, NLP, IoTs, and semiconductor technology to tackle problems in Med. Tech, datamanagement, environmental monitoring, waste management, etc. New courses are also being launched on these topics to train a new generation of enthusiastic researchers, policymakers, educators, and industry professionals. They have recently implemented a secure digitaldegree concept for our graduating students.3.2.4 Director, IIT, Gandhinagar in his submissions mentioned about the advancements made by the Institute since its establishment and progress made in fields such as AI, ML, IoT, Blockchain, and shared insights into ongoing developments. He stated that IIT Gandhinagar presently holds the 18th position in the NIRF rankings, a remarkable achievement in a short span compared to very few institutions reaching this level. He also mentioned that collaboration with international universities from Brazil, America, Europe, Australia, and Singapore underscores their global partnerships and significant ongoing programs. Noteworthy accomplishments in nanotechnology that were highlighted included the development of single-sheet boron technology with potential applications in energy conservation and storage, particularly in advancing battery-related fields. Additionally, the institute has pioneered 3D concrete printing technology, collaborating with the Indian Army to develop bunkers and high-level testing stations for easier and quicker testing.3.3 Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) Thiruvananthapuram3.3.1Director, IIST, Thiruvananthapuramhighlighted key aspects of the Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) which was established 15 years ago under the Department of Space, Government of India, with the primary aim to cultivate high-quality human resources for space applications.3.3.2 He submitted that IIST offers undergraduate, dual degree, postgraduate, and doctoral programs in various Space Science and Technology fields, with a combined annual intake of 433 students. Currently, there are 1,233 students on campus, with nearly 30% being women. Notably, the representation of women in faculty and staff also stands close to 30%. Further it was submitted that the institute holds an NIRF ranking of 48 (as of 2023) and boasts a substantial number of graduates1,316who now serve in the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), many reaching mid-level management positions. Noteworthy achievements include collaborations with prestigious institutions like Caltech, internships at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in the USA, and a strong commitment to implementing the National Education Policy (NEP) of 2020 from the upcoming year.

16
3.3.3 Research areas span a wide spectrum, crucially focusing on Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Internet of Things, Blockchain, Robotics, and their integration with industry, particularly for quantum technology. The institute emphasizes hands-on experience, developing small satellites launched through PSLV programs, showcasing student-designed rockets, and deploying numerous nanosatellites. With over 30 ongoing projects in collaboration with ISRO, efforts are concentrated on technological advancements for significant missions such as Gaganyaan, Electric Propulsion, and Scramjet Propulsion, as well as various aspects of the space economy. IIST maintains robust collaborations, both nationally and internationally, with more than 10 international institutions and over 30 national institutions. The institute's technology developments feed into ISRO's projects and have broader societal applications.3.3.4Director, IISThighlighted specific research thrusts:Internet of Things (IoT):Research aims at developing high-altitude platforms using IoT, facilitating seamless data transfer between UAVs, satellites, and ground systems for industry and student projects.Blockchain:Focus on enhancing existing protocols for internet architecture,acknowledging its crucial role in securing information like passports and Aadhar data, digital currencies, and smart contracts.Quantum Technology:Active involvement in Quantum Key Distribution and experimental work generating entangled beams with potential applications in quantum cryptography, enhancing space security and communication.Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning:Aiming to contribute to various societal applications, space sciences, strategic missions, computer vision, surveillance, weather forecasting, and more. The institute also emphasizes Industry 4.0, incorporating intelligent digital technologies into manufacturing processes, and plans to introduce courses on smart manufacturing.Robotics:Efforts are directed towards developing robots for extraterrestrial, societal, and military applications, focusing on intelligent dexterous robotic manipulation for space station construction and medical/industrial collaborations.3.3.5 Additionally, the institute envisions expanding research areas, especially in healthcare for safe learning control, AI/ML-based systems, and health monitoring in human spaceflight missions. Dr. Nair acknowledged the breadth of unexplored areas beyond those discussed in the presentation.

17
3.4 Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore3.4.1 Director, IISc, in his submission, outlined the significant aspects of the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), an institution with a rich legacy and diverse research portfolio. He stated that the Institute established in 1909 by Shri J.N. Tata through a public-private partnership following a conversation between Swami Vivekananda and Tata, IISc has been associated with renowned figures such as Shri C.V. Raman, Dr. Homi Bhabha, Dr. Vikram Sarabhai, Satish Dhawan, and Prof. Roddam Narasimha. Further it was stated that the institute has secured top rankings globally, recognized as the world's top research university for Citations per Faculty and ranked no. 1 in India under various categories, including the NIRF rankings and as an institution of eminence by the Government of India and the institution conducts research across various scientific and engineering domains. Notably, it has also initiated a medical school to foster collaboration between science, engineering, and medicine faculties.3.4.2 Several advancements in AI and blockchain at IISc, including the development of AI-based neuromorphic computing surpassing diffraction limits, computer vision techniques for crowd management, and AI-based assessments of emotional and skill development in autistic children were highlighted. It was stated that the Institute's innovations span GPU acceleration for AI applications, autonomous legged robots for agriculture, visual analysis for salinity propagation in the Bay of Bengal, and scalable watchtower network models for identifying suspicious transactions in blockchain. Medical advancements include Xray-Setu, using AI to interpret degraded images sent via WhatsApp for diagnosis, and large language models for code development to minimize errors. Other innovations involve autonomous drones aiding visually impaired individuals, a chatbot developed during the COVID-19 pandemic, a smart water distribution system using IoT, and research in MM Waves for 6G communication and open Radio Access Network. n Quantum Technology, IISc boasts a substantial faculty working on various aspects, including the development of a 4-qubit superconducting transom quantum processor and pioneering methods for generating random numbers based on electron movement, setting new standards in the field. Additionally, IISc plays a pivotal role in Industry 4.0 by establishing smart factories for research, innovation, and training, combining additive manufacturing, automation, robotics, and IoT for future factory models. However, the implementation of these factories in operational industries is still in the research and development phase. It was submitted that furthermore, the institute has contributed significantly to 'Make in India' and 'Atmanirbharat' initiatives by developing India's first industry-grade 10 kW 

18
Electron beam and a powder bed metal additive manufacturing machine, reducing dependency on expensive imports..3.5 Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Indore3.5.1 The Committee was informed of the various domains that IIT Indore is working upon,such as the following: CHARAK DT- Human Digital Twin (DT) Healthcare Platform: DT platform for high- resolution patient models for precise diagnosis & personalized treatment, which connects developers to hospitals and data sources for validation.AgriHub:Tools for plant breeding, genomics election, marker-assisted breeding, andgene editing, new technologies of cloud based Big Data Analytics and Scalable AI/ML for NGS data analysis will speed up the varietal development program. Precision agriculture will help in smart farm management and to increase crop production.Prediction of Potential Flood-Causing Atmospheric Rivers:Characterizing Atmospheric Rivers (ARs) using Re analysis Data, Analyzing the impacts of ARs. SinceARs lead to extreme floods, a better understanding of AR impacts and prediction could be beneficial for the farming industry, regional and national water resources managingbodies, Disaster management bodies, etc.Wide Area-Monitoring of the Indian Electricity Grid for Enhanced Visibility: To increase the visibility of various events (generation loss, line faults, equipment failure, grid separation, etc.) in the power grid at the load dispatch centers using real-time dataanalytics and visualization tools.IoT-enabled Quantum Technology-based Toxic Gas Sensing Solution2d TMT sensor for real-time and remote monitoring for chemical and polymer industries,environmental pollution control board, research labs and automotive industry.An automated and intelligent tool based on Digital Twin (DT) for dynamic shop-floor decision support:Digital Twin for Smart Manufacturing Ecosystem, AI/MLmodels to predict machine and part failure based on data captured through IoT sensor network along with Digital Eyes and Digital Ears to identify production units and sound-based debugging. A cost-effective bouquet of tools and services will support MSMEsfollow Zero Effect Zero Defect production.Block Bill: An Environmentally Inclusive and Sustainable disruptive blockchain 

19
Tech Solutions:domain and CO2emissions by more than 5000 T annually.Impact of BlackSwan Events on Ethereum Blockchain ERC20 Token TransactionNetworks:The ERC20 financial ecosystem has evolved from a localized wealth formation period to a more mature financial ecosystem where wealth has dispersed among the traders in the network after the crypto crash and during the pandemic period.Collaborative Learning and Machine Skin Development for Manufacturing Servitization: To perform collaborative AI model training keepingsensitive data private for health management of distributed assets, this tool is highly helpful for data poor organizations with sensitive data, for example OEMs and MSMEs.3.5.2 In his submissions, Director, IIT Indore highlighted the following points about the Institute, multiple projects and initiatives undertaken, across various domains:Institute Overview:Established in 2009, the institute has grown over 14 years, offering 9 undergraduate and 16 postgraduate programs. There are about 600 Ph.D. students and over 2,800 total students. It stands 14th in NIRF Ranking in India.Technology Innovation Hub:Aiming to bring together entrepreneurs working on various aspects of the human body, the Charak Human Digital Platform facilitates collaboration among small companies focusing on different body elements like the heart, eyes, and x-rays.Collaborations:The institute collaborates with AIIMS, Bhopal, and AIIMS, Delhi, fostering joint research initiatives.Projects and Research Areas:oCharak Human Digital Platform:Aims at building an AI-based platform for replicating the entire human body through data-based modeling.oAgri-Hub:Focuses on developing water-resistant crop varieties and phenomics for observing plant conditions, working in collaboration with organizations like the Soybean Research Institute and the Institute of Agriculture Engineering.oFlood Prediction:Researching the prediction of potential flooding caused by atmospheric rivers in various regions, in collaboration with the National Institute for Disaster Management.3.5.3 He also informed about several ongoing projects related to toxic gas sensing, IoT-based industries, virtual setups for machine diagnostics, and initiatives like the 'Vigyan Pe Charcha' 

20
lecture series and astronomy labs in Haryana schools. He also mentioned proposing similar initiatives to the Madhya Pradesh government.3.6 Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Mohali3.6.1 It was informed that that the research activitie pursued in different IISERs are focusedat understanding and capacity building in space science technologies, energy storage technologies, quantum technologies, artificial intelligence and machine learning, climatechange, earth and environmental sciences, health and allied sciences. At IISER Mohali, different research groups are engaged in Health and allied sciences, Quantum and emerging technologies and sustainable environmental technologies. 3.6.2Director, IISER, Mohali highlighted key aspects of the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), a group comprising seven institutions established around 15 years ago. The focus was on offering high-level integrated education in Physics, Chemistry, Biology, and Mathematics coupled with research. He elaborated on the education policy, emphasizing that 1,500 students are admitted through competitive exams across these institutions, pursuing a dual degree of BS and MS after rigorous education in the four core subjects. The core areas of research include fundamental sciences and their potential applications in space science, technology, functional materials, nanotechnology, energy research, health sciences, environmental studies, quantum technologies, computational sciences, astrophysics, and astronomy.3.6.3 Information about ongoing research projects was shared, such as the development of diphenyl urea derivatives for treating viral diseases, which has shown promise against conditions like COVID and influenza. Other ventures include work on neurodegenerative diseases, lysosomal functions, stem cells' role in heart and blood vessel development, quantum technologies, laser applications in biomaterials, real-time air quality monitoring, and decentralized wastewater management.3.6.4 He highlighted collaborations between institutions like IIT Ropar, IISER Mohali, IMTECH Chandigarh, PGI Chandigarh, and IISc Bangalore, emphasizing the importance of these joint efforts in various research endeavors and stating that these initiatives showcase the integration of fundamental research in the life sciences with potential applications and collaborations with both national and international institutions and organizations

21
3.7 Assam University3.7.1Director, Research Development, Assam University in his submission before the Committee outlined the key features in respect of research activities being carried.  He mentioned that emphasis has been placed on research and development, with increasing project allocations from government and funding agencies, reaching 65 projects amounting to Rs. 13.5 crore in 2021-22. Efforts have been directed towards patenting, resulting in 23 granted patents across various fields. It was further submitted that the university's research endeavors concentrate on climate change, particularly the North-East Region's vulnerability to floods, landslides, and erratic weather patterns. Projects in environmental sustainability, bioremediation, climate impact, carbon sequestration, and microbe-based strategies for pollution mitigation are actively pursued.3.7.2 Nanotechnology research spans healthcare to agriculture, integrating departments like Physics, Chemistry, and Agriculture. Computer scientists and engineering faculties focus on AI, blockchain, and IoT applications in agriculture, intending to bring research results to the region's periphery. Also Biodiversity conservation is another priority, given the North-East Region's status as a biodiversity hotspot. Projects aim to preserve flora and fauna, potentially contributing to eco-tourism and sustainable livelihoods. Efforts also extend to protecting Son Beel, the second-largest wetland in Asia, and drug designing in collaboration between the Pharmacy and Microbiology Departments.3.7.3 It was mentioned that the University's impact areas include sustainable research management, rural development, and understanding the region's economy, especially focusing on tribes and societies in the North-East, aiming to address their challenges and contribute positively to society3.8 Central University of South Bihar3.8.1 It was informed that establishment of Research and Development Cell as per UGC guidelines to foster advanced research to achieve SDGs has been done and the following research areas are being pursued in this respect:. SDGsResearch Areas03Anti microbial Resistance (AMR) surveillance and its impact on humanhealth,technologytomanagepollutionanditseffects.Zoonotic,infectious,chronic,lifestyleandgeneticdiseasesandDrug discovery

22
09&12Biodegradable materials for sustainable use & Phyto-and bacterialBioremediation of Arsenic07&13Alternate energy resources: Heat resistant Camelina sativa,Hydrogen storage & Green and Safe Nuclear Energy15Conservation of Natural Resources and propagation of climate-Resilience crops6,11 &13Land and water resources and disaster management using Artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning for enhancing the resources and livelihood of the community03&15Center for Climate Change and LiFE is created to carry out research onvarious issues of climate change over the Gangetic Plain of India and itseffect on agriculture, infection diseases,diversity and conservation09,10 &11Cyber Security, Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain Technology andInternet of Things (IoT)17Collaboration with other Higher Educational Institutions/ResearchLaboratories/Industries in a overstated research areas3.8.2 Vice-Chancellor, Central University of South Bihar mentioned about initiation of a Bachelor of Social Sciences in Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, aligning with the needs of the 21st century. It was also stated that the ongoing work in social sciences centers around providing inputs to the government, campus planners, and policymakers. Ten specific research projects obtained from ICSSR are being actively pursued, addressing critical schemes like Jan-Dhan Yojana, Ayushman Bharat Yojana, and Ujjwala Yojana to assess their impact. 3.9  During another meeting of the Committee held on 9thNovember,2023,theCommittee heard the representatives of Institutes/Universities namely Directors of Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) of Delhi, Madras, Palakkad and Mandi; Vice-Chancellors of Delhi Technological University and Delhi University on the subject. Brief submissions of these Institutions are as under. 3.10. Indian Institute of Technology, IIT, Delhi3.10.1 It was informed that the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi lays a strong emphasis on the sponsored research and industrial interaction. The Industrial Research & Development (IRD) Unit in the Institute provides administrative and accounting support for research. The

23
Institute is actively involved in collaborative research programmes with national andinternational organizations/universities in Austria, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Denmark,Ethiopia, European Commission, France, Finland, Germany, Holland, Hungary, Ireland Israel,Italy, Japan, Korea, Kuwait, Netherland, Nepal, Portugal, Russia, Slovenia, Sweden,Switzerland, Taiwan, UK, USA, etc. Along with teaching and academic research leading to doctoral degree, the Institute gives very high priority to sponsored research and developmentprojects sponsored by national and international agencies and user organizations.3.10.2 The Committee noted that a total of 1,,440 Crores have been undertaken in the last five financial years by the IRD Unit, averaging 264 projects with average sanctioned value ocrores per Financial Year (FY). The major funding entities for sponsored research projects in the last five years were Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO), the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Ministry of Education (MoE), and the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). The crore from international agencies. Further, atotal of 4803 research staff were employed in various projects undertaken through the IRDunit in the last five financial years. This amounts to an average of 961 Research Staff in anygiven FY. Out of the 4803 research staff employed in various projects, 3026,which is 63% were male while 1777, which is 37%were female staff.3.10.3 Director, IIT Delhi in his submission mentioned the institution's significant research initiatives and societal impact. He stated that with 620 faculty members and over 12,700 students, they have expanded research opportunities for undergraduates, focusing on outcomes and societal influence rather than just publications and patents. He also highlighted impactful projects such as environmentally friendly cement, AI for vision restoration, water security mapping, and smart manufacturing. He also outlined their efforts to scale research programs, inviting UG students from various colleges for summer research and facilitating faculty engagement. Their facilities, like the Central Research Facility and SATHI, worth Rs. 400-500crores, operate round the clock, yet face challenges in operation and maintenance funding.3.10.4 Collaborative efforts with other institutions and proposed a cluster approach to influence the research ecosystem were also mentioned. Challenges regarding international researcher engagement, complexities in large project deliveries, insufficient overhead charges for infrastructure development, declining funding per student, and procurement issues through GeM for time-sensitive projects were also mentioned. 

24
3.11 Indian Institute of Technology (IIT),Madras3.11.1 Director, IIT Madras outlined the institution's significant strides in research-based education, emphasizing interdisciplinary focus and various initiatives aimed at fostering innovation and entrepreneurship. He stated that the Master of Science by Research and Ph.D. programs have been instrumental, with an increased focus on inter disciplinarity through 15 Centers of Excellence, covering areas like additive manufacturing, quantum sciences, and technology policy. He further submitted that the institution offers interdisciplinary dual-degree programs allowing students to pursue diverse interests. It focuses on translating ideas into design and prototypes through centers like the Centre for Innovation and incubators targeting health, cyber-physical systems, and rural technology stating that over 400 companies have been incubated, with a cumulative evaluation of around Rs. 40,000 crores, providing substantial equity to IIT Madras.3.11.2 He submitted that the Institute's research endeavors have led to remarkable developments, including 3D printed rockets by a startup named Agnikul, advancements in hyperloop technology, and contributions to the 5Gi standard in telecommunications. Additionally, social impact initiatives like a robot for cleaning septic tanks and assistive technologies for differently-abled individuals were highlighted. It was mentioned that IIT Madras has introduced new Departments like the School of Sustainability and a state-of-the-art medical science and engineering course and also started an MD-Ph.D. program. The institute collaborates extensively with industry and is striving to increase industry-funded projects while facing challenges in funding for engineering Ph.D. programs, especially for women scholars.3.12 Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Mandi3.12.1  Director, IIT Mandi highlighted the institution's focus on research-driven education and its evolution since its foundation. It was stated that Research forms a core part of their educational delivery, with design and innovation integral to the B.Tech program. To promote research, they've transformed Master's programs into research programs to allow students more time for publications. Ph.D. enrollments have surged from 330-340 to 700, including provisions for direct Ph.D. applications for high-performing B.Tech students.3.12.2 It was informed that the institute has established several interdisciplinary research centers focusing on areas such as Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Indian Knowledge Systems and Mental Health Applications, Human-Computer Interaction, Quantum Science and Technology, among others. Notable projects include brainwave-controlled wheelchairs, landslide monitoring 

25
systems, digital skin technologies, and efforts to develop a room-temperature quantum computer through collaborations.3.12.3 It was submitted that IIT Mandi encourages students to work with multiple supervisors across disciplines, emphasizing interdisciplinary collaboration. Their undergraduate curriculum integrates research through courses like 'Foundation of Design Practicum,' where students design products and address societal issues. Research internships are also embedded in the curriculum, allowing students to work on projects with societal impact and collaborate with international institutions.3.12.4 Further to foster a research culture among undergraduates, the institute awards credits and grade points for published research articles and encourages research internships by offering scholarships. Collaborative Ph.D. programs with other institutes have been initiated, and initiatives like incentives for high-impact journal publications and awards for young achievers and faculty have been introduced to promote excellence in research and education.3.13 Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Palakkad3.13.1 It was informed that since its inception in 2015, IIT, Palakkad has maintained a well-established academic framework, high standards of academic excellence and innovation. Prof.A. Seshadri Sekhar, Director, IIT Palakkad emphasized the Institute's status as one of the younger IITs, celebrating recent achievements despite challenges in transitioning to a permanent campus. He informed about the exceptional gender ratio, with a significant representation of female students and faculty and highlighted the establishment of a Data Science Department, collaborations with the Rahul Mehta Foundation for a school of Data Science in AI, and awards for the Engineering Works Division.3.13.2 It was stated that the institute prioritizes research-based education, introducing curricular flexibility and open-ended lab projects in the B.Tech. program, fostering a culture of innovation through dedicated centers and support for start-ups. They offer long-term internships and incentives for Ph.D. submission, encouraging early career research and industry collaboration. Moreover, initiatives like web-enabled courses cater to industry professionals pursuing education while enabling collaboration on industry-relevant projects. It was highlighted that IIT Palakkad's focus extends to agricultural advancements, showcasing a dedicated research center to aid farmers using AI techniques, yielding 30% better results in field tests. It was informed that they have engaged in a DST-proposed Hydrogen Valley and have initiated a Center of Renewable 

26
Energy (CoRE) focusing on hydrogen, wind, solar, and biomass energy verticals. Collaborations with Bosch and initiatives like the Global Sanitation Centre further emphasize their commitment to research and innovation.3.13.4 The institute actively engages in Covid-related research, exploring ultrasound techniques for detection and addressing after-effects, particularly in children. Initiatives to study viruses like Nipah and monitoring air quality through real-time indices demonstrate their commitment to public health research. Additionally, their outreach efforts target tribal hamlets, providing skill development, infrastructure support, and employing drone technology for transport solutions3.14University of Delhi3.14.1 Vice Chancellor, University of Delhi highlighted Delhi University's evolution, marking its 100th year and its noteworthy QS ranking at 94th, a significant improvement from its previous global ranking. He stated that as a multi-disciplinary institution catering to a vast student population, the University has demonstrated a keen focus on research-based education and a commitment to implementing the National Education Policy (NEP). He further stated that emphasis is on promoting creativity, critical thinking, and originality in the curriculum. The University aims to foster leadership qualities in students and encourages their active participation in the learning process through innovative teaching pedagogies. Under NEP, they have introduced a four-year undergraduate program emphasizing research and flexibility in selecting minors across disciplines, fostering a multidisciplinary approach.3.14.2 It was submitted that the institution endeavors to cultivate research interests from the outset by encouraging project-based learning, offering flexibility in experiments, and dedicating the final year to extensive research projects. Plans are in place to revamp postgraduate programs to align with NEP, focusing on research-oriented, problem-based studies related to local industries and socioeconomic facets. It was mentioned that Delhi University aspires to create a robust research ecosystem, encouraging faculty to pursue beyond publication, aiming for patents, prototypes, and commercially viable products. The University emphasizes sustainable development goals, evident in the increase in publications centered around these goals over the years. The university is establishing incubation centers and research development cells across faculties, nurturing an environment conducive to innovation and ideation. Additionally, a research council under the innovation cell oversees research-related matters, fostering a culture of inquiry and development throughout the university

27
3.15 Delhi Technological University (DTU)3.15.1 Vice Chancellor, Delhi Technological University's (DTU) submitted that research-based education, emphasizing its impact on critical thinking, creativity, and communication skills have have contributed to its improved ranking. It was also submitted that the institution has integrated elective research within the core curriculum, allowing students to commence research work in their third year, which is considered a core credit course. Students are required to complete their project work leading to research publications for credit acknowledgment. This academic approach has positively influenced the institution's ranking, highlighting their commitment to fostering research-oriented education.3.15.2 DTU has expanded research initiatives into postgraduate programs, notably with a successful Ph.D. program producing 120 Ph.D. graduates, resulting in recognition for 17 professors among the top two percent of scientists by Stanford University. The acquisition of a 5G lab and a robust incubation center supporting 15 startups, generating around Rs. 20 crore in revenue, showcases DTU's commitment to innovation and entrepreneurship.4. The Committee , in its deliberations on the subject also heard the views and submissions of the Secretaries, Ministry of Science & Technology (Department of Science & Technology, Department of Scientific & Industrial Research &  Department of Biotechnology) along with representatives of the National Research Foundation, National Institute of Virology, ICMR, Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,  Representatives of National Council of Applied Economic Research and NITI Aayog. Brief submissions of these Ministries/ Organizations are as under.4.1Department of Science & Technology (DST), Ministry of Science & Technology4.1.1Submissions of the Department of Science & Technology (DST): 4.1.2 It was informed that the Department plays a pivotal role in promoting new areas of Science & Technology and leads as a nodal department for organizing, coordinating and promoting S&T activities in the country. It also functions as the key agency to connect science and technology sector with different Government verticals. DST provides the largest extramural research and development support in the country to strengthen national S&T capacity and capability primarily through a competitive mode of funding cutting across institutions and disciplines. This 

28
scientific and industrial R&D initiatives and helps transform the national S&T landscape.4.1.3 With a view to promote basic research in science and engineering and to achieve higher levels of excellence in internationally-competitive research, the Government had established a Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) through an Act of Parliament: the Science and Engineering Research Board Act, 2008 (Science Act). SERB has so far provided a good foundation for promoting basic science and engineering research, through financial assistance to persons engaged in such research. One of the key recommendations of NEP 2020 had been the creation of a National Research Foundation (NRF) in India, as a body to catalyse, facilitate, coordinate, seed, grow, and mentor research in institutions around the country.4.1.4 Anusandhan National Research Foundation: The Anusandhan National Research Foundation Act, 2023 (No. 25 of 2023) empowers the Central Government to make rules and also it empowers the Executive Council of the ANRF to make regulations. The Foundation will be an overarching apex body for coordinating across Central Government, State Governments, Public Authorities, Industries and Research Institutions and encouraging collaboration with scientists from within and outside India including scientists of Indian origin, in order to enrich the Indian scientific ecosystem. Specific objectives of ANRF include:(a) preparing the roadmap for short, medium and long-term research and development;(b) seeding, growing and facilitating research at academic and research institutions, particularly at universities and colleges where research capacity is at a nascent stage, through programmes such as research and development projects, fellowships, academic chairs, and creation of centres of excellence;(c) funding competitive peer-reviewed grant proposals to eligible persons;(d) assisting in setting up research infrastructure and environment that is conducive for scientific pursuit with specific focus on matters of national priorities, emerging frontiers and strategic research; (e)tance;(f) supporting translation of research undertaken into capital intensive technologies;(g) evolving nationally coordinated programmes to identify scientific and practical solutions for societal, developmental, financial and techno-economic challenges;

29
(h) coordinating across the Central Government, State Governments, public authorities, industries, and research institutions, to document and analyse the expenditure on scientific research and their outcomes during each financial year, and report the same to the Central Government; (i) evolving participation in international collaborative projects and fostering exchange of scientific information;(j) encouraging collaboration with scientists from within and outside India, including scientists of Indian origin, with a view to enriching the Indian scientific ecosystem; and (k) encouraging the Public Sector Enterprises as well as the private sector entities to invest in the activities of the Foundation.4.1.4 The foundation will ensure the quality and quantity of research across universities and institutions and will promote quality workforce. Best R&D practices will be adopted in the Foundation to make the R&D enterprise more vibrant, competent and productive. The Foundation will be governed by the Governing Board chaired by the Prime Minister of India and the Executive Council chaired by the Principal Scientific Advisor to Government of India. The NRF will receive funds for any year in the form of (i) grants and loans from the Government (ii) donation from any source for the purpose of R&D (iii) recoveries made of the amounts granted to NRF (iv) any income from investment of the amount received by NRF and (v) all amounts with FSER under SERB Act, 2008. during 2023-28 in the NRF Fund to start the functions of NRF which includes research grants, cost of research fellowship and centres of excellence and salaries, allowances and other administrative expenses for discharging the functions of NRF. NRF will have the flexibility to mobilise funds through donations from any other source, including industry, public sector enterprises, philanthropist organizations, foundations, international bodies etc. to increase the quality and quantum of research in the country.Innovation Fund: NRF will create an innovation fund involving both NRF as well as private sector. The Government of India (GoI) share and the private funds share in the innovation fund shall be in the ratio of 1:3.5. If in the innovation fund corpus, the private funds exceed GoI funds and after NRF frames its own Financial Rules with concurrence of Department of Expenditure (DoE), exemption of NRF Innovation Fund from the provisions of the General Financial Rules (GFR) will be granted.

30
Special Purpose Fund (SPF): One or more SPFs will be created for managing any specific project or research.Fund for Science and Engineering Research (FSER):  The Governing Board shall allocate into a FSER Fund, and maintain such fund for such time as determined necessary for the continuation of the projects and programmes initiated under the Science and Engineering erstwhile SERB in the period 2023-28.4.1.5Major Schemes and Programs:Salient features of Major DST schemes / programs which have profound inclination towards Technology, Education, Women, Children and Youth are given below:i. National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical Systems (NM-ICPS): Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) combines digital/ cyber elements with physical objects (e.g. machines, autonomous vehicles) and data with capabilities of communication, data collection & processing, computing, decision making and action. Under the NM-ICPS, 25 Technology Innovation Hubs (TIHs) ( Annexure I)  have been established in reputed institutes across the country in the areas of advanced technologies which include: Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, Robotics, Cyber Security, Data Analytics & Predictive Technologies, Intelligent Collaboration Systems, Technologies for Agriculture & Water, Technologies for Mining, Advanced Communication System, Quantum Technologies etc. ii. National Quantum Mission (NQM): The Union Cabinet approved the National Quantum Mission (NQM) on 19th April 2023 being implemented by DST with a total outlay of Rs.6003.65 Crore for a period of eight years. The Mission aims to seed, nurture and scale up scientific and industrial R&D and create a vibrant & innovative ecosystem in Quantum Technology (QT). This will accelerate QT led economic growth, nurture the ecosystem in the country and make India one of the leading nations in the development of Quantum Technologies & Applications (QTA).iii.Startup Ecosystem in IndiaIndia's startup ecosystem is a globally-competitive powerhouse of innovation and entrepreneurship. Boasting an astounding 1,14,000+ startups, the country stands as the third-largest startup ecosystem in the world. It is supported by a robust infrastructure of over 1,140 consistently year-on-year.

31
Central Government Departments Supporting Innovation & EntrepreneurshipSeveral Government Departments spearhead various schemes to nurture innovation and entrepreneurship in specific sectors. Here are some of the most promising national-level Schemes and Programs for the Startup Ecosystem:Department of Science and Technology: Runs the flagship NIDHI program, focusing on Science and Technology startups.Dept. of Defense Production: Oversees iDeX, targeted at Defense-related innovations.Dept. of Biotechnology: Manages BIRAC for Biotechnology initiatives.MEITy: Manages TiDE 2.0, aimed at Information and Communication Technologies.NITI Aayog: Administers the Atal Innovation Mission, which is sector-agnostic.DPIIT: Manages the Startup India Seed Fund Scheme, also sector-agnostic.DST's Flagship Programs: National Initiative for Developing & Harnessing Innovation (NIDHI): NIDHI stands as a cornerstone in India's academic innovation landscape, transforming scholarly research into practical solutions. It provides a holistic, stage-wise support structure, ensuring continuous backing for startups from ideation to scaling.4.1.6 Submissions by the Secretary, DST:Prof. Abhay Karandikar, Secretary, DST highlighted the following key points before the Committee: DST's Role and Focus:DST serves as the initiating body for science and technology programs and research. Its primary focus extends beyond technology to encompass sustainable development, including climate research, energy transition, cyber-physical systems, and quantum technology.National Missions and Objectives:The Department has launched national missions and aims to promote not only technology development but also its commercialization. This initiative supports the goal of creating a self-reliant India in the field of science and technology. It involves backing startups, incubators, and institutions, primarily within academic and technical institutes.Research Funding and National Research Foundation:The National Research Foundation, a major initiative under DST, was established to provide strategic direction for research, innovation, and entrepreneurship across natural sciences, engineering, and technology. It emphasizes the integration of humanities and social sciences with technology and science. The recommendations for this foundation emerged following the National Education Policy of 2020, aiming to elevate the research and development 

32
activities in the country to a higher level.Expansion of Research Support:DST's objectives extend beyond premier institutions. They aim to enhance research and development support not only in premier institutions but also in universities, colleges, state universities, and state colleges. This expansion aims to create an environment conducive to research and development across the nation.4.1.7 As regards the National Research Foundation (NRF) and its objectives, it was submitted that:Funding Targets:Over the next five years, the target is to generate a fund of approximately 50,000 crore rupees, with 14,000 crore rupees coming from the Central Government. Of this, 10,000 crore rupees are allocated for new activities under the NRF, while 4,000 crore rupees are designated to sustain the existing Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) activities. Remaining 36,000 crores are expected to be generated through industry or philanthropists or line Ministries.NRF's Scope:NRF will supersede SERB and operate on a larger scale and scope. It will possess a higher-level governing structure and will support research and development through projects, fellowships, and initiatives like Academic Chairs and Centers of Excellence.Commercialization and Impact:NRF aims not only to facilitate academic research but also to translate it into commercial ventures. It will act as a think-tank for strategic planning in science and technology, focusing on both short-term and long-term objectives.Data Strategy and Monitoring:NRF plans to establish a data strategy cell to collect, analyze, and benchmark scientific and technological data globally. It will ensure annual outcomes and report these to the government while monitoring coordination among various funding agencies.Governing Structure:NRF's high-level governing board will be chaired by the Prime Minister and will oversee strategic directions. An Executive Council chaired by the Principal Scientific Advisor will monitor and approve projects and involve various committees for technology funding and peer reviews.Research Focus:NRF will concentrate on major areas such as clean energy, AI, quantum computing, health sciences, disaster management, sustainable agriculture, and more. The focus will extend beyond laboratory research to commercialization through startups and industries.

33
Social Relevance:While emphasizing technological advancements, the discussion also highlighted the importance of addressing societal concerns such as water quality. The Chairman stressed the need to incorporate research focused on improving drinking water quality, especially in areas affected by arsenic contamination causing severe health issues.Equitable Research Ecosystem:NRF aims to develop an equitable research ecosystem by involving Tier-II and Tier-III Colleges and Universities. It plans to create a Hub and Spoke model where institutions with expertise act as hubs and surrounding colleges and universities function as spokes, receiving funding support.Infrastructure Development:Identifying a need for advanced research infrastructure in universities, NRF intends to enhance research facilities in the top 100 universities based on NIRF rankings. This improvement aims to assist Mission Mode Projects by providing necessary equipment and support.4.2Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR)Submissions of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research, Ministry of Science & Technology (DSIR)4.2.1 It was informed that DSIR is the nodal Department for granting recognition/ registration to the In-house R&D centers established by industry, Scientific and Industrial Research Organizations (SIROs) and Public Funded Research Institutions (PFRI) in the country for availing various Fiscal and other Incentives by these entities offered by the Government. This a flagship program of the Department. DSIR also undertakes programmes to promote R&D by the individuals, SMEs, start-ups and various organizations/ industry in developing competitive technologies having a commercial potential through its various schemes like (i)Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs (PRISM) (ii) Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research & Technology Development (PACE) (iii) Building Industrial Research & Development and Common Research Facility (BIRD-crf) and (iv) Access to Knowledge for Technology Development and Dissemination (A2K+). It was further informed that DSIR is the administrative body for Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) which is the India's premier organization for scientific research and development. DSIR also has two public sector 

34
Technology (APCTT), a regional institution of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Pacific (UN-ESCAP). 4.2.2 With regard to research based education and CSIR contribution, it has been submitted that the doctoral and postdoctoral research programmes in science and engineering act as catalysts for S&T innovations and impact the overall development of a country. CSIR has worked since inception in 1942 to identify and nurture young scientific talents who could be enrolled for Ph.D. programmes across the various scientific institutions in the country. In 1983, CSIR started the research fellowship scheme called Junior Research Fellowship (JRF-NET). CSIR is contributing significantly for the development of highly qualified S&T manpower at the national level by fostering and sustaining the stock of highly specialized scientific manpower indiverse disciplines of S&T. The objective of the CSIR fellowships is to identify and nurture the nascent talent who have aptitude and aspirations to work for generation of new knowledge and to evaluate students from wide spectrum of universities at a common platform in their subject-areas and encourage them by granting incentive by way of fellowships with the ultimate objective to foster and strengthen the stock of highly specialized manpower in basic, inter-disciplinary and frontier scientific fields in the country. CSIR has been offering the doctoral and postdoctoral fellowships since 1950 and has the following fellowships to offer to young researchers:A. Doctoral FellowshipsI.Junior Research Fellowship (JRF) through CSIR-UGC NET:The award of Junior Research Fellowships (JRFs) through CSIR-UGC National Eligibility Test (NET) conducted by CSIR since March 1983, is the biggest initiative in the country in terms of providing fellowships for bright students for pursuing research in basic sciences. This National Eligibility Test is an all-India level examination and is conducted twice a year for the selection of Junior Research Fellows in five basic science areas, viz. Life Sciences, Chemical Sciences, Earth Sciences, Physical Sciences and Mathematical Sciences. Those selected become eligible to avail research fellowship for pursuing doctoral research leading to award of the PhD degree. II.Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowship:To commemorate the birth centenary year (2000) of Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, who was the first Vice-President of CSIR in the Independent India, CSIR has 

35
instituted a special fellowship, namely, "DR. SHYAMA PRASAD MUKHERJEE (SPM) FELLOWSHIP" to felicitate the toppers of CSIR-UGC JRF-NET awardees. The main objective of the scheme is to nurture the budding scientific talent and to nourish the objective of doing scientific research by pursuing of PhD programmes. The scheme was approved by the Governing Body (GB), CSIR in its 150th meeting held on 15th February 2001. III.JRF-GATE:GATE examination was recognised by the Ministry of Science & Technology as equivalent to the national test and CSIR vide its OM No. 13/1/88-EMR-I dated 25th January 1989 recognised the GATE for enrolment of Junior Research Fellows. The scheme was instituted to promote academic excellence in CSIR labs and to generate high level science. The scheme is aimed at GATE qualified engineering graduates and GPAT qualified pharmaceutical graduates to pursue research through a suitable PhD programme in AcSIR or in any other institution. These fellowships are tenable only at CSIR laboratories and JRFs selected under this scheme have excellent opportunity to work with CSIR Scientists with state-of-art R&D facilities. IV.Senior Research Fellowship:A sizeable number of Senior Research Fellowships (SRF) are awarded for pursuing the doctoral research in the areas of basic sciences, engineering, medicinal and pharmaceutical sciences, including agriculture/veterinary sciences, each year by CSIR through interview mode to those possessing the qualification as those of JRF-NET and having research experience.B. Post-doctoral FellowshipsI.Research Associateship:For pursuing the postdoctoral research in the area of basic sciences, engineering, medicinal and pharmaceutical sciences including agriculture/veterinary sciences, a sizeable number of fellowships are awarded each year by CSIR to those possessing the doctorate (PhD) degree in basic science or MD/MS/MDS/ME/M.Tech/M.Pharm/MVSc with 3 years research experience. II.The Senior Research Associateship (SRA):This is primarily meant to provide temporary placement to highly qualified Indian scientists, 

36
engineers, technologists, and medical personnel returning from abroad, who are not holding any employment in India. Persons, who have not been abroad and possess outstanding academic record and have not been able to secure regular employment are also eligible for selection. Bonafide Indian citizens only are eligible to apply. III.CSIR-Nehru Science Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: CSIR-Nehru Science Postdoctoral Research Fellowship was instituted to identify promising young researchers with innovative ideas and provide them with training and research opportunities in niche areas of basic science, engineering, medicine and agriculture. The scheme aims at facilitating their transition from mentored to independent research career.4.2.3 It has further been submitted that CSIR covers a wide spectrum of science and technology from oceanography, geophysics, chemicals, drugs, genomics, biotechnology and nanotechnology to mining, aeronautics, instrumentation, environmental engineering and information technology. It provides significant technological intervention in many areas concerning societal efforts, which include environment, health, drinking water, food, housing, energy, farm and non-quality of life of the citizens of India through innovative Science and Technology, globally competitive R&D, by developing sustainable solutions and capacity building to fulfil the dream of Atmanirbhar BharatC -driven industry and nurture trans-disciplinary leadership thereby catalysing inclusive economic -4.2.4 The R&D efforts of CSIR are aligned to the needs of the domestic industry and the social needs of the nation exemplified by the Government Mission Programs and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) chartered by UN. Thus, the R&D of CSIR caters to the Government initiatives such as Make in India; Swachh Bharat; Namami Gange; Swasth Bharat; Smart Cities; Smart Villages; Clean, efficient, affordable and renewable energy technology solutions; Innovate o these National Goals. Recently, CSIR has undertaken several initiatives to translate laboratory leads to marketable/value-added technologies/products and thereby enhance interactions and connect to stakeholders for enabling ease of doing technology licensing.

37
4.2.5 CSIR has been working very closely with the industry, SIROs and academia.  CSIR and its constituent laboratories in order to strengthen its scientific and technological knowledge base through R&D and Industrial collaborations have signed MoUs/ Agreements with IITs, Ministry of Ayush, ICAR, Indian Navy, Amity University, NITI Aayog, Sun Pharma, ISRO, Khadi and Village Industries Commission etc. The efforts are to enhance technology commercialization and deployment of CSIR interventions and also enabling synergy with the needs of the line ministries. Further, in order to ensure industry connect right from the inception stage, CSIR has entered into agreements with major industry players such as GAIL, NTPC, NPC and the Strategic Sector. The private sector collaboration includes Reliance, Unilever Industries, TCL, ITC, Spice Healthcare, Piramal, Mahindra & Mahindra, Colgate, P&G, Intel etc. These collaborations are in the form of technology symposiums, ToT, Technology Up-scaling, Webinars, Industry meets etc. In FY 2023-24, till Q2 of FY 2023-24, CSIR has signed 461 national MoUs/ agreements and 24 international MoUs/ agreements which are of high value. CSIR also has signed Agreements of co-operation with Technology Transfer Organizations and Industry Associations such as Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and National Research Development Cooperation (NRDC). These efforts are to enhance technology commercialization and deployment of CSIR interventions and to provide enabling synergy with the needs of the line ministries.4.2.6 Submissions by the Secretary, DSIR:Secretary, DSIR outlined various initiatives of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) with the following key points: Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR):Highlighted it as a unique institution, offering dual degree programs in collaboration with foreign universities. The program aims to facilitate knowledge exchange and has gained recognition internationally.Women-Centric Programs:DSIR has introduced ASPIRE, specifically catering to women interested in research. Several initiatives like Aroma Mission, Waste-to-Wealth Mission, and others focus on empowering women in various sectors such as agriculture, floriculture, sanitary pad production, leather apparels, and temple waste utilization.Science and Industry Integration:development for individuals, industries, and institutions. The Department also offers certification and funding support.

38
4.3 Department of BiotechnologySubmission by the Department of Biotechnology: 4.3.1 It has been submitted that the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) promotes holistic development and provides support to young students, researchers and scientists working in the field of biotechnology, through its various schemes, programs and fellowships. The 15 theme-based Autonomous Institutes and one International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology are playing a cardinal role in capacity building, training, and skilling of young scientists, students and researchers, to inculcate scientific temperament at a young age and Centres, for popularizing science and engaging with young minds. 4.3.2 Besides skilling and capacity building in life sciences, DBT along with its industry-academia interface agency, Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), has fostered and nurtured a vibrant biotech innovation and translation ecosystem through various national programmes and international partnerships. 4.3.3Some of major HRD programs of DBT for promoting research in education are as follows:I. Fellowships and Grants for Fostering Research Aptitude:PG Teaching Program (M.Sc./M.Tech./M.VSc.) of courses such as medical, agricultural, marine, veterinary, industrial, food and pharmaceutical biotechnology, and molecular and human genetics. For promoting the R&D activities, DBT also provides thesis grant of Rs. 50,000/- per student for in-house hands on training. DBT-Junior Research Fellowship Program (DBT-JRF) is provided for pursuing PhD in life sciences in universities and/or research institutions in the country. The students are selected through Biotechnology Eligibility Test (BET) conducted at national level. There is a provision for 500 fellowships per year. Currently, around 1099 ongoing fellows are working in Indian institutions for Doctoral Research under DBT-JRF programme. A total of 6021 fellows supported under DBT-JRF Program in last 5 years. A total of 1708 research articles and reviews in journals of national and international repute have been published by DBT-JRF fellows. 

39
DBT-Research Associateship Program (DBT-RA) programme provides fellowship for post-doctoral research in frontier areas of Biotechnology and life sciences at premier institutions in India. There is a provision for 100 fellowships per year. Currently, a total of 103 Research Associates are working under DBT-RA programme for post-doctoral training. A total of 1030 fellows supported under DBT-RA Program in last 5 years. Ramalingaswami Re-entry Fellowship Programaims to attract high quality Indian brains working abroad to pursue their research interests in life sciences, biotechnology and other related areas in India.  This is a step towards creating a pool of highly skilled and trained researchers working on cutting edge technologies in Indian laboratories. Currently Department is providing 75 fellowships per year.  Har Gobind Khorana- Innovative Young Biotechnologist Fellowship Program: This program was instituted by the Department in 2005. This is a career-oriented fellowship to identify and nurture outstanding young scientists/faculty (regular) with innovative ideas who are desirous of pursuing research in the frontier areas of Biotechnology. Up to 15 fellowships are given per year. MK Bhan - Young Researchers Fellowship Program: This has been launched as grant opportunity with an aim to encourage young bright researchers to continue their research in the country after Ph.D. The scheme is to offer an independent research grant and a fellowship to young Post-Doctoral Fellows for 3 years, so as to enable them to emerge as future leaders and take up cutting edge research focused on issues of national relevance. II. Skilling, capacity building and creation of research infrastructure in education   i. DBT Star College Programme: Thiswas initiated in 2008 to support colleges and universities offering UG education to improve science teaching across the Country. The programme was initiated with a vision to encourage more students to take up higher education in Science. ii. Research Resource Service Facility and Platform aims to establish infrastructure facilities for  biotech R&D and operates through two major arms:DBT- Boost to University Interdisciplinary Life Science Departments for Education and Research Programme (DBT-BUILDER) focuses on upgradation of the PG teaching and training laboratories by enabling interdisciplinary advanced research and teaching capacity.

40
A. DBT-Scientific Infrastructure Access for Harnessing Academia University Research Joint Collaboration (DBT-SAHAJ) programme serves to create national research resource facilities/platforms to provide access to resources that could not be provided by any single B.Anusandhan Scenario in Sciences with Special Emphasis on Biotech: It has been mentioned that the emphasis is on promotion of excellence, innovation and technology development. Creation of world-class high end research infrastructure and national facilities, the vibrant startup ecosystem, and the enabling regulatory scenario, facilitated by DBT and BIRAC have led to several unique achievements across all the sectors of biotechnology. Vaccines are one of the most cost effective interventions for combating infectious diseases. It has also been submitted that DBT has launched various women-centric programmes..4.3.4Submission by the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology:Dr. Rajesh S. GokhaleSecrerary, DBT highlighted initiatives fostering biotech innovations and the bio-economy in India and mentioned the following key points:The Department makes efforts to enhance scientific education, foster research, support entrepreneurship, and address critical health challenges through innovative solutions. It also acknowledges the need to improve the visibility of opportunities in biotechnology among students, especially in life sciences. The Department aims to inculcate scientific temperament and facilitate scientific thinking among students at various levels, including Masters, Ph.D., undergraduate, and postgraduate levels. Initiatives like bio-technology career advancement for women, teacher and scientist training programs, and infrastructure development were highlighted.Funding and support provided by the Department to numerous programs and individuals across various educational levels like the UG-level Star College program, funding for post-doctoral fellowships, and scholarships like the Ramalingaswami Re-entry Fellowship to incentivize the return of Indian talent from abroad were highlighted.It was mentioned that the Department has funded and facilitated a range of research initiatives, especially in critical areas such as pre-term birth identification, vaccine development (including the Mission Covid Suraksha Program), and initiatives to encourage entrepreneurship among students, especially women.

41
4.4 Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 4.4.1 It was informed that the aim of Department of Health Research (DHR), is to bring Modern Health Technologies to the people through research and innovations related to diagnosis, treatment methods and vaccines for preventions; to translate them into products and processes and, in synergy with concerned organizations, introduce these innovations into public health system.4.4.2 The DHR administers and monitors the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), which is the  apex body for the formulation, coordination and promotion of biomedical research. The 27 national institutes and Regional Medical Research Centres (RMRCs) under ICMR, undertake research on specific health topics like tuberculosis, leprosy, cholera and diarrheal diseases, viral diseases including AIDS, malaria, kala-azar, vector control, nutrition, food & drug toxicology, reproduction, immuno-hematology, oncology, medical statistics, etc.4.4.3 One of the mandates of DHR-ICMR and its institutes includes capacity building to This is achieved through training programs for field epidemiology and public health laboratories, human resource development through teaching and research programs, in addition to undertaking outbreak investigations, emergency preparedness /proactive public health research, preparedness for unknown pathogens, development of newer diagnostic tests and supply of diagnostic kits to national programs.4.4.4 It was also informed that towards human resource development, following are research fellowships/schemes (with number of fellowships/schemes per year) offered by ICMR & DHR:ICMR-DHR Short-Term Studentship (STS) Fellowship (2000)ICMR-DHR MD/MS-Ph.D. Fellowship (50)ICMR-DHR MD/MS/ DM/MCh /MDS/ DNB/DrNB thesis support (400)ICMR-DHR Non-medical fellowships for Ph.D.-NET (300)ICMR-DHR Non-medical fellowships for Ph.D.-INIs (200)ICMR-DHR Centenary Post-Doctoral Fellowship (PDF) (200)ICMR-DHR Travel Grant to non-ICMR scientists/researchers (300)ICMR-DHR Workshops funding grant in biomedical research (100)DHR-ICMR Support to Institutes for Training/Modules/Courses in biomedical research (5)DHR-ICMR Short & Long-term National fellowship (40)DHR-ICMR Women Scientist fellowship (30)DHR-ICMR Biomedical Research Fellowships for NRI/OCI/PIO (5)

42
4.4.5 All 27 ICMR Institutes/RMRCs offer Ph.D. programs with affiliations to different universities/Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR). The institutes/RMRCs offer short term training programs depending on their specific specializations.There are various certificate courses offered by different ICMR institutes as follows:One Health RMRC, Bhubaneswar(Seats: Not fixed; Current batch: >1600)Associate Fellow in Industrial Health (AFIH) (ICMR-National Institute of Occupational Health (ICMR-NIOH), Ahmedabad (Seats:165) Smokeless Tobacco cessation course for health professionals ICMR-National Institute of Cancer Prevention and Research (ICMR-NICPR), Noida (Seats: 200)NICPR-Officers/Nurses/Dentists/Gynaecologists ICMR-NICPR, Noida (Seats: Not fixed, so far 33 trained)Clinical Nutrition ICMR-NIN, Hyderabad (Seats: 20)Medical Lab Technology ICMR-BMHRC, Bhopal (Seats:15)Health Research Fundamentals ICMR-NIE, Chennai (Seats: Not fixed, so far 4696 awarded certificate)4.5 National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) 4.5.1 Representative of NCAER emphasized the need for interdisciplinary approaches to address complex issues like pollution. Proposed a model similar to ARPA-H in the US, suggesting that India could establish a competition via NRF for interdisciplinary research centers focused on crucial social issues. Further advocated for decentralized training models, citing examples from NCAER where non-residential fellows were engaged in online mentorship programs. Highlighted the importance of reaching out to individuals from remote areas toprovide training opportunities and also proposed the idea of long-term research programs focusing on issues like nutrition, suggesting the need for tracking and analyzing changes over time and suggested a blend of biomedical sciences, social sciences, and engineering to address such long-standing issues.4.6 NITI AAYOG4.6.1 It has been submitted that India's investment in R&D has been steadily increasing, with significant contributions from both the government and the private sector. The country has also 

43
made substantial progress in scientific publication output and patent filing, positioning itself as a global player in research and development. India's Gross Expenditure on Research and Development (GERD) has seen remarkable growth, more than doubling from Rs. 60,196.75 crore in 2010-11 to Rs. 127,380.96 crore in 2020-21. 4.6.2 India's scientific publication output has been on the rise, growing 2.5 times from 60,555 publications in 2010 to 149,213 in 2020, with a growth rate of 9.4% compared to the world average of 4.3%. India's share in global research publication output increased from 3.1% in 2010 to 5.1% in 2020. In 2020, India ranked third in scientific publication output, surpassing many developed and developing countries. In 2021-22, India saw 66,440 patent applications, with 44% filed by Indian residents. India ranks 7th in Resident Patent Filing activity worldwide, with a dominance of disciplines like Computer/Electronics, Mechanical, Communication, and Bio-medical.4.6.3 The Government of India recognized the pivotal role of 'Innovation' and declared 2010-20 as the "Decade of Innovation." Over the past few years, 'Innovation' has been established as a priority by the Government to realize the goal of a "New India." Launched in 2016, the Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) stands as India's driving force in fostering innovation and entrepreneurship with the vision of instilling a culture of innovation across all stakeholders. 4.6.4 India's Science and Technology (S&T) journey has evolved through distinct phases, shaped by societal needs and scientific progress. In recent years, India's S&T landscape has shifted towards a holistic and integrated approach with several Mission Mode initiatives that emphasize interdisciplinary collaboration to tackle complex challenges. 4.6.4service delivery, enhanced transparency, and reduced corruption. Initiatives like Aadhaar, BHASHINI, DigiLocker, and e-Sign have empowered millions with digital services. From digital villages to e-districts, its impact is felt nationwide, promoting digital literacy and financial inclusion. Innovations like the Unified Payment Interface (UPI) have revolutionized digital payments, while programs like PMGDISHA and Future Skills Prime have enhanced citizen skills. These technologies have catalysed an era of application-oriented research and entrepreneurship.

44
4.6.5 Another useful Mission has been India Semicondutor Mission, where we have seen a second-order impact. Whereas this mission offered support for establishing semiconductor foundries and fabs, it has also led to a marked rise in graduate courses focusing on various aspects of chip design. IISc and IIT Roorkee have started an M Tech in Semiconductor Technology, while IIT Palakkad offers an MTech in System-on-Chip (SoC) design, and Amity University offers an M.Tech. in Semiconductor Technology and Instrumentation.4.6.6 Important Upcoming Missions: India is launching groundbreaking missions, including the National Green Hydrogen Mission to position itself as a global leader in green hydrogen. The National Quantum Mission aims to make India a frontrunner in quantum technology. In bio manufacturing, India is on track to be a top 5 global hub by 2025. These missions position the nation as a frontrunner in sustainability, cutting-edge technology, and the bio economy.5. Additional Information on various aspects shared by the Ministries/ Departments 5.1 Research Journals and initiatives of Government of India for benefit of Indian Researchers5.1.1 It has been informed that access to scholarly publications and journals, both current and archival, is a key necessity for research. Access to scientific literature is primarily through accessible through payment structures. Despite the digital transformation of the content, the subscription costs levied by journals are still high and access to them is available to a limited section of society.  Some of the journals charge Article Processing Charges (APCs) which are to be paid by authors to make their articles open access, i.e., available to the readers without payment of subscription charges. APCs are levied by Open Access (OA) journals. APCs are also al papers can be made open access upon payment of APC by the author.5.1.2 At present, access to journal subscriptions are done by different library consortia of different Government Departments, namely, Department of Science and Technology and Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Ministry of Earth Sciences, E-Sodh-Sindhu Library consortium, Electronic Resources in Medicine, Department of Biotechnology and NER Institutes consortium, etc. Details are at Annexure II5.1.3 To extend the benefits of scientific publications to more higher education institutions, a Core Committee, chaired by the Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India was constituted. The initiative is called the One Nation One Subscription (ONOS) initiative. The ONOS initiative aims to provide access of national and international journal publications 

45
covering all streams of STEM (Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics) and SSH (Social Sciences and Humanities) to as many higher education institutions and researchinstitutions as possible. This would help to:i) Eliminate disparities in cost of subscription charged by publishers from various institutions.ii) Eliminate excess expenditure on overlapping resources between various library consortia in the country.iii) Discounts for APC charges are obtained for participating institutions and their researchers,The cost negotiations for ONOS with the publishers is going on. Once the prices get firmed up, firm proposal with costings will be processed for a decision in this regard.It is estimated that nearly 2,373 government academic and R&D institutions are subscribing to approx. 8000 e-journals from various publishers. 5.1.4Benefits of ONOS:Through ONOS it is aimed that with a minimal increase in the expenditure on subscriptions for e-resources like journals, databases and standards, access can be expanded to three times more number of institutions. And full collections access to all publishers e-journals hence access can be increased to 10,000 e-journals. Also every user who is a part of ONOS, will be able to access every resource which is subscribed under ONOS. This is highly beneficial compared to the discipline-specific access to e-resources which is currently being provided to members of library consortia. This will be a great push for promoting inter-disciplinary research in our institutions. 5.1.5Alignment of ONOS with other major policies: ONOS will be instrumental in achieving the outcomes of following national policies:a) ONOS aligns with the vision of the National Education Policy 2020 (NEP) by providing access to users for knowledge resources in all streams of STEM and social sciences, thereby promoting inter-disciplinary research. b) ONOS is one of the instruments identified in the draft Science Technology and Innovation Policy (STIP) under the chapter on Open Science. c) ONOS reverberates the vision of the National Research Foundation (NRF) by expanding the availability of knowledge and research resources to tier-2 and tier-3higher education institutions and research institutions in the country. 5.2   Incubation Centres and Start-ups set up in various Indian Institutes of Technologies : It has been informed that a number of Incubation Centres and Start-ups that have been started during the last five years in various Indian Institute of Technology (IITs). Details of these are at 

46
Annexure III. 5.3Scheme for Promotion of Academic and Research Collaboration (SPARC) : In respect of the Scheme it has been submitted that the scheme became functional with effect from 28thOctober,Institutions by supporting joint research proposals and facilitating academic and research collaborations between Indian Institutions and the best foreign institutions from 28 selected nations (USA, UK, Germany, Australia, Austria, Denmark, France, Canada, Italy, China & Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, Russia, Israel, Switzerland, Sweden, Netherlands, South Africa, South Korea, Norway, Portugal, New Zealand, Taiwan, Belgium, Spain, Brazil, and Finland). The scheme envisages that culmination of joint research proposals would lead the direction of solving problems of national and/or international relevance.5.3.1 The SPARC Scheme has had an impact in providing the best international expertise to address major national problems, expose Indian academicians to the best collaborators abroad, enable international faculty to stay in India for a longer duration, provide Indian students an opportunity to work in the world class laboratories, to develop strong bilateral relationships in research, and improve the international ranking of Indian Institutions.5.3.2Status of the SPARC Scheme: In the first phase of SPARC (FY 2018-20, extended till 2023), 392 Projects with a total budget of Rs. 251.0921 crores have been approved. Out of these, 153 projects ended on 31stMarch 2023 and 239 projects were re-extended till 30thSeptember 2023 (closures of these projects are being finalized). In the second phase of SPARC (FY 2023-25), 266 proposals with a total budget of Rs.158.4759 crores have been approved. IIT Kharagpur (Central Nodal Agency) has released first instalment against these projects. Financial Progress (in Crores)-SPARC Scheme is as under: Financial Year Budget EstimateRevised EstimateReleased Amount2022-23 74.00 70.59 68.752023-24 50.00 - -5.4 In respect of details of research infrastructure created in the country in various institutes/universities of the country it has been submitted that the Government, through Higher Educational Financing Agency (HEFA) provides financial assistance for creation of educational to augment their research and innovation capabilities. Accordingly scientific and technological developments are encouraged 

47
by supporting R&D facilities for conducting high-quality research. Through HEFA, 101 institutions across the country have been supported by a sanctioned amount of Rs. 36644.76 cr. institutions into globally top ranking institutions through improvement in their academic and infrastructure quality, including their research facilities.5.4.1 Indian Science, Technology and Engineering facilities Map (I-STEM) is a dynamic and interactive national portal, which hosts various scientific programs, initiated by office of the Principal Scientific Adviser, Govt. of India. The main objective of having this portal (developed using public fund) is to provide support to needy researchers in different ways and strengthen the R&D ecosystem to fulfil the necessity of people of the country. Further, various scientific Ministries/ Departments such as Department of Science & Technology, Department of Biotechnology and Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) also supplement the educational institutions by providing them funds for research purposes.5.4.2 Moreover, the Government had sanctioned establishment of Research Parks at IIT Madras, IIT Bombay, IIT Kharagpur, IIT Kanpur, IIT Delhi, IIT Guwahati, IIT Hyderabad, IIT Gandhinagar and IISc Bangalore to augment the research ecosystem in the country. The research parks at IIT Madras, IIT Kharagpur and IIT Delhi are functional and others are in advanced stages of completion. The main objectives of these Research Park are to have research collaboration with top-rated industries, to enable entrepreneurship and incubation of students and building strong academic linkages for the same, to increase outreach of academic content to industry and enabling industry to add value to academic programme through close collaborations etc.In addition, the Government has approved IIT Hyderabad- JICA collaboration which envisages construction of infrastructure facilities and procurement of high-end research equipment for IIT, Hyderabad, at an estimated cost of Rs 1776.50 crore. Under this initiative, Rs. 1531.43 cr. have been released to IIT Hyderabad for augmenting their infrastructure/ research capabilities.5.4.3 Modernization and Removal of Obsolescence (MODROB) is one of the AICTE Quality Improvement Scheme (AQIS), which intends to support development of laboratories with appropriate equipment technology/ tools/ software and encourages financial contribution from industry. This is to ensure that the practical work and project work to be carried out by students is contemporary and suits the needs of the industry.It also ppromotes problem-solving approach

48
revisions /modifications in the AICTE Model Curriculum. 5.5. It has further been informed that to maintain standards of quality research and academics, the Government is keenly focussing on filling up of faculty posts in the institutions under the Mission Mode Recruitment. Further, in order to address shortage of faculty in premier institutions,Scheme under which most talented students are incentivised by providing attractive fellowship for pursuing doctoral program and undertaking research in premier institutions, thereby maintaining standards of quality of research in the technical institutions. 5.6 Informing about the details of steps taken for hand holding and collaboration to augment research in science in institutions/universities run by the State Governments, it has been informed that the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 envisages the promotion of quality research within the Higher Education system. Research and innovation are important aspects to enhance quality education by the Higher Education Institutions (HEls). Societal challenges of our country can only be addressed by having a strong and vibrant higher education eco system with an emphasis on research, innovation, and technology development. UGC has developed guidelines for establishment of Research & Development Cell in Higher Education Institutions with a vision to put in place a robust mechanism for developing and strengthening the research ecosystem within HEls, aligned with the provisions of NEP-2020 and with a missionTo create a conducive environment for enhanced research productivity. To encourage collaboration across industry, government, community- based organizations and agencies at the local, national, and international levels. To facilitate greater access to research through mobilization of resources and funding. 5.6.1 The Objectives of this initiative are:To create an organizational structure with role-based functions of RDC, formulate Research Policy for the HEls, identify thrust areas of research, and form related cluster groups/ frontline teams/consortia of researchers. To create enabling provisions in Research Policies for recruitment of research personnel, procurement of equipment, and financial management with adequate autonomy to the Principal Investigator(s) and disseminate research outcomes to stakeholders and the public at large. 

49
To establish a special purpose vehicle to promote researchers and innovators, identify potential collaborators from industry, research organizations, academic institutions &other stakeholders for cooperation and synergistic partnerships. To act as a liaison between researchers & relevant research funding agencies, extend guidance in preparation & submission of project proposals and post-sanctioning of the grants to oversee adherence to timelines.To have better coordination among other cells/centres dealing with University-Industry Inter Linkage, Incubation, Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development and Intellectual Property Rights (IPR). To develop an Institutional Research Information System for sharing the status of on-going completed research projects/Programmes, expertise & resources, etc., making effective use of Information & Communication Technology (ICT) for preparing the database of in-house experts to provide industrial consultancy and services. To engage & utilize the services of superannuated active faculty/scientists in research capacity building of talented young minds and promote mobility of researchers across institutions and R&D Labs.To serve as nodal centre for ideation and conceptualization of research topics/themes byorganizing workshops and training programs and ensuring the integrity and ethical practices in research activities including clearance of bioethical committee wherever required. Under, UGC:As on date, 1595 HEIs have developed Research & Development cell as per UGC guidelines so far.UGC organizes online lectures by eminent persons for R&D Cell coordinators/Directors to share the best practices. Four lectures in the series have already been organized.UGC, from time to time share many advisories regarding R&D programmes, exhibitions, conferences and symposia.5.7 Informing about the mechanism to monitor research work in sciences and related fields to promote quality research at par with international standards, the Department of Higher Education  has submitted thatthe University Grants Commission, concerned with the maintenance of standard and quality of higher education, has undertaken various steps to promote and ensure quality research. These initiatives are listed below:-a) UGC (Promotion of Academic Integrity and Prevention of Plagiarism in Higher Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2018. These regulations aim to put a check 

50
on plagiarism and recommend institutional mechanisms to eliminate plagiarism and related issues I higher education in the country. b) INFLIBNET, an IUC of UGC has provided Higher Educational Institutions with plagiarism detection software.c) UGC issued a letter against Self-plagiarism to promote Indian research among the nations, and to ensure credibility and quality in research. The letter draws the attention of the academic community on various aspects of self-plagiarism and advises all/any experts involved in academic performance/evaluation and assessment to ensure that decisions in the case of promotions, selections, credit allotment, award of research degrees must be based on an evaluation of the applicant's published work to ensure that the work being submitted for promotion/selection is not self-plagiarized. d) UGC-CARE - an initiative of the University Grants Commission with the main objective of fostering quality research, academic integrity and publication ethics in Indian universities. The UGC-CARE initiative is aimed at eliminating predatory journals and bad publishing practices. Journals are selected as per the journal analysis protocols approved by the Empowered Committee of UGC-CARE.e)good practices across the research lifecycle for quality, impact and ethical research.f) The Ph.D. regulations also mandate including a two credit course on Research and Publication Ethics as notified by UGC vide D.O. No. F.1- 1/2018(Journal/CARE) in 2019 for Ph.D. Scholars as part of the Credit requirement for the Ph.D. coursework.g) UGC issued a letter to all Higher Educational Institutions for uploading of full text of Ph.D. theses on Shodhganga, a repository of full text theses and dissertations. The initiative aims to facilitate deriving authentic data on number of Ph.D. students graduated. It also aims to help in making a formidable resource of research conducted in India. The online availability of electronic theses through centrally maintained digital repositories aims to not only ensure easy access and archiving on Indian doctoral theses but would also help in raising the quality of research. UGC mandated submission of Ph.D. theses on Shodhganga through its Regulations.

51
5.7.1 Further, AICTE has developed robust and transparent monitoring mechanism by way of constituting Research Advisory and Review committee at national level to provide funds for research work under RPS and fund utilization certificate is obtained from time to time. In order to evaluate and assess various outcomes and impact of theInnovation Councils, IIT, Delhi was engaged as an independent reviewer. Post assessment, it has 5.7.2Benchmarking Innovation &Entrepreneurship (I&E) Ecosystem in HEIs through NIRF-Innovation (Atal Ranking of Institutions on Innovation Achievements): NIRF Innovation ranking (earlier named as ARIIA - Atal Ranking of Institutions on Innovation Achievements) Framework, which objectively defines and measures the innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem has been developed in educational ecosystem. Furthermore, it benchmarks the I&E performance and practices in HEIs and sets directions for achievements. ARIIA framework came into action in 2019 and so far three editions of Atal Ranking exercises have been completed to rank all major HEIs based on their innovation and startup ecosystem development efforts and achievements. The participation from both technical and non-technical HEIs have been increased substantially from 496 HEIs in very first edition of ARIIA (2019) to record high participation of 1438 HEIs for ARIIA 2021.For the ARIIA 2022, 1417 HEIs are part of the benchmarking process. Result of the NIRF-Innovation (ARIIA) 2023 has been declared on 5th June 2023.5.7.3 For monitoring of the research work under different schemes, committees are constituted to monitor and review the projects. Further, online portals are to be updated by the implementing agency of the scheme. Some of the mechanisms are adopted by Institutes to monitor research work are as under-programs and exchange programs with international universities, which leads to the quality of research being on par with the international standards.Filing of international patents and publications in high impact international journals are given a significant weightage at the time of promotions.Doctoral theses are sent to at least one international examiner to ensure quality on par with international standardsPeriodic departmental peer reviews, enlist experts from national and international institutes to provide impartial evaluations, ensuring adherence to international standards.

52
Institutes organize international conferences and seminars, facilitating the presentation of research work, receipt of constructive feedback, and engagement with experts. This practice serves as a benchmark for research done in the institute against international standards.Institutes have established Chair Positions to acknowledge and reward researchers based on transparent performance metrics for research output. This incentivizes high-quality research and is evaluated by leaders in the research field.5.7.4 IITs and IISc have excelled in the QS rankings, which have International Research Network and Citations per Faculty among its parameters, thereby indicating strong research and university in terms of Citations per Faculty in the QS World University Rankings 2022.  IISc had scored a perfect 100/100 in this metric.5.7.5 The faculty members are motivated to apply for the various research projects called by various sponsoring agencies such as UGC/CSIR/ICCR/DST/SERB/ NMMT/MoES/MeitY etc. The research proposals are being scrutinized by the respective funding agency as per the norms and being sanctioned to the host institute.The thesis (research work) submitted by the Ph.D. student is sent for external evaluation-one for Indian examiner and another for foreign examiner experts in the area of research Indian: At least one examiner from any IITs/IISc/NITs. Others may be from Institutions viz. CFIs, Scientists from reputed research institutes/industries or Institutions of high repute. Foreign Examiner:Should be from reputed research institutes/universities outside India. In the panel of examiners given by the Guide, at least one should be from universities in USA/UK / Canada / Australia / Germany / Japan / Singapore / Malaysia / Korea / South Africa / China / Sweden / Israel.Publication Standards:Researchers are encouraged to publish their work in peer-reviewed journals of high impact. The quality of journals is often assessed based on metrics like the impact factor.Plagiarism Detection Tools:Institutions use plagiarism detection tools to ensure the originality of research work. This helps maintain academic integrity and ensures that the research is based on sound principles.

53
Research Ethics Committees:Institutions have ethics committees to review and approve research involving human subjects or animals. Ensuring ethical conduct in research is a key aspect of maintaining research quality.The faculty members and students publish various research articles in reputed journals -SCI/SCOPUS etc.5.8 Informing about specific research programmes being run to identify scientific and practical solution for societal, developmental, financial and techno-economic challenges along with major achievements therein, so far, it has been informed that the IMPRINT India Initiative was launched by the Government aiming at addressing and providing solutions to the most relevant engineering challenges faced by the nation by translating knowledge into viable technology (products or processes) in 10 selected technology domains: (1) health care, (2) energy, (3) sustainable habitat, (4) nano technology hardware, (5) water resources and river systems, (6) advanced materials, (7) Information and communication technology, (8) manufacturing, (9) security and defence, and (10) environmental science and climate change. Under IMPRINT-I, 142 research projects, with an outlay of Rs. 320.72 crores, and under IMPRINT-II, 184 projects with an outlay of Rs. 163.42 cr. were selected for funding by the Government, with industry contribution, as applicable. These projects are under various stages of implementation. IMPRINT-II is currently being implemented through Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) (a body under the Department of Science and Technology).5.8.1 With a view to promoting innovation of a higher order that directly impacts the needs of the Industry and thereby improves the competitive edge of Indian manufacturing, the Uchhatar Avishkar Yojanaas under:-To promote innovation in areas that is directly of relevance to the manufacturing and design industry. To spur innovative mindset in the students and faculty in premier technological institutes.  To bring a coordinated action between academia and the industry.To strengthen the laboratories and research facilities in the premier technological institutions.To have outcome-based research funding.

54
Under this scheme, 136 projects at a total cost of Rs. 360.11 crores with joint funding from Ministry of Education, participating Ministries and Industry were selected, which are under various stages of implementation.5.8.2Scheme for Transformational and Advanced Research in Sciences (STARS)was launched with objective to provide extra mural funding to faculty of higher education institutions for research projects in basic sciences which are inter-disciplinary and translational in outcomes. The projects also need to be India-centric and focused on socially relevant research. The basic thrust domains of the Scheme include Physics, Chemistry, BiologData Sciences & Mathematics and Earth Sciences. The scheme also has a provision to encourage projects from talented researchers from eligible institutions in Tier-II cities and below.As a part of the first round, the Apex Committee had approved a total of 141 project proposals across 37 Institutions, for funding. Under the second call of STARS scheme, a total of 227 projects were approved by the Apex Committee with an overall cost of Rs 131.97 Cr in February, 2023.5.9 In respect of Central Universities and IITs which are assisting or hand holding the other institutions/universities in the country, it has been informed that the IITs have not only acted as frontrunners in the field of science and technology, but have been handholding and supporting other institutions of the Country. For instance, IIT Madras had mentored newly set up IIT Tirupati and IIT Palakkad, IIT Bombay had mentored IIT Dharwad and IIT Goa, IIT Hyderabad had mentored IIT Bhilai and IIIT Raichur, while IIT Delhi had mentored IIT Jammu.5.9.1 Some of the other initiatives undertaken by the Institutes for handholding other institutions are under-i) IIT Bombay has recently initiated a program with Department of Technical Education (DTE) of Government of Maharashtra to train and hand hold government aided engineering colleges in Maharashtra in conducting research and framing academic programs.ii) Currently, IIT Kanpur is actively engaged in mentoring Sindu Central University in Ladakh, with the aim of establishing a robust foundation and ensuring a high-quality academic curriculum. As part of this collaboration, M.Tech students from Sindu Central University are being admitted and provided mentorship within the academic framework of IIT Kanpur.iii) IIT Delhi has helped IIIT Delhi with courses, has led the development of virtual labs as a resource for all national science and engineering colleges.

55
iv) IIT Ropar is leading a consortium of 5 central universities, namely; Central University of Bhatinda in Punjab, Central University of Rajasthan, Central University of Himanchal Pradesh, Central University of Jammu, Central University of Haryana, for research and innovations, entrepreneurship and academics.v) IIT Patna has cooperated with the Department of Science and Technology (DST) of the Government of Bihar to establish centres of excellence (CoEs) in government polytechnic institutions.5.9.2 It has been stated that these MoUs have provided excellent opportunities to students to finish their final year of B.Tech. programs (for internship purpose) at leading IITs and seamlessly transition into Ph.D. programs. Notably, these academic, research and industrial organizations are also providing students with internship opportunities. Moreover, these MoUs offer faculty members opportunities to launch collaborative research programs, engage in faculty exchanges, undergo pedagogy training, and more. This enables them to broaden their horizons and actively contribute to the nation's development.5.9.3 Details of outcome regarding Central Universities which are assisting or hand holding the other institutions/universities in the country is at Annexure IV.5.10 The Department of Higher Education informing about collaboration with international institutions to facilitate Indian students for their research in various sciences has submitted that  the IITs are governed by Institutes of Technology Act and the Statutes framed there under and as per the Act, IITs are empowered to co-operate with educational or other institutions in any part of the world having objects wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of teachers and scholars and generally in such manner as may be conducive to their common objects.Various collaborations have been made by IITs with International universities. Some of the recent ones are as follows:a. An MoU has been signed (on 07.09.2023) between Indian universities, represented by the IIT Council, and the Association of American Universities(AAU) to establish the India-U.S. Global Challenges Institute, with a combined initial commitment of at least US$10 million. b. IIT Bombay joined the Chicago Quantum Exchange as an international partner by signing an MoU with it. c. IIT Kanpur and New York University-Tandon have joined hands for advanced research centre. Similarly IIT Delhi, IIT Kanpur, IIT Jodhpur, IIT BHU Varanasi 

56
and Joint Research centres of the State University of New York at Buffalo have also decided to collaborate in the areas of critical and emerging technologies.d. India-U.S. Defence Acceleration Ecosystem (INDUS-X) convened the inaugural Academia Start-up Partnership at IIT Kanpur, with the participation of Penn State University, and initiated the Joint Accelerator Program for Indian Start-ups, through a workshop led by U.S. accelerator M/s Hacking 4e Allies (H4x) and IIT Hyderabad in August 2023.e. IIT Kanpur and Massachusetts Institute of Technology have partnered to promote exchange between faculty and students at IIT Kanpur and MIT, USA by providing seed fund.f. IIT Ropar and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) had signed an MoU in Jun 2023 to cooperate in Biotech/Healthcare and extend it to other iCET areas like advanced materials and quantum technology.g. IIT Bombay and Stanford University held a 4-day workshop at Mumbai on sustainability to set up a long term collaboration in this area.h.A workshop for the Indian startups for acclimatizing them towards US Defence market was conducted on August 25, 2023 in Hyderabad.i.As per the education exchange programme between India and Hungary, the Hungarian Governments provides 200 scholarships annually for Indian students to pursue higher studies in Hungarian HEIs. UGC is the implementing agency for the scholarship programme called Stipendium Hungaricum. Details of scholarship awarded since 2021-22 is as follows:Year Scholarships awarded2021-221732022-231482023-241125.11Prime Ministers Research Fellowship (PMRF):It has been informed that the Prime research thereby realizing the vision of development through innovation. The talent pool is identified for carrying out research indigenously in cutting edge science and technology domains. The research under the Scheme addresses training manpower towards national missions on the one hand and shortage of quality faculty in the premier educational institutions 

57
of the country on the other. The institutes which can offer PMRF include all the IITs, all the IISERs, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore and some of the top Central Universities/NITs that offer science and/or technology degrees. Over 3,690 scholars are selected over the last four years, with increasing number of selections (Cycle 1 May, 2018, Cycle 11- May, 2023). The scholars admitted until December, 2023 have generated 6,517 publications in scopus indexed journals and conferences, 318 patents field with greater than 3,46,189 man hours of training & skill development.5.11.1 It has further been informed that the fellowship for each year of Ph.D. is: Rs. 70,000; 70,000; 75,000; and 80,000. In addition they are provided a research grant of Rs. 2 Lakhs/year. Overall, the research is carried out in 10 broad areas, involving 3,869 Research Guides in premier research institutes. Compared to other competitive fellowships available in top Universities, this fellowship is at par. The yearly fellowship (USD) for top Universities in the world and the PMRF fellowship in dollar equivalent is about 13,000 USD but in items of purchase power parity is 44,800 USD per year. 5.11.2 It has been informed that PMRF is ensuring quality research as a lucrative opportunity, contribution to Sustainable Development Goals, Internationalization, Networking and publication opportunities and creating a readily available talent pool, etc. in the following manner:Research as a lucrative opportunity after graduation/post graduation:A large fraction of graduating students chooses jobs in industry over academic research in spite of having a very good research aptitude because of the salary structure shown below.After Bachelors/masters Remuneration/year in Rs1. Public Sector 22 Lakh / year2. Private Industry 16 Lakh / year(Medium Data from IITM placement)3. Govt. ServiceAfter Bachelors/maters20 Lakh / yearRemuneration/year in Rs4.PhD in higher education institutes with MoE fellowship (Revised)4.5 Lakh / year5. PMRF9 Lakh / year + Research Grant of 2 Lakh/yearPMRF gives an opportunity for all graduating scholars to get a competitive financial 

58
remuneration, thereby attracting bright and talented students towards R&D. In addition the attractive fellowship encourages scholars to stay back in the country rather than moving to foreign universities and carry out translational research in India. This trend is extremely positive and gears towards Make in India and Atma Nibhar India initiatives.5.11.3 Preparedness to research and contributions to sustainable development goals: PMRF scholars write a strong research proposal at the beginning of their program, which chalks out a clear plan of action; the preparation levels for research is significantly higher compared to non-PMRF scholars. These proposals are thoroughly reviewed by subject experts and only less than 50% of eligible scholars are selected through the process as PMRFs. Hall of the research are oriented towards SDG Goal 9 (Industry, Innovation & Infrastructure). The second most prominent one is SDG Goal 3 (Good Health & Well-being), followed by Goal 7 (Affordable & Clean Energy).5.11.4 Continued quality assurance:year by national experts in the specific research domain. Feedback on the research work is given and the scholars get an opportunity to interact with the national subject experts (at least 3 per years) in this domain, and improve the quality of their work through this interaction and feedback. This is directly reflected in the number of publications/patents the scholars produce, which compares the average number of publications/scholar for both PMRF and non-PMRF scholars, admitted in 2018, as they progress towards their PHD.5.11.5 Internationalization, Networking and publication opportunities:PMRFs receive Rs. attend conferences which helps them to publicize their research provide networking opportunities with the international experts in the domain, buy essential components/consumables/cloud etc. that help them hasten fulfilling their research requirements. PMRF projects need to be treated at par with the research proposals funded by SERB/other funding agencies.5.11.6 Creating a readily available talent pool:The best talent pool of the country in different domains is easily identified. A large fraction of PMRFs would like to be academia, Faculty position and Industry R&D after their PHDs, as seen in the survey result shown below. The proposed scheme will thus readily address the shortage of faculty with excellent quality and research credentials in CFTIs.5.11.7 Social Impact:PMRFs carry out Teaching Assistantship in neighborhood colleges/polytechnics/schools/NPTEL, sharing technical knowledge and spreading STEM awareness, thereby encouraging the next generation for better quality work. Just to quantify the impact, in just one year, the scholars have spent more than 76,000 hours, with an average of more 

59
than 55 hours/scholar/year.5.11.8 The first phase of the project has been completed successfully with the May 2023 admission. Considering the impact it has created, PMRF 2.0 is proposed with-5000 Scholars/year for five years, thus benefitting a total of 25,000 PhD scholars;Expand the granting institutes to include all CFTIs, Top 100 NIRF Rank institutes;Offering fellowships to excellent students in their final year of their degrees;Offering limited fellowships to foreign scholars to improve internationalization; Revised fellowship, research grant to remain competitive option after the Bachelors/program; andRigorous monitoring mechanisms5.12 On queries as regards Overheads/indirect costs, it has been informed that Science and engineering research needs significant physical infrastructure (i.e., laboratory, computational and other facilities) as well as appropriate institutional and administrative support. In addition, the operational expenses of running and maintaining these facilities can be substantial. Leading international universities cover the costs of developing and maintaining this infrastructure and covering associated expenses through overheads/indirect costs on research grants.  These overheads/indirect costs rates can be substantial: for example, the rates for MIT are 54.7%, Stanford, 54.4%, and Caltech, 70%.  Keeping this in mind, it has been submitted that it would be helpful to review the approach of S&T funding agencies like DST, DBT. This is particularly pertinent given the establishment of the National Research Foundation that is intended to boost research and innovation in the country. The experience of IIT Delhi suggests that the current average overheads provided from Government agencies is about 8%. The Higher Education Institutes have to provide funds for all the support infrastructure and maintenance. 5.12.1 High end research facilities: At many of the leading HEIs there are cutting edge characterization, fabrication facilities as central research facilities, SATHI, Nano Research Facility these facilities are now being kept open for researchers, students and industry from across the country. However the cost of the AMC, support technicians and consumables is significant. 6. Recommendations of the Committee  6.1 The Committee appreciates the formation of Anusandhan Naitional Research Foundation (ANRF), which will ensure that scientific research will be conducted and funded equitably with greater participation from private sector. The Committee also appreciates that Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF) will not only fund in 

60
natural sciences but also in humanities, social sciences, environmental sciences andagricultural sector. It also aims to involve the colleges, universities, higher institutes in scientific research which are worthy of appreciation. 6.2 The Committee recommends that the Department of Higher Education, UGC, AICTE and Department of Science and Technology must take a proactive stance in identifying key national priorities, emerging frontiers, and strategic research areas and imperatively allocate substantial funding to these crucial research projects. Moreover, the Committee emphasizes the need for adequate funding towards research endeavors aimed at identifying scientific and practical solutions for addressing societal, developmental, financial, and techno-economic challenges, aligning with the objectives outlined in the Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF). The Committee is of the view that this strategic allocation of resources is essential to drive impactful innovation and address pressing societal needs effectively.6.3 The Committee firmly believes that coordination among the Central Government, State Governments, public authorities, industries, and research institutions regarding the documentation, analysis of expenditure on scientific research and its outcomes is the key to a synergized use of financial resources and achieve better outcomes and hence, recommends bolstering the coordination mechanisms amongst them through enhanced collaboration and information sharing.  Furthermore, the Committee emphasising the importance of enhancing private sector involvement in activities associated with the NRFrecommends for encouraging and facilitating private sector investment in research, as well as promoting funding partnerships, which will significantly contribute to the advancement and promotion of scientific research initiatives.6.4 The Committee has observed the contamination of arsenic, fluoride and the presence of other heavy metals in ground and drinking water across multiple states. This contamination is contributing to severe health issues such as cancer, skin diseases, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes among the inhabitants in affected regions and States.Additionally, the Committee notes that substantial research dedicated to eradicating arsenic, fluoride, and other heavy metals from ground and drinking water in these affected areas is urgently needed to address the issue. Taking note of the magnitude of the issue, the Committee strongly recommends that the Department of Science and Technology, Department of Health Research, and Department of Higher Education, including various 

61
esteemed institutions like IITs should prioritize and fund comprehensive research initiatives aimed at eliminating arsenic, fluoride, and other heavy metals detrimental to health from ground and drinking water within the affected regions and states upon a mapping of such territories. This proactive step will not only address the immediate health hazards but also pave the way for sustainable, innovative solutions towards effective wastewater management and saline water treatment practices.6.5 The Committee takes notes of remarkable growth registered in Scientific Publications in past 10 years, growing 2.5 times from 60555 publications in 2010 to 1,49,213 in 2020 with a growth rate of 9.4% compared to world average of 4.3%. India ranked 3rdin Scientific Publication Output surpassing many developed and developing countries. In 2021-22 India saw 66,440 patent applications and India ranks 7thin Resident Patent Filing Activity worldwide which is worthy of appreciation. 6.6 The Committee strongly recommends for a symbiotic relationship between established institutions and newly formed ones to foster knowledge sharing and advancement. To this end, the Committee recommends that older IITs should take an active role in mentoring, guiding, and supporting the newer IITs/NITs/IISERs within their respective regions. This mentorship will facilitate the transfer of valuable expertise, best practices, and institutional wisdom, empowering the newer institutions to flourish and maintain high standards of excellence in their academic and research pursuits. Similarly, the Committee stresses upon the importance of reputed and well-established Central Universities engaged in cutting-edge research in scientific and related fields to extend their guidance and support to newly established Central/ State Universities. Such mentorship initiatives will help to create a collaborative ecosystem, nurturing the growth of quality research in sciences and related disciplines across these institutions. The Committee is of the view that such knowledge exchange, resource sharing, and collaborative projects, will be beneficial in elevating the research capabilities and academic standards of the newly formed universities, enriching the entire academic landscape of the country.6.7 The Committee acknowledges the significant milestone achieved with the establishment of a large number of Incubation Centers and Start-ups across various Indian Institutes of Technologies (IITs), dedicated for fostering research initiatives. The concerted efforts undertaken by the Departments and multiple IITs in not just setting up but also effectively operating these Incubation Centers and Start-ups in diverse scientific and 

62
related fields are commendable. The Committee appreciates the successful execution of these centers, recognizing their pivotal role in providing a fertile ground for nurturing cutting-edge ideas, facilitating technology transfer and incubating start-ups that drive advancements in various scientific domains. Furthermore, the Committee recommends for continued support and enhancement of these incubation ecosystems to further fuel research and innovation as it is felt that such sustained efforts in leveraging these platforms shall accelerate breakthroughs, promote entrepreneurship and strengthen India's position as a hub for pioneering research and technological innovation in the global landscape6.8 The Committee underscores the significant reliance of esteemed Institutions of Excellence, including IITs, IISc, IISERs, and Central Universities engaged in diverse scientific research, on government funding. While recognizing the invaluable contributions of these institutions, the Committee recommends for a strategic shift towards fostering research endeavors that hold market potential with these institutions to pivot towards developing and promoting research outputs that are commercially viable, capable of generating revenue streams to sustain their research initiatives autonomously. The Committee also feels that encouraging a culture of innovation geared towards marketable research outputs will not only reduce the strain on Government funding but also empower these institutions to become self-sufficient entities and will channelize their research outcomes into practical applications, fostering a self-sustaining ecosystem of innovation and funding for continual advancement.6.9 The Committee acknowledges the commendable initiative in awarding 3,690 scholarships under the PMRF (Prime Minister's Research Fellowship) between May 2018 and May 2023.The Committee notes that expanding the PMRF initiative will not only provide a larger platform for exceptional talent but also propel India's research landscape to be more competitive on the world stage and will serve as a catalyst for innovation and scholarly pursuits, empowering a greater number of scholars to pursue impactful research that contributes significantly to the nation's scientific and academic advancement. Towards this aim, the Committee recommends a significant increase in the number of fellowships offered under PMRF 2.0. The Committee also stresses that fellowship amount should also be increased to attract and retain the brightest minds. 

63
6.10 The Committee notes that substantial physical infrastructure, encompassing laboratories, computational resources, and other facilities, coupled with robust institutional and administrative support, are indispensable for advancing science and engineering research. The operational expenses incurred in maintaining these essential facilities and cutting-edge research equipment are considerable. Internationally renowned universities cover these costs, including infrastructure development and maintenance, through overheads or indirect costs on research grants. The Committee, therefore, stresses that it is imperative by the concerned Ministries/ Departments to reconsider the overheads provided on public-funded research projects as the current rate falls significantly short of meeting the actual operational expenses which impedes the progress and affordability of research initiatives. In light of this, the Committee strongly recommends that funding agencies for scientific research, such as the Department of Science and Technology, Department of Biotechnology, Department of Higher Education, etc. should allocate additional funds for the development and maintenance of physical infrastructure, including laboratories, computational resources, equipment and machineries in particular and other facilities, for all publicly funded research projects in various scientific disciplines. This supplementary allocation will help the institutions like IITs, Central Universities, and Higher Education Institutes to bolster their infrastructure and sustain high-quality research endeavourseffectively.6.11 The Committee appreciates the cutting-edge characterization and fabrication facilities, such as SATHI and Nano research facilities, within some Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). These facilities serve as central research hubs, open to researchers, students, and industry professionals nationwide. However, the operational expenses for these facilities, including Annual Maintenance Contracts (AMC), support technicians' salaries, and consumables, pose a significant financial burden. The Committee, therefore,recommends for having a structured support scheme specifically for catering to maintenance and operational costs. This scheme can operate on a model that accounts for the number of external users accessing these facilities. It is also felt that sustained accessibility to vital research infrastructure would get ensured, fostering a more equitable and enabling environment for cutting-edge research and innovation in the country byimplementing such a scheme.6.12 The Committee appreciates the concerted efforts by the Government, involving various Departments and agencies like the Department of Higher Education, Department 

64
of Science and Technology, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Department of Biotechnology, Department of Health Research/ICMR, Department of Agricultural Research/ICAR, and others in various areas of research and recommends for a coordinated, collaborative approach to actively foster private partnerships in scientific research and related fields. The Committee is of the view that strategic collaboration with private entities is essential to alleviate the burden on Government funding and ensure adequate financial support for research endeavours in science and allied disciplines. It is also felt that by proactively engaging in partnerships with the private sector, the Government can facilitate a more sustainable and diversified funding ecosystem for scientific research as these collaborative efforts will not only reduce the Government's financial burden but also it will harness the expertise and resources of the private sector to drive innovation and scientific advancement. Encouraging and nurturing such partnerships will create a conducive environment for ground-breaking research and will ensure a more balanced distribution of funding responsibilities between the public and private sectors.6.13 The Committee strongly recommends for a comprehensive support framework from key Departments such as the Department of Higher Education and its subordinate bodies like UGC, AICTE and Departments of the Ministry of Science and Technology, extending their assistance to universities for the promotion and advancement of research in scientific and related fields. This support should encompass funding initiatives, active mentorship, guidance, and capacity-building measures to empower universities in their research endeavours. The Committee feels that these Departments can play a pivotal role in nurturing a robust research ecosystem across the academic landscape by actively catering to the needs of Universities. Initiatives such as targeted funding, guidance on best practices, and mentorship programs can significantly enhance the research capabilities and competitiveness of Universities to make them emerge and thrive as hubs of innovation, contributing meaningfully to the scientific and technological progress of the nation.6.14 The Committee notes the potential benefits of One Nation One Subscription (ONOS) initiative  thereby promoting interdisciplinary research and its alignment with national policies like the National Education Policy 2020 (NEP), the draft Science Technology and Innovation Policy (STIP), and the vision of the National Research Foundation (NRF)in driving inclusive access to knowledge resources. The Committee strongly recommends the accelerated implementation of the One Nation One Subscription (ONOS) initiative to democratize access to scholarly publications and journals across all higher education and 

65
research institutions in India as access to scientific literature, primarily through digital journals, is currently hindered by exorbitant subscription costs and limited availability.6.15 The Committee is of the view that research on India's traditional knowledge systems not only enriches the country's heritage but also offers viable solutions to contemporary challenges in healthcare, agriculture, and sustainability and this holistic approach towards development is imperative for India's progress and cultural preservation. In view of this, the Committee recommends prioritizing research in India's traditional knowledge systems due to their immense significance on multiple fronts such as Vedic mathematics, heritage preservation as it plays a pivotal role in preserving and documenting the ancient wisdom and practices inherent in traditional knowledge systems, validating the efficacy of traditional medical systems like Ayurveda and Yoga , sustainable practices in respect ofagricultural methods, ecological wisdom, and natural resource management. 6.16 The Committee notes that to fully harness India's demographic dividend and position as a global powerhouse for Science and Technology (S&T) talent, a multitude of coordinated steps like educational reforms that harmonize the quality of S&T education across States, investment in cutting-edge skill development programmes aligned with industry demands, enhancement of India's image as an appealing career destination for budding S&T professionals, creating a conducive environment and implement of measures to retain and attract talent, both domestic and abroad, facilitating easier access for foreign scientists interested in contributing to India's scientific landscape etc would be required. The Committee recommends that a holistic approach should be adopted and all the stakeholder Departments should collaborate with each other for formulation of such a comprehensive and holistic policy to unlock India's vast potential as a global leader in S&Tby creating commonly agreed platforms as far as possible.6.17 The Committee appreciates the commendable research efforts taken by DBT, DST, Institutions of Excellence, IITs, IISc, IISERs, CSIR, ICMR, and reputed Central Universities in various scientific domains. The Committee suggests that for more substantial research initiatives in specific areas, crucial for India's welfare, like curbing the excessive use of harmful chemicals and pesticides detrimental to human health, as well as addressing issues of air and water pollution alongside health-specific research in both human and cattle diseases, the Committee also recommends for a strategic shift to address these critical gaps with the research entities pivoting towards an India-centric, utility-

66
driven approach in their scientific endeavors, especially in fields of agriculture, healthcare, and environmental sectors. 6.18 The Committee notes that for a developing country like India, investing in space science research not only drives technological advancements but also addresses crucial socio-economic and developmental challenges, through better monitoring of natural resources, including water resources, forest cover, and agricultural productivity. Also, Space-based technologies offer critical data for predicting natural disasters such as floods, cyclones, and droughts helping in early warning systems, evacuation planning, and efficient disaster response and thereby reducing the impact on lives and infrastructure. Taking note of this, the Committee recommends for introducing specialized courses in space science, astronomy, astrophysics, and related fields within departments of science and establishing collaborations between Universities and space research organizations like ISRO (Indian Space Research Organisation) to provide students with research opportunities. Further, internships, joint projects, and mentorship programs which can foster practical skills and knowledge and organize seminars, workshops, and outreach programs should also be encouraged to generate interest in space science among the public and attract morestudents to pursue careers in this field.6.19 The Committee recommends that the University Grants Commission (UGC) shouldtake a focused approach through formulation of a blueprint to bolster the research scenario in India and the following points be examined in light of current policies while developing the proposed blueprint: mechanisms to encourage a robust research culture across universities by incentivizing and recognizing research contributions, developing schemes that reward quality publications, patents, and impactful research outcomes.increase funding specifically earmarked for research activities within Universities, facilitate grants for research projects, infrastructure development, and faculty development programs.foster an environment conducive to interdisciplinary research by encouraging collaborations among departments and institutions and establishing more interdisciplinary research centers to tackle complex challenges requiring diverse expertise.

67
facilitate partnerships and collaborations with global universities and research institutions, encourage joint research projects, student exchange programs, and access to international funding opportunities.invest in faculty development programs focusing on research methodologies, proposal writing, and mentorship with experienced researchers guiding and mentoring young faculty to elevate research standards.upgrade and modernize research infrastructure by providing state-of-the-art laboratories, libraries, and technology facilities and ensuring accessibility to cutting-edge equipment and resources for researchers.promote adherence to ethical guidelines in research practices and ensure transparency. forging stronger ties with industries to align research goals with real-world challenges, collaborate on research projects, internships, and skill development programs that address industry needs.implement robust mechanisms for monitoring and evaluating research outcomes, ensuring accountability and quality assurance across universities.6.20 The Committee appreciates the concerted efforts by various departments and institutes which has helped the IITs and IISCs to excel in World QS rankings. The Research University in terms of University Citation per Faculty in QS World Ranking 2022. 6.21 The Committee appreciates that India has witnessed a massive jump in its Global Innovation Index (GII) from 52ndin the year 2019 to 40thin the year 2023 among 132 economies of the world. Also its international research collaboration, especially in themes related to SDG 07 (Affordable and clean energy from 16% in 2018 to 20% in 2022). The Committee also appreciates the submission of the Department of Higher Education that the national spending on research and development (R&D) measured in terms of gross expenditure on Research and Development has increased over the years and more than doubled from Rs. 60,196.75 crore in 2010-11 to Rs. 1,27,380.96 crore in 2020-21 which is worth of appreciation. The Committee also appreciates the efforts of the Department of Higher Education for benchmarking Innovation and Entrepreneurship (I&E) ecosystem in higher education institutes (HEIs) through Atal Ranking of Institutions on Innovation Achievements (NIRF-Innovation)

68
6.22 Upon examining various Higher Education Institutes (HEIs) for future-readiness in the upcoming Industry 4.0 technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, Block Chain, Internet of Things (IoT), Quantum Technologies, etc., the Committee found their ongoing efforts  in research, innovation and implementation of these future technologies to be satisfactory and on the right trajectory.

75 
 
 
MINUTES 
OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS (EWCY&S)  
 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 11:00 A.M.  
on Thursday, 9th November, 2023 in Committee Room No.4, A-Block, Parliament House Annexe   
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3.  Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
4.  Dr. M. Thambidurai  
 
LOK SABHA 
5.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
6.  Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
7. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
8. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
9. Shri Dharambir Singh  
10. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
6. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
11:00 A.M. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION, MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
 

76 
 
1.  Shri K. Sanjay Murthy Secretary  
2.  Sh. Sunil Kumar Barnwal Additional Secretary 
3.  Sh. Govind Jaiswal Joint Secretary, (TEL) 
4.  Shri Sanjog Kapoor JS& FA 
5.  Ms. Saumya Gupta Joint Secretary (TE) 
6.  Ms. Rina Sonowal Kouli Joint Secretary 
7.  Shri P.K. Banerjee Joint Secretary, MGT 
8.  Shri Prashant Agarwal Director 
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION (UGC) 
 
1.  Prof. Manish R. Joshi 
 
Secretary 
ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION (AICTE) 
 
1.  Prof. T. G. Sitaraman 
 
Chairman 
2.  Prof. Rajiv Kumar Member Secretary 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY (IIT) - DELHI, MADRAS, PALAKKAD 
AND MANDI 
1.  Prof Rangan Banerjee Director (IIT Delhi) 
2.  Prof. V. Kamakoti Director- IIT Madras 
3.  Prof. Laxmidhar Behera Director –IIT Mandi 
4.  Prof. (Ms) Angelie 
Multani 
Dean (Diversity and 
Inclusion)- IIT Delhi 
5.  Prof. Rajendra Singh Associate Dean (Research 
& Development)-IIT 
Delhi 
6.  Prof. A. Seshadri Sekhar Director (IIT Palakkad) 
DELHI TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY  (DTU) 
1.  Prof. S. Indu 
 
 
Vice Chancellor 

77 
 
2.  Prof. Rajeshwari Pandey, Dean, Academic (UG) 
UNIVERSITY OF DELHI (DU) 
1.  Prof. Yogesh Singh 
 
Vice-Chancellor 
2.  Dr. Vikas Gupta Registrar 
 
3.  Prof. Rajni Abbi Proctor 
 
4.  Shri  Raju Nair Joint Registrar 
NITI AAYOG 
        1. Shri Neeraj Sinha Senior Adviser (S&T) 
 
       2. Shri Rajib Kumar Sen Senior Adviser 
(Education) 
 
TIME: 2.30 P.M. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (DST) 
1. Prof. Abhay Karandikar Secretary  
2. Dr. Akhilesh Gupta Sr. Adviser 
3. Ms. A. Dhanalakshmi Joint Secretary 
 
4. Dr. Praveen Kumar 
Somasundaram 
 
Scientist ‘F’ & Head, NM & NSM 
Division 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (DSIR) 
 
1. Dr. N. Kalaiselvi Secretary 
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY (DBT) 
 
1. Dr. Rajesh S Gokhale Secretary 
2. Dr. Sanjay K Mishra Scientist -‘H’ 
3. Dr. Alka Sharma Scientist -‘H’ 
 
NATIONAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION (NRF) 
 
1. Dr. Parvinder Maini Scientific Secretary 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF VIROLOGY (NIV) 
 

78 
 
1. Dr. Pragya D Yadav Scientist F, National Institute of 
Virology (NIV), Pune 
ICMR, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
1.  Dr. Rajiv Bahl,  Secretary (Department of Health 
Research) –cum-Director General 
(Indian Council of Medical Research) 
2. Smt. Anu Nagar Joint Secretary 
3.  Dr. Sheela V. Godbole Scientist-'G' & Director, National AIDS 
Research Institute 
4.  Dr. Nivedita Gupta  Scientist ‘F’ & Head, Epidemiology and 
Communicable Diseases (ECD), 
Division, (ICMR) 
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF APPLIED ECONOMIC RESEARCH (NCAER) 
 
1. Dr. Sonalde Desai Senior Faculty Member  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. 
He then informed about agenda for the meeting and apprised the Members that the Committee has 
invited Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education, Secretary, UGC, 
Chairman, AICTE, Directors of Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi, IIT Madras, IIT Mandi, 
IIT Palakkad, Vice-Chancellors of University of Delhi and Delhi Technological University (DTU) 
and representatives of NITI Aayog to hear their views on "Research based education and 
Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and related fields, etc". *        *        * 
3. The Chairman further informed that during the post-lunch session, the Committee has also 
invited the Secretaries of the Department of Science and Technology, the Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research, the Department of Biotechnology, Secretary, Department of Health 
Research, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Director-General, ICMR and representatives of 
National Institute of Virology along with the representatives of National Research Foundation, 
representatives from National Council of Applied Economic Research and NITI Aayog to present 
their views on "Research based Education and Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and related fields". 
 
 
* Pertains to other matters 
 

79 
 
After the Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education; representatives 
from UGC, AICTE and NITI Aayog; Directors and Vice-Chancellor of various Institutes/ 
Universities and other senior officials take their seats 
4. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of 
Education and representatives from UGC, AICTE and NITI Aayog; Directors and Vice-Chancellor 
of various Institutes/ Universities to the meeting of the Committee and asked them to apprise the 
Committee on "Research based education and Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and related fields, 
etc". The Committee desired to be apprised of the strategies adopted/ steps taken by the 
Government for improving the research scenario in the country in the field of science, technology 
and innovations, details of the fund allocated, released and utilized by the Department for 
promotion and augmentation of research in various sciences in the country, along with the 
hindrances and difficulties being faced in making India a world leader in the field of science and 
emerging technologies. Thereafter, the Committee decided to hear the views of Directors and Vice-
Chancellor of various Institutes/ Universities. 
5.         Secretary, Department of Higher Education apprised the Committee that the Government 
has taken numerous efforts to enhance the Research & Development (R&D) expenditure and create 
adequate opportunities for the researchers. It has also taken various steps to increase opportunities 
for research students pursuing Ph.D. and postdoctoral research and its efforts is visible through its 
global position in scientific publications, number of Ph.Ds., number of start-ups, resident patent 
filing, Global Innovation Index, etc. during the last three years. The Committee was also informed 
that India occupies 3rd rank in terms of number of scientific publications, number of Ph.Ds. 
awarded and number of start-ups. India is ranked at 7th position in terms of resident patent filing 
activity.  
6.     The Committee was further apprised that India has witnessed a massive jump in its Global 
Innovation Index (GII) ranking from 52nd in the year 2019 to 40th in 2023 among 132 economies of 
the world. Also, its international research collaboration, especially in themes related to SDG-07 
(Affordable and Clean Energy) from 16% in 2018 to 26% in 2022. As per the latest available R&D 
statistics, the national spending on Research and Development (R&D) measured in terms of Gross 
Expenditure on Research and Development (GERD) has increased over the years and more than 
doubled from Rs.60,196.75 crore in2010-11 to Rs.127,380.96 crore in 2020-21. 
 

80 
 
7. Secretary, UGC while deposing before the Committee informed that University Grants 
Commission in line with the vision of NEP 2020 has taken pivotal steps to strengthen research 
in HEIs such as it has framed guidelines for the establishment of a Research & Development 
Cell in Higher Education Institutions with a vision to put in place a robust mechanism for 
developing and strengthening the research ecosystem within HEIs and it has launched a 
programme for skill-based education which emphasizes upon developing a skilled workforce 
with vocational education. The Committee was also informed that UGC has advised all Higher 
Educational Institutions (HEIs) to disseminate the information about the National Quantum 
Mission (NQM) among the faculty, researchers and students so as to acquire benefit from this 
mission.  
7. Chairman, AICTE while deposing before the Committee, informed that, Ministry of 
Education along with All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE) has taken several steps to 
promote and facilitate research based education such as 42 institutions spread over 11 States/UTs 
were selected to establish AICTE IDEA Lab in the Financial Year 2022-23, which has increased 
the total count of AICTE – IDEA Labs to 106, out of which, 31 Labs are self-financed where 
AICTE provides mentorship. The Committee was also apprised that Ministry of Education has 
established an ‘Innovation cell (MIC)’ to foster the culture of Innovation in HEIs and schools 
through series of policy interventions and handholding supports and further enabling ecosystem 
development in educational institutions to support from idea generation to pre-incubation support, 
generating strong pipeline of quality innovations and early-stage start-ups for the incubation 
industry for further support.  
 
8.     The Director, IIT, Delhi started his deposition by informing the Committee of the Industrial 
Research & Development (IRD) Unit in the Institute which provides administrative and accounting 
support for research. It was also informed that the Institute is actively involved in collaborative 
research programmes with national and international organizations/universities in Austria, 
Australia, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Ethiopia, European Commission, France, UK, USA, etc. The 
Committee was thereafter informed that a total of 1,319 sponsored research projects worth ₹ 1,440 
Crores have been undertaken in the last five Financial Years by the IRD Unit, averaging 264 
projects with average sanctioned value of ₹ 288 crores per Financial Year (FY). The major funding 
entities for sponsored research projects in the last five years were Defence Research and 
Development Organization (DRDO), the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Ministry 

81 
 
of Education (MoE), and the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR).  
9. Director, IIT Delhi in his submission also mentioned that with 620 faculty members and 
over 12,700 students, they have expanded research opportunities for students pursuing graduation, 
focusing on outcomes and societal influence rather than just publications and patents. He also 
highlighted impactful projects such as environmentally friendly cement, AI for vision restoration, 
water security mapping, and smart manufacturing. He also outlined their efforts to scale research 
programs, inviting UG students from various colleges for summer research and facilitating faculty 
engagement. Their facilities, like the Central Research Facility and SATHI, worth Rs. 400-500 
crores, operate round the clock, yet faces challenges in operation and maintenance of funding. 
10. Director, IIT Madras apprised the Committee of the institution's significant strides in 
research-based education, emphasizing interdisciplinary focus and various initiatives aimed at 
fostering innovation and entrepreneurship. He stated that the Master of Science by Research and 
Ph.D. programs have been instrumental, with an increased focus on inter disciplinarity through 15 
Centers of Excellence, covering areas like additive manufacturing, quantum sciences, and 
technology policy. He further informed that the institution offers interdisciplinary dual-degree 
programs allowing students to pursue diverse interests. It focuses on translating ideas into design 
and prototypes through centers like the Centre for Innovation and incubators targeting health, 
cyber-physical systems, and rural technology stating that over 400 companies have been incubated, 
with a cumulative evaluation of around Rs. 40,000 crores, providing substantial equity to IIT 
Madras. The Committee was also informed that IIT Madras has introduced new Departments like 
the School of Sustainability and a state-of-the-art medical science and engineering course and also 
started an MD-Ph.D. program. The institute also collaborates extensively with industry and is 
striving to increase industry-funded projects while facing challenges in funding for engineering 
Ph.D. programs, especially for women scholars. 
11.   Director, IIT Mandi while deposing before the Committee highlighted the institution's focus 
on research-driven education and its evolution since its foundation. He stated that research forms a 
core part of their educational delivery, with design and innovation integral to the B.Tech program. 
The Committee was also informed that the institute has established several interdisciplinary 
research centers focusing on areas such as Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Indian Knowledge 
Systems and Mental Health Applications, Human-Computer Interaction, Quantum Science and 
Technology, among others. Notable projects include brainwave-controlled wheelchairs, landslide 

82 
 
monitoring systems, digital skin technologies, and efforts to develop a room-temperature quantum 
computer through collaborations. Further, to foster a research culture among undergraduates, the 
institute awards credits and grade points for published research articles and encourages research 
internships by offering scholarships.  
 
 12.       Director, IIT Palakkad emphasized the Institute's status as one of the younger IITs, 
celebrating recent achievements despite challenges in transitioning to a permanent campus. He 
informed the Committee about the exceptional gender ratio, with a significant representation of 
female students and faculty and highlighted the establishment of a Data Science Department, 
collaborations with the Rahul Mehta Foundation for a school of Data Science in AI, and awards for 
the Engineering Works Division. Moreover, initiatives like web-enabled courses cater to industry 
professionals pursuing education while enabling collaboration on industry-relevant projects. It was 
highlighted that IIT Palakkad's focus extends to agricultural advancements, showcasing a dedicated 
research center to aid farmers using AI techniques, yielding 30% better results in field tests. It was 
also informed that institute is engaged in a DST-proposed Hydrogen Valley and have initiated a 
Center of Renewable Energy (CoRE) focusing on hydrogen, wind, solar, and biomass energy 
verticals. Collaborations with Bosch and initiatives like the Global Sanitation Centre further 
emphasize their commitment to research and innovation. 
13.  Vice Chancellor, University of Delhi while deposing before the Committee highlighted Delhi 
University's evolution, marking its 100th year and its noteworthy QS ranking at 94th, a significant 
improvement from its previous global ranking. He further stated that as a multi-disciplinary 
institution catering to a vast student population, the University has demonstrated a keen focus on 
research-based education and a commitment to implementing the National Education Policy (NEP). 
He further stated that emphasis is on promoting creativity, critical thinking, and originality in the 
curriculum. He also submitted before the Committee that the institution endeavors to cultivate 
research interests from the outset by encouraging project-based learning, offering flexibility in 
experiments, and dedicating the final year to extensive research projects. It was further added that 
plans are in place to revamp postgraduate programs to align with NEP, focusing on research-
oriented, problem-based studies related to local industries and socioeconomic facets. The 
Committee was also informed that a research council under the innovation cell oversees research-
related matters, fostering a culture of inquiry and development throughout the university 

83 
 
14.   Vice Chancellor, Delhi Technological University's (DTU) apprised the Committee that 
research-based education, emphasizing its impact on critical thinking, creativity, and 
communication skills have been the University’s focus and DTU's efforts to incorporate research at 
the graduation level have contributed to its improved ranking. She also submitted that the 
institution has integrated elective research within the core curriculum, allowing students to 
commence research work in their third year, which is considered a core credit course. Students are 
required to complete their project work leading to research publications for credit acknowledgment. 
This academic approach has positively influenced the institution's ranking, highlighting their 
commitment to fostering research-oriented education. The Committee was also informed of the 
acquisition of a 5G lab and a robust incubation center supporting 15 start-ups, generating around 
Rs. 20 crore in revenue, showcases DTU's commitment to innovation and entrepreneurship. 
15.     *              *              *  
16.   After deposition by the Secretary, HE, Secretary, UGC, Chairman, AICTE and Directors/ 
Vice-Chancellor of various Institutes/Universities, the Members of Committee raised queries 
regarding research scenarios in India, setting up of research organizations, facilities being provided 
to students and challenges being faced to achieve international standards in field of research. Some 
of the queries raised by the Members were responded to by the various representatives present in 
the meeting. They also mentioned that Department of Higher Education will send written responses 
to the unanswered queries raised by the Members of the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    * Pertains to other matters 

84 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
AFTERNOON SESSION  
After the Secretaries of Department of Science and Technology, Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, Department of Biotechnology, Department of Health Research, Director-
General, ICMR and representatives of National Institute of Virology along with the 
representatives of National Research Foundation, National Council of Applied Economic 
Research and NITI Aayog take their seats 
17. The Chairman welcomed the Secretaries of Department of Science and Technology, 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Department of Biotechnology, Department of 
Health Research, Director-General, ICMR and representatives of National Institute of Virology 
along with the representatives of National Research Foundation, National Council of Applied 
Economic Research and NITI Aayog to the meeting of the Committee to present their views on 
"Research based education and Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and related fields, etc". 
18.  Secretary, DST informed the Committee that the Department plays a pivotal role in promoting 
new areas of Science & Technology and leads as a nodal department for organizing, coordinating 
and promoting S&T activities in the country. The Committee was apprised of the fact that DST 
provides the largest extramural research and development support in the country to strengthen 
national S&T capacity and capability primarily through a competitive mode of funding cutting 
across institutions and disciplines. It was further informed that with a view to promote basic 
research in science and engineering and to achieve higher levels of excellence in internationally-
competitive research, the Government had established a Science and Engineering Research Board 
(SERB) through an Act of Parliament: the Science and Engineering Research Board Act, 2008 
(Science Act). SERB has so far provided a good foundation for promoting basic science and 
engineering research, through financial assistance to persons engaged in such research. One of the 
key recommendations of NEP 2020 had been the creation of a National Research Foundation 
(NRF) in India, as a body to catalyse, facilitate, coordinate, seed, grow, and mentor research in 
institutions around the country. 
19.   Secretary, DSIR informed that DSIR is the nodal Department for granting recognition/ 
registration to the In-house R&D centers established by industry, Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organizations (SIROs) and Public Funded Research Institutions (PFRI) in the country for availing 

85 
 
various Fiscal and other Incentives by these entities offered by the Government. The Committee 
was also apprised with regard to research based education and CSIR contribution, it has been 
submitted that the doctoral and postdoctoral research programmes in science and engineering act as 
catalysts for S&T innovations and impact the overall development of a country. It was further 
informed that CSIR covers a wide spectrum of science and technology – from oceanography, 
geophysics, chemicals, drugs, genomics, biotechnology and nanotechnology to mining, aeronautics, 
instrumentation, environmental engineering and information technology. The Committee was also 
apprised of the fact that CSIR provides significant technological intervention in many areas 
concerning societal efforts, which include environment, health, drinking water, food, housing, 
energy, farm and non-farm sectors. 
20.    Secretary, DBT apprised the Committee that the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) 
promotes holistic development and provides support to young students, researchers and scientists 
working in the field of biotechnology, through its various schemes, programs and fellowships. The 
Committee was also apprised that besides skilling and capacity building in life sciences, DBT along 
with its industry-academia interface agency, Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council 
(BIRAC), has fostered and nurtured a vibrant biotech innovation and translation ecosystem through 
various national programmes and international partnerships. Thereafter, the Secretary, DBT 
highlighted some of the initiatives for fostering biotech innovations and the bio-economy in India 
such as funding and support provided by the Department to numerous programs and individuals 
across various educational levels like the UG-level Star College program, funding for post-doctoral 
fellowships, and scholarships like the Ramalingaswami Re-entry Fellowship to incentivize the 
return of Indian talent from abroad. 
21.   Secretary, DHR cum Director General, ICMR apprised the Committee that DHR administers 
and monitors the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), which is the apex body for the 
formulation, coordination and promotion of biomedical research. The 27 national institutes and 
Regional Medical Research Centres (RMRCs) under ICMR, undertake research on specific health 
topics like tuberculosis, leprosy, cholera and diarrheal diseases, viral diseases including AIDS, 
malaria, kala-azar, vector control, nutrition, food & drug toxicology, reproduction, immuno-
hematology, oncology, medical statistics, etc. He also informed that one of the mandates of DHR-
ICMR and its institutes includes capacity building to enhance India’s public health response. This is 
achieved through training programs for field epidemiology and public health laboratories, human 

86 
 
resource development through teaching and research programs, in addition to undertaking outbreak 
investigations, emergency preparedness /proactive public health research, preparedness for 
unknown pathogens, development of newer diagnostic tests and supply of diagnostic kits to 
national programs. 
22.    While deposing before the Committee, the representative of NCAER emphasized the need for 
interdisciplinary approaches to address complex issues like pollution. Proposed a model similar to 
ARPA-H in the US, suggesting that India could establish a competition via NRF for 
interdisciplinary research centers focused on crucial social issues. Further, it was advocated for 
decentralized training models, citing examples from NCAER where non-residential fellows were 
engaged in online mentorship programs. She also highlighted the importance of reaching out to 
individuals from remote areas to provide training opportunities and also proposed the idea of long-
term research programs focusing on issues like nutrition, suggesting the need for tracking and 
analyzing changes over time and suggested a blend of biomedical sciences, social sciences, and 
engineering to address such long-standing issues. 
23.   The representatives of NITI Aayog submitted that India's investment in R&D has been steadily 
increasing, with significant contributions from both the government and the private sector. The 
country has also made substantial progress in scientific publication output and patent filing, 
positioning itself as a global player in research and development. India's Gross Expenditure on 
Research and Development (GERD) has seen remarkable growth, more than doubling from Rs. 
60,196.75 crore in 2010-11 to Rs. 127,380.96 crore in 2020-21. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
24.  The meeting then adjourned at 4:35 P.M. 
25. A verbatim record of the meeting was also kept. 
 
09.11.2023                                                                                                                       A. K. Mallick 
New Delhi                                                                                                                                Director 
 

 
87 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(EWCY&S)  
 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 10:00 A.M. 
on Tuesday, 12th December, 2023 in Committee Room No.2, A-Block, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
4. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7.  Dr. T.R.Paarivendhar   
8.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
9. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
10.Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
11.Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
14. Shri Ratansingh Magansingh Rathod 
15. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Ms. Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 

 
88 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He 
then informed that the agenda for the meeting was to consider and adopt the two draft Action 
Taken Reports and one subject Report of the Committee which are as under: 
a) * * * 
b) 358th Report on "Research based Education and Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and 
related fields"; and 
c) * * * 
 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid three draft Reports one by one and after 
a brief discussion, adopted the *, 358th and *  Reports without any modification. 
4. The Committee further decided to present/lay the said Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament on Wednesday, 13th December, 2023 during the current winter Session of the 
Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri Vivek Thakur, Chairman of the 
Committee and in his absence, Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav, M.P. and in their absence Dr. 
Faiyaz Ahmad to present the said Reports in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
Lavu, M.P. and in his absence, Dr. T.R.Paarivendhar, M.P. were authorized to lay the above 
mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. The Committee also authorized the 
Secretariat to correct patent errors and consequential changes in the said reports. 
5. * * * 
   6.   The meeting adjourned at 10:40 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                            A.K. Mallick  
     12 th December, 2023                                                                                               Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*  Pertains to other matter. 

69 
 
 
MINUTES 
OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS (EWCY&S)  
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 11:00 A.M.  
on Friday, 13th October, 2023 in Committee Room No.4, A-Block, Parliament House Annexe   
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3.  Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
4.  Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
5.  Dr. M. Thambidurai  
6.  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA 
7.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
8.  Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
9. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
10. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
11. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod  
12. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
3. Ms. Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
5. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
 
11:00 A.M. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
1. Ms. Saumya Gupta Joint Secretary (TE) 

70 
 
2. Smt. Rina Sonowal Kouli Joint Secretary (HE) 
3. Dr. Deepak Vats Joint Secretary, UGC 
4. Shri Prashant Agarwal Director 
5. Shri Subhash Chand Sharu Director 
6. Dr. Monika Deputy Secretary, UGC 
7. Prof. S. Sudarshan Acting Director (IIT Bombay), 
Maharashtra 
8. Prof. Sachin Patwardhan Dean (R&D), (IIT Bombay), 
Maharashtra 
9. Prof. Rajat Moona Director, IIT, Gandhinagar, 
Gujarat  
10. Prof. Suhas S. Joshi  Director, IIT, Indore 
11. Prof. I. A. Pilani Dean, IIT, Indore 
12. Prof. G. Rangarajan  Director, IISc, Bengaluru, 
Karnataka 
13. Dr. S. Unnikrishnan Nair Director, IIST, Trivandrum, 
Kerala  
14. Dr. Kuruvilla Joseph Registrar, IIST, Trivandrum, 
Kerala  
15. Dr. Aravind V. Professor, IIST, Trivandrum, 
Kerala 
16. Dr. Deepak Mishra Professor, IIST, Trivandrum, 
Kerala 
17. Prof. J. Gowrishankar Director, IISER, Mohali, Punjab 
18. Prof. Kameshwar Nath Singh Vice Chancellor, Central 
University of South Bihar 
19. Prof. Sudipto Director, Research 
Development, Assam University  
 
 
*      *        * 
2. *          *          * 
3.  He then informed about agenda for today’s meeting and apprised the Members that the 
Committee has invited Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education to hear 
their views on "Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and related fields along with Industry 4.0 and 
Emerging Technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, Internet of Things (IoT), Blockchain 
technology, etc." Thereafter, the Committee will hear the representatives of Institutes/Universities  
      * Pertains to other matters 
                                                                                                                                                                         

71 
 
namely Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Gandhinagar and Indore; Directors of Indian 
Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology, 
Thiruvananthapuram and Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Mohali, Vice-
Chancellors of Central Universities of South Bihar (Gaya) and Director (R&D) of Central 
University of Assam on the subject.  
4. *           *           * 
After the Joint Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education; 
representatives from UGC; Directors and Vice-Chancellor of various Institutes/ Universities and 
other senior officials take their seats 
5. The Chairman welcomed the Joint Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of 
Education and representatives from UGC; Directors and Vice-Chancellor of various Institutes/ 
Universities to the meeting of the Committee and asked them to apprise the Committee on 
"Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and related fields along with Industry 4.0 and Emerging 
Technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, Internet of Things (IoT), Blockchain technology, etc." 
The Committee desired to be apprised of the strategies adopted/ steps taken by the Government for 
improving the research scenario in the country in the field of science, technology and innovations, 
details of the fund allocated, released and utilized by the Department for promotion and 
augmentation of research in various sciences in the country, along with the hindrances and 
difficulties being faced in making India a world leader in the field of science and emerging 
technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, Internet of Things, Blockchain technology. Then 
Committee decided to hear the views of Directors and Vice-Chancellor of various Institutes/ 
Universities to begin with the meeting. 
6. The Director, IIST, Thiruvananthapuram started his deposition by informing the Committee 
of the undergraduate courses, one dual degree and 15 post graduate programmes along with doctor 
programmes in various areas of Space Science and Technology in IIST. He further informed that 
institute has an NIRF ranking of 48 in the year 2023 and 1,316 graduates who passed out of IIST 
are serving in ISRO and they have come up to the middle level management and toppers from the 
institute do masters programme in Caltech, the prestigious university in the US and several 
students have completed their internships at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, USA and IIST is going to  
 
* Pertains to other matters 

72 
 
implement the NEP-2020 from next year onwards. With regard to Artificial Intelligence, Machine 
Learning, Internet of Things, block chain, Robotics, he apprised the Committee that IIST has 
collaboration with more than 10 international institutions and more than 30 national institutions to 
develop technologies that will be feeding to ISRO and also for many societal applications. 
 
7.   Director, IIT, Gandhinagar, Gujarat while deposing before the Committee informed about the 
achievements of the institute in field of nanotechnology like development of single sheet Boron 
technology. He informed the Committee about the cancer drug discovery which has been a major 
research in which the relation of a type of bacteria, H-Pylori bacteria with cancer has been 
established. 
8.   Director, IISc, Bengaluru, Karnataka, apprised the Committee that the institute has been ranked 
no. 1 in the NIRF rankings under the university category, under the Research Institutions category 
and has been ranked as the world's top research university in terms of Citations per Faculty in the 
latest QS World University Rankings. He then informed that IISc has developed techniques for 
assessing the emotional and skill development of autistic children using AI techniques because the 
autistic children do not interact with human beings. He then informed that using IoT by appropriate 
sensing technology, we are able to develop much more efficient water distribution mechanisms.  
 9.  Acting Director, IIT Bombay, Maharashtra, informed the Committee that IIT, Bombay has 
about 85 faculty members across all Departments who work in AI in every branch of science, 
engineering, etc. and therefore, IIT has created a Centre for Machine Intelligence and Data Science 
about three-plus years back, and this Centre, along with the faculty from all the Departments, 
works in many areas such as is healthcare and life science. 
10. Director, IIT Indore, apprised the Committee that there are 9 under-graduate programmes 
and 16 post-graduate programmes in the Institute.  About 600 Ph.D. students work in the Institute 
and we have more than 2,800 total number of students in the Institute.  IIT Indore stands 14th in 
NIRF Ranking in the country. He then informed the Committee of the various on-going projects in 
field of Artificial Intelligence, agriculture and disaster management being initiated by the 
institution.  
11.  Director, IISER, Mohali, Punjab, informed that IISER focuses in providing very high level and 
integrated education on basic sciences of Physics, Chemistry, Biology and Maths combining it 
with research at the same time.  He further informed that the first five institutions were set up 
between 2006 and 2008 at Kolkata, Pune, Mohali, Thiruvananthapuram and Bhopal.  

73 
 
Subsequently, two more institutions are less than ten years old, IISER, Tirupati and IISER, 
Behrampur, were also set up. He then informed the Committee of the various on-going projects 
such as intrinsically disordered proteins, stem cells and their relationship to disease development, 
particularly with regard to development of heart and blood vessels, ultra fast lasers and high 
powered lasers in collaboration with DRDO and low cost system for domestic waste water 
management. 
12.  Director, Research Development, Assam University informed the Committee that the 
university has two campuses, one at Silchar and another at Diphu. It was also informed that Assam 
University has 43 Academic Departments out of which 27 Departments are for humanities and 
social sciences and Management.  Also, it has three Engineering Departments and 11 Science 
Departments along with Pharmacy.  There are 79 affiliated colleges where nearly 60,000 students 
are studying. He also apprised the Committee that the university is creating its own resources for 
research purposes and in 2021-22, it has received 65 projects from 22 funding agencies amounting 
to Rs.13.5 crore.  While, in 2020-21, it was 50 projects from 18 agencies.  The institute is also 
working well to carry on nano research consortiums. Our computer scientists and engineering 
faculties are working in AI block chain and IoT, mainly in the field of agriculture as we are having 
one Agricultural Engineering Department within North-East Region. With regard to research and 
development, the Committee was informed that the University is working well to carry on nano 
research consortiums and the computer scientists and engineering faculties are working in AI block 
chain and IoT, mainly in the field of agriculture as we are having one Agricultural Engineering 
Department within North-East Region. 
13.   Vice Chancellor, Central University of South Bihar, while deposing before the Committee 
informed that it is a special university, because there are 13 aspirational districts in Bihar, one of 
which is Gaya district, where this university is established. At present Samprati University has 12 
schools, 26 departments and 34 courses are running. There are teachers and students from 28 
States, so this university gives a view of the entire mini India. 
14.   After deposition by the Vice-Chancellor/Directors of various Institutes/Universities, the 
Committee raised queries regarding research scenarios in India, setting up of research 
organizations, facilities being provided to students apart from scholarships and challenges being 
faced to achieve international standards in field of research. Some of the queries raised by the 
Members were responded to by the representatives. They also mentioned that Department of 

74 
 
Higher Education would send written responses to the unanswered queries raised by the Members. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
AFTERNOON SESSION  
After the representatives from Department of School Education and Literacy, Department of 
Higher Education and Chairperson, CBSE take their seats 
15. *             *             * 
16.  *             *             *  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
18.  The meeting then adjourned at 3:11 P.M. 
19. A verbatim record of the meeting was also kept. 
 
13.10.2023                                                                                                                       A. K. Mallick 
New Delhi                                                                                                                                Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matters 

89 
 
Annexure I  
S.No. Name of the TIH and Host Institute Technology Verticals Total Allocation 
(Rs. in Crores) 
1 IIT Kharagpur AI4ICPS I-Hub 
Foundation 
at Indian Institute of Technology 
(IIT), Kharagpur 
Artificial Intelligence 
and Machine Learning 
170 
2 TIH FOUNDATION FOR IOT 
AND IOE  
at Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay 
Technologies for Internet 
of Things & Internet of 
Everything 
170 
3 IIIT-H DATA I-HUB Foundation 
at International Institute of 
Information Technology, Hyderabad 
Data Banks & Data 
Services, Data Analysis 
110 
4 I-HUB FOR ROBOTICS AND 
AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS 
INNOVATION FOUNDATION 
at Indian Institute of Science, 
Bengaluru 
Robotics & Autonomous 
Systems 
170 
5 IHUB NTIHAC FOUNDATION  
at Indian Institute of Technology 
Kanpur 
Cyber Security and 
Cyber Security for 
Physical Infrastructure 
170 
6 IHUB DRISHTI FOUNDATION 
at Indian Institute of Technology 
Jodhpur 
Computer Vision, 
Augmented and virtual 
reality 
115 
7 TIH Divyasampark iHub Device 
Material and Technology 
at Indian Institute of Technology 
Roorkee 
Device Technology and 
Materials 
135 
8 IIT PATNA VISHLESAN I-HUB 
FOUNDATION 
at Indian Institute of Technology, 
Patna 
Speech, Video & Text 
Analytics 
110 

90 
 
S.No. Name of the TIH and Host Institute Technology Verticals Total Allocation 
(Rs. in Crores) 
9 IITM Pravartak Technologies 
Foundation 
at Indian Institute of Technology 
Madras 
Sensors, Networking, 
Actuator & controls 
170 
10 NMICPS TECHNOLOGY 
INNOVATION HUB ON 
AUTONOMOUS NAVIGATION 
FOUNDATION (TiHAN) 
at Indian Institute of Technology 
Hyderabad 
Autonomous Navigation 
and Data Acquisition 
systems (UAV, RoVetc) 
135 
11 I-DAPT-Hub Foundation 
at Indian Institute of Technology 
(Banaras Hindu University) 
Data Analytics & 
Predictive Technologies 
110 
12 IIT Guwahati Technology 
Innovation and Development 
Foundation 
at Indian Institute of Technology 
Guwahati 
Technologies for Under 
water exploration 
135 
13 IIT MANDI IHUB AND HCI 
FOUNDATION at Indian Institute 
of Technology, Mandi 
Human Computer 
Interaction 
110 
14 I-Hub Foundation for Cobotics,  
at Indian Institute of Technology 
Delhi 
Cobotics 170 
15 IIT ROPAR-TECHNOLOGY AND 
INNOVATION FOUNDATION 
at Indian Institute of Technology 
Ropar 
Technologies for 
Agriculture & Water 
110 
16 TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION IN 
EXPLORATION AND MINING 
FOUNDATION 
at Indian Institute of Technology, 
Dhanbad 
Technologies for Mining 110 

91 
 
S.No. Name of the TIH and Host Institute Technology Verticals Total Allocation 
(Rs. in Crores) 
17 IIT PALAKKAD TECHNOLOGY 
IHUB FOUNDATION 
at Indian Institute of Technology, 
Palakkad 
Intelligent Collaborative 
Systems 
100 
18 IIITB COMET FOUNDATION 
at International Institute of 
Information Technology Bengaluru 
Advanced 
Communication System 
150 
19 BITS BioCyTiH Foundation,  
at Birla Institute of Technology & 
Science Pilani 
Bio-CPS 125 
20 IDEAS- Institute of Data 
Engineering, Analytics and Science 
Foundation,  
at Indian Statistical Institute Kolkata 
Data Science, Big Data 
Analytics and Data 
curation etc. 
100 
21 IITI DRISHTI CPS FOUNDATION 
at Indian Institute of Technology 
Indore 
System Simulation, 
Modelling & 
Visualization 
100 
22 IHUB Anubhuti-IIITD Foundation 
at Indraprastha Institute of 
Information Technology, New Delhi 
Cognitive Computing & 
Social Censing 
100 
23 I-HUB QUANTUM 
TECHNOLOGY FOUNDATION,  
at Indian Institute of Science 
Education and Research Pune 
Quantum Technologies 170 
24 IIT Tirupati Navavishkar I-Hub 
Foundation 
at Indian Institute of Technology 
Tirupati 
Positioning and Precision 
Technologies 
100 
25 IIT Bhilai Innovation and 
Technology Foundation at Indian 
Institute of Technology Bhilai 
Technologies for 
Financial Sector 
55 

92 
 
Annexure II 
 
S. No. Consortium/Group of Institutions/Department/Ministry 
1.  Shodh Sindhu (ESS) Consortium under Department of Higher Education (DHE) 
2.  National Knowledge Resource Consortium (NKRC) of the Department of Science 
& Technology (DST) and Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) 
3.  DERCON Consortium under Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) 
4.  CERA Consortium under Department of Agricultural Research & Education 
(DARE) 
5.  DESIDOC under Department of Defence Research and Development (DDR&D) 
6.  Electronic Resources in Medicine (ERMED) Consortium under Department of 
Health Research (DHR) 
7.  Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 
8.  DeLCON Consortium for Department of Biotechnology (DBT) and North Eastern 
Region Institutes 
9.  Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) consortium 
10.  Department of Space (DoS) consortium 
 
  

93 
 
Annexure III 
 
Institute Incubation centres started during last 5 
years 
Whether 
functional 
or not? 
(Y/N) 
Startups started 
during last five 
years 
Whether 
functional 
or not? 
(Y/N) 
IIT Kharagpur NIL   25 Y 
IIT Bombay Society for Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship (SINE) , IIT Bombay 
(Incorporated - April 2004) 
(NIDHI-COE, BIONEST, Other programs) 
Y 107 startups 
incubated  
180 
innovators/startups 
preincubated  
Y 
IIT Kanpur Foundation for Innovation and Research in 
Science and Technology 
Y 217 Y 
SIIC , IIT Kanpur Y 102 Y 
IIT Delhi Atal Incubation Centre (AIC Sonipat) Y 16 Yes 
Science Parks/NIDHI COE/BioNEST Y 87 Yes 
IIT Guwahati IIT Guwahati Technology Innovation and 
Development Foundation 
Y 48 Y 
IIT Roorkee TIDES Bio Incubator Y 40 Y 
TIDES TBI Y 107 Y 
iHub Divyasampark, IIT Roorkee Y 21 Y 
IIT BHU, 
Varanasi 
RKVY-RAFTAAR Agri Business Incubator Y 44 Y 
Ideation Innovation & Incubation (I-3) 
Foundation 
Y 11 Y 
IIT(ISM) 
Dhanbad 
Centre for Innovation Incubation 
& Entrepreneurship (CIIE) 
Y 44 Y 
TEXMiN, IIT (ISM) Dhanbad Y 11 Y 
ACIC IIT (ISM) Foundation 
 IIT(ISM) Dhanbad 
Y 39 Y 
Coal India Innovation & Incubation Centre, 
IIT (ISM) Dhanbad 
Y 4 Y 
IIT 
Gandhinagar 
IIT Gandhinagar Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship Center (IIEC) 
incorporated on 17 December 2015 
Y 61 48 
functional; 
13 moved 
on 
IIT 
Bhubaneswar 
 "IIT Bhubaneswar Research and 
Entrepreneurship Park" has completed 6 
years of operations this October 12, 2023 
Y 33 ( This year) Y 
IIT 
Hyderabad 
iTIC- IITH Technology Incubation Center 
(incorporated in 2015) 
  80 (till date) Y 
CfHE- Center for Heathcare 
Enterprunership (incorporated in 2016) 
  17 (till date) Y 
TIHAN- Technology Innovation Hub on 
Autonomous Navigation (incorporated in 
2020) 
  8 (till date) Y 
IIT Jodhpur IITJ Technology Innovation and Startup 
Center 
Y Greenoearth Pvt 
Ltd 
N 
    Divya Plasma 
Solutions Pvt. Ltd 
Y 
    Novealthy Y 

94 
 
Innovations Pvt. Ltd 
    Healyantra Pvt. Ltd. Y 
    Caldor Health 
Technologies Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Y 
    Medvocare Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Y 
    Cellverse Pvt. Ltd. Y 
    Niranthar Care Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Y 
    NxGen Healtech 
pvt. Ltd  
Y 
    Tempvision 3D Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Y 
    Oncosphera Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Y 
    Sarbit Innovation 
Pvt. Ltd 
Y 
    Rigvedita 
Technologies Pvt 
Ltd 
Y 
    Visionence Tech 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Y 
    Sensekriti 
Technology 
Solutions Pvt. Ltd. 
Y 
    RKSH IMPACT Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Y 
    Medront Datalabs 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Y 
    ShilpinMed 
Technologies Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Y 
IIT Ropar IIT Ropar Technology Business Incubator 
Foundation  
Y 33 Y 
IIT Patna Incubation Centre IIT Patna started more 
than 5 years, registered on 15.02.2016 
Y 109 Y 
FOUNDATION FOR INNOVATORS IN 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY-Technology 
Business Incubator, IIT Patna, started in the 
year of 2019, October 
Y 29 Y 
IIT Patna Vishlesan I-Hub Foundation, 
Technology Innovation Hub, IIT Patna, 
Registered on 08.09.2020 
Y 17 Y 
IIT Indore Center of Innovation, Incubation, 
Entrepreneurship and Industry Relations 
CIIEIR, IIT Indore established by the 
Institute 
  50   
This incubation center has been converted 
into a Foundation as IITI ACE Foundation, a  
Section 8 Company on 14th July 2022. 
Y Y 
IIT Mandi IIT Mandi Catalyst, established in 2016 Y 355 Functional - 

95 
 
315, not 
functional-
40 
IIT Mandi iHub and HCI Foundation, 
established 2020 
Y 92 Functional - 
91, non 
functional - 
1 
IIT Palakkad Technology Innovation Foundation of IIT 
Palakkad            
Y 15 Y 
TECHIN, IIT Palakkad, Kanjikode       
Palakkad 678623       
CSquare Innovation Lab, IIT Palakkad Y     
IIT Palakkad Technology Ihub Foundation 
(IPTIF) 
Y     
IIT Tirupati IIT Tirupati Innovation and Incubation 
Foundation (IITT IIF) - Incorporated on 20th 
November 2022 
Y 3 Y 
IIT TIRUPATI NAVAVISHKAR I-HUB 
FOUNDATION  
      
IIT Jammu I3C IIT Jammu Y 7 Y 
AIC Foundation IIT Jammu Y Setting up in 
progress 
- 
ACIC Foundation IIT Jammu (Leh) Y Setting up in 
progress 
- 
IIT Bhilai IIT Bhilai Innovation Technology 
foundation, IIT Bhilai Permanent Campus, 
Kutelabhata Durg 
Y The following 10 
fintech startups are 
incubated under 
IBITF, a company 
registered under 
Section 8 of the 
Companies Act 
2013 and limited by 
Guarantee, 
established by IIT 
Bhilai to manage all 
entrepreneurship-
related initiatives 
of IIT Bhilai and 
activities related to 
the Technology 
Innovation Hub 
(NM-ICPS, DST).  
Y 
    Viswaprayag Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Y 
    Nitminer Pvt. Ltd. Y 
    Whitenet Explorer 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Y 
    Blocflare Pvt. Ltd. Y 
    Ai Vocab Pvt. Ltd. Y 
    Hajo Pvt. Ltd. Y 
    Amrit Meditech 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Y 

96 
 
    Alfalgo Pvt. Ltd. Y 
    Stella Next 
Technologies Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Y 
    Bhoomicam Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Y 
IIT Goa        
    Credence Energy Yes 
    Arkle Energy 
Solutions 
Yes 
IIT Dharwad Dharwad Research and Technology 
Incubator Foundation(DhaRTI) 
YES VKF Agri Farms Pvt 
Ltd 
Yes 
 
  

97 
 
Annexure IV 
 
S.No. Name of CUs Out Come 
1. Central University 
Punjab 
Signed MoU with more than 40 institution all over the country viz. 
AIIMS, Adesh Group of Institutions and Hospital, IIT Roper and MRS 
Technical University, JNU, ICMR Bhopal etc. to enhance the research 
environment in the university and explore the academic and 
research excellence in National and the Globe level. 
2. Indira Gandhi 
National Tribal 
University, 
Madhya Pradesh 
Signed MoU with more than 35 institutions all over the country viz. 
National Institute of Electronics and Information technology, IITTM, 
Research and  Resurgence Foundation, National Botanical Research 
Institute, University of Ladakh, Manipur University, CSIR, Ambedkar 
Foundation etc.  to enhance the research environment in the 
university and explore the academic and research excellence in 
National and the Globe level. 
3. Rajiv Gandhi 
University, 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Signed MoU with more than 25 institutions all over the country viz. 
Department of Social Justice & Empowerment and Tribal Affairs, 
school of Planning and Agriculture, Bhopal, Research and  
Resurgence Foundation, Nagpur, Adroit Digisoft Solution PVT. LTd, 
Guwahati, tezpur University , Gandhi Kind Foundation , Hyderabad, 
Kallinga Institutt of Industrial technology, Defense research 
Laboratory, MoD GOI etc. to enhance the research, training, 
awareness, Publicity & accessibility for research activities,  
4. Central University, 
Andhra Pradesh 
Signed MoU with JNU and CU Punjab to develop academic 
collaboration for scaling up implementation of NEP-2020, skill & 
Entrepreneurship, Sharing of recourses and promote innovation in 
teaching and research. 
5 Hemvati Nandan 
Bahuguna Garhwal 
University , 
Uttarakhand  
Signed MoU with more than 20 institutions all over the country viz. 
Indian Himalayan Central Universities Consortium (IHCUC), , IGNOU, 
Uttrakhand Open University, Yogpeeth in Rishikesh, Indian Council 
Forestery research and Educatin in deheradun etc. to advancing 
research activities with a primary forcus on the holistic development 
of Himalayan region, to  
6. Mahatma Gandhi 
Antarrashtriya 
Hindu 
Vishwavidyalaya 
Higher Education Institutions viz. Parshwanth Vidyapeeth, Varnasi, 
Central Sanskrit University, Indira Gandhi National Art center, 
Ayodhya Research Institution etc. to carry out the academic 
activities/Research  collaborations to the benefits of the faculty, 
scholars and Students university. 
7. Pondicherry 
University 
Signed 47 MOU's with State/National Institution to carry out the 
academic activities / collaborations to the benefits of the faculty, 
scholars and Students of the country.  
 