= OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
| COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

(DEMAND NO. 49) OF THE
; DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)
4996-97

(PRESENTED ON THE 30th AUGUST, 1996)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 30.8.1996)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT—
NEW DELHI cd
AUGUST, 1996/BHADRA; 1918 (SAKA)



PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FORTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1996-97 (DEMAND NO. 49) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30.8.1996)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30.8.1996)

g

ata aa

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 1996/Bhadra, 1918 (Saka)


CONTENTS

Composrrion OF THE COMMITTEE

PREFACE

ene

Rerorr
(i) Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi.
(ii) National Museum
(iii) Indian Museum, Calcutta
(iv) Salarjung Museum, Hyderabad
(v) National Council of Science Museums, Calcutta
(vi) Scheme for Promotion and Strengthening of Regional and Local Museums
(vii) National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property,
Lucknow
(viii) Anthropological Survey of India
(ix) Libraries
(x) Khuda Baksh Oriental Public Library, Patna
(xi) Thanjavur Maharaja Serfoji’s Sarasvati Mahal Library, Thanjavur
(xii) National Library, Calcutta
(xiii) Raja Rammohan Roy Library
(xiv) Delhi Public Library
(xv) Akademies
(xvi) Centre for Cultural Resource and Training
(xvii) Zonal Cultural Centres
(xviii) Assistance to Dance, Drama and Theatre Ensembles
(xix) Dissemination of Tribal, Folk Art and Culture
(xx) Festivals of India :
(xxi) Scheme for Setting up Multi-purpose Cultural Complexes
(xxii) Memorials and Centenaries
(xxiii) 50th Year of “India’s Independence
(xxiv) Cultural Agreements and Cultural Exchange Programme
(xxv) Indira Gandhi’ National Centre for Arts, New Delhi
(xxvi) National Policy on Culture

4. Miyutes

PAGES
(i)-(ii)
(iii)

Le
hwwwwenn

re

-
an

a
७ ००००००० -३ ५३५३ ५३ ० ० ० ७ ७» ४ (७

|
|
|
i


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

1. Shri $.8. Chavan—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Dr. B.B. Dutta

4. Dr. M. Aram

5. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

6. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
7. Shri Raj Nath Singh

8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

9. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
10. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

11. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

12. Shri R. Margabandu

13. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

14. Dr, Mohan Babu

15. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
17. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

18. Shri Sartaj Singh

19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Shri Jai Prakash

21. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

22. Shrimati Divya Singh

23. Shri Mahant Abedyanath
24.. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

25. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

26. Dr. C. Silvera

27. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
28. Shri Dutta Meghe

29. Shri 1.0. Sanadi

30. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
31. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao
32. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
33. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

34. Shri Pawan Diwan

35. Shri Krishna

36. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
37. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
38. Shri Samik Lahiri

39. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

40. Shri Mukhtar Anees

41. Dr. M. Jagannath

@


(ii)

42. Dr. Bali Ram

43. Shri Ranen Barman

44. Shri Surender Singh

45. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Forty-third Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 49) of the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human
Resource Development for the year 1996-97.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource Development and also heard the
Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the said Demands for Grants in its
meeting held on 10th August, 1996.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 24th August,
1996.

New Deu; $.8. CHAVAN
August 24, 1996 Chairman,
a. Department-related Parliamentary
Bhadra 2, 1918 (Saka) Standing Committee on

Human Resource Development.

(iii)


REPORT

1. The Department of Culture plays a vital role in the promotion and dissemination of
art and culture. The aim of the Department is to develop ways and means for instilling basic
values and perceptions in the minds of people, particularly the young. The Department also
undertakes the programme of preservation, encouragement and dissemination of various
manifestations of creative activity, both past and present. The Department is engaged in
excavation, conservation and promotion of ancient monuments and historic sites; administra-
tion of libraries, museums and institutions of anthropology; collection, preservation and
ethnology of national character; catering to institutions and organisations in the areas of
Buddhist and Tibetan Studies; promoting literary, visual and performing arts; observing
centenaries and anniversaries of important personalities and entering into cultural agree-
ments with foreign countries.

1.1 The Department carries out its various programmes through two attached offices,
six subordinate offices and 26 autonomous organisations. The Department of Culture has
been allocated Rs. 203.23 crores which includes 113.76 crores as Plan component and 89.47
crores as non-Plan component. The allocation of funds during the Eighth Five Year Plan to
Department of Culture was Rs. 460 crores which is only 0.19% of the total Plan outlay. The
Committee strongly feels the necessity of increasing the allocation.

1.2 The Revised Estimates (RE) for 1995-96 for the Department of Culture was Rs.
211.27 crores which has been slashed down to Rs. 203.23 crores in the Budget Estimates of
1996-97. Explaining its justification the Department answered the RE of 1995-96 included a
provision of one time grant of Rs. 10 crores to National Gandhi Museum on the occasion of
the 125th Birth Anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, but the BE for 1996-97 do not include any
such special provision and, hence, the decrease of Rs. 8.04 crores. For the year 1996-97, the
‘Department had asked for an enhanced allocation of Rs. 273.40 crores under Plan
allocation. However, the Planning Commission after assuring an allocation of Rs. 237 crores,
actually approved a Plan outlay of Rs. 113.76 crores only. The Committee is of the view that
the Planning Commission has not taken a realistic view of the conservation of our cultural
heritage, particularly when the nation is going to celebrate its 50th year of Independence.
The Committee recommends allocation of required amount at the RE stage.

1.3 The Committee, in its Tenth and Eighteenth Reports recomended for setting up of
a National Cultural Fund. The Committee was given to understand that a corpus fund with
the Government contribution of Rs. 19.5 crores has been created. On this the Department
clarified that due to resource crunch the amount from Government side was reduced to 19.5
crores from Rs. 100 crores as proposed originally. The fund has, however, not so far been
set up. Clarifying this the Department informed the Committee that the efforts to set up the
fund are maturing. The proposals, as finalised, providing for the setting up of the Fund and
the Scheme to administer it, stand referred to the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Law and
Justice and Planning Commission for concurrence. The Committee strongly recommends that
the Department should vigorously pursue the matter with them for getting it cleared at the
earliest. The Committee desires that the UNESCO should also be approached for additional
funding.


ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA, NEW DELHI

2. The Archaeological Survey of India was set up in 1861. Conservation, preservation
and maintenance of the centrally protected monuments and sites is the prime task of this
organisation. At present, it has 3562 centrally protected monuments, declared to be of
national importance, with more than 5000 structures

2.1 The BE for 1996-97 is Rs. 52.35 crores as against Rs. 50.85 crores in the RE for the
year 1995-96. Commenting on the increase in the budget provision, the Department of
Culture has stated that even this amount falls short of the requirements. It is also a cause for
concern that if sufficient funds are not provided in the Revised Estimate 1996-97, it may be
difficult even to disburse the salary and allowances of the employees besides meeting office
expenses during the current financial year. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
sufficient allocation should be made to the ASI, at RE stage.

2.2 The Committee had earlier recommended to expand the network of ASI and to
increase the staff strength. The Department had formed a Committee with the Joint
Director, SIU, Ministry of Finance to assess actual requirement of the staff through the spot
inspection. But this Committee is yet to visit any circle. The Committee feels that there is
virtually no progress in this respect and there is an urgent need for filling up required
number of vacancies at the earlies:.

2.3 The Committee is concerned to note that Taj Mahal remains closed on Monday and
the entry fee for it after 4 P.M. onwards has been increased to Rs. 100/. Regarding entry
fee for the Taj Mahal, the Secretary stated that at present, the Archaeological Survey of
India has been charging only 50 paise per person. However, with effect from Ist September,
1996, the entry fee for Taj Mahal and some other major monuments will be raised to Rs. 5
per person; in respect of comparatively less important monuments, the entry fee was being
revised to Rs. 2 per person, he added. For the purpose of maintenance, the Taj is also being
closed on Mondays. As regards the levy of Rs. 100 for entering the Taj before 9 A.M. and
after 4.00 P.M., Secretary (Culture) clarified that this had been done by the Agra
Development Authority and that State Government is separately apprising the Supreme
Court as to how this money is being utilised for development of Taj Mahal and Agra. The
Committee, however, desires that the Department should take up the matter with the State
Government of U.P. to reduce the levy of Rs. 100 to a reasonable limit.

NATIONAL MUSEUM

3. The Committee is constrained to observe that during the transit of exhibits for
holding exhibitions abroad and also during the course of the exhibitions there, sufficient
protection to art pieces is not taken care of due to which several exhibits are damaged. In its
reply the Department stated that necessary steps are taken for protecting the art objects in
accordance with the guidelines. The Committee feels that instead of original documents,
replicas may be sent in the exhibitions including those meant to be placed at the festivals
abroad. This would ensure the safety and security of the precious and rare exhibits.
INDIAN MUSEUM, CALCUTTA

4. The Indian Museum, established in 1814, is the oldest and the largest institution of
its kind in the country. It houses unique treasures of Indian and foreign art, representing
centuries of cultural ethos and traditions.

4.1 The Indian Museum, Calcutta was allocated Rs. 2 crores on Plan side and Rs. 1.19
crores on non-Plan side in the BE of 1996-97, which remained same as compared to RE of
1995-96. It may be increased at RE stage.


4.2. The Committee has observed that five organisations namely. Botanical, Zoological,
Geological, Anthropological and Archaeological Survey of India are occuping space in the
Indian Museum, Calcutta. The Department stated that there was no possibility of vacating
the space by these organisations in the near future. The Committee, however, desires that
the matter may be pursued vigorously.

SALARJUNG MUSEUM, HYDERABAD

5. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that some important materials and
jewellaries were missing from the Salarjung Museum. The Committee is of the view that
sufficient security measures are not taken by the Museum and Committee recommends that
enough security measures may be taken immediately.

5.1 The Salarjung Museum has undertaken the construction of two additional wings i.e.
Far Eastern Gallery and European Gallary which were supposed to be completed by 31st
May, 1996 and 15th July, 1996, respectively. The Committee is constrained to note that the
construction work has not yet been completed by the scheduled dates. The National Building
Construction Corporation (NBCC) which is doing the construction job there has sought
extention upto 31st December, 1996. The Committee hopes that the construction would be
completed at least by the revised date.

NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENCE MUSEUMS, CALCUTTA

6. The Committee in its 18th Report had recommended for taking necessary steps to
involve ‘Nagarpalikas and Panchayats’ in the NCSM’s new programme for setting up small
size low capital intensive school science centres in underpriviledged schools in rural areas.
The Department has stated that the Nagarapalikas and Panchayats would henceforth be
involved in these activities. The Committee, however, feels that there is no progress in this
regard and concrete steps are required to be taken immediately.

SCHEME FOR PROMOTION AND STRENGTHENING OF REGIONAL AND LOCAL
MUSEUMS

7. The aim of this scheme is to enable establishment of Regional Museums in the
country. The Budgetary provision made during the last year was Rs. 1 crore which remained
the same in the BE for 1996-97. The Committee in its 18th report had recommended that
steps be taken to involve Panchayats and Nagarpalikas in this scheme. The Department
stated in its reply that at the district level, Panchayats and Nagarpalikus are proposed to be
included. The Committee feels that no concrete steps have so far been taken. Hence the
Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that necessary steps should be taken to
involve the Panchayats and Nagarpalikas in it.

NATIONAL RESEARCH LABORATORY FOR CONSERVATION OF CULTURAI
PROPERTY, LUCKNOW

8. This institute is a subordinate office of the Department of Culture established in 1976
engaged in the conservation of cultural property including monuments and development of
conservation techniques through short-term and long-term research projects. The budgetary
provision for the institution for the year 1996-97 on the Plan side is Rs. 1.10 crores and on
the non-Plan side Rs. 0.55 crores which may be further increased at RE stage.

8.1 The Committee was given to understand that the historical monuments of great
national importance in Lucknow like Imambara, Mosques and other Maqbaras in the -
adjoining areas are in a depleting stage in the absence of proper care and upkeep. Many of
these monuments have their great historical past which needs to be preserved. The
Committee was given to understand that the President of Iran, during his visit to Lucknow,
last year had announed a grant of Rs. 1 crore exclusively for the upkeep and maintenance of
these historical monuments and to preserve the cultural heritage of this great city of


4

Lucknow. Unfortunately, this money has not reached the place yet, with the result that
these monuments are further decaying. The Committee desires that the position with regard
to this external aid may be checked up and the Ministry of Finance be approached for
making budgetary provisions for this purpose at the RE stage. The Government has no right
to withhold any such grant received from an external agency meant for the preservation and
maintenance of historical monuments of great national importance. The amount should be
utilised for the purpose for which it has been given to the Government of India by the
Iranian Government.

8.2 The Committee was also given to understand that an amount of Rs. 11 to Rs. 12
crores was received by Hussainabad Trust for the maintenance, upkeep and preservation of
very good and rare pieces of architecture in this area. There are a number of monuments of
historical importance but they have not so far been declared as monuments of national
importance. These pieces .f rare art and architecture need to be protected and preserved
with the Government's intervention. The residency is also reported to be in very bad shape.
This residency was the centre of attraction during the freedom struggle. Earlier there used to
be a light and sound show which has since been closed. The Committee being distressed to
hear the sad state of affairs, strongly recommends that every effort should be made to
preserve the cultural heritage of these monuments and the grant of Rs. one crore received
from the President of Iran should be utilised for this purpose without any delay.

ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA

9. The allocation in the RE for 1995-96 on its Plan side was Rs. 1.60 crores, which has
been reduced to Rs. 0.98 crores in 1996-97 BE. Commenting on this reduction, the
Department stated that total allocation for the Eighth Five Year Plan for Anthropological
Survey of India was Rs. 6.00 crores out of which Rs. 5.02 crores were already allocated
during the previous 4 years of the Eighth Five Year Plan. Hence it was restricted to Rs. 0.98
crores only for 1996-97. The Committee feels that the amount allocated for this year is too
limited and it would certainly hamper the progress of the working of Anthropological Survey
of India. The Committee feels that there is a need for rational allocations to be made each
year. Anthropoligcal Survey of India has undertaken a project called “People of India”
under which 43 volumes are expected to be brought out. However, only 8 National volumes
and 14 States volumes have been brought out so far. The Committee recommends that the
remaining volumes also should be completed at the earliest. The reduction in the allocation
is also likely to hamper the progress of this project. The Committee, therefore, desires that
the required funds may be restored at the RE stage.

LIBRARIES

10. Outlay for Libraries was Rs. 17.16 crores in the RE for 1995-96, Where as BE of
1996-97 is only Rs. 14.29 crores. The Department stated that the RE for the year 1995-96
included the amount of Rs. 3 crores for the “School-cum-Village Libraries”. The scheme was
not approved by the Finance Ministry. Hence there was no allocation for this scheme
resulting in reduced allocation in 1996-97, the Department added. The Scheme was not
approved by the Ministry of Finance during 1995-96. The matter was referred to the
Planning Commission for evaluation of the existing schemes on Library Services with special
reference to the utility of the scheme of School-cum-Village Libraries. The evaluation is
being processed by the Planning Commission, and the matter is being actively persued, the
Department added. The Committee desires that an early decision is required to be taken in
the matter.

10.1 The Committee in its 18th Report recommended to spread the network of libraries


5

with computer facilities particularly in small towns. The Department stated that Raja Ram-
Mohan Roy Library Foundation had organised a conference of State Library Planning
Convenors in August, 1995 which recommended the networking of Libraries to the District
level Report of the working group on Libraries and Informatics which recommended that all
Libraries should be linked through networks and that the INFLIBNET should be made fully
operational, is under consideration, the Department added. The Committee recommends that a
final view should be taken in the matter at the earliest.

KHUDA BAKSH ORIENTAL PUBLIC LIBRARY, PATNA

10.2 Khuda Baksh Oriental Public Library, Patna is an institution of national importance
which maintains more than 18,000 manuscripts, 95,000 old and rare printed books and over 200
original paintings of Mughal, Rajput, Iranian and Turkish Schools. This Library has instituted a
Khuda Baksh Award to recognise the original creative work done in related fields. The
Committee has been given to understand that the condition of this library is in a bad shape The
preservation and upkeep of manuscripts in it is not properly done. The Committee recommends
that a thorough study be made on the functioning of this library and proper upkeep and
preservation of manuscripts be ensured.

THANJAVUR MAHARAJA SERFOJI’S SARASVATI MAHAL LIBRARY THANJAVUR

10.3 The Thanjavur Maharaja Serfoji’s Sarasvati Mahal Library, is one of the few medieval
libraries that exist in the world, It symbolises a priceless repository of culture and time defying
treasure house of knowledge, built up by the successive dynasties of Nayaks and Marathas of
Thanjavur. The library embodies rich and rare collection of manuscripts on all the features of
art, culture and literature. The Committee has noted the fact that valuable palm leaf
manuscripts containing important information about Siddha medicines are available here. The
Committee recommends that the Department of Culture may take necessary steps to publish
the material in a suitable manner.

NATIONAL LIBRARY, CALCUTTA

11. The Committee is of the view that much attention is not being given on the preservation
work of the Library. The Committee is constrained to note that the Library is starved of funds.
There is also scarcity of staff. The Secretary accepted that inadequate staff, due to 10%
compulsory cut in recruitment, has adversely affected not only the governance but also the
preservation of documents in the Library. The Committee was informed that the recuitment
rules for filling up various posts. in the National Library has since been finalised based on
chottopadhyay Committee’s recommendation and the vacant posts would be filled up shortly.
The Committee is deeply anguished to observe that a Microfilming Equipment bought in
1993-94 has not yet been used due to paucity of staff. The Committee feels that the staff
problem brooks no delay and should be solved immediately, Required funds may be released at

RE stage.
RAJA RAMMOHAN ROY LIBRARY

12. The Committee had earlier recommended for appointment of an Enquiry Committee to
look into the purchasing methodology of this library. The Department informed that the
Enquiry Committee had submitted its report. However, the present methodology of purchase of
books has not been adversely commented upon by this enquiry Committee, the Department
added. The Committee, however, desires that a regular monitoring should be kept on the
activities of this Library.

12.1 The Enquiry Committee has also recommended to spread the Library Movement to
Village Level. The Committee is of the view that this should be expedited immediately.


DELHI PUBLIC LIBRARY

13. The Committee had earlier recommended to spread the network of the Delhi Public
Library in the slum and under-developed areas. The Department stated that the DPL has
not taken up the construction of Library building in Raja Garden, Janak Puri, R.K. Puram,
Patparganj and Ashok Vihar due to non-availability of funds. The M.C.D. and N.D.M.C
had been approached by the authorities of the DPL since 1992 for allotment of suitable
accommodation for setting up libraries in slum and under-developed areas. The Committee
is, however, constrained to note that though the matter has been vigorously pursued by the
then Director and the administration of the DPL, no success has been achieved in this
direction so far. The present authorities of DPL will be meeting the Chief Minister of Delhi
shortly, to discuss the proposals and prospects of DPL, the Department added. The
Committee feels that there is an urgent need to spread the library facilities in the slum and
under developed areas of Delhi. The required funds and accommodation should be made

available at the earliest.

AKADEMIES

14. The Sahitya Akademi, Lalit kala Akademi and Sangeet Natak Akademi have been
allocated in the plan side Rs. 2.75 crores. Rs. 1.70 crores and Rs. 3.10 crores respectively,
Only in case of Sahitya Akademi Rs. 0.25 crores have been increased in the BE of 1996-97
as compared to RE of 1995-96. The Committee feels that this meagre amount is inadequate
for the Akademies. Hence the Committee is of the view that adequate funds may be
allocated. at RE stage.

14.1 The Committee expresses its concern over the misuse of funds and autonomy in the
Lalit Kala Akademi. They have also not implemented the recommendations made by the
Haksar Committee. However, in view of the serious nature of the alleged irregularities in
this Akademi, it has been decided to institute two enquiries into the recent happenings at
Lalit Kala Akademi; one of the equiries will be conducted by Chief Accounts Officer of the
Department and the other from the Vigilance angle by a Director of the Department, the
Secretary added. The Committee recommends that the enquiries may be completed at the
earliest and necessary action taken thereon.

CENTRE FOR CULTURAL RESOURCE AND TRAINING (CCRT)

15. The allocation made on the plan side for 1996-97 is Rs. 3.10 crores and on non-plan
side Rs. 0.84 crores. The Committee in its 18th Report had recommended for opening of
new CCRTs. The Department stated that due to inadequate resources, opening new CCRTs
will be a difficult proposition. The Committee desires that adequate allocations be made for
this purpose. The Department should chalk out a plan for expansion and seek for additional

funds.
ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES (ZCC)

15.1° The main purpose is to emphasise the Cultural Linkages that extend beyond
territorial and linguistic boundaries. These centres reflect not only the forms and styles of
different States by which they stand but also represent jointly the composite culture of the
country. The Budget allocation for it is Rs. 2.10 crores which was at the same level last year
also. This scheme is in need of funds and the required funds may be given at RE stage. The
Committee was informed by the Department that a Review Committee had been set up
under that Chairmanship of Dr. U.R. Ananthamurthy to review the functioning of the Zonal
Cultural Centres (ZCC) and its report was submitted in January, 1996. The report has been


7

sent to Centres, Secretaries of the Academies and the State Governments falling under the
jurisdiction of respective Zonal Cultural Centres. The comments from many agencies are still
awaited, the Department added. The Committee desires that the Dej.rtment should pursue
the matter vigorously with all agencies for sending their comments at the earliest as all is not
well in the functioning of Zonal Cultural Centres. After the comments are received, the
Department should take action without much loss of time.

ASSISTANCE TO DANCE, DRAMA AND THEATRE ENSEMBLES

15.2 Under this scheme assistance in the form of salary grant, production grant is given to
well established voluntary cultural organisations for promoting the cultural heritage of the
country. The allocation for 1996-97 on the Plan side is Rs. 2.00 crores and non-plan side is
Rs. 0.40 crores. The scheme is suffering from the under-utilisation of funds. During 1993-94
and 1994-95 the funds could not be utilised fully. The Committee strongly recommends that
full utilisation of the funds should be ensured. Lucknow is a large treasure house of art and
culture; particularly Puppet Dances (Kathputli Dance) Marathi Natya Sangeet in
Maharashtra is culturally a rich art form. However, all such art forms are not getting any
kind of encouragement. They need immediate attention for revival.

DISEMINATION OF TRIBAL, FOLK ART AND CULTURE

15.3 The Scheme provides for financial assistance to voluntary cultural organisations,
institutions and individuals both tribal and non-tribal for undertaking small projects of about
a year’s duration on preservation, development and dissemination, of tribal/folk arts and
culture. The Committee feels that special attention needs to be paid for the dissemination of
Tribal Folk Art and Cultural especially in the tribal areas of Orissa. Madhya Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh and other places. There is a provision for constructing a Centre for
promotion of tribal folk arts and Culture in Hyderabad. But there is no significant
concentration of tribal people in and around Hyderabad. Tribals are located in
Vizianagaram, Srikakulam and Koraput. The Committee, therefore feels that a Tribal
Centre should be appropriately set up in those areas where there is concentration of tribal
population. One finds different kinds of cultural patterns among the tribals of Andhra
Pradesh and Orissa. Steps should be taken to preserve and encourage their culture and they
should be integrated with the rest of the population and the dominant culture.

FESTIVAL OF INDIA

>

15.4 The Government of India has organised festivals of India in United Kingdom, USA,
France, CIS (Former USSR), Sweden, Germany, China and Thailand. These festivals have
been quite successful in carrying the message of the country across the seas and have served
as vehicles for disseminating Indian Culture abroad. The allocation for 1996-97 is Rs. 2.20
crores which is at the same level as that of the last year. The Committee feels that proper
utilisation of money needs to be ensured. The Committee also desires that allocation may be
suitably increased. It has come to the notice of the Committee that various exhibits of
bronze and silver are taken abroad in their original forms for Festivals of India. It has also
come to notice of the Committee that the idols of ancient temples are also carried for the
exhibition purpose in the Festivals stating that those idols are not worshipped in the temples
and, therefore have no sacred value. The Committee, however feels that, even though they
do not have sacred value, but they have the archive value and they should not be allowed to
-be carried abroad in original.


SCHEME FOR SETTING UP MUL¥I-PURPOSE CULTURE COMPLEXES

15.5 The objective of the scheme is to provide financial assistance to autonomous bodies set
up by the State Governments for establishment of cultural complexes for improving the
quality of life among youth and students and making them sensitive to what is aesthetically
and morally good in our society. These are also expected to expose the youth to the finest
forms of creative expression and to foster coordinated activities in the States in different
cultural fields, such as music, drama, dance, literature, fine arts, etc. The Budgetary allocation
for the year 1996-97 has been reduced to Rs. 1.50 crores as compared to Rs. 2.00 crores last
year. the Committee desires that the scheme needs to be restored the required funds. The
Committee feels that there should be one Multi-Purpose Centre at each block level under the
roof of which all the activities of human resource development such as cultural, sports,
education, health could be converged. The Committee recommends that a proposal may be
worked out in this direction in tendem with all other Departments of the Ministry.

MEMORIALS AND CENTENARIES

16. The Committee has been given to understand that the former Prime Minister had
announced a grant of Rs. 6.25 crores for Netaji Research Bureau which is situated in the
ancestral house of Netaji. The present Prime Minister also visited Netaji Bhavan and
reiterated that the grant will be given to the Bureau for development and to keep the
archieves in perfect condition. It was a grant of Rs. 12 crores, half of which was to be released
immediately. This is also going to be the Centenary Year of Netaji. The Committee, however,
is constrained to note that nothing has been done so far by the Department in this regard. The
Museum has not received any grant so far. The Committee was astonished to note that the
Secretary, Department of Culture was not aware of the announcements made by the former
and the present Prime Minister of India in this regard. The Committee strongly recommends
that the matter may be taken up with the Ministry of Finance and Prime Minister’s Office
immediately for an early release of the grant without any more delay.

16.1 The Government of India has decided to celebrate birth centenaries of Shri V.K.
Krishna Menon, Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose, Shri Morarji Desai, centenary of Enlighten-
ment of Bhagwan Ramana Maharishi and comemoration of 50 years of India’s Independence.
The Committee observes that the centenaries of National Leaders like Rana Pratap, Mirza
Ghalib Acharya Vinoba Bhave and Surya Kant Nirala and 500 years of Tulsi Das may also be
included in the list.

50TH YEAR OF INDIA’S INDEPENDENCE

16.2 The Committee is glad to note that the Nation will be celebrating its 50th Year of
Independence soon. The Committee has been informed that the Government has decided to
celebrate the occasion in a befitting manner from 15th August, 1997 to 15th August, 1998. The
Department of Culture has been designated as the nodal agency for it. It was also decided to
constitute a National Committee under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister, an
Implementation Committee under the Chairmanship of the Minister of Human Resource
Development and a Cabinet Committee under the Chairmanship of the Home Minister, the
Department added. The Committee desires that this historic occasion should be celebrated in
a befitting manner. It is indeed a pride occasion for the country. The occasion should also be
taken as an opportunity for the cultural renaissance. Our rich cultural heritage, moral values
and ethos should be reflected in the celebrations. The Department should gear itself up and
rise to the occasion to celebrate this great national event in a grand and befitting manner.


CULTURAL AGREEMENTS AND CULTUKAL EXCHANGE PROGRAMME

17. The allocation made for the scheme during 1996-97 is Rs. 0.365 crores. The
Committee has noted that at present the Government of India has cultural agreements with
98 countries, out of which specific biennial / triennial cultural exchange programme have
been entered into with 70 countries. The Committee feels that allocation is not sufficient and
needs to be suitably increased.

INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR ARTS, NEW DELHI

18. The centre was set up in 1987. A sum of Rs. 25 crores was released to the centre as
the initial corpus fund with the stipulation that the centre would run on the interest accruing
from the investment. During the Eighth Plan an additional corpus fund of Rs. 25 crores was
approved. The allocation for 1996-97 is the same, both on Plan side and Non-Plan side, as
that of 1994-95 i.e. Rs. 20 crores on Plan side and Rs. 2 lakhs on Non-Plan side. The
Committee is of the view that the centre is being allotted substantial budgetary allocations
and its activities must commensurate with the sanctioned funds.

NATIONAL POLICY ON CULTURE

19. The Committee had earlier considered the Approach Paper on the National Policy
on Culture and after a detailed and indepth study of the varied aspects of Indian cultural
scene in its 12th Report, recommended early drafting of the final document on National
Policy on Culture.

19.1 The Committee is not happy with the inordinate delay in drafting the National
Policy on Culture. The Secretary informed that the draft of National Cultural Policy was
now ready and was being processed for obtaining approval of the Cabinet. Drafting the
document had not been an easy task, given the complexity of the issues involved, he added.
The Committee is not happy with the reply and recommends early finalisation of the
National Policy on Culture.

19.2 The Secretary (Culture) also informed that the Department of Culture proposed to
create five organised services i.e. :

(a) Indian Archaeological Service;

(b) Indian Archival Service;

(०) Indian Museums. and Arts Service;
(d) Indian Anthropological Service; and
(e) Indian Library Service.

With the constitution of these services, the gap in the demand and supply of trained
professionals in the aforementioned field will be automatically filled up and the prestigious
cultural organisations of the country will have culture managers of highest calibre.
Visualising the necessity of such professionally specialised services, the Committee recom-
mends for finalisation of the proposal.

19.3 The Committee also observes that in the face of cultural invasion by the West,
through electronic media, India has to bring its voice through its great cultural heritage.
Gandhian Philosophy with its voice for non-violence and peace now stands symbiotically


10

| the voice of UNESCO which focusses its attention on “From Culture of War to Culture
of Peace’. In this respect not only is there a need for Preservation of culture but also a need
for ‘Cultural Renaissance’. In this 50th year of Independence, culture should be the centre
of gravity for India’s progress.


MINUTES



II
“SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 10th August, 1996 in Committee

Room ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS
1, Shri 5.8. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
. Dr. M. Aram
. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik
. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
11. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
12. Shri Jai Prakash
13. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
14. Chaudhary Paragi Lal
15, Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
"16. Shri 1. 0. Sanadi
17. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
18. Shri Samik Lahiri
19, Shri S.K. Karvendhan
20. Shri Mukhtar Anees
21. Dr. M. Jagannath
22. Dr. Bali Ram

23. Shri Ranen Barman

CS ० -३ ७ ७ ew

24. Shri Surender Singh

*Minutes of the Ist mecting relate to matters not included in this report.

13


14

WITNESSES
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Culture

1. Shri B.P. Singh, Secretary

2. Shri Ashok Vajpeyi, Joint Secretary
3. Shri S. Satymurthy, Financial Advisor
4. Mrs. Humera Ahmed, Director

5. Shri Satendra Kaul, Director, ASI

6. Shri Rajiv Yadav, Director

7. Shri Ravi Kant Chopra, Director

8. Mrs. Kalpna Das Gupta, Director

9. Dr. S.S. Biswas, Director-General, National Museum
10. Dr. B.M. Pandey, Director, ASI

11. Shri S. Sarkar, Director, NAI

12. Shri A.C. Grover, Director, ASI

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J. G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary and other officials of the
Department of Culture in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants for the

year 1996-97
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on the 17th
August, : 1996.


Vv
“FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 24th August, 1996 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.8. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
. Dr. B.B. Dutta.

Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri M.P. Abdussamiad Samadani

LOK SABHA

9. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya

12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

13. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

14. Dr. M. Jagannath 2
15. Dr. Bali Ram 7

SECRETARIAT
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Demands for Grants for 1996-97
of the Departments of Health (Demand No. 39), Culture (Demand No. 49), Family Welfare
(Demand No. 41) and Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (Demand No. 40).
The Committee, after some discussions, adopted the same with some modifications.

9० :3 9 ७ + ० ७

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati
Ray and Dr. M. Aram to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Mahadeepak Singh
Shakya and in his absence Shri S.K. Karvendhan to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha. The
Committee decided that the Reports may be laid/presented on 29.8.96 or on a subsequent
day subject to availability of Hindi version.

4. * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 p.m.

“Minutes of HIrd & IVth meetings relate to matters not included in this Report.
“**Relate to matters not included in this Report.

15