109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED NINTH REPORT
 
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE 72ND  REPORT ON ADULT EDUCATION
THE DEPARTMENT OF ELEMENTARY EDUCATION AND LITERACY
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  31ST JULY, 2001)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON  31ST JULY , 2001)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JULY, 2001/SRAVANA, 1923 (SAKA)
 
C O N T E N T S
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                    
2.         PREFACE                                                                                                             
3.                  REPORT                                                                                                                        
CHAPTER  I   Recommendations/Observations which  have been
                        accepted by the Government--------------------------                  
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
                        does not desire to pursue in view of the
                        Government’s replies --------------------------------                             
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
                        replies of the Government have not been accepted
                        by the Committee-----------------------------------                              
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
                        replies of the Government have not been received---------                      
4.         MINUTES                                                                                                         
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2001-2002)
 
1.         Shri S.B. Chavan                      ¾¾                Chairman

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
 
MEMBERS
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.                  Shri Maurice Kujur
3.                  Shri Akhilesh Das
4.                  Shri Eduardo Faleiro
5.                  Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”
6.                  Shri Dina Nath Mistra
7.                  Prof. R. B. S. Varma
8.                  Shri Bratin Sengupta
9.                  Shrimati Kamala Sinha
10.              Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”
11.              Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
12.              Shri Mrinal Sen
13.              Dr. C. Narayana  Reddy
 
LOK SABHA
 
14.              Shrimati Jaskaur Meena
15.              Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
16.              Shri Ramakant Angle
17.              Shri Kirti Jha Azad
18.              Shri Baliram Kashyap
19.              Shri Ramanand Singh
20.              Shri Dileep Sanghani
21.              Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
22.              Shri G. S. Baswaraj
23.              Shri V. M. Sudheeran
24.              Shrimati Shyama Singh
25.              Shri Sunil Dutt
26.              Shri Ramesh Chennithala
27.              Shri Kantilal Bhuriya
28.              Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
29.              Shri Samik Lahiri
30.              Dr. D.V.G. Shankar Rao
31.              Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
32.              Shrimati Renu Kumari
33.              Shri Shivaji Mane
34.              Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
35.              Dr. Baliram
36.              Dr.  A.D.K. Jayaseelan
37.              Dr. V. Saroja
38.              Shri Trilochan Kanungo
39.              Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
40.              Shri Vanlal Zawma
41.              Shrimati Kumudini Patnaik
42.              Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao
43.              Dr. S. Venugopal
 
SECRETARIAT
 

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer
Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer
 
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this
Hundred and Ninth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the 72
nd  Report on
Adult Education of  Department of Elementary Education and Literacy,  Ministry of Human Resource Development.
2.         The Seventy-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th December, 1998.  Replies of the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Elementary Education
and Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource Development were considered by the Committee.  Clarifications were also
sought by the Committee from the representatives of the Department.  .
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 8th June, 2001.
NEW
DELHI;
June 8,
2001
S.B. CHAVAN
Chairman,Asadha 18-, 1923 (Saka)                                                              Department-related
Parliamentary                                                                                                                     Standing Committee
on                                                                                                        Human Resource Development
 
     
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in its Seventy-second Report on the Adult Education which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok
Sabha on 8
th December,1998. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report.  They have been categorized as follows:-
(i)                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: Para  15, 16 and 18.2
(Chapter-I)
(ii)                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies: para-10,11, 12.1, 13.2, 17.2, 19  and 21.2 (Chapter-II)
(iii)               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee : Para-8.1, 8.2, 9.1, 9.2,14,17.1, 20.1 and  20.2 (Chapter-III)
(iv)              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government have not been
received- Para –Nil, (Chapter-IV)
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
15.       Keeping in view the social background of women, there should be exclusive centres being run by women

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
volunteers (Preraks) and during the timings convenient to women at large.
Action Taken
            The Adult Education centres are chosen mutually by the volunteers and the learners identified in a particular
area.  Care is taken to keep the centre as close to the habitation as possible.  Wherever possible/feasible, women
volunteers are appointed to run the centres for women exclusively.
Recommendation
16.       The Committee feels that the village education committee/local community should be involved in the selection
of volunteers for running of Adult Education Centres in order to ensure the acceptability of Preraks in the community.
Local students from higher classes may also be involved in this task
Action Taken
            The selection of volunteers is done with the active involvement of the Village Education Committee/local
community.  The interested local unemployed youth and students  are also involved in this task
Recommendation
18.2
          The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should plan its media campaign keeping in view the
region-specific demands of areas where Adult Education Programme is yet to take its roots.  Advertisements/Posters in
the language of the area and according to the specific social background would result in higher participation in this
programme.
Action Taken
            With regard to the recommendation of the Committee for making media campaign region-specific and release
advertisements/posters in the language of the area and specific to social background, so as to attract higher participation,
it is submitted that the suggestion has already been included in the Media Policy prepared for the 9
th  Five Year Plan.
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation
10.  The Committee finds that districts identified are those which had taken up the campaign programme  without
adequate preparation, the project had dragged behind for two to three years and are stagnating  after an initially
successful total literacy phase.  However, mere identification of districts and allocation of funds would not achieve the
desired results.  Concerted efforts by the Central Government are required so that the State Governments are impressed
upon to take corrective measures. 
Action Taken
As regards restoration of the campaigns stagnating for various unavoidable reasons, it may be stated that the
component of operation restoration had been approved by the Cabinet under the Scheme of Special Projects for
Eradication of Illiteracy. 
The Districts to be taken under operation restoration are not merely identified but a concerted effort is made to
revamp and revitalize these stagnating campaigns by sending special teams to such districts.   The concerned Zilla 
Saksharata Samities  have also been advised to prepare action plans with specific strategies so that the campaigns could
be implemented more effectively.  Based on the reports of the Consultants , the revised action plans are examined
closely by the National Literacy Mission Authority and wherever necessary additional funds are sanctioned for such
campaigns. 
Further Comments
On a query as to which are the districts where special teams have been sent and the outcome/feedback state-wise,
the Department stated that National Literacy Mission (NLM)  set up a Sub-Committee in 1996 to coordinate the literacy
activities of 25 districts identified in six States where Operation Restoration of TLCs had been initiated.  Special teams

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
of consultants were sent to all 25 districts and the teams submitted their reports indicating the reasons for slow progress
of the Campaign, present status, weaknesses and strengths prevailing for taking up Operation Restoration etc.  On the
basis of the assessment of the ground realities, special action plans were formulated to revamp and revitalise the
campaigns.  Owing to the concerted efforts of the National Literacy Mission, the literacy campaigns in a majority of the
identified districts have been revived.  Out of the 25 districts identified for Operation Restoration, 16 districts have
completed Total Literacy Campaigns and entered Post Literacy, while 2 districts after having completed Post Literacy
have entered the Continuing Education phase.
Recommendation
11.       The Committee also recommends that steps should be taken for introducing some vocational courses based on
local  needs which have become source of income for the participants.
Action Taken
            During the second phase of the campaign approach, i.e. the post literacy phase, various vocational courses under
the skill development programme are introduced by Zilla Saksharata Samities for which adequate grant are released by
the National Literacy Mission. 
Further Comments
The Department has further replied that  Zila Saksharatas Samities (ZSSs) have been advised to form women
groups and other self-help groups/cooperatives whereby women beneficiaries are taught appropriate techniques relating
to market economy so that they can sell their products for their economic betterment.
            In reply to a query whether any feedback regarding forming of such groups has been received from the states,
the Department has informed that Women’s groups and other Self-help Groups have been formed in almost all the
districts where Continuing Education programme has been launched and many post literacy districts.  For example,
information regarding formation of Self-help Groups has been received from Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Karnataka and Kerala.  In Dumka district of Bihar this was taken up quite some time back and called ‘Didi Bank’.
Recommendation
12.1 The Committee is of the view that successful implementation of Adult Education Programme would also indirectly
result in a positive impact on various Government Run Family Welfare Programmes. 
Action Taken
            As per the reports received from various districts , it has been established  that women constitute more than
2/3
rd  of the total beneficiaries under Adult Education Schemes. The skills such as rural art/vocations are organized  for
women beneficiaries at Adult Education Centres.  Under the Scheme of Literacy Campaigns , Zilla Saksharata Samities
have been advised to form woman groups and other self-help groups/cooperatives whereby women beneficiaries are
taught appropriate technique relating to market economy so that they can sell their products for their economic
betterment.  
Recommendation
13.2     The Committee is of the firm view that Adult Education Programme should strictly adhere to the age-group of
15-35 years . 
Action Taken
            With regard to the clientele under the Scheme of Literacy Campaigns, it may be stated that the NLM’s target
age-group is 15-35 years.  However, children from 9-14 age-group are covered only when the Scheme of Non-Formal
Education is either not in operation or its coverage is  inadequate.  This is done to avoid any future accretion to the
NLMs target of 15-35 years age-group. 
Recommendation
17.2  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should impress upon the State Governments to take
steps to involve the VAs having a good track-record in reaching out to illiterate population in tribal areas.
Action Taken

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
In this regard the Voluntary Agencies are funded for literacy projects in areas where the Total Literacy
Programme has not been sanctioned to the District for implementation through Zilla Saksharta Samities.  During the
Monthly Monitoring Meetings as and when the issue regarding covering the whole State for literacy Programmes is
taken up, the State Government can decide as to whether to take up to projects on Total Literacy or to promote
Voluntary Agencies.
Recommendation
19.       The Committee feels that libraries are a must for neo-literates if their interest in education is to be sustained. 
The Committee finds that libraries have played a very important role in spreading literacy in Kerala. Similar efforts are
required in other parts of the country.  Community libraries can be made use of in generating interest in reading among
the neo-literates.
Action Taken
The importance of providing facilities of libraries and Reading Rooms for generating interest in reading among
the neo-literates has been recognised and  adequate financial provision has been made in the non-recurring and recurring
grants for Continuing Education centres under the Continuing Education (CE) programme.
Recommendation
21.2     While appreciating the monitoring mechanism for Adult Education, the Committee feels that involvement of
local MPs/MLAs in this task will prove to be more effective
Action Taken
The literacy  campaigns launched by the National Literacy Mission are being implemented in more than 450
districts around the country.  These campaigns have  become a people’s movement and people from all walks of life are
actively involved in various activities like mobilising learners, volunteers, environment building, training, material
preparation, monitoring, evaluation and so on.
In many campaign districts the local MPs, MLAs and other political leaders are taking keen interest in the
programme and they are closely associated with the various activities under this programme.  As members of State
Literacy Mission Authorities and Zilla Saksharta Samities (ZSS) , the local MPs and MLAs keep a vigil on the
implementation of various schemes.
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation
8.1  The Committee apprehends that until some radical measures are taken the target date may again have to be
extended.  There is a strong need of working out a mechanism of enrolment of adults, their retention and their
continuing education.  It must  be ensured that any adult enrolled is helped to reach the final stage of permanent
functional literacy.  Therefore, tracer study approach will have to be adopted.
Action Taken
National Literacy Mission has the objective of making 100 million persons literate in a time bound manner. 
Against this objective, the literacy campaigns, which is the principal strategy of the National Literacy Mission for
eradication of illiteracy, have been launched in 450 districts of the country.  As per the latest reports, approximately 130
million learners have been identified through survey, of which approximately 95 million persons were enrolled.  Out of
these, 73 million persons have so far been made literate under various schemes of the NLM.
The target of the National Literacy Mission which was set at 80 million persons to be covered in 345 districts by
1995 was revised to making 100 million persons functionally literate by the end of the 8
th   Five Year Plan i.e. the year
1996-97.  Keeping in view the progress made by the NLM, this target was reset in the year 1996 extending the date to
the year 1998-99.  Presently, the target stands reset to make 100 million persons literate in a time bound manner without
fixing any time schedule.

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
     Against the objective of 100 million, NLM has been able to achieve 73% of the target which could be termed as quite
satisfactory.  In addition, the learners attending literacy centres, are still in the pipe line and this figure is certainly going
to cross the 100 million mark very shortly.
To revitalise and revamp the literacy campaigns in different districts, special strategies have been evolved by the
NLM which include involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions with literacy campaigns, more effective and result-
oriented monitoring, transparent evaluation systems, non-cash incentives to volunteers to enhance their level of
participation and linkages of literacy with other development programmes as well as programmes for the economic
well-being  of  the learners. 
Further Comments
On a specific query about  the  reasons for revising the target of the National Literacy Mission again and again,
the Department simply informed that the goal has now been redefined so as to attain full literacy i.e., a sustainable
thresh-hold level of 75 per cent literacy by 2005.   The progress made against the latest target was that upto March 2000,
number of districts covered under Total Literacy Campaigns was 559.  The number of persons made literate under
different programmes upto March 2000 was 84.0 million.
 The Department further clarified that  the figures regarding number of persons made literate were based on data
collected from monitoring reports of the literacy projects.  In order to obtain real picture on the ground as far as the
Nation as a whole and for individual states is concerned, the Department commissioned NSSO to carry out the required
exercise and bring out a consolidated picture of literacy as from the time of the last decennial census in 1991.
         The data now released at the end of the 53
rd round of survey indicates literacy rates in  the 7 + age group between
1991 and 1997 as well as that projected for 1998 as  shown below:
                 Year                     Literacy Percentage
1991                                                    52
1997                             62
1998
                                                    64
               Secondly, the urban-rural differential in literacy rates has shown a marked decline to 24% in 1997 as against 
28.4% in 1991.   Thirdly, and vitally important, the rise in female literacy between 1991 and 1997 has been 11%
whereas the male literacy rate for the same period has risen by 9%.  In the previous decade too, the female rate of
literacy had grown faster than the male rate (9.6% as against 7.8%).         
Comments  of the Committee
The Committee expresses its serious concern over setting an unrealistic target at the time of launching  of
National Literacy Mission in 1988.  The target data had to be extended from 1995 to 1996-97, from 1996-97 to 1998-
99.  As per the Action Taken Note submitted by the Department in August, 1999, target was reset to make 100 million
people literate in a time bound manner without fixing any time schedule.   However, the Committee finds that the goal
has been yet again redefined  so as to attain full literacy , i.e. a sustainable thresh hold level of 75%  literacy by 2005,  as
indicated in the reply given by the Department to the Questionnaire on ATN in September, 2000.   The Committee is
constrained to observe that the initial target of NLM, i.e. 80 million people by 1995 could be achieved only by March,
2000 (84 million).    Not only this, out of total 588 districts in the country,  Total Literacy Campaigns are yet to be 
launched in 32 districts.   The Committee notes that 53
rd round of NSSO survey commissioned by the Department was
meant to bring out a consolidated picture of literacy i.e. of +7 age group as from the time of the last decennial census in
1991.   The Committee fails to understand  as to how this survey can bring out the achievements under NLM which
covers non-literate persons in the age-group of 15 to 35 years. 
Recommendation
8.2       Against the total allocation of Rs.1400 crores for adult education during the 8
th   Plan, actual expenditure was
only Rs.718.14 crores.  Similarly, for 1997-98 although there was an allocation of Rs.129.81 crores , expenditure was
only Rs.84,48 crores.  The Committee expresses its deep concern over underutilsation of funds. It is true that in some of
the educationally backward states like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, campaigns have lagged
behind leading to underutilisation of funds.  The Committee strongly feels that merely requesting such State

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
Governments to draw a time bound action plan for bringing uncovered districts under Total /Post Literacy Campaigns
will not serve the purpose.  What is required is a result oriented coordination between the Centre and the States.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should impress upon the States for effective implementation of
Adult Education Programme. The role of bureaucracy should recede and involvement of people should increase the
ownership level of the programme.  Strategy for this will have to be worked out.
Action Taken
In the report, it has been stated that against a total allocation of Rs.1400 crores,  only Rs.718.14 crores was
utilized.   Similarly for the year 1997-98 against an allocation of Rs.129.81 crores only Rs.84.48 crores was utilised.  It
may be submitted that apart from slow progress of the campaigns particularly in the Hindi speaking areas, the campaign
approach has reached a saturation  point where more release and /or utilization of funds may not help in the successful
implementation of the campaigns.   Of late, the National Literacy Mission has laid stress on consolidation of the existing
campaigns on ground rather than more and more expansion by way of more releases.  In addition to this community
participation has also gone up through contributions made to the implementing agencies by individuals as well as by
agencies in different areas for conducting various activities relating to the campaigns. This has a bearing on less
utilization of funds. 
As regards less expenditure by the National Literacy Mission, it may be stated that though Rs.1400 crores was
allocated for the 8
th  Five Year Plan , only a sum of Rs.953 crores was actually made available over a period of five
years.  In the case of less utilization of funds for the year 1997-98,  it may be submitted that due to non- finalisation of
revised enhanced norms for various schemes during the 9 th  Five Year Plan, the allocations had to be reduced at
appropriate stages of the financial year.  This resulted in less expenditure against the actual allocation.
The focus is now shifting towards decentralisation and devolving of powers on State Literacy Mission
Authorities (SLMAs) set up in different States.  The SLMAs  will be responsible not only for approval of literacy
projects like continuing education but also for actual implementation of the programme and its close monitoring .  State
level workshops have been held by the National Literacy Mission in several States to make aware the concerned
agencies of the role of SLMAs and clearly bring out as to how the literacy  programmes  would actually function.
Further Comments
The Department has informed the Committee  that in the revitalised National Literacy Mission, financial and
administrative powers have been decentralised to the State Literacy Mission Authorities (SLMAs).  SLMAs which have
been set-up in 18 States  have a two layer structure viz. Governing Council and Executive Council.  The State
Directorate of Adult Education serves as Secretariat.
           The State Literacy Mission Authorities are now specifically responsible for  the following:
-         Planning for literacy programmes in the State; fixing target dates for completing one phase of the programme and
launching new programmes.  Issuing guidelines for execution of State level.
-           Sanctioning Projects of Continuing Education: 
-           Sanctioning of Projects to NGOs:           
-           Monitoring of programmes:
-           Evaluation.
            The Department further informed that  the Director of Adult Education who is the member- secretary of the
SLMA in each State/UT is required to hold a monthly meeting on a fixed date.   The objectives of these meetings are to
review the progress of literacy campaigns and post literacy projects in various districts.  The focus of discussion is also
on assessment of qualitative aspects such as problems encountered in accelerating the pace of literacy campaign,
efficacy of corrective measures initiated in the past, activities planned for the coming month, and so on.   These
meetings are attended by secretaries of the Zila Saksharta Samities, Directors of State Resource Centres, State/Area
coordinators of the Bharat Gyan-Vigyan Samiti or representatives of the nodal voluntary agency and of Jan Shikshan
Sansthans. A representative from the National Literacy Mission or the Directorate of Adult Education is also present.
            The State Directorates scrutinise, analyse and compile the data from all the districts carefully and send
consolidated state reports to the central Directorate of Adult Education in the prescribed format.   National-level status
reports on literacy and post literacy are also compiled and published periodically.

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
.           The Committee was informed that  under the  three-step evaluation system of Literacy Programmes, self-
evaluation is a built-in feature of the literacy primers, concurrent and final evaluation is carried out by competent
evaluation agencies from outside the concerned district or State respectively.  The State Directorate is responsible for
nominating three evaluation agencies of which the district chooses one to conduct the concurrent evaluation.  Agencies
for external evaluation are nominated by NLM, but the SLMA keeps a close co-ordination and watch over progress and
results.
          As informed by the Department, recently, seven SLMAs- UP, MP, Rajasthan, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra
Pradesh & Maharashtra were visited by officers from NLM and qualitative and quantitative assessment of performance
made.  Criteria of performance appraisal were effectiveness of administration, management, planning, monitoring and
evaluation of the literacy programmes in the State.
Comments of the Committee
Despite the fact that the actual fund made available was less than that of allocated funds under 8th Five Year
Plan, the Committee finds that even the available fund  was not utilized upto the optimum level.    In Committee’s
view, major portion of allocation of funds under the programme is either wasted or misused.   The Committee,
therefore, feels that remedial steps need to be taken in this direction.  Decentralization of administrative and financial
powers to the State Literacy Mission Authorities (SLMAs) is a step in the right direction.    The Committee, however is
of the view that  the composition of SLMA  should be made in accordance with requirement of the state and  elected
representatives should  be involved in its activities. Besides, the monitoring of the programme in any state should be
done at the level of Chief Secretary periodically  and the D.C./D.M.  be made responsible for proper  implementation of
programmes under this scheme in his/her district.
Recommendation
9.1 The Committee, however is constrained  to note that PLCs have not taken off in the country in the real sense. 
Whereas 442 districts have been covered under TLC, Post Literacy Campaigns have been launched in only 229 districts
so far. 
Action Taken
            The progress of the literacy campaigns was not upto the mark in Hindi Speaking areas due to various factors. 
This has resulted in slow progress of post literacy campaigns throughout the country.  However, the present number of
districts where PLCs have been launched stands at 280 out of total of 450 districts.  In addition, 66 districts have also
launched the subsequent phase of continuing education after completion of the literacy phase.  It is expected to cover the
remaining districts under the PL as well as CE phase during the 9
th  Five Year Plan.  
 
Further Comments
In response to a query as to the factors responsible for the slow progress of literacy campaigns  in Hindi
speaking areas , the Department replied that  the reasons could be as follows:
1.         Low level of literacy: A small base to act as catalyst for Literacy Campaigns
2.         Lower Female Literacy Rates
3.     Inadequate Voluntary Teachers due to low literacy rate and social factors inhibiting Female       Literacy.
The Department also informed that  it has been indicated by the NSSO survey that during the period 1991-97, 
all the Hindi Speaking States have done exceptionally well. Rajasthan has shown dramatic improvement, pushing
forward from 38.55 per cent in 1991 to 55 per cent in 1997, a rise of 16.5 per cent. Uttar Pradesh registered a rise of
14.4 per cent, moving from 41.6 per cent to 56 per cent.  Bihar showed a gain of 10.5 per cent, rising from 38.5 per cent
to 49 per cent.  Himachal Pradesh has surged forward to take third position in the country, moving from 63.9 per cent to
77 per cent --a rise of 13.1 per cent.    The trend indicates that the Hindi Speaking States, though still below the National
average have been able to break the barriers and are surging ahead and it is expected that they would be able to match
the National level soon.
Recommendation
9.2  There is a gap of two to three years in the launching of TLC  and PLC in all the districts.  Thus the basic objective

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
of PLC to provide opportunities of continuing education  to neo-literates so as to facilitate retention of their literacy
skills and to enable the learners to continue their learning beyond elementary literacy stands defeated.  The community,
therefore, recommends that the Department should impress upon all the states especially the educationally backward
states to launch PLCs  in the remaining districts so as to ensure  that benefits of literacy are sustained by the neo-
literates.
Action Taken
NLM’s  policy is to avoid any time lag between the completion of TLC and the subsequent launch of a PLC in a
district.   In order to achieve this, the districts are expected to formulate a Post Literacy Campaign during the currency
of the TLC itself .   However, it is true that in some districts, delay in launching PLC has occurred due to various
unavoidable reasons.   The State Governments have been advised to launch timely PLCs in various districts.
Further Comments
On a specific query as to   what steps are being taken to launch PLC in the remaining districts and  which are the
districts where  formulation of the PLC has not been done during the continuance of the TLC, itself, the Department
informed that Post-Literacy Campaigns have been launched in 352 districts in the country. In the revised policy for
NLM an integrated approach to Literacy has been launched which would enable the enormous illiteracy problem to be
tackled in a holistic manner.  By treating the imparting of functional literacy as a continuum rather than as a one-off
benefit for the illiterate person, progress of literacy efforts would be made goal-directed.  Literacy campaigns would
continue to run in those areas where there are large pools of residual illiteracy.  At the same time, for those who have
crossed the basic learning phase, programmes of consolidation, remediation, vocational skills, integration with life skills
and such other aspects are considered the basic unit.
         A district, while submitting their initial project, now also submits their strategy for post- literacy on the basis of
their anticipated target and projections of achievement.  The integrated proposal seeks to effectively bring the activities
of literacy campaigns under one ‘Literacy Project’ to achieve continuity, efficiency and convergence and to minimise
unnecessary time lag between the two, the Committee was informed.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee has been given to understand that as per the findings of 53
rd round of NSSO  Survey, during the
period 1991-97, all the Hindi speaking States have done exceptionally well.   The Committee would however, like to
point out that the literacy rate under NSSO  Surveys are based on 7+age  groupwhereas targeted group of NLM is 15 to
35 years age group.   The Committee notes that although considerable progress has been made in the launching of Post
Literacy Campaigns, gap between launching of Total Literacy Campaigns (TLCs) and Post Literacy Campaigns (PLCs)
still persists.   Position as in March, 2000 is that TLCs have been launched in 556 districts, and PLCs have been lunched
in 352 districts.   The Committee is constrained to observe that nine districts of Bihar are yet to be covered by TLCs
inspite of the Department vigorously pursuing the matter with the State Govt. and earmarking funds specially for these
districts.   The Committee notes that besides wide gap between launching of TLCs and PLCs in educationally backward
States, in NE States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Sikkim and also in J&K, not even one
district has been covered by PLCs so far.   The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that all such States
should be impressed upon to launch PLCs at the earliest in the districts not covered so far.
Recommendation
14.  The Committee, however, feels that  Government proposal  to sanction at least one Shramik Vidyapeeth (SVP) to
each district would not have the desired results. There might be many districts where there is no industry at all .  What is
required is to make , in the first instance, the existing 58 SVPs more purposeful, based on the area specific needs of the
working class. Evaluation of SVP Scheme, if not already done , may be initiated by the Department before further
expansion of the Scheme.
Action Taken
It has been proposed to sanction Shramik Vidyapeeth (SVP) for each district in due course of time keeping in
view the shift of focus of the revised scheme of Shramik Vidyapeeths from urban industrial workers to the neo-literates
and semi literates  and deprived sections of the society. The Expenditure Finance  Committee in its meeting held on
18.12.1998 has approved opening of 50 SVPs during the 9
th  Five Year Plan .  The Shramik Vidyapeeths, at present,

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
functioning in the urban areas, will henceforth be  catering  to the needs  of the neo-literates, semi literates and other
deprived sections of people in urban and rural areas to help them acquire  some vocational skills or to upgrade their
vocational skill and income generating capacity . 
As per the revised scheme , the Shramik Vidyapeeths will concentrate more on continuing education in which
vocational education is a part. Enhanced role of the Shramik Vidyapeeths would be more or less to act as a district level
resource agency for vocational programmes.
The scheme has been evaluated by the Tata Institute of Social Sciences which gave valuable suggestions and
based on that a number of modifications have been carried out in the scheme.  As the scheme is in the threshold of a
change, further evaluation can be carried out after the scheme in the revised form is implemented  for some time.
Further Comments
         The Committee was informed that the Scheme of of Shramik Vidyapeeths was evaluated by the Tata Institute of
Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai in 1993.  Some of the findings of the evaluation are as under:
·
        As long as the Sharmik Vidyapeeths remain committed to the deprived sections of the society with its tailor-made
programmes of polyvalent education, they have all the justification to exist as institutions outside the formal system
and deserve financial support from the Government;
·        The skill-oriented programmes of the Sharamik Vidyapeeths are largely directed towards enabling the beneficiaries
to be engaged in self-employment;
·        The Shramik Vidyapeeth scheme has the potential to equip individuals with the skills required to be gainfully
employed;
·        None of the existing organisational structures is in itself against the interests of the scheme of Shramik
Vidyapeeths.  Shramik Vidyapeeths can function effectively as autonomous, non-autonomous or semi-autonomous
institutions.
The Committee was further informed  that keeping in view the findings of the evaluation, scheme of  Shramik
Vidyapeeths has been  renamed as Scheme of Jan Shikshan Sansthan (JSS) or Institute of People’s Education with
increased focus on imparting vocational training to neo-literates.  Area of Operation of the JSS has been expanded to
cover both the urban and rural areas in the entire district where it is located.   Activities have been enlarged to function
as district repositories of vocational and technical skills under the Continuing Education Scheme.     JSS are to provide
academic and technical support to Zila Saksharata Samitis in taking up vocational and skill development programmes
for neo-literates and to organise equivalency programmes through the Open Learning System.
Comments  of the Committee
The Committee is of the view that adult persons are not merely interested in learning their alphabets.   They
would be only drawn towards this programme if there is a provision of some incentives and their money earning
capacity is also increased. The Committee notes that the revamped scheme of Shramik Vidyapeeths, now renamed as
scheme of Jan Shikshan Sansthan (JSS) approved by the Cabinet on 30.11.99 is under implementation  at present.  The
Committee has been given to understand that under this scheme, besides incentives, vocational education is being
imparted so as to enable the beneficiaries to get jobs.
The Committee finds that annual grants  for JSS have been considerably enhanced – from Rs. 12.30 lakh to Rs.
35 lakh for `A’ category city/ town, from Rs. 8 lakh to Rs. 30 lakh for `B’  category city/town and Rs. 25 lakh fixed for
`C’ category city/town.   Besides that considerable provision of non-recurring grant has also been made for vehicle,
equipment and building.  The Committee is of the view that due to the enhanced financial parameters laid down for the
scheme of Jan Shikshan Sansthan, an inbuilt effective monitoring mechanism with involvement of public
representatives is also required to be built up.  The Committee recommends  that evaluation of the scheme of JSS may
be carried out after some time so as to assess the impact of changes made therein.
Recommendation
17.1 The Committee feels that services of  VAs can be more gainfully employed if identification of really motivated
VAs is got done by State Governments.

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
Action Taken
In this regard in the EFC for the 9 th Five Year Plan it is proposed that 50% of the grants to the Voluntary
Agencies will be given by the State Literacy Mission Authorities for local projects.  State Literacy Mission Authorities
will be in a better position to screen Voluntary Agencies and also to monitor their performance.  At national level to
release the funds to Voluntary Agencies, the  credentials are checked and with lesser number of projects for monitoring,
the monitoring will be strengthened.
Further Comments
Since the scheme is implemented  with the support of NGOs/VAs , the Committee wanted to know as to what
were the sources of checking the credentials of voluntary agencies at national level.  In response,  the Department has
informed that  the credentials of voluntary agencies at national level are checked by following means:
·        Scrutiny of documents as to whether they have the requisite registration, constitution and experience.
·        Feedback from the State in which functioning regarding performance and credentials through SLMAs.
·        Feasibility study, especially in case of innovative projects by teams comprising of NLM, SLMA & established NGO
personnel.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is of the view  that most of the NGOs, particularly in the field of Adult Education, are not
performing well and all sorts of complaints have been received against them from various states.  The success of
implementation of a scheme/programme, to a great extent, depends upon the work done by good NGOs.   Therefore, the
selection of NGOs becomes very important.   The selection criteria for NGOs needs to be fool-proof so as to eliminate
fake NGOs without in anyway causing harassment to good NGOs.  The Committee is not sure about the effectiveness of
the above criteria in view of large number of complaints against NGOs.
The Committee  feels that high school students during their vacations can prove to be excellent instructors under
the Adult Education Programme.   The Committee has been given to understand that a special provision has been made
under the revamped programme to involve students as volunteers in Literacy Campaigns.   The Committee hopes that
this initiative would have a positive  impact.
Recommendation
20.1     The Committee, therefore, recommends that steps should be taken to ensure that Adult Education Programme is
taken up on a priority basis  by panchayats.  There is a specific responsibility of making the district fully literate as per
functional norms set by the NLM which may be given to Zilla Panchayats with total planning, implementation and
monitoring.  The funds for this as per requirements of the Zilla  Panchayat should be provided by the Central
Government from the Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  It must be made clear that this fund is in addition to the fund
allocated by the State Finance Commission.  The achievement of the target set by the Zilla Panchayat should be
externally evaluated and responsibility for any shortfall should be fixed on the concernedagency.  This will ensure the
responsibility and accountability coupled with decentralization of power and implementation.
Action Taken
Regarding the role of Panchayati Raj Institutions in the implementation of Literacy Campaigns, it may be stated
that wherever the elected Panchaytat Bodies exist, the implementing agencies  have been  advised to involve Panchayati
Raj functionaries in the actual implementation of the Campaigns.  Instructions have also been issued to reconstitute the
existing Zilla Saksharta Samities wherever PRIs  do not find a place in the Executive Committee  of the ZSS.  During
the 9
th Five Year Plan, the role of Panchayat Bodies in the implementation of Literacy Campaigns is proposed to be
specified more clearly so that they are made responsible for achievement of the overall objectives of the National
Literacy Mission.
Recommendation
20.2     The Committee was also given to  understand that there is a proposal to shift Collector Centric model to
alternative second – line of command to implement the campaigns,  through involvement of more and more non-
officials and voluntary agencies. The 

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
Committee in this connection would like to suggest that the Kerala model may be experimented by making District
Panchayat President as the Chairman and District Collector as coordinator.
Action Taken
Wherever the elected Panchayat bodies exist, like in the States of West Bengal, Kerala  etc., the District
Panchayat President/Chairman of Zilla Parishad have been made as the Chairman of the Zilla Saksharta Samities and
the District Collector as the Executive Vice-Chairman,. This practice could be followed in other States also.
Further Comments
Specifying the role of Panchayat bodies, the Department informed that after the 73
rd Constitutional amendment,
responsibility of Adult Education rests with Zila Parishad/Zila Panchayat.  Panchayat elections have taken place in most
of the States and steps have been taken to nominate the elected representatives of the Panchayati Raj Institutions to the
literacy programmes and to integrate the Panchayat Raj structure more meaningfully with the Zila Saksharata Samiti
(ZSS).  In newly sanctioned districts, representation of Panchayat Raj Organisations at various levels is being ensured. 
Zila Saksharata Samities which were constituted before the election, people’s representatives at Panchayat, Block and
District level are being inducted by reconstituting the ZSS.  Panchayati Raj representatives are being imparted
orientation and sensitisation through workshops being held by the State Resource Centres and the National Literacy
Resource Centre at Mussoorie.
In response to a further query as to whether  the practice of Kerala and West Bengal of making  District
Panchayat President/Chairman of Zila Parishad, the Chairman of the Zila Saksharta Samities (ZSSs) and the District
collector as the Executive Vice-Chairman has been followed in any other State, the Department informed that in the
revised scheme for the nine Plan, the Literacy Programmes will continue to be implemented by the ZSS headed by the
Collector.  However, a democratically elected Chairman of the Zila Parishad may also head the ZSS in a State where a
full-fledged Panchayati Raj system has been established. The Zila Saksharta Samities have complete freedom to adopt
either of the systems, but no other State except West Bengal and Kerala have yet adopted a different pattern.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee feels that the matter has not been taken up in the right earnest.   It recommends that the
experience  of Kerala and West Bengal could be discussed/shared with other States and they could adopt the same if
they found it convenient and useful.
CHAPTER-IV
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED.
 
NIL
MINUTES
X
TENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 8
th June,  2001 in Committee Room `A’,  Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri S.B. Chavan                      ¾¾          Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Maurice Kujur

109th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/109threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:15:20]
3. Shri Eduardo Faleiro
4. Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”
5. Shri Dina Nath Mishra
6. Shri Bratin Sengupta
7. Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”
8. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
 
9. Shrimati Jaskaur Meena
10. Shri Baliram Kashyap
11. Shri Ramanand Singh
12. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
13. Shri V. M. Sudheeran
14. Shri Ramesh Chennithala
15. Shri Samik Lahiri
16. Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
17. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
18. Dr. Baliram
19. Dr. A.D.K. Jayaseelan
20. Shri Trilochan Kanungo
21. Dr. S. Venugopal
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Smt. Vandana Garg, Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
 Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer
 Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer
2.         The Committee considered the Draft 107
th, 108th, 109th and 110th Action Taken   Reports of the Committee on  
the Problem of Drop-Outs, All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore, Adult Education and Vocational
Education respectively.   The Committee, after some discussion, adopted the Reports with certain  modifications.
3.         The Committee decided that the reports may be presented/laid in both the Houses in the ensuing Monsoon
Session.   The Committee,  in this connection, authorised Shri Maurice Kujur and Shri Dina Nath Mishra to present the
Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Trilochan Kanungo  and Shri Baliram Kashyap   to lay the Reports in the Lok
Sabha.
4.         The Chairman informed that the Committee will meet again on the 2
nd and 3rd July, 2001 to hear the Secretaries
of various Ministries/Departments and NGOs who are concerned with the Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products
(Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution), Bill,
2001. 
5.         The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at  11.40 A.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 2
nd  July,
2001.