PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
QEf>ARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
The Dr. B.R. AMBEDKAR UNIVERS ITY BILL, 1994 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1 9.8. 1994. 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha Q_n 1 9.8. 1 994. 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

CONTENTS 
Pages 
' I I. CoMPOSITION oF THE C oMMITTEE (V) 
I ' I I 
IJ II. REPORT 1-53 
~-'\ 
III. APPENDICES .. 54 TO 78 

COMPOSITION OF THE' COMMIITEE 
1. SHRI P. UPENDRA CHAIRMAN 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdh~ry 
4. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
5. Shri O.P. Kohli 
6. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbl')ai Patel 
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
8. Shri Md. Salim 
9: Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
10. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen 
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
15. 
LOK SABHA 
16. · Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
. 17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran 
18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
20. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
21. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak • 
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole 

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe 
26. Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar 
28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
29. Shri lnder Jit 
30. Shri Anna Joshi 
31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami 
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
34. Prof. K Venkatagiri Gowda 
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
. 36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
38. Shri Rambadan 
39. . Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
41. Shri Ramchandra Dome 
42. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
44. Shri Suraj Mandai 
45. Shri Kanshi Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Nand Lal - Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Surinder Kumar - Under Secretary 
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu - Committee Officer. 

' I 
I 
f 
I 
REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authoris.ed by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
present this Eleventh Report of the Committee on the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University Bill, 1994, alongwith 
the Bill, as amended by the Committee. · 
2. The Bill, which was introduced in.the Rajya Sabha on.the 9th May, 1994, seeks to establish 
and incorporate a teaching and residential University in the State of Uttar Pradesh and to provide for 
matters connected thereWith or incidental thereto. In pursuance of the rules relating to Department­
related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred* .the Bill, to the 
Committee for examination arid report. 
3. A Press Communique, inviting suggestions from various individuals, organisations and 
institutions interested in the subject matter of the Bill, was issued on 24th May, 1994 (Appendix-I). 
4. Twelve memoranda, containing views, opinions, comments and suggestions on the various 
provisions and aspects of the Bill, were received by the Committee. (List at Appendix-IT)'. 
5. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 8th July, 1994, decided that the memoranda received 
by it be sent to the Ministries of Human Resource DevelopmenVLaw, Justice and Company. Affairs 
for obtaining their comments for its consideration. The comments from the concerned Ministries were 
received and considered by the Committee. · 
6. The Committee considered the Bill in seven sittings (Appendix-III) and heard the oral evidence 
of 8 witnesses, including the representatives of Ministries of Human Resource Development 
· (Department of Education) and Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Department of Legal Affairs and 
Legislative Department). Besides, the Committee also heard the views of some eminent Members of 
Parliament. 
7. In its meeting held on the 18th August, 1994 the Committee considered the Draft Report 
and adopted it for presentation/laying in both the Houses. 
8. The Department of Education,. in their detailed note on the subject sub~itted to the 
Committee, explained the need for introduction of the Bill and the circumstances under which the 
University, initially proposed to be set up as a State University, is now sougnt to be set up as a Central 
University. (Appendix-N) 
9. The Secretary, Department of Education, during the course of his oral evidence before t~e 
Committee, stated that one of the unique features of this University is to gives it a distinct bias in favour 
of science and key and frontier areas qf technology, as compared to any other University. 
10. However, some Members expressed the view that the objects of the University, as contained 
in Clause 4 and Schedule 1 of the Bill, do not provide for teaching of subjects near and dear to the 
heart of Dr. B.A. Ambedkar, on whose name the University is being set up. The Committee is of the 
view that a specific provision should be included on this so as to promote the study of the ideology 
and philosophy for which Dr. Ambedkar stood and strove throughout his life. 
11. The Clause also provides for promotion of educational and economic interests and welfare 
* Aajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin part II, Para 34509 dated the 19th May, 1994, 

of the people of Uttar Pradesh, etc. However, the Committee is of the view that the University, which 
is nar:ned after one of the great son of India, should not confine itself to Uttar Pradesh only, and it 
should promote the interests and welfare of the people of the entire country. The Committee has, 
therefore, decided to delete the words of 'Uttar Pradesh'. · 
. 
. 12. The Committee also had some apprehensions about the jurisdiction of the University which 
is mentioned in Clause 6 as Uttar Pradesh and also about admissions in the University. Some Members 
were of the view that a9missions in the University shall be open to students from all parts of the country. 
In this regard, th.e Chairman. U.G.C. clarified to the Commil1ee thaUhe jurisdiction has nothing to do 
· ·· . with admissions. Jurisdiction relates to opening of campuses, etc. It w~s also made clear that this 
University would admit students from all parts of the country. 
13. Members of the Comr:nittee felt that the 'Planning and Academic Committee', as provided 
in the Bill, which would carry out the functions of the Academic Council and the Planning Board during 
the first 10 years of the University, was superfluous and the Comfllittee felt that the provisions relati[lg 
to 'Planning and Academic Committee', wherever occurr~d in the Bill, be done away with. 
14. Some Members of the Committee expressed apprehensions over the possible implications 
of providinQ higher percentage of seats for SCs!STs in this University, on the ground that similar 
demands might be raised in future in the case of admissions to other Central Universities. The 
percentage of reseNations applicable in all the exis.ting Central Universities is 15 per cent for the 
Scheduled Castes and 71/ 2 percent for Scheduled Tribes. This is the first Act of a Central University, 
where the quantum of reseNation is being specifically mentioned. It is· done because this University 
is proposed to be set up for special reasons, which do not apply in the case of other Central Universities. 
Therefore, higher than normal reservation. is proposed in the Bill. 
15. The Committee also sought the views of the Law. Secretary on the legality of providing 
higher percentage to SCs/STs over and above the existing percentage. He stated that a higher 
percentage of seats for SCs/STs would not violate the provisions of the Constitution. He also agreed 
with the view that reseNation could also be provided to BCs, women and handicapped, besides higher 
reseNati<;>n to SCs/STs, subject to an overall ceiling of 50 percent. 
16. On the same issue of higher percentage of reservations to SCs/STs in this University, the 
Chairman, U.G.C .. , during the course of his evidence stated as under: 
• As far as reservation is concerned, there is a provision for reservation in Central Universities. 
But, it is not there in the AGts. This is the national policy ~hich the Central University are expeeted 
to follow." · ' · 
"The University Grants CommissiGn has advised all the Central Universities to implement. it ... 
Now with regard to this Bill, I think this is a departure from the National Policy. Wheri we say that more 
reseNation would be provided, it means that it would be more than 221/ 2 percent.This, naturally, would 
generate demand in other Central Universities as well. But, Ke~ping in mind the fact that this University 
is being named after one of the distinguished sons of this country, Dr. Ambedkar, the Government. 
probably, wanted that there should be more reservation for SCs and STs in this University: 
17. The Committee is of the view that since the University is being set up to perpetuat~ the 
memory of a great son of India, there should not be any reason for such apprehensions. H_owever, 
the ·committee decided to substitute ."higher percentage" by "adequat~ percentage". 
18. While considering Clause 19, some merDbers were ·of the view that the composition of the 
Board of Management had not been specified, either in the Bill or ·in the Statutes. Tl1e Committee 

i recommends that necessary steps should be taken to specify the details of the composition of the Board 
~ in the Statutes at the earliest. The Committee also suggests that ~ provision be made for the 
~ representation of Parliament, Government of India, U.G.C.,etc. in the Bill itself. 1 
19. Th.e Committee agrees with the views expressed by the Chairman, University Grants 
Commission, that whenever a new Central l)niversity is proposed to be set ·up, additional financial 
provision for the same should be made. Otherwise, the funds meant .to~. State Universities would have : 
to be diverted and the State Universities would face resource crunch. ·The Committee recommends 
that Government ·should take necessary steps in t~is regard. · · 
20. The changes suggested by the Committee in the Bill anc:bthe reasons ther~for are set out 
in the succeeding paragraphs. . . 
' 
Clause 2: The Committee obseNE5S. that planning and .Academic Committee is a body 
having powers and functions overlapping with those of the Academic Council and the Planning Board. 
The Committee is of the view that right from :the incep_tion of the University, Acade'mic Council and 
Planning Board should be there· and planning: and Academic Committee is superfluous. Therefore, Sub-.· 
Clause (m) has been deleted and the reference to this Body, wherever occurs in the body of the Bill 
or in the Statutes, has been deleted. · 
Sub-Clause (v) deals with the. name of the University. The Committee is of the view that it would 
be more appropriate to name the University 'Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University' instead of in 
the abbreviated · form of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University'. Therefore, the words 'Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 
University' have been substituted by the words·. 'Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University'. 
Clause 3: The name of the University has been amended as 'The Babasaheb Bhimrao 
Ambedkar University', and a reference to 'Planning and Academic Committee' has been deleted . 
. , Clause 4: The Committee observes that the objects of the University do not depict the 
philosophy and ideology for which Dr. B.R. Ambedkar stood throughout hjs life. It would be in the fitness 
of things to i-ncorporate, in the objectives, the study of his philosophy and ideology and also the related 
subjects. · 
Therefore, the following lines have been added after the wo~ds 'Programmes of the University:­
"to offer· appropriate courses relevant.· for the ·development of socially and economically 
depressed sections of the people, including agricultural technology and rural crafts; to promote th~ 
study ot the principles for which Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar worked during his life time, namely, 
national integration, social justice and democratic way of life, and also study of 'the Constitutions of 
the world". 
The Cof\lmittee is also of the view that the University shall promot.e the interests and· welfare 
of the people of the entire country, instead of confining to the people ot Uttar Pradesh only, as mentioned . 
in this ~lause. Therefore, the words 'of Uttar Pardesh' have been. deleted, and the words 'higher . 
percentage' have been substituted by 'a?equate percentage'. 
Clause 5: The Committee is also of the view that the· University should also have _: 
. orientation courses, in addition to.the cQtJrses already mentioned. Therefore,' in sub-Ciaup~$ (XVI) the 
words 'Orientation courses' have been added after 'refresher courses'. 
The Committee also observes that the quota for students belo.nging to SCSISTsl for admission 
·' 
·. -:. 
.. . :~ 
i ·;.• 
} .. ·. 
l r.·: l· ... 

purposes in the University has not been specified. The University should have the power to fix the quota 
to be specified in the statutes. Therefore, the following Sub-Clause has been added after Sub-Clause 
(XX) : 
"To fix quota for students belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for 
admissi_on purposes" · 
Clause 7: The Committee is of the view that the University ~hall be open to all persons, 
irrespective of places of domicile, in addition to other aspect~ me~ltioned ·in this Qlause. Therefore,after 
the words 'the University shall be open to th~ word "all" has been added and after :race or class' .the 
words 'or place of domicile' have been added. · ·· · · · ·· 
Clause 8 : The Committee observes that the stay for students in the hostel of the University, 
should not be made compulsory. A student, who is a resident outside the University or who may like 
to stay outside the campus, should also be permitted to study in the University while staying outside. 
In fact almost all the residential Universities have not been able to provide hostel accommodation to 
all the students. Therefore, before the words 'reside .. in a Hall' the word 'normally' has been added. ····· 
. Clause 10 : The Committee is of the view that there shouid be more than one Pro-Vice-
Chancellor so that in the absence of one Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the other may discharge the duties. 
There,fQ~€1. ir} Clause 10 (3) the words 'the Pro-Vice-Chancellor' have been substituted by 'the Pro-Vice-
Chancellors·;. ·-·-· · ·· · · · , . ·"" - ~'"' --· -· . -· . 
Clause 1U3): The Committee holds the view that the Chancellor, as per the existing 
provisions of the Bill, has not been given any powers except that of being the Head of the University 
and to preside at the Convocation of the Unviersity. The Committee ha~ been give sto understand that 
usually in State Universities the Chancellors have got many powers and such powers in a Central 
University are vested in the Visitor. However, the Committee feels that1here should be a provision for 
delegation of powers to the Chancellor as and when necessary. Accddingly, in sub-Clause (3) at the 
end, after 'degrees' the words 'and may be delegated such powers as. may be necessary' have been 
added. · · 
Clause 12(2).· The Committee feels it appropriate to show with Vice-Ch?ncellor as an 
academic head' rather than .. 'acaoemic 'officer'. Therefore, the word officer' occuring after 'academic' 
has been substituted by the word 'head'. · ·· · · ···· · ··· 
Clause 13: The words 'the Pro-Vice-Ctlancellor' have·been substituted by the words 'one or more 
Pro-Vice-Chancellors'. It is a consequential change. · · 
. . - . . 
Clause 18: (2} The provision relating to Planning and Academic -Committee i.e. sub-clause 
(2), has been deleted. It is a consequential change. · 
Clause 19: The Committee observes that the composition of th¢ Board of Management has not 
been specified, either in the provisions of the Bill or in the Statutes. The Government should take steps 
to incorporate· this provision in the Statutes. However. the Committee is :Of the view that the Board should 
have· representatives of Parliament, the Government of India, the UGC and the teachers. Therefore, 
in sub-clause (2) the .following provisio has been added: ~ - _ -·~ 
... 
"Provided that ttie Board of Management shall also have representatives of the Parliament, 
the Government of India, the Univer.sity Grants Commission and the teaching community." 

Clause 20: Clause·2o deals with Planning and Academic Committee. The Clause has been 
deleted. It is a consequential amendment. 
Clause 21(2): The Committee observes that the composition of the Academic Council has 
not been specified in the Bill. The Government should incorporate such a provision in the Statutes for 
this purpose. However, the Committee is of the view that the Academic Council should have 
representation of stu9ents also. Accordingly, in sub-clause (2} the following proviso has been added: 
"Provided that representation shall be given to students also." 
~ : The Committee is of the view that the Planning Board should have 
representation of the non-teaching staff also .. Accordingly, ·in sub-clause (2), the following proviso has 
been. added: 
"Provided that representation shall be given to non-teaching staff also." 
Clause 27(5): The Committee is of the view that in sub-clause(S) the Visitor has been given 
extraordinary powers to make new or additional Statutes or amend or repeal the existing Statutes. 
Generally, these powers should be vested in the University. The Visitor should not have such over­
riding powers. Therefore, sub-clause (5) has been deleted. 
Clause 27(6.}: The words "in exceptional circumstances," have been added before "may direct 
.the University" in line 2. • 
Clause 32(3): The words "In such matters" have been added after "Tribunal" and the words 
"no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the matter decided by the Tribunal" have been deleted, 
so as to emphasise the finality of the findings of the Tribunal. 
Clause 43(d).· The Committee doe$ not agree with the view that Academic Council and 
Planning Board shall be contstituted a her the expiry of 10 years. Both these bodies should be constituted 
right from the inception of the University. Similarly, the Planning and Academic Committee. with 
overlapping powers, is unnecessary. Therefore, this sub-clause has been substituted by the following 
sub-clause: · 
"The first Academic Council and the first Planning Board shall be nominated by the Visitor for 
a term of three years." 
The First Schedule : 
The Committee observes that the objects of the University, incorporated in the First Schedule, 
are on the same lines as those in Clause (4) of the Bill. The Committee has made certain amendments 
in Clause (4) incorporating therein the philosophy and ideology of Or. Ambedkar and the related subjects. 
The words 'of Uttar Pardesh' have been deleted and the words 'higher percentage' have been substituted 
by 'adequate percentage'. Similar changes have been effected in this Scheduled as well. 
The Second Schedule : 
Statute 1. Clause UJ: The name of the University has been amended as 'The Babasaheb 
Bhimrao Ambedkar University'. 

S.tatute 2. Clause (2}: The Name words 'or Planning and Academic Committee' have been 
, deleted, which is a consequential amendment. ... . 
S.tatute 2 Clause 6: The words "~ro-Vice- Chancello( have been substituted by "one of the 
Pro-Vice-Chancellors". Similarly, in the proviso to this clause, before 'Pro-Vice-Chancellor' the word 'the' 
has been substituted by 'no' and 'not' has been deleted. These are consequential amendments. 
Statute 13: Statute 13 deals with Constitution, power~ and the functions of Planning and 
Academic Committee. As the committee has already decided to do away with the Planning qnd 
Academic Committee, this Statute has been deleted. 
Statute 19C1WU: "The· Pro-Vice-Chancellor" has been substituted by "one or more Pro-
Vice-Chancellors", as the case may be. • . 
Statute 20 (31:The words 'the Pro-Vice-Chancellor' have been amended as "one of the Pro­
Vice-Chancellors". 
~ 
·•. . . Cfause 1 of. the BW: The words "The Dr. B. R: Ambedkar University" have been substituted 
by 'the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University'. 
The Title of the Bill has been amended as 'The Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University Bill, 
1994. 
21. The Committee recommends that the Bill, as amended, be passed. 
NEW DELHI; 
August 18, 1994 
27 Sravana, 1916 (Saka) 
P.UPENDRA 
CHAIRMAN 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Commitee on Human 
Resource Development. 

Bill No. XXXVI of 1994 
THE BABASAHEB BHIMRAQ AMBEDKAR UNIVERSITY BILL. 1994 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. The University. 
4. Objects of the University. 
5. Powers of the University. 
6. Jurisdiction. 
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed. 
8. Residence of students. 
9. The Visitor. 
10. Officers of the University. 
11. The Chancellor. 
12. The Vice-Chancellor. 
13. The Pro-Vice-Chancellor. 
14. Deans of Schools. 
15. The Registrar. 
16. The Finance Officer. 
17. Other officers. 
18. Authorities of the University. 
19. The Board of Management. 
20. The Academic Council. 
21. The Planning Board. 

22. The Boards of Schools. 
23. The Finance Committee. 
24. Other authorities of the University. 
25. Power to make Statutes. 
26. Statutes how to be made. 
27. Power to make Ordinances. 
28. Regulations. 
29. Annual report. 
30. Annual accoun~. 
31. Conditions of service of employees. 
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students. 
33. Right to appeal. 
34. Provident and pensions funds. 
35. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies. 
36. Constitution of Committees. 
37. Filling of casual vacancies. 
38. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies. 
39. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
40. Mode of proof of University record. 
41. Power to remove difficulties. 
42. Transitional provisions. 
43. Status, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE s ·ECOND SCHEDULE. 

Bill No. XXXVI of 1994 
THE BABASAHEB BHIMRAO AMBEDKAR UNIVERSITY BILL, 
1994 . 
(At reported by the Standing Committee} 
A 
BILL 
. .to establish and incorporate a teaching and residential University in the 
State of Uttar Pradesh and to provide for matters connected there with or 
incidental thereto. 
t3E it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-. 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University Short title 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Act, 1994. and com -
(2). It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
· 2. In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context 
otherwise requires,--
(a) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the University; 
(b) "Academic staff" means such categories of staff as are designated · 
as academic staff by the Ordinances; 
(c) "Board of Management " means .the Board of management of the 
Universi ty; 
(d) "Board of Studies" means the Board of Studies of the University; 
(e) "Chancellor". "Vice-Chancellor" and "Pro-Vice-Chancellor" meaD. 
respectively, the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the 
University; 
(f) "College" means a College maintained by the University; 
(g) "Department" means a Department of Studies; and includes a 
Centre of Studies; 
. (h) "Distance education system" means the system of imparting 
education through any means of communication, such as broadcasting. 
mencen1ent. 
Definitions. 

telecasting, correspondence courses, seminars, contact programmes or the 
combinJ.tion of any two or more such means; 
· · (i) "employee" means any person appointed by the University; and 
includes teachers and other staff of the Univers ity; 
(j) "Finance Comm i!tee" means the 'finance c:;ommittee of the University; 
(k) "Hall'' means ~ · unit of residence or of corpor(3te life for the students 
of the University, or of a College or of an Institution, maintained by the 
University; 
(I) "Institut ion" means an academ ic 1nst1tution , not being a College, 
maintained by the University; 
(m) "Planning Board" meJ.ns the Planning Board of the University; : 
(n) "Principal" means the Head of a College or an lns:it_ution maintained 
by the University, and includes, wh~re there is no Principal, the person for the 
time being duly appoint~d to act as Principal, ·and, in the absence of the Principal 
or the acti ng Principal, a Vice-Principal duly appointed as such; 
(o) " Recognised institution" mea~s an inst itution of higher -learning 
·rec:ognised by the · University., · · · .. ·· · · ··· · · " · · 
.. M • ' 
(p) "Recognised teachers" means such persons as may be recognised 
by the Universi ty for the purpose ofimparting instructions in a College or an 
Institutio n maintained by the University; 
(q) "Regulations" means the Regu lations made by any authority of the 
· University under this Act for the time being in force; 
(r) ''School" means a School of Studie.s 6i the !Jniversity: · .' ·· · 
(s) "Statutes" and "Ordinances" mean, respecrively; the.:Statutes and 
Ordm~mces of the University for the time being in f?rce·:· 
(t) "Teachers of the University" means Professors, Readers, Lecturers 
etnd such ot~er persons as may be appointed for impartin9 instruction or 
conducting research in the University or in any College or Institution maintained 
by the Univers ity and are designated as teachers by the Ordina.ces; 
(u) "Univers ity" means the Babasaheb .• Bhimrao Ambedkar University 
estab lished under this Act. · · · 
3( 1) There shall be established a University by the name of Babasaheb 
Bhimrao Ambedkar University." · 
•'· 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Lucknow and it may also 
. estobl ish Campuses at such other places within its jurisdic tion as it may deem 
frt 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 ' 
35 

5 
10 
15 
20 
(3) The first Vice-Chancellor and the first members of the Board of 
Management. or the Academic Council or the Planning Board and all persons 
who may here a her become such officers or members, so long as they continue 
to hold such office or membership are hereby constituted a body corporate by 
the name of Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University". 
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and 
shall sue and be sued by the said name. 
4. The objects of the University shall be to promote advanced knowledge 
by providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning 
as it may deem fit; to make provisions for integrated courses in Science and 
key and frontier area_s of Technology and other allied disciplines in the 
educational programmes of the University to offer appropriate courses relevant 
for the development of socially and economically depressed sections of the 
people, including agricultural technology and rural crafts; to promote the study 
of the principles for which -Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar worked during his 
life time, namely, national integration, social justics and demoeratic way of life, 
and also study of the constitutions of the world; to take appropriate measures 
for promoting innovations in teaching learning processes in inter-disciplinary 
studies and research and pay special attention to the promotion of educational 
and economic interests and welfare of the people in general and of members 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in particular by 
providing adequate percentage of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes and the University shall, in organinsing its activities, have due 
regard to the objects specified in the First Schedule. 
5. The University shall have the following powers, namely:-
(i) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the 
University may, from time to time, determine and to make provision for 
research and for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge; 
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine 
diplomas or certificates to and confer degrees or other academic 
25 distinctions on the basis of examination s, evaluation or any other method 
of testing on, persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates 
degcees or other academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause; 
30 
(iii) to organise and to undertake extra-mural studies,training and 
extension services:· 
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctioos in the manner 
prescribed by the Statues: 
(v) to provide facilities through the distance education system to such 
persons as it may determine: 
35 (vi) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships 
and other teaching or academic positions required by the University and 
40 
Objects of 
the Univer­
sity. 
Powers of 
the Univer­
sity 

40 
to appoint persons to such Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, 
Lecturerships or other teaching on academic position; 
(vii) to recognise an isstitution of higher learning for such purposes as 
the University may determine and to with draw such recongnition; 
(viii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any College or 
Institution maintained by the University; 
45 (ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or organisation 
as teacher of the University for a specified period; 
{x) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make 
appointments thereto; 
(xi) to co-operate or colilaborate or associate with any other University 
or authority or institution of higher learning in such manner and for such 
5 purposes as the University may determine; 
(xii) to establish such campuses special centres, specialised laborato­
ries or other units for research and instruction as are, in the opinions of 
the University, necessary for the furtherance of its objects; 
1 o {xiii) to institute and award fellowships, Scholarships, studentships, 
medals and prizes: 
(xiv) to establish and maintain college, Institutions and Halls. 
{xv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that 
15 purpose to enter into such arrangements with other institutions. industrial 
or other organisations, as the University may deem necessary; 
(xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, orientation courses, 
workshops, seminars and other programmes for teachers, evaluators and 
20 other academic staff; 
{xvii) to make special arrangements in respect of the residence, 
discipline and teaching of women students as the University may consider 
desirable : 
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus 
52 Professors, Consultants, Scholars and such other pesons who may 
contribute to the advancement of the objects of the University; 
(xix} to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a 
30 Department, as the case may be, in accordance with the Statutes; 
(xx) to determme standards of admission to the University which may 
mclude examination.evaluation or any other method of testing. 
(xxi) to fix qouota for students belonging to the scheduled castes and 

the Scheduled. Tribes adm issions purposes; 
(xxii) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges; 
35 (xxiii) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and 
to make arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare; 
(xxiv) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, 
including their code of conduct; 
40 (xxv) to regula te and enforce discipline among the students and the 
5 
employees, and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may · 
be deemed by the University to be necessary ; 
(xxvi) to make arrangements for promot1ng the health and general 
welfare of the employees : 
(xxvii) to receive benefactions.donations and gifts and to acquire, hold , 
manage and dispose of any property, movable or immovable, including trust 
and endowment properties for the purposes of the Universi ty; 
(xxviii) to borrow . with the prior aproval of the Central Government, on 
the secunty ol the prope11y ol the University, money for the purposes of 
the University; 
10 (xxix) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, 
15 
20 
incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of its objects. 
6. The jurisdiction of the University shall extent to the whole of the State 
of Uttar Prades h. 
Jurisdic­
tion. 
7. The University shall be open to all persons of either sex and of whatever University 
caste , creed race class or place of domicile and it shall not be lawful for the open to all 
University to adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious classes, 
belief or profession in order to entitle him to be appointed as a teacher of the castes and 
University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in creed. 
the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the 
University from making special provisions for the employment or promotion of 
educational interests of women, physically handicapped or of persons belong ing 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes 
25 and the Scheduled Tribes. 
8. Every student of the Univers1ty (other than a student who pursues a Residence of 
course of study by distance education system) shall normally reside in a Hall students. 
or hostel or under such conditions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances 
30 9. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University. The Visitor. 
(2) The Visitor may , from time 'to time, appoint one or more persons 

35 
40 
10 
15 
20 
25 
to review the work and progress of the University, including Colleges and 
Institutions managed by it, and to submit a report thereon: and upon receipt 
of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Board of 
Management thereon through the Vice-Chancellor, take such action and issue 
such directions as he considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt 
with in the report and the University shall be bound to comply with such 
directions. 
(3} The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made 
by such person or persons as he may direct of the University, its 
buildings,laboratories and equipment, and of any College or Institution 
maintained by the University and also of the examinations, teaching and other 
work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made 
in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration or 
finances of the University, Colleges or Institutions. 
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub-section (2), give 
notice of his intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made to the 
University and the University shall have the right to make such representations 
to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary. 
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, 
the Vishor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to 
in sub-section (3) 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by 
the Visitor, the University shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall 
have the right to be present and be heard at such inspection in inquiry. 
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection of inquiry is made in respect of 
the University or any College or Institution maintained by it, addt:ess the Vice­
Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspecstion or inquiry together 
with such views ans advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as 
the Visitor may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address made by the 
Visitor, the Vice-Chancellor shall communicate to the Board of Managemen~ 
the views of the Visitor with such advice as the V~sitor may offer upon the action 
to be taken thereon. 
(8) The Board of Management shall communicate through the Vice­
Chancellor, to the Visitor such action, if any as it proposes to take or has been 
taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry. 
(9} Where. the Board of Management does not, within a reasonable 
time, take action to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after 
considering any explanation furnishe9 or representation made by the Board of 
Management issue such directions as he may think fit and the Board of 
·Management shall comply with such directions. 
(1 0) Without prejudice ot the foregoing provisions of this section, the 
.( ' 

30 Visitor may, by order in writing annul any proceeding of the Univresity which 
in not in conformity with the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances: 
40 
10 
15 
Provided that before making any sch order, he shall call upon the 
Register to show cause why such an order should not be made and if any cause 
is shoun within a reasonable time, he shall consider the same. 
( 11) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed 
by the Statutes . 
. 1 0. The following shall be the officers of the University:-
( 1) the Chancellor; 
(2} the Vice-Chancellor; 
(3) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor; 
(4) the Deans of Schools; 
(5) the Registrar; 
(6) the Finance Officer; and 
(7) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers 
of the University. 
Officers of 
the Universi­
ty. 
11. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the visitor in ?UCh manner The Chan-
as may be prescribed by the Statutes. cellor. 
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the 
University. 
(3) The chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocation of the 
University held for conferring degrees , and may be delegated such powers as 
may be necessary. 
12. ( 1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such The Vice 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes. Chancellor. 
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic 
head of the University and shall exercise general supervision and control over 
the affairs of the University and give effect to the decisions of all the authorities 
of the University. 
(3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action 
is necessary on any matter, ·exercise any power conferred on any authority of 
the ·University by or under this Act and shall report to such authority the action 
takan by him on such matter: 
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action 

20 
2 
0 
35 
ought not to have been taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose 
decis1on thereon shall be final; 
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who 
is aggrived by the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-section 
shall have the right to appeal against such action to the Board of Management 
within three months from the date on which decision on such action is 
communicated to him and thereupon the Board of Management may confirm, 
modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor. 
(4} The Vice-Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any 
authority of the University is beyond the powers of the authority conferred by 
the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances or that any decision 
taken is not in the interest of the University. may ask the authority concerned 
to review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority 
refuses to rev1ew the decision either in whole or in part or no decision is taken 
by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the 
Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final: 
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform 
such other duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
· 13. One or more Pro-Vice-Chancellors shall be appointed in such The Pro- Vice 
manner and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be Chancellors. 
prescribed by the Statutes. 
14. Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and Deans of 
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by schools. 
the Statutes. 
5 15. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be The Re-
10 
15 
prescribed by the Statutes. gistrar. 
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreement, sign 
documents and authenticate records on be~1a lf of the University and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes. 
16. The Finance Officer sllal l be appointed in such manner and shall 
exerc1se such powers and perform such dutiL.·s as mJy be prescribed by the 
Statutes. 
The Fi­
nance 
Officer. 
17. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other Other 
officers of the Un1versity shall be prescribed by the Statutes. officers. 
18. The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely:- Authorities 
of the 
( 1) the Board of Management ; University. 
(2) tt1e Academic Council:· 

20 
25 
20 
(3) the Planning Board; 
(4} the Boards of Studies; 
(5) the Finance Committee; and 
(6) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be 
the authorities of the University. 
19 ( 1) The Board of Management shall be the principal executive body 
of the University. 
(2} The constitution of the Board of Management. the term of office 
of its members and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes: 
Provided that the Board of Management shall also have representatives 
of the Parliament of India, the Govt. of India, the University Grants Commission 
and the Teaching Community. 
The Board 
of Manage­
ment. 
20 (1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of The Aca­
the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act . the Statutes and demic 
the Ordinances, co-ordinate and exercise general supervision over the Council 
academic policies of the University. 
(2) The constitution ot the Academic Council, the term of office of its 
members and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes: 
Provided that representation shall be given I? students also. 
21 (1} The Planning Board shall be the principal planning body of the The Plan-
University. ning Board. 
(2) The constitution of the Planning Board, term of office of its members 
and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes: 
Provided that representation shall be given to non-teaching staff. 
22. The constitution. powers and functions of the Boards of Schools 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes. 
23. The constitution , powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes. 
24. The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, as may 
be ·declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes. 
25. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for 
all or any of the following matter. namely. 
(a) the constitution , poWers and functions of the authorities and other 
The Board 
oi Schools. 
The Fi­
nance 
Committee . 
Other authori­
ties of the 
University 
Power to 
make 
Statutes. 

bodies of the University, as may be Constituted from time to time; 
(b) the election and continuance in office of the members of the said 
authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other 
matters relating tc those authorities and other bodies for which it may be 
necessary or desirable to provide; 
. 25 (c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University 
30 
35 
and their emoluments; 
(d) the app,ointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees 
of the University, their emoluments and other conditions of service; 
. (e) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any other 
University or organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint 
project; 
(I) the conditions of service of employees including proviSIOn for 
pension, insurance and provident fund, the manner of termination of service 
and disciplinary action; 
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees 
or students and the University; 
(h) the procedu~e for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees 
or students and the University; · 
40 (i) the procedure for appeal to the Board of Management by any 
5 
10 
employee or student against the action of any officer or authority of the 
University: 
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution 
or a Department: 
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, 
Halls, Colleges and Institutions: 
(I) the conferment of honorary degrees; 
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other 
academic distinctions: 
(n) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and 
prizes; 
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities :or officers of the 
· University; 
(p) the maintenance of the discipline among the employees and 
students: 

15 (q) all other matters which py this Act are to be or may be provided 
20 
25 
30 
40 
10 
for by the Statutes. 
27 (1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Second Schedule. 
(2) The Board of Management may, from time to time, make new or 
additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub­
section (1) : 
Provided that the Board of Management shall not make, amend or repeal 
any Statutes affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authorities of 
the University until such authority has been given an opportunity of expressing 
an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Board of Management. 
(3) Every new Statutes or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or 
repeal of a Statute shall require the assent of the Visitor who may assent 
thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Board of Management for 
reconsideration. 
(4) A New Statute. or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute 
shall have no validity unless it has been assented to by the Visitor. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-section, the 
Visitor in exceptional circumstances, may direct the University to make 
provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Board of Management is unable to implement such direction within sixty days 
of its receipt, the Visitor may, after considering the reasons, if any, 
communicated by the Board of Management for its inability of comply with such. 
direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably. 
27 (1) Subject to the provision of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as 
such; 
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and 
certificates 0f the University; 
(c) the medium of instruction and examination; 
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic 
distinctions, the qualifications for the same and the means to be taken 
relating to the granting .and obtaining of the same; · 
15 . (e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and 
for admission to the examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University; 
(f) the conditions for a":".ard of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, 
medals and prizes: 
Statutes how to 
be made. 
Power to 
make 
Ordinances. 

20 (g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner 
of appointment and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and 
moderators; 
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University; 
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the 
25 residence. discipline and teaching of women students and the prescribing 
of special courses of studies for them; 
30 
35· 
40 
5 
10 
(j) The appointments and emoluments of employees other than those 
for whan provision has been made in the statutes; 
(k) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Special 
Centres. Specialised Laboratories and other Committees; 
(I) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other. Universities 
and authorities including learned bodies or associations; 
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body w hich 
is considered necessary for improving the academic life of the University; 
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other 
academic staff as are not prescribed by the Statutes: 
(o) the management of Colleges and Institutions established by the 
University: 
' (p) the setting -up of a mach.inery for redressal of grievances of 
employees; and 
(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided 
for by the Ordinances, 
·. 
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor with the 
previous approval of the Central Government and the Ordinances so made may 
be an:ended, repealed or added to at any time by the Board of Management 
in the manner prescribed by the Statutes. 
28. The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with Regulations 
this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business 
and that .of the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for 
by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances. in the manner prescribed by the 
Statutes. 
29. (1) The annual report of the University shall ·be prepared under the Annual 
directio n of the Board of Management, which shall include, among other report. 
matters, the steps ta_ken by the University towards the fulfilment of its objects. 
(2) The annual report so·prepared shall be subm itted to the Visitor on or 
bef~)(e such d.:tte. as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 

(3) A copy of the annual report as prepared under sub-section (1), shall 
15 also be submitted to -the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, 
cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
20 
25 
30 
30. ( 1) The annual accounts and balance-sheet of the University shall be Annual 
prepared under the directions of. the Board of Management and shall, once at accounts 
least every year and at interval of not more than fifteen months, be audited 
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or by such persons as he may 
authorise in this behalf. 
(2). A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon 
·shall be submitted to the Visitor. 
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be 
brought to the notice of the Board of Management and the observations of the 
Board of Management , if any, shall be submitted to the Visitor. 
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as 
submitted to the Visitor, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, 
which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same tope laid before both Houses 
of Parliament . 
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses 
of Parliament shall be published in the Gazette of India. 
35 31 ( 1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written Conditions of 
contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall service of 
be furnished to th e employee concerned. emplqyees 
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University·and any . 
· employee shall , at the request of the · employee, be referred to a Tribunal of 
40 Arbitration consisting of o.ne member appointed by the Board of Man.agement, 
one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed 
by the Visitor. 
(3) The decision of the. Tribunal in .such matters shall .be final . 
2~1 1940 (4) Every request made by the employee unc;ler .sub-section (2}, ~t)all be 
deemed to be a·submission. to arbitration upon the terms of this section wiihin 
the meaning of the Arbitration Act. 1940. 
5 (5) The procedure for regulating the works of the Tribunal shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes. 
32. (i) Any student or candidate for an examination whose name has been Procedure of 
removed from the rolls of the University by the orders or resolution of the Vice- appeal and 
10 Chancellor,· Discipline Committee, or Examination Committee as the case may arbitration in 
be. and who has been debarred from appearing at th€ examinations of the disciplinary 
Univers ity for more than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt cases against 
of such orders or copy of such resolution by him. appeal to the Board of students. 

.Management and the Board of Managemen t may confirm , modify or reverse 
the decision of .the Vice-Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be. 
15 (2} Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University 
20 
25 
30 
19 of 
1925 
35 . 
40 
45 
5 
against a student shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal 
of Arbitration and the provsions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 
·(31) shall, as far as may be, apply to a r~ference made under this sub-section. 
33. Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
maintained by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contained In this 
Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes, to the Board of Management against the decision of any officer or 
authority of the University or of the Principal of any. College .or Institution, as 
the case may be, and thereupon the Board of Management may confirm, modify 
or reverse the decision appealed against. 
34. (1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its employees such 
provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem 
fit in such manner and subject to such condit ions as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes. 
(2) Where such prov ident fund or pension fund has been so const ituted, 
the Central Government may declare that the provision of the Provident funds 
Act, 1925, shall apply to such fund, as if it were a Government provident fund. 
Right to 
appeal. 
Provident , 
arid pension 
funds. 
35. If any question arises as to whether any person has'teen duly elected Disputes as to 
or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body co~stitu~on of 
of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision ~:~~;~i·~ and 
thereon shall be final. bodies. 
36. Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act or the 
statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise 
provided , consist of the members of the authority concerned and of such other 
person, if any, as the aut11ority in each case may think fit. 
37. All casual vacancies ·among the members (other thqn ex oficio 
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as 
soon as may be, by the person or body who appointed, elected or co-opted 
the member whose place has become vacant and the person appointed, elected 
or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body 
for the residue of the term lor which the person whose place he fills would have 
been a member. 
38. No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of the University 
shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies 
among its members. 
Constitution of 
Committees. 
Filling of casual 
Vacancies. 
Proceedings of 
University 
authorities or 
bodies not 
invalidated by 
vacancies . 
39. No suit or other legal proceedi"ngs shall lie against any offic"er of other Protection of 
employ.ee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended action taken in good faith. 

10 
15 
1 of 
1872. 
20 
25 
to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act. the statutes or 
the Ordinances . 
40. A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order , proceeding, resolution 
: of any authority or Comm ittee of the University, or other documents in 
possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by 
the Univers ity, if certified by the Registrar, shall be recived as prima facie 
evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or 
documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as 
evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the ori9inal thereof 
would, if produced. have been admissib le in evidence , notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or in any other law for the time being 
in force, 
41.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of three years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made , before each House of Parliament. 
42. Notwiths tanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes.-- -
30 (a) the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and the 
35 
30 
5 
said officer shall hold office for a term of five years; 
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed 
by the Visitor and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term 
of three years ; 
(c) the first Board of Management shall cons ist of not more than eleven 
members who shall be nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office 
for a term of three years; 
(d) the first Academic Council and the first Planning Board shall be 
nominate d by the visitor for a term of three years; 
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities. 
the same shall be filled by appointment or nomination, as the case may be, 
by the Visitor, and the persons so appointed or nominated shall hold office for 
so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or nominated 
·would have held that office, if such vacancy had not occurred. 
43. (1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation· made under this Act 
Statutes, Ordinance and Regulations to be published in t11e Official Gazette and 
to be laid before Parliament shall be published in the Official Gazette. 
Mode of proof 
Univers ity 
record. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
Transitional 
Provisions . 

10 
15 
20 
25 
24 
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days wh1ch may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions. and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation or both House agree that the Statute, Ordinance or 
Regulation should not be made, the Statute. Ordinance or Regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so. however. that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation. 
(3) The Power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include 
the power to give retrospect ive effect from a date not earlier than the date of 
commencement of this Act, to the Statutes. Ordinances or Regulations or any 
of them but no retrospect ive effect shall be given to any Statute, Ordinance 
or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom 
such Statute. Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable. 

10 
15 
20 
25 
(2) Every Statute. Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be af1er it is made, before e ach House of Parliament, 
while it is in session. for a total period of thirty days wh1ch may be compnsed 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Statute. 
Ordinance or Regulation or both House agree that the Statute, Ordinance or 
Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be: so. however. that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation. 
(3) The Power to make Statutes. Ordinances or Regulations shall include 
the power to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of 
commencement of this Act. to the Statutes. Ordinances or Regulations or any 
of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, Ordinance 
or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom 
such Statute, Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable . 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 4) 
THE OBJECTS OF THE UNIVERSITY 
The University shall endeavour to promote advanced knowledge by 
providing instructiona l and research facilities in Science and key and frontier 
areas of Technology and other allied disciplines and to offer appropriate 
courses relevant for the development of socially and economically depressed 
sections of the people. including agricultural technology and rural crafts : to 
promote the study of the principles for which Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar 
worked dt,Jring his lifetime. namely, national integration, social justice and 
democratic way of life, and also study of the const itutions of the world . It would 
take appropr iate measures for promot1ng innovations in teaching -learn1ng 
processes in inter-diSCiplinary studies and research and pay spec1al alten t1on 
to the promot 1on ot educat1onC1l 2nd econom,c ,nte.t:sts and welfare of the 
people in general and of members belong1ng to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes in part1cutar by provid1ng adequate percentage of seats lor 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The University shall. in organising 
its activities. have due regard to the objects specit:ed in the First Schedule. 

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 27) 
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY 
The Chancellor: 
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor of the Babasaheb 
Bhimrao Ambadekar University recommended by the Board of Management 
from amongst persons of eminence in the academic or public life of the country 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so 
recommended,he may call for fresh recommendat ions from the Board of 
Management 
(2} The Chancellor shall shall office for a term of five years and shall be 
eligible for re-appointment. 
The Vice-Chancellor.: 
2. (1) The Vice-Cha ncellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel 
of not less than three persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as 
constituted under clause (2) : 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included 
in the panel , he may call for a fresh panel. 
(2) The Comm ittee referred to in clause (1 ), shall consist of three persons, 
none of whom shall be an employee of the University or a member of the Board 
of Management, Academic Council member of any authority of the University 
or connected with an institution associated with the University and out of the 
three persons, two shall be nominated by the Board of Management and one 
by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall be the convenor of the 
Comm ittee. 
(3) The Vice-Chancello r shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the 
University. 
(4) The Vice-Chancel lor shall hold office for a term of five years from the 
date on which he enters upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty­
five years. whichever is earlier, and he shall not be eligible for reappointment: 
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said· period of five years, 
he shall continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his 
office : 
Provided further that the Visitor n~ay direct any Vice-Chancellor after his 

term has e::pired, to continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total 
period of one year, as may be specified by him. 
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor 
shall be as follows:-
(i) The Vice-Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances 
other· than the house rent allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central 
Government from time to time and he shall be e11titl~d, without payment 
of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and no 
charge shall fall on the Vice-Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of 
such residence. 
(ii) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and 
allowances as may be fixed by the Board of Management with the approval 
of the Visitor from time ot time: 
Provided that where :~n employee of the University or a College or an 
Institution maintained by it, or of any other Univeq5ity or any Institution. 
maintained by or affiliated to such other University, is appointed ~s the Vice­
Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident 
fund of which he is a member and the Uni\fersity shall contribute to the 
account of such person in that provident fund at the same rate at which 
the person had been contributing immediately before his appointment as 
the Vice-Chancellor: 
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any 
pension sch~me, the University shall make the necessary_contribution to 
such scheme. 
(iii) The Vice~Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such 
rates as may be fixed by the Board of Management. 
(iv) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the fate · 
of thirty days in a calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his 
account in advance in two half-yearly instalments of fifteen days each on 
the 11th day of January and 1st day of July every year: ~ 
Provided that ii the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of 
the office of the Vice-Chancellor during the currency , ot a half year, the 
leave shall be credited proportionately at the rate of two and-a- half days 
1or each completed month of services. · 
(v) In addition to the leave (eferred to in sub-clause (iv), the . Vice­
Chancellor shall also be entitled to half pay leave at the rate to twenty days 
for each completed year of service.This half pay leave may also be availed 
of as commuted leave on ~~II pay on medical certificate. When commuted 

leave is availed, twice the amount of half pay leave shall be debited against 
half pay leave due. 
(6) If the office of the Vice-Chancellor. becomes vacant due to death, 
resignation or otherwise or if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill health 
or any other cause, one of the Pro-Vice chancellors shall perform the duties 
of the Vice- Chancellor: 
Provided that if . no Pro-Vice-Cha.n.cellor is available the seniormost 
Professor shall perform the duties of the' Vice-Chancellor until a new Vice- · 
Chancellor assumes office or until the existing Vice-Chancelior attends to ·ihe 
duties of his office, as the case may be. 
Powers and duties uf the Vice-Chancellor 
3.(1) The Vice-Chancellor ~hall be ex officio Chairman of the Board of 
Management the Academic Council, the Planning Board and the Finance 
Committee and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor preside at the 
convocations held for conferring degrees. 
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address any . 
meeting of any authority or other body of the University', but shall not be entitled 
to vote thereat unless he is a member of such authority or body. 
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to see that this Act, the 
Statutes, the ordinances and the Regulations are duty observed, and he shall 
have all the powers necessary to ensure such observance. 
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the 
University and shall give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the 
University. 
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper 
maintenace of dir cipline in the University and he may delegate any such powers 
· ot such person or persons as he may deem fit. 
(6) The Vice-Cha,nc~llor shall have the power to convene or cause to be 
conven8d the meeting of the Board of Management the Academic Council, the 
Planning Board and the rinance Committee. 
Pro- Vice-Chancellor 
4. ( 1) Every Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Board of 
Management on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor: 
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor is not 
accepted by the Board of Management, the matter shall be referred to the 
Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended by the Vice-Chancellor 

or ask the Vice-Chancellor to recommend another person to the Board of 
Management: 
Provided further that the Board of Management may, on the recommen­
dation of the Vice-Chancellor, appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of 
a Pro-Vice-Chancellor in addition to his own duties as a Professor. 
(2) The term of office of a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be 
decided by the Board of Management but it shall not in any case exc~ed five 
years or until the. expiration of the term of office of the Vice-Chancellor, 
whichever is earlier: 
Provided that a Pro-Vice-Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall 
be eligible for reappointm.ent: 
Provide.d further that, in any case, a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall retire on 
attaining the age of sixty-five years: 
Provided also that the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall, while discharging the 
duties of the Vice-Chancei lor under clause (6) of Statute 2, continue in office 
notwithstanding the expiration of his term of office as Pro-Vice-Chancellor, until 
a new Vice-Chancellor or the existing Vice-Chancellor, as the case may be, 
assumes office: 
Provided also that when the office of the Vice-Chancel)or becomes vacant 
and there is no Pro-Vice-Chancellor to perform the functions of the Vice­
Chancellor the Board of Management may appoint a Pro-Vice-Chancellor and 
the Pro-Vice-Chancellor so appointed shall cease to hald office as such as soon 
as a Vice-Chancellor is appointed and enters upop h~ls office. . 
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro­
Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
(4) A Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall assist the Vice-Chancellor in respect of 
such matters as may be specified by the Vice-Chancellor in this behalf from 
time to tinie, and shall also exercise such powers and perform such duties as 
may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice-Chancellor. 
Registrar: 
5.(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Board of Management on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted fo rt h~ purpose and shall 
be a whole~time salaried officer of the University. ". 
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
reappointm ent. 

(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the 
8egistrar shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances: 
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years: 
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age 
of sixty years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters 
upon his office or until the expiry of a period of one yerar whichever is earlier. 
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by 
reason of illness, absence or any other cause unable to perform the duties of 
his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the 
Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose. 
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against 
such of the employees, excluding teachers and academic staff, as may be 
specified in the order of the Board of Management and to ·suspend them 
pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the 
penalty of censure or the withholding of increment: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against 
the action proposed to be taken in regard to him. 
(b) An appe_al shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any order of the 
Registrar imposing any of the penalties specified in sub-clause (a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the 
power of the Registrar is called for, the Registrar shall. upon conclusion of the 
inquiry, make a report to the Vice-Chancellor along· with his recommendations:· 
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Board of Management ag<;1inst an 
order _of the Vice-Chancellor imposing any penalty. 
(6) Th~ Registrar shall be ex officio Secretary of the Board of Management .. 
the Academic Council and the Planning Board but shall not be deemed to be 
a member of any of these .authorities. 
(7} It shall be the duty of the Registrar-
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such oiher 
property of the University as the Board of Management shall coll}mitt to his 
charges: 
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Board of Management, 
the Academic Council, the Planning Board and of any Committees appointed 
by those authorities; 

(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Board of Management, 
the Academic Council, the Planning Board and of any Committees appointed 
by those authorities; 
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Board of Management, 
the Academic Council, and the Planning Board; 
(e) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of the University in 
accordence with the manner prescribed by the Ordinances; 
(f) to supply to Visitor copies of the agenda of the meetings of the· authorities 
of the University as soon
1 
as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings; 
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the . 
University, sign powers -of-attorney and verify pleadings or depute his 
·representative for the purpose; and 
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the 
Ordinances or the. Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by 
the Board of Management or the Vice-Chancellor. 
The Finance Officer: 1 
6. (1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Board of Management 
on the recommendatio~s of a Selection Committee consitituted for the purpose 
and· he shafl be a whole-time salaried officer of the University. 
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
· reappointment. 
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Finance Officer shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances: 
Provided that a Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty 
years: 
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining 
the age of sixty years, continue in office until his succ'essor is appoinfed and 
enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period of one year, whichever 
is earlier. 
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer .is vacant or when the Finance 
Officer is by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform 
th.e duties of his office, the duties of the oflice shall be performed by such person 
as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose . 
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio Secretary of the Finance 
Committee, but shall bot be deemed to be a member of such Committee. . .. 

(6) The Finance Officer shall--
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and 
shall advise it as regards its financial policy; and 
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him 
by the Board of Management or as may be prescribed by the Statutes or 
the Ordinances. 
· (7) Subject to the control of the Board of Management, the Finance Officer 
shall--
. •, ~ ... ··.' 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University 
including trust and endowed property; . 
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Board of Management for 
recurring and non-recurring expenditure for a year are not exceeded and 
that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which they are granted 
or allotted; 
(c) be· responsible for the preparation of annual accounts ._.and_ the 
budget of ·the University and for their Presentation to the B9g_rd of 
. Management; 
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances 
and on the state of investments; 
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the 
methods of_ collection employed; 
(f) ensure that the registers of buildrngs·. land, fuhiifUre·afid·ec:{uipment 
·are maintain€3d up-to-date and that stock-checking is. concfu.cted; of 
·equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, Special Centres, 
Specialised Laboratories, Colleges and Institutions maintained by the 
University; '· · 
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice-Chancellor unauthori.seo. e~pen9.iture 
and other finandal · irregularities and suggest discipiinary action against 
persons at fault; and 
(h) call for -from any office, Centre,. Laboratory, Coll.ege or jnstitution 
... . . ... ITl.?Jnt_aLnecj_ ~Y. ._the University any information or ret runs that he may 
co~sider necessary for the performance of his duties. - - - ~· -·-· 
(8) Any receipt giveri by the Finance Officer or the person or-persons duly .. . ·- .. ~----- ·- -- -··- . ··- . . 
authorised in this behalf by the Board of Management for any money payable 
to the University shall be sufficient discharge for payment of such money. 

Deans of Schools of Studies: 
7 (1) Every Dean of a School of Studies shall be appointed by the Vice­
Chancellor from among the Professors in the School for a period of three years 
and he shall be eligible for reappointment: 
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty years shall cease to hold 
office as such: 
Provided further that if at any time there is no Professor in a School, the 
Vice-Chancellor. or a Dean authorised by the Vice-Chancellor in this behalf, 
shall exercise the powers of the Dean of the School. 
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason 
of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, 
the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice­
Chancellor may appoint for the purpose . 
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible 
for the conduct and maintenance of the standards of teaching and research 
in the School and shall have such other funtions as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances. 
( 4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting 
of the Boards o! Studies or Committee of the School, as the case may be, but 
shall not have the right to vote thereat unless he is a member thereof. 
Heads of Departments.: 
8. (1) In the case of Department which have more tran one Professor, 
the Head of the Department shall be appointed by the Board of Management 
on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor from among the Professors. 
(2) In the case of Departments where there is only one Professor. the Board 
of Management shall have the option to appoint, on the recommendation of 
the Vice-Chancellor. either the Professor or a Reader as the Head of the 
Department: 
Provided that it shall be open to a Professor or Reader to decline the offer 
of appointment as the Head of the Department. 
(3) A person appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office 
as such for a period of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(4) A Head of a Department may resign his office at any time during his 
tenure of office. 
(5) A Head of a Qepartment shall perform such duties as may be prescribed 
by the Ordinances. 

Proctors.: 
9. (1) Every Proctor shall be appointed by the Board of Management 
on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor and shall_ exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by the Vice-Chancellor. 
(2) Every Proctor shall hold office for a term of two years and shall 
. be elligible for reappointment. 
Librarian.: 
10. (1) The Liberarian shall be appointed by the Board of Management 
on the recommendations of the Selection Comm ittee constituted for the purpose 
·and he shall be· a vyhole-time officer of the University. 
·(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties 
as may be assigned to him by the Board of Management. 
Quorum for meetings of the Board of Management.: 
11. Five m'embers of the Board of Management shall from a quorum 
·. for a meeting qf the Board of Management. 
Powers and functions of the Board of Management. 
12.(1) The Board of Management shall have the power of management 
and administrat ion of the revenue and property of the University and the 
counduct of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided 
for. 
(2) Subject to the prov1s1ons of this Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances, the Board of Management shall, in addition to all other powers 
vested in it, have the following papers namely:-
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number · 
and emoluments of such posts and to define the duties and conditions of 
service of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff and 
Principals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University:-
Provided that no action shall be taken by Board of Management in 
respect of the number,qua lifications and then emolur(lents of teachers and 
academic staff otherwise than after consideration of the recommendations 
of the Academic Council: 
(ii) to appoint such Professors. Readers, Lecturers and other academic 
staff. as may be necessary, ·and Principals of Colleges and Institutions 
maintained by the University on the . recommenda tion of the Selection 
·Committee constituted for the purpqse and to fill up temporary vacancies 
therein; 

(iii) to create administrative , ministerial and other necessary posts and 
to make appointments thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances; 
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than 
the Chancellor and the Vice-Chancellor, and to make necessi:!ry arrange­
ments for the discharge of the functions of such officer during his absence; 
(v) to regulate ·and enforce discipline among employees in accordance 
with the Statutes and the Ordinances; · 
(vi) to manage and regulate the ffnances, accounts, investments, 
property, business and all other administrative affaris of the University, and 
for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit; 
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non-recurring 
expenditure for a year on the recommendations of the Finance Committee: 
(viii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any 
unapplied income, in such stocks, funds, share or securities, from time to 
·time .. as it may think fit or the purchase of immovable property in India, 
with the like powers of varying such investment from time to time; 
(ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable· 
property on behalf of the University; 
(x) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other 
means needs for carrying on _the work of the University: 
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry out ~md cancel contrats on behalf of the 
University: 
(xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit to redresss any 
grievances of the employees and students of the University who may, for 
any reason, feel aggrieved: 
(xii) to appoini examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove 
them, and to fix their fees. emoluments and travelling and other allowances, 
after consulting the Academic Council; 
(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the 
custody and use of such seal: 
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the 
residence and discipline of women students: 
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice­
Chancellor, the Deans. the Registrar or the Finance Officer or such other 
employee or authority· of the University or to a committee appointed by it 
as it may deem fit: 

(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and 
prizes; 
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus 
Professors; Consultants and Scholars ·and determine the terms and 
conditions of such appointments; and 
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as 
' •.' : /_. 
may be conferred or imposed on it by the Act, or the Statutes. . . . . . ". 
Quorum for meetings of the Academic Council.: 
13. Nine Members of the Academic Council shall from a quorum for a 
meeting of the Academic Council. 
Powers of the Academic Council.: 
14. Subject to the Act. the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic 
Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the .following 
powers, namely:- · 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the 
University and to give directions regarding methods of intructions, co· 
operative teaching among Colleges and Institutions, evaluation of research 
. or improvements in academic standards; 
(b) to bring about inter-School co-ordination, to establish or appoint 
committee or boards. for taking up projects on an inter School basis; 
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own 
initiative or on a reference by a School or the Board of Management and· 
to take appropriate action thereon: and 
(d) to trame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and 
the Ordinances regarding the academic functioning of the Universi.ty, . 
discipline. residences, admissions. award of fellowships and studentships, 
fees. concessions. corporate lile and attendance. 
The Planning Bc?rd.: 
15 .. ( 1) The Planning Board· shall be the principal planning. body of the 
University and sh<~ll be msponsible for·-· 
(a) reviewing the educational programmes offered by the University; 
. (b) organising the structure of education in the University s0 as to 
provide opportunities to students to offer different combinations of subjects 
appropriate for the development of personality and skills for useful work 
in society: 

{c) creating an atmosphere and environment conductive to valueoriented 
education: and 
(d) developing new teaching-learning processes which will combine the 
lectures, tutorials, seminars, demonstrations. self-studies and collective 
practical projects. 
(2) The Planning Board shall have the power to advise on the development 
of the University and review the progress implementation of programmes so 
as to ascertain whether they are on the lines recommended by it and shall also 
have the power to advise the Board of Management and the Academic Council 
on any matter in connection therewith . 
(3) The Academic Council and the Board of Management shall be bound 
to consider the recommendations of the Planning Board and shall implement 
such of the recommendations as.are accepted by it. 
(4} Such of those recommendations of the Planning Board as have not been 
accept ed by the Board of Management or the Academic Council under clause 
(3) shall be submitted by the Vice-Chancellor along with the recommendations 
of the Board of Management or the Academic Council, to the Visitor for advice 
and the advice of the Visitor shall be implemented by the Board of Management 
or the Academic Council, as the case may be. 
(5) The Planning Board may constitue such Committees as may be 
necessary for planning and monitoring the programmes of the University. 
Schools of Studies and Departments 
16. ( 1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as may be 
specified by the Ordinances. 
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first 
Shoo! Board shall be nominated by the Board of Management ~nd shall hold 
office for a period of three years. 
(3) The powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinan ces. · 
(4} The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required 
for such meetings shall be prescribed by the Or~inances. 
(5) (a} Each School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned 
to it by the Ordinances. 
(b) No Department shall be established or abolished except by the Statutes: . 
Provided that the Board of .t0anagement may, on the recommendation of 
tne Academic Council, establish Cent of Studies to which may be assigned such 

teachers of the University as the Board of Management may consider 
necessary. 
(c) Each Department shall consist of the following members. namely:-
· (i) Teachers of the Department; 
(ii) Persons conducting research in the'. Department; 
(iii) Dean of the School: 
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department:· 
and 
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Department 
in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinances. 
Board of Studies: 
17. (1) Each Department shall have a Board of Post-graduate Studies 
and a Board of Under-graduate Studies. 
(2) The constitution of a Board of Post-graduate Studies and the term 
of office of its members shall be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
(3) The functions of a Board of Post-graduate Studies shall be to 
approve subjects for research for various degress and other requirements of 
research degrees and to recommend to the concerned Shchool Board in the 
manner prescribed by the Ordinances:-
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for post-gratuate 
courses, but excluding research degrees: 
(b) appointmen t of supervisors of research; and 
(c) measures of the improvement of the standard of post-graduate 
teaching and research: 
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Post-gratuate Studies shall, 
during the period of three years immediately after the commencement of the 
Act, be performed by the Department. .< • 
(4) The constitution and functions of a Board of Under-graduate Studies 
and the term of its members shall be prescirbed by the Ordinances. 
Finance Committee: 
· 18 (1) The Finance Committee shall cons ist of the following members . . 
namely:-

(i) the Vice-Chancellor; 
(ii) one or more Pro-Vice-Chancellors, as the case may be; 
(iii) three persons nominated by the Board of Management, out of whom 
at least one shall be a member of the Board of Management ; and 
(iv) three persons nominated by the Visitor. 
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee, shall form a quorum for a 
meeting of the Finance Committee. 
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio 
members, shall hold olfice for a term of three years. 
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record 
a minute of dissent if he does not agree with any decision of the Finance 
Committee. 
(5) The Fin~nce Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to exmine 
the accounts and to scrutinise proposals for expenditure. 
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which 
havenot been included in the Budget. should be examined by the Finance 
Committee before they are considered by ths Board of Management. 
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University 
prepared by the Finance Ollicer shall be laid before the Finance Committee 
for consideration and comments and there after submitted to the Board of 
Management for approval. 
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring 
expenditure and the total non-recurring expenditure for the year. based on the 
income and resources of the University (which, in the case of productive works. 
may include the proceeds of loaris). 
Selection Committee: 
19. (1) There shall be Selection Committes for making recommendations 
to the Board of Management for appointment to the posts of Professor. Reader, 
Lecturer, Registrar. Finance Officer . Librarian and Principals of Colleges and 
Institutions maintained by the University. 
(2) . The Selection Committee for appointmer.tt to the posts specified in 
column 1 of the Table below shall consist of the Vice-Chancellor, Pro-Vice­
Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the . persons spcified in the 
corresponding entry in colum 2 of the said Table; 

Professor 
Reader/Lect urer 
Registrar,Finance Officer 
Librarian 
(i) 
TABLE 
2 
The Head of the Department con­
cerned if he is a Professor. 
(ii) One Professor to be nominated by the 
Vice-Chancello r. 
(iii) Three persons not in the service of the 
University, nominated by the Board of 
Management, ou t of a panel of names 
recommended by the Academic Coun­
cil for their special knowledge of, or 
interest in, the subject with which the 
Professor will be concerned. 
(i) The Head of the Department con­
cerned 
(ii) One Professor to be nominated by the 
Vice-Chancellor. 
(iii) Two persons not in the service of the 
University, nominated by the Board of 
Managment. out of a panel of names 
recommended by the Academic Coun­
cil for their special knowledge of, or 
interst in, the subject with which the 
Reader or a Lecture will be concerned. 
(i) Two members of the Board of 
Management nominated by it. 
(ii) One person not in the service of the 
University nominated by the Board of 
Management. 
( i) Two persons not in the service of the 
University, who have special knowledge 
of the subject of the Library Science/ 
Library Administration to be nominated 
by the. Board of Management. 
(ii) One person not in the service of the 
University, nominated by the Board of 
~anagement. 

Principal of College or Institution 
maintained by the University. 
Three persons not in the service of the 
University of whom two shall be 
nominated by the Board of Manage­
ment and one by the Academic Coun­
cil for their special knowledge of, or 
interest in, a subject in which instruc­
tion is being provided by the College 
or Institution . 
NOTE: 1. Where the appointment is being made for an inter-disciplinary project, 
the head of the project shall be deemed to be the Head of the 
Department concerned. 
2. The Professor to be nominated shall be Professor concerned with 
the specially for which the selecton is being made and that the Vice­
Chancellor shall consult the Head of the Department and the Dean 
of School nominating the Professor. 
(3) The Vice-Chancellor, or in his absence, one of the Pro-Vice-Chancellors 
shall preside at the meetings of a Selection Committee: 
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after 
prior consulation with, and subject to the convenience of Visitor's nomiriee and 
the persons nominated by the Board of Management under clause (2): 
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee shall not 
valid unless,-
(a) Where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated 
by the Board of Management is four in all, at least three of them attend 
the meeting; and 
(b) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated 
by the Board of Management is three in all, at least of them attend the 
meeting. 
(4) The meeting of a Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vice­
Chancellor or in his absence by the Pro-Vice-C hancellor. 
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making 
recommendations shall be laid down in the Ordinances. 
(6) If the Board of Management is unable to accept the recommendations 
made by a Selection Committee , it shall record its reasons and submit the case 
to the Visitor for final orders. 
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated 
below:~ 

(i) If the temporary vacancy is for a duration longer than one academic 
session, it shall be filled on the advice of the Selection Committee in 
accordance with the procedure indicated in the foregoing clauses: 
Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor is satisfied that in the interest of work 
it is necessary to fill the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a pureiy 
temporary basis by a local Selection Committee referred to in sub-clause 
(ii) for a period not exceeding six months. 
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment 
to such vacancy shall be made on the recommendation of a local Selection 
Comm ittee consisting of the Dean of the School concerned, the He·ad of 
the Department and a nominee of the Vice-Chancellor: 
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head 
of the Department .. the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of 
the Vice-Chancellor: 
Provided further that in case sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts 
caused by death or any other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with 
the Head of the Department concerned, make a temporary appointment 
!or a month and report to the Vice-Chancellor and the Registrar about such 
appointme nt. 
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended 
·by a regular Selection Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be 
continued in service on such temporary employment, unless he is 
subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular Selection 
Committee. for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may 
be. 
Special mode of appointment :-
20. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statut.e 19, the Board of 
Management may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional 
attainments to accept a post to Professor or Reader or any other academic 
posi in the University as the case may be, on such terms and conditions as 
it deems fit, and on the person agreeing to do so appoint him to the Post. 
(2) The Board of Management may appoint a teacher or any other academic 
staff working in any other University or organisation for undertak ing a joint 
project in accorda nce with the manner laid down in the Ordinances. 
Appointment for a fixed tenure :-
21. The Board of Management may appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 19 for a fixed tenure on 
such terms and conditions as it deems· fit. 

Recognised teachers :-
22. (1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may be 
precribed by the Ordinances. 
(2) All applications lor the recognition of teachers shall be made in such 
manner as may be laid down in the Ordinances. 
(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose in the 
manner laid down in the Ordinances. 
(4) The perio.d of recongnition of a teacher shall be determined by the · 
Ordinances made in that behalf. 
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority 
of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw 
recognition from a teacher: 
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has 
been given to the person concerned calling upon him to show cau·se, within 
such times as may be specified in the notice, why such resolution should not 
be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce 
in support of them have been considered by the Academic Council. 
(6} Any person aggrieved by an order of withdrawal under clause (5} may, 
within three- months from the date of communication to him of such order, 
appeal to the Board of Management which· may pass such orders thereon as 
it thinks fit. 
Committees :-
23. (1) Any authority of the University may appoint as many standing or 
special Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committee 
persons who are not members of such authority. 
(2) Any such Committee apointed under clause (1) may deal with any 
subject delegated to it s ubject to subsequent confirmation by the authority 
appointing. 
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc. 
24. (1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, 
in the absence of any agreement to the contract, be governed by the terms 
and conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, 
the Ordinances and the Regulations. 
(2} Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall 
be appointed on a written contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by 
the Ordinances. 
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause (2) shall be deposited 
with the Registrar. 

44 
'S and conditions of service and code of conduct of other emplyees: 
5. All the employees of the University other than the teachers and other 
emic staff of the University, shall, in the absence of any contract to the 
arty, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of 
Jet as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations. 
Jrity list: 
5. ( 1) Whenever, 'in accordance with the Statutes. any person is to hold · 
;ice or be a member of an authority of the University by rotation according 
niroity, such seniority shall be determined according to the length of 
1uous service of such person in his grade, and, in accordance with such 
principles as the Board of Management may, from time to time, prescribe. 
~) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain, in respect 
ch class of persons to whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a 
lete and up-to-date seniority list in accordance with the provisions of 
e (1 ). 
:) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a 
ular grade or the relative seniority of any person or persons in otherwise 
Jbt, the Registrar n1ay, on his own motion and shall, at the request of 
;uch person, submit the matter to the Board of Management whose 
on thereon shall be final. 
wal ot employees of the University: 
7. (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a 
)er of the academic staff or other employee of the University, the Vice­
::ellor, in the case of the t·eacher or member of the academic staff, and 
Jthority competent to appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appoin~ing 
rity) in the case of other employee, may, by order in writting place such 
er, member of the· academic staff or other employee, as ihe case may 
1der suspension and shall forthwith report to the Board of Management . 
rcumstances in which the order was made: 
·ovided that the Board of Management may, if it is of the opinion that the 
1stances of the case do not warrant the suspension of the teacher or the 
>er of the academic staff, revoke such order. 
} Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of 
1tment or of any other terms and conditions of service of the employees. 
)ard of Management in respect of teachers and other academic staff, and 
)pointing authority in respect of other employees. Shall have the power 
1ove a teacher or a member of the academic staff or as the case may 
her emolovee on orounds of misconduct. 

(3) Save as aloresiad, the Board of Management or as tile case may be 
the appointing authority, shall not be entitled to remove any teacher, member 
of the academic staff or other employee except for a good cause and alter giving 
three month$ notice or on payment of three months salary in lieu thereof. 
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be 
removed under clause (2) or clause (3) unless he has been given a reasonable 
opportun-ity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard 
to him. · 
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of t he academic s taff or other 
employee shall take effect from the date on which the order of removal is made: 
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other 
employee is under suspension at the time of his removal, such removal shall 
take effect from the date on which he was placed under suspension. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this 
Statute, a teacher, member of the academic s taff or other' employee m~y 
resign,---
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months notice 
in writing to the Board of Management or the appointing authority, as the 
case may be, or by paying three month's salary in lieu thereof; 
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's 
notice in writing to the Board of Manageme nt or as the case may be 
appointing authority or by paying one month's s alary in lieu thereof; 
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which 
the resignation is accepted by the Board of Management or the appointing 
authority, as the case may be. 
Honorary degrees: 
28. (1) The Board of Management may, on th.e recommendation of the 
Academic Council and by a resolution passed by a majority o f not less than 
two-thirds of the members present and voting, make proposals to tt1e Visitor 
for the conferment of honorary degrees: 
Provided that in case of emergency, the Board oi Management may, on 
its own motion. make such proposals. 
(2) The Board of Management may. by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two-thrids of the members present and voting, 
withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor. any honorary degree 
conferred by the University. 

Withdrawal of degree. etc: 
29. The Board of Management may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two-thrids of the members present and voting, withdraw 
any degree or academic distinction cantered on, or any certificate or diploma 
granted to, any person by the University for good and sufficient cause: 
Provided that no such resolution shall . be passed until a notice in writing 
has been given to that person calling upon him to show cause within such time 
·as may be specified in the nit ice why such a resolution should not be passed 
and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support 
of them, have been considered by the Board of .Management. 
Maintenance of discipline among students of the University: 
. 
30 (1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to 
students of the University shall vest in the Vice-Chancellor. 
(2) The Vice-Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems 
proper to a Proctor and to such other officers as he may specify in this behalf. 
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the 
maintenance of discipline and taking such action, as may seem to him 
appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice-Chancellor may, in 
excercise of his powers, by order, direct that any student or stydents be 
expelled, or rusticated, for a specified period, or be not admitted to a course 
or courses of study in a College Institution or Department of the University lor 
a stated period, or be punished with finte for an amount to be specified in the 
order, or be debarred form taking an examination or examinations conducted 
by the University, College, Institution or Department or a School for one or more 
years, or that the results of the student or students concerned in the 
examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be cancelled. 
(4) The Principals of Colleges and Institutions, Deans of School!? of Studies 
and Heads of teaching Departments in the University shall have the authority 
. to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the students in their repective 
Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teaching Departments in the University as 
may be necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges, Institutions, Schools 
and teaching Departments. 
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice-Chancellor, the Principals 
and other persons specified in clause (4), detailed rules of discipline and proper 
conduct shall be made by the University. The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, 
Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads oi teaching Departments in the 
University may also make the supplementary rules as they deem necessary 
for the aforesaid purposes. 
(.6) At t11e time of admission, eyery student shall of required to sign a 

dec laration to the effect that, he subm its himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction 
of the Vice -Chance llor and other authoities of til e University . 
Convcations: 
3 :1 . Convoca tions of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other 
purposes shal l be held in such manner as may be presc ribed by the Ordina nces. 
Acting Chairman of meetings: 
32. Where no provisio n is made for a President or Chairman to pres ide over 
. a meeti ng of any authority of. the University or any Comm ittee of such authority 
or ·whern the ·Preside nt or Chairman so prov ided for is abse nt, the membe rs 
present shall elect one from among themselves to preside at such meeting. 
Resignation: 
33 . Any member, other . than an ex officio member, of the Board o f 
Management , the Academ ic Counc il or any other authority of the University or 
any Comm ittee of such authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar 
and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such lette r is received by the 
Registrar. 
Disqualifications: 
34. (1) person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a 
member of any of ihe authorities of the U niversity:-
(i) if he is of unsound mind; 
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent; 
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving 
mora l turp itude and sentenced in respec t thereof to imprisonment for n ot 
less than six months. 
(2) if any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected 
to any of the disqualificaitons mentioned in clause (1), the question shall be 
referre d to the Visitor and. his decision shall b e f inal and no suit of other 
procee ding sha ll lie in any civil court against such decision. 
Residence condition for membership and office: 
35. Notwit hstanding anything containe d in the Statutes, a person who is 
not ordinarily resident in India shall be eligible to be an o fficer of the University 
or a membe r of any author ity of the University . 
Membership of authorities by v~·rtue of membership of other bodies: 
36. Notw ithstanding anyt11ing contained in the Statutes, a person who holds 
any post in t he University in l.~e University or is a member of any authority or 
body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular autho rity or 

body or as the holder or a particular appointment shall hold such office or 
membership only for so long as he cont inues to be a member of that particular 
authority or body or the holder of that particula r appointment, as stile case may 
be. 
Alumni Association: 
37. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the U niversity. 
{2) The subsceription ior membership of the A lumni Associa tion shall be 
prescirbed by the Ordinances . 
{3} No member of the Alumni Assoc iation shall be entitled to vote or stand 
for elect ion unless he has been a member of the Assoc iation for at least one 
year prior ot the date of the election and is a degree holder of the University 
of at least five years standing : 
Prov ided that the condit1 on relating t o t he comp letion of one year's 
membership shall not app ly in the case ol the first elec t1on. 
$tudent's Council-· 
38. ( 1} The re shall be constituted in the University, a Student's Council tor 
every academic year . consist ing of--
(i) the Dean of Student's Welfare who shall be the Chairma n of the 
Student's Cou ncil: 
(ii} all students who have won prizes in the previous academic year 
in the fields of studies . fine arts. sports and extensio n work: 
(iii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academ ic Council on the 
basis of mer it in studies, sports activiti es a nd all-round deve lopmen t of 
personality: 
Provided that any student of the Univer sity shall have the right to bring up 
any matte r co ncerning the University before the students coun cil if so permitted 
by the Cha irman. and he shall have the right to participate in the discussio ns 
at any meeting when the mailer is taken up for considerati on . 
{2) The functions of the Student 's Counc il shall be to make suggestions 
to the a ppropriate a utt1orities of Univers ity in regard to the prog rammes o f 
studies. studen t's welfare and other matters ol importance in regard to the 
working of the Univers1ty in genera l and such suggestions shal l be made on 
the basis of consensus of opin ion. 
{3) The Student's Counc il shal l meet at least once in an academic yea r 
preferably in the beginn ing of that year. 

Ordinances how made. 
39. ( 1) The first Ordinances made under sub-section (2) of section (27) may 
be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the Board of Management 
in the manner specif ied below. 
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the mailers enume rated in section 23 other 
than those enumerated in clause (n) of sub-sectio.n { 1) thereof, shall be made 
by the Board of Management unless a draft of such Ordinance has been 
proposed by the Academic Council. 
(3) The Board of Management shall not have power to amend any draft 
of any Ordinance proposed by the Academi c Council unde r clause (2), but may 
reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic Council for 
reconsideratio n, either in whole or in part together wrth any amendment which 
the Board of Management may suggest. 
(4) Whe re the Board of Management has rejected or returned tile draft of 
an Ordinance proposed by tt1e Academrc Councrl. the Academrc Counc1l may 
consider the question <lfrcsll and rn case the onginal draft in reaffirmed by a 
majority of not less than two·lt111ds of n1e members present and voting and more 
than half the total numt:·er of members of the AcademiC Council . the draft may 
be sent back to the board of Management whrch shall either 11 or refer rt to 
the Visrtor whose decrsron shall be lrnal. 
(5) Every Ord,nance mude by the Board of Management shall come rnto 
effect immediately 
16} Every Ordinculce made by lhG Board of rvtanagemen t shall be submitted 
to the Visitor withi n two weeks from the date of 1ts adopt1on. The Visitor shall 
havr! the power to drrect the Unrversity w1tl1rn four weeks of the receipt of t11e 
Orc;nance to suspend the operatron of any such Ordinance and he shall. as 
soon as possib le. inform the Board of Management about t1rs obj(:Ctron to the 
proposed Ordi nance . The Visitor may. after receiv ing the c omments of the 
Unive rsity, either withdraw the order suspending the Ordi nance or disallow the 
Ordrnnnce. and his decision shall be final. 
Regulations· 
40. (1) Tl)t; authorit .es of the Urlrvcrsity may make Regu'a ticns consiste nt 
wrth tne Act. 111(: Sl cih.Jtt::; dlld the Ordin;,nces tor the following matters . namely:-
(i) laying down tt1e procedu re to be obse rved Jl their meetings and the 
number ol members requ,red to lorm a quorum 
(ii) providi ng for all matter which are required by the Act. the Statutes 
or the Ordinances to be prescribed by Regulation s: 

(iii) providing for all otl1er matters soley concerning such authorities or 
Committees appointed by them and not provided lor by the Act, the Statutes 
to the Ordinances. 
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for 
the giving of notice to the members of such authority of the dates of meeting 
and of the business to be considered at meeetings and for the keeping of a 
record of the proceedings of meeetings. 
(3) The Board of Management may direct the amendment in such manner 
as it may specify, of any Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment 
of any such Regulation. 
Delegation of powers: 
41 . Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his or its powes to any other officer 
or authority or person under his or its repective c ontrol and subject to the 
cond ition that overa ll responsibility for the exercise of the powers so delegated 
shall continue to vest inthe officer or authority delegating such powers. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Uttar Pradesh Dr. Shim Rao Ambedkar Act, 1989 (UP Act 25 of 
1989) was enacted by the State Legislature to establish and incorporate a 
unitary teaching and residential University at Lucknow as a memorial to the 
life and works of the late Dr. Shim Rao Ambedkar. However the establishment 
of the University under the State Act was not notified by the State G~vernment. 
2. The U,P. Government had requested that the Central Govt. should 
either convent the Dr. B. R. Ambedkar University of the State Govt. into a 
Central University or agree to bear 50 per cent of the projected cost for the 
establishment of the University. The Standing Committee for the celebration 
of Centenary Year of Dr. B. R. Ambedkar had resolved that this University be 
converted into a Central University and that it may specialize in technology 
courses and provide for higher percentage of seats for SCs/STs. 
3. The Bill Seeks to establish a teaching and residential University at 
Lucknow in the State of Uttar Pardesh. The University shall promote advanced 
courses in Science and key and frontier areas of teshnology and other allied 
· disciplines in the educational programmes of the University;. take appropriate 
measures for promoting innovations in teaching -learning process in inter-
. disciplinary studies and research and pay special attending to the improvement 
of social and economi Conditions and welfare of the people of Uttar Pardesh 
in general and to members belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes in particular by providing higher percentage of seats for SCs and STs. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
ARJUN SINGH 
NEW DELHI; 
The· 6th May, 1994 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Claus e 3 ofth~ Sill provides fo~ the establishment of a C~ntral Un_iversity in Uttar 
Pradesh at Lucknow . 
. 2.- T.he State. Government of Uttar Pardesh had estimated Rs. 200.00 crores 
· as the cost of setting up the University. An appropr iate e;timate of f~ri&l"' 
required for setting up the University would be assessed in the project repon 
to be got prepared through the University Grants Comm ission. Since the Or. 
Bhim Rao Ambedkar University would be specialising in technology courses. 
the cost of setting up this University would ·be more than that of a 
conventional University. During the balance of the 8th Plan Period. the 
Government would require Rs. 8.12 crores for setting up the proposed 
Centra l University. 
3. The above mentioned expenditure will be met by the University Grants 
Comm ission from its Plan allocation after approviQg developmental proposal 
of- the proposed Univ€rsity on 5-year basiS-with _a . view Jo ensuring its 
· optimum deve lopment. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 27 of the Bill provides that the first Statutes are those set out 
in the Sch ed1,.1ie to the Bill. It also empowers the Board of Management of the 
University to make a new or additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes 
to the Univers.ity subject ot the assent of the Visitor. Sub-clause (5) of the 
aforesaid clause empowers the Visitor also to make new or additional St.atutes 
or amend or repeal the Statu tes of the University during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of the Act. Sub-clause (6) further 
empowers the Visitor to direct the University to make prdvisions in the Statutes 
in respect of any matter specified by hiin and if the Board of Management is 
unable to implement such directions within sixty days of its receipts, the Visitor 
may, after considering the request, if any communicated by the Board of 
Management for its inability to comply with such directions, make or amend 
the Statutes suitably. The matter in respect of which the Board of Management 
and the Visitor may make, amend or repeal Statutes include the constitution, 
powers and funcitons of the authorities and other bodies of the University, the 
appointment of officers and teachers of the University, the conditions of service 
of the employees of the University and other such matters. 
2. Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the Vice-Chancellor of the University 
to make the first Ordinances of the University with the previous approval of 
the Central Government and provides that the Ordinances so made may be 
amended. repealed or added to at any time by the Board of Management in 
the manner prescribed by the Statutes. The matters in respect of which 
Ordinances may be made, or as the case may be. amended, repealed or added 
to, relate to admission of students, Courses of Study, medium of instruction 
and examina tion. the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies. 
Special Centres, Specialised Laboratories and the manner of co-operation and 
collaboration with other Universities and authorities. the management of 
Colleges and Institutions established by the Univesities and other such matter. 
3. Caluse 29 of the Bill enables the authorities of the University of make 
Regulations, consistent with the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the 
conduct of their own business and that of the Committees appointed by them 
and not provided for by the . Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
4. The matter for which Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may be 
made pertain to matter of procedure of detail and it is hardly possible to provide 
for them in the Bill. The delegation of legislat ive powers is, therefore, of a 
·normal character. 

APPENDIX- I 
DR. B.R Ambedkar University Bill , 1 994 
The Dr. B.A. Ambedkar University Bill, 1994 has been referred to the 
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development headed by Shri P. Upendra for examination · and report . . 
The present Bill as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 9th May, 1994 
seeks to establish a teaching and residential University at Lucknow in Uqar 
Pardesh. The University shall promote advanced courses in Science and key 
and frontier areas of techn9logy and other allied disciplines in the educational 
programmes of the University; take appropriate measures for promoting 
innovations in teaching-learning process in inter-disciplinary studies· and 
research and pay special attentions to the improvement of social and aconomic 
conditions and welfare of the people of Uttar ·Pardesh in general and to 
members belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in particular 
by providing higher percentage of seats for SCs and STs. 
The Committee has decided to invite views through memoranda on the 
provisons of the Bill from organisations, institutions and individuals interested 
in the subject matter of the Bill. 
Interested organisations, irtstitutions and individuals amy submit their 
memoranda to the Under Secretary (CHAD), Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament House Annexe (Room No, 212), New Delhi-110001. So as to reach 
him on or before the 6th June, 1994, A copy of the Bill can be obtained from 
the concerned officer on request. 

APPENDIX -II 
LIST OT MEMORANDA 
I. Prof. S.K. Verma, Vice-Chancello r, Central Institute of English and 
Foreign Languages. Hyderabad . 
2. Prof. M.S. Sodha, Vice-Chancellor , Lucknow University, Lucknow. 
3. Dr. Chhedi Lal Sathi, President, Bharat Ratna Dr. Bhim Rao 
Ambedkar Maha Sabha. 
4. Shri R.R. Verma, Assistant Registrar (Accounts) I.I.T. Kanpur: 
5. Prof. Upendra Baxi Vice-Chancellor, University of Delhi. 
6. Shri Thomas V. Kunnunka l, S.J. Delhi Jesuit Society, St. Xavier's 
4. Raj Niwas Marg, Delhi. 
7. Prof. Yogeshwar Sharma, Director of Planning & Development Kota 
open University, Kota. 
8. Dr. M.S. Valiathan. Vice-Chanceller, Manipal Academy of Higher 
Education, Manipal. 
9. Dr. Kailash Nath Pandey, Akhil Bhartiya Hindi Pratishthapan Manch, 
Bombay. 
10. Prof. A.K. Sharma Centre of Advanced Study (Cell and 
Chromosom~ Research) Dept. of Botany, Calcutta. 
11. Dr. Ramgee Singh, Vice-chancellar,Jain Vishva Bharati Institute 
Ladnun , Rajasthan. 
12. Shri Kanai Lal Das. Genaral Secretary, All Tripura Scheduled Caste 
Offices, Welfare Society, Tripura (W). 

MINUTES 

APPENDIX -Ill 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT­
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
FIRST MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development 
met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 6th June, 1994 in Committee Room 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P. Upend ra - Chairman 
MEMBERS . 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri O.P. Kohli 
5. Shri Md. Salim 
6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
8. Shri lshwarbhai Khodabl1ai Chavda 
9. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
1 o. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
11. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
12. Shri Anna Joshi 
13. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
14. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai. 
15. Shri Venkateswrlu Ummareddy. 

SECRETARIAT 
1. Sh. Raja Ram,Oeputy Secretary 
2. Sh. Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
3. Sh. Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
4. Sh. Rohtas. Committee Officer 
2 .• • 
3 .• 
4. The Chairman than referred to the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University Bill, 1994 which had been 
referred to the Committee for examination and report. He informed the Members that a Press 
communique inviting. suggestions etc. through the memoranda from the interested individuals/ 
organisations/institutions, etc. was issued on 24th May, 1994, After deliberations on the 
objectives of the Bill, the Committee decided to hear the views of the Secretary, Department 
of Educations on the provisions of the Bill at its meeting to be held on 7th June 1994. 
s.-· 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. to meet again ·on Tuesday, the 7th June, 1994. 
Relates to other Matters 

II 
SECOND MEETING . 
. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development 
met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 7th June, 1994 in Committee Room 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Sh. P. Upendra 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SA~HA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Miss. Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri O.P. Kohli 
· 5. Shri Md. Salim 
6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
Chairman 
7. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
LOK SABHA 
8. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
9. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
. 10. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
11. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
12. Sh. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
13. Sh. Anna Joshi 
14. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
15. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
16. Shri Ramchandra Dome 
17. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
18. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
19. Shri Suraj M<tndJI 

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY QF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (DEPARTMENT 
OF EDUCATION). . . 
S 1. Shri S.V. Giri, Secretary 
t:; 2. Dr. Y.N. Chaturvedi, Additional Secretary 
c; 3. Shri D.S. Mukhopadhyaya, Joint Secretary 
~~ 4. Shri D.O. Gupta , Directqr' 
~ 5. Shri Uday Verma, Director 
r.:, 6. Mrs. Arti Kant, Director 
REPESENTATIVE OF DEPARTMENT OF LAW & JUSTIUE 
~ 1. Shri S.D. Ahuja , Assistant Legisla tive Counsel 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Raja Ram. Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Rohtas , Committee Officer 
2. . --.. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary and other representatives of the Ministry 
of Human Resource Development (Department of Education) in connection with the Dr. B.A. Ambedkar 
University Bill, 1994 under consideration of the Committee. 
3. A verbatim record of the procedings of the meeting was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 
the 8th June , 1994. 
... Relates to other matter 
· .. :.. 

v 
• FIFTH MEETING 
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human .Resource Development 
met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 7th July, 1994 in Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P. Upendra 
RAJYA SABBA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri O.P. Kohli 
Chairman 
5. Smt. Urmilaben ChitDanbhai Patel 
6. Shri Md. Salim · · 
7. Shri. Pravat Kumar Samantary 
8. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
9. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
10. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
LOK SABHA 
11. Dr .. Viswanatham Kanithi 
12. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
13. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak 
14. Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
15. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
16. Dr. Ramesh Chahd Tomar 
17. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi . 
18. Shri Mahadeep:1k Singh Shal<ya 
19. Shri Anna Jcshi 
* 'Minu tes of lllrd & IVth meetings relate to matters not included in . this Report 

20. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
.• 
21. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
22. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
SPECI AL INVITEE 
5 - 1. Shri Sangh Priya Gau~ham, M:P 
WITNESS 
~ 1. Prof. G. Ram Reddy, Chairman, University Grants Commission. 
~ 2. Or. T.R. Kom, Joint ,Director, University Grants Commission. 
MINISTRY OF LAW , JUSTICE & COMPANY AFFAIRS 
C, 3. Dr. P.C. Rao, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs. 
r; 4. Shri K.L. Mohanpuria, Secretaty, Legislative Department. 
c:::, 5. Shri R.L. Meena, Additional Secretary, Deptt. of Letal Affairs. 
'~, 6. Dr. Raghub ir Singh, Joint Sec~tary, Legislative Department. 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (DEPARTMENT 
OF EDUCATION) 
S 1. Smt. Arti Kant, Director. 
::...., 2. Shri Nirmal Singh, Under Secretary. 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary. 
2. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretatry. 
3. Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary. 
4. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary. 
5: Shri P.P.K. Ramcharyulu, Committee Off_icer. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Special Invitee and took the oral evidence of the above 
mentioned witnesses on matters concerning the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University Bill, 1994 
· referred to the Committee. 
A vP.rbation record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Comm ittee then adjourned at 6.05 P.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 
8th July, 1994. 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development 
met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 8th July, 1994 in Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P. Upendra Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
3. Shri O.P. Kor•: 
4. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
5. Shri Md. Salim 
6. Shri. Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
7. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
8. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
LOK SABHA 
9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
10. Prof. (Smt.} Savithri Lakshmanan 
11. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak 
12. Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
13. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
15. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
17. Shri Anna Joshi 
18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 

.1 9. Prof. Malini Bhattacha rya 
20. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
21. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy 
22. Shri Suraj Mandai 
SPECIAL INVITEES 
(- -- · 1. Shri H. Hanumanthappa, M.P. 
2. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya, M.P. 
WITNESS 
r:..1 1. Shri M. Ramachandran. Secretary (Department of Higher Education. U.P.) 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (DEPARTMENT 
OF EDUCATION) 
r;. 1. Smt. Arti Kant, Director 
.;.. 2. Shri Nirmal Singh, Under Secretary 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Ram Krishan. Under Secretary 
4. Shri Surinder Kumar. Under Secretary 
5. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer 
6. Shri Rohtas. Committee Officer 
2. The Committee heard the views ol the Special invitees and took the oral evidence of the 
witness on matter concerning the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University Bill. 1994 referred to the 
Committee. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Chairman requested the members of the Committee to send their suggestions/ 
amendments on the provisions of the Bill Latest by the 11th July, 1994. The Committee also 
decided to take up Clause-by- Claus~ consideration of the Bill on 21st and 22nd July, 1994. 
The Committee also decided that t)le Mamoranda received by it from various individuals, 

4. 
5. 
organisations and institutions containing their views suggestions on the provisions of the Bill 
may be sent to the Ministries of Human Resource Development and law. Justice and 
Company Affairs for their Comments. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.05 P.M. to rl}eet again on Thursday, the 21st July, 1994. 
Relates to other matter. 

VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development 
mef at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 21st July, 1994 in Committee Room ·o· Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P. Upendra Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri O.P. Kohli 
5. Shri Md. Salim 
6. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
7. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma. 
LOK SABHA 
8. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran 
9. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
10. Shri Subhash Chandra Nayak 
11 . Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
12. Shri lnder Jit 
1.3. Shri Rambadan 
14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
15. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
16. Shri Anna Joshi 
17. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
18. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya 
. . ; .. 

19. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
20. Shri Suraj Mandai 
SECRETARIAT 
Shir Surinder Kumar - Under Secretary 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRIES 
1. Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Eduaction) 
1. Shri O.S. Mukhop adhyaya, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.O. Gupta, Director 
3. Smt. Arti Kant, Director 
· 11. Ministry of Law. Justice & Company Affairs (Legislative Department 
Dr. Raghubir Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. . The Committee took up Clause-by-Clause cons ideration of the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University 
Bill, 1994. 
CLAUSE 2 
The Clause was adopted subject to following amendments:-
(I) Sub-Clause (m) was deleted . 
(II) Sub-Clause (q) :The Committee held detailed discussions on the sub-clause and held 
over its decision thereon. 
(Ill) Sub-Clause, (V) : Line 1, lor the words 'Dr.B.R. Ambedkar University', subs titute 
.·sabasahe b Bhimrao Ambedkar Universi ty'. 
CLAUSE 3 
The Clause was adopted subject to following amendments:-
(I) Sub-Clause ( 1) : Lines 1 and 2. for 'Or. B.R.Ambedkar University' substitute 
'Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar Univesity'. 
(II) Sub-Clause (3) (i} : Line 2, delete the 'the Planning and Academic Committee or' and 
line 3. after 'Counc il', for 'or' substitute 'and' 

(Ill) In tile last line. lor ·o r.B.R. Arnbedkar University' Substitute 'Babasaheb Bhimrao 
Ambedkar University'. 
CLAUS£ 4 
The Clause was adopted subject to following amendments:-
(I) Line 5, after 'University' insert 'to offer appropriate course relevant for the development 
of socially and economically depressed sections of the peoples, inciuding agricultural 
technology and rural crafts; to promote the study of the principles for which Babasaheb 
Bhimrao Ambedkar worked during his life time' namely national integration, social justice 
and democratie way of life; and also study of the Constitutions of the world; 
(II) Line 9, delete 'of Uttar Pradesh'. 
(Ill) Line 11, for 'higher', substitute 'adequate'. 
CLAUS£ 5 
The Clause was adopted subject to following amendments:-
":":""'-~.. ... - ........ : ·~··• . ....... ~-··· . . .. .... . . -:· ... -· --. 
· ·-: --. (1) · ·- Sub-Clause (xvi), Line 1, after ·courses' insert 'orientation courses'. 
(II) After sub-clause (xx) insert the following new Sub-Clause:-
CLAUS£ 6 
'to fix quota for students belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
for admission purpose's. 
· The Clause was adopted without any c_hange. 
CLAUS£ 7 
The Clause was adopted subject to following amendments:-
(I) Line 1, after 'to' insert 'all'. 
(II) line 2, after 'class· insert 'or place of domicile'. 
CLAUS£ 8 
··-- ·---·-·-The Clause was adopted subject to following amendme"r'1ts~- • 
Line -2, after 'shall' insert 'normally'. 
CLAUS£ 9 
The Clause was adopted without any change. 

CLAUSE 10 
The.Ciause was adopted subject to following amendments:-
Sub-Ciause (3) for 'the Pro-Vice-Chancellor' substitute 'the Pro-Vice-Chancellors'. 
CLAUSE 11 
. .The. C_lau~·e was adopted subject to' following amendment:-
Sub~Ciause · 3, Line 2, after 'degrees' insert 'and inay be delegated such power as may be 
necesssary'. · 
CLAUSE 12 
The Clause was adopted subject to following amendment:-
· Sub-Clause (2), Line 2, for 'o_fficer' substitute 'head'. 
CLAUSE 13 
The Clause was· adopted subject to following amendment:-
Line 1, for 'The Pro-Vice-Chancellor' substitute one or more "Pro-Vice-Chancellor's . 
. CLAUSE 14 TO 17 
The Clauses were adopted without any change. 
CLAUSE 18 
The Clause was adopted subject to following amendment:-
Sub-Clause (2) was deleted. 
· CLAUSE 19 
The Committee held detailed discussions on this Clause and held-over its decision thereon. 
CLAUSE 20 
The Clause was deleted. 
CLAUSE 21 
. The Clause was adopted subject to· following amendment:-
Sub-Clause (2) the follo~ing proviso was added:-

'Provided that adequate representation shall be given to non-teaching staff and students'. 
CLAUSES 22 TO 26 
The Clauses were adopted without any change. 
CLAUSE 27 
The Clause was adopted subject to following amendments:-
(I) Sub-Ciasue 5 was deleted. 
(II) Sub-Clause 6, Line 2, after 'Visitor' insett, 'in exceptional circumstances,'. 
CLAUSE 28 TO 31 
The Clauses were adopted without any change. 
CLAUSE 32 
The Clause was adopted subject to following amendments: 
(I) Line 1, Sub-Clause (3) after 'Tribunal' insett 'in such n:atters'. 
(II) Lines 1 and 2, after 'final' delete 'and no suit shall Lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal. 
CLAUSES 33 TO 42 
The Clauses were adopted without any change. 
CLAUSE 43 
The Clause was adopted subject to following amendment:-
Sub-Clause (d) was deleted. 
CLAUSE 44 
The clause was adopted without any change. 
3. A summary record of the proceepings of the meeting was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.15 P.M. to meet again on 3.00 PM on Friday, the 22nd 
.July, 1994. 

VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development 
met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 22nd July, 1994 in Committee Room 62, First Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
1. 
, PRESENT 
MEMBERS 
Shri P. Upendra 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. M. Aram 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde . 
4. Shri O.P. Kohli 
Chairman 
. 5. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma. 
LOK SABHA 
7. Dr. Vishwanatham Kanithi 
8. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
9. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
1 o. Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
11. Shri lnder Jit 
12. Shri Rambadan 
13. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
14. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
15. Prof. Malini Bhattach~rya 
SECRETARIAT 
· Shri Nand Lal - Deputy Secretary 
Shir Surinde'r Kumar - Under Secretary 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer 

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRIES 
1. Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Eduaction) 
1. Shri D.S. Mukhopadhyaya, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Arti Kant. Director 
II. Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs (Legislative Department 
2. 
Dr. Raghubir Singh, Joint Secretary 
The Committee resumed Clause-by-Clause consideration of the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University 
Bill, 1994. 
CLAUSE 2 (q) 
Atter further discussion on Sub·Ciause (q) of Clasue 2, the Committee adopted the same without 
any change. 
CLAUSE 19 
The Committee held detailed discussion on this Clause and adopted the same with following 
amendment;-
After Sub-Clause 2 the followmg proviso was inserted:-
'Provided that adequate representation shall be given to the Parliament, Government of India, 
the University Grants Commission and the members of the teaching community'. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(The objects of the University) 
The Schedule 1 was adopted subject to following amendments, in Line with the idea contained 
in amendments to Clause 4 of the Bill:-
(I) Line 3, after 'disciplines· insert 'to offer appropriate course relevant for the development of 
socially and economically depressed sections of the people, including agricultural technology 
and rural crafls; to promote the study of the principles for which Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar 
worked during his lifettme' namely national integration, social justice and democratie way of 
life: and also study of the Constitution of the world; 
(II) Lrne 7, after 'People' delete ·of Uttar Pradesh' . 
(Ill) For 'hrgher percentage · subs{1tute '3di.:quate percentage· 

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(The Statutes of the Univ ersity) 
STATUTE 1 
The Statute was adopted subject to following amendments:-
CLAUSE (-1)-The name of the University has been amended as 'Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar 
University. 
STATUTE 2 
The Statute was adopted subject to following amendments: 
(i) Clause 2, Lines 3 and 4, delete 'or Planning and Academic Committee'. 
(ii) Clause 6, Line 3, for 'the Pro-Vice-Chancellor' substltue 'one of the P.ro-Vice-Chancellor's. 
(iii) Line 5, for 'the Pro-Vice-Chancellor is not' substitute 'no Pro-Vice-Chancellor is'. 
STA TVTES 3 AND. 4 
The Statutes were adopted without any change. 
STATUTE 5 
The Statute was adopted subject to following amendments:-
(i) Clause 6, Line 2, delete 'Planning and Academic Committee'; 
(ii) Clause 7, Sub-Clauses (b) and (d), delete 'the Planning and Academic Committee'. 
STATUTES 6 TO 12 
The Statutes were adopted without any change. 
STATUTES 13 
The Statute was deleted. 
STATUTES 14 TO 16 
The Statutes were adopted without any change. 
STATUTE 17 
The Statute was adopted subject to· following amendment:-

Clause 5, Sub-Clause (b),Line 4, delete 'the Planning and Academic Committee or'. 
STATUTE 18. 
The Statute· was adopted without any change. 
- STATUTE 19 
The Statute: was adopted subject to following amendment:-
Clause 1, Sub-Clause (ii) for 'the Pro-Vice-Chancellor' substitute 'one or more Pro-Vice­
ChancellorS as the case may. be'. 
STATUTES 20 TO 42
4 
The Statutes were adopted without any change. 
ENACTING FORMULA 
.The Enacting formula was adopted without any change. 
CLAUSE 1 AND THE TITLE 
. . 
The Clause and the Title were adopted subject to following amendment:-
Sub-Ciau~e (1), iines 1 and 2 for 'Dr.B.R. Ambedkar University Act, 1994 'substitute 'The . 
Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar Univesity Act, 1994' and in the title, for 'the Dr.B:R. Ambedkar 
University Bill'. substitute 'Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University Bill, 1994'. 
3. The Committee authorised the Legislative Counsel, Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs 
to correct patent errors, if any, and to carry out amendments of minor and co"risequential nature, 
if necessary, in the Bill. · 
The Committee also directed the Legislative Counsel to prepare a muanuscript copy of the Bill, 
as amended by the Committee, for consideration and approval of the Committee. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 P.M. 

IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 18th August, 1994 in Committee Room 'A' 
Ground Floor. Parhnment House Annexe. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1 Shri P Upendra Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2 Dr M. Ardr'l 
3. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel 
4. Shri Md. Salim 
5. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma. 
7. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
8. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
9. Dr. Vasant Pawar 
1 O.Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
1 1. Shn K.T. Vandayar 
12 Shn lnder Jit 
13. Shri Cinma ya Nand Swamr 
14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
15. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRIES 
I Ministry of Law Justice and Company affairs (Legislative Department) 
Dr. Raghub rr Singh. Jomt Secretary 

II Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education) 
1. Smt. Arti Kant, Director 
2. Shri Nirmal Singh, Under Secretary 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary. 
· 2. · Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary. .. 
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up for consideration it draft eleventh report on the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 
University Bill, 1994, and reconsidered Clauses 19,21,22 and 43 after some discussion, the 
following amendments were accepted:-
CLAUSE 19 
Sub-Clause 2, the following proviso was added: 
"Provided that the Board of Management shall also have representatives of the Parliament, 
the Government of India, the LJniversity Grants Commission and the teaching community." 
.! 
CLAUSE 21 
Sub-Clause 2, the following proviso was added: 
"Provided that representation shall be given to students also." 
CLAUSE 22 
Sub-Clause 2, the following provise was added: 
"Provided that representation shall be given to non-teaching staff also. 
CLAUSE-43 
Sub-Clause (d) was substituted by the following: 
:'the first Academic Council and the first Planning Board shall be nominated by the Visitor for 
- a term fo three years." 
3. The Committee. then. adopted the report and decided to present the same to Rajya Sabha 
on the 19th August. 1994 and also to lay it on the Table of Lok Sabha, the same day. 
4. The Committee authonsed the Chairman and in his absence Dr. N. Aram and Shri Md. Salim 
to present the report to RaJya Sabha. The Committee also authorised Shri lnder Jit and in his 
absence, Dr. Vasant Pawar to lay the same on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on the 23rd August, 
1994. 
Relates to other Matters. 

APPENDIX-IV 
Note Necessitating the introduction of the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University Bill, 1994 
In pursuance of the provisions of Clause (3) of Article 348 of the Constitution, the Governor 
of Uttar Pradesh promulgated on 11th April, 1989, the Uttar Pradesh Doctor Bhimrao Ambedkar 
University Ordinance , 1989 (U.P. Ordinance No.3 of 1989) for the establishment of Doctor Bhimrao 
Ambedkar University at Lucknow and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
Subsequently the Legislature of Uttar Pradesh Passed on 6th October, 1989 the Uttar Pradesh Doctor 
Bhimrao Ambedkar University Act. 1989 (U.P. Act No. 25 of 1989} to establish and incorporate a unitary 
teaching and research residential University at Lucknow as a memorial to the life and works of the 
late Doctor Bhimrao Ambedkar. The above- mentioned ordinance as also the Act, provided that the 
Ordinance or the Act would come into force on such date as the State Goverment might, by 
notification,appoint in this behalf. The State Government has reported that the Ordinance as well as 
the Act have not been brought into force by the State Government. As a conseq uence. no of­
ficer of the University, namely Vice-Chancellor. Registrar, Faculty members, etc. have been appoinfed. 
A limited staff headed by a Chief Administrator has. however, been appointed by the State Government 
in a project to ensure the establishment of the proposed State University. 
2... The State Government. of Uttar Pradesh had. constituted an Expert Committee in July, 1989, 
under the Chairmanship of Shri T.P. Tiwari, to give recommendations on the faculties and courses to 
be started in the University. The Expert Committee identified the following faculties with which the 
University could start operating with provisions for future expansion:-
1. Material Science & Technology . 
2. Bio-Sciences & Technology . 
3. Space Sciences & Technology. 
4. Instrumentation & Design Engineering (including Micro-Eiectronices) . 
5. Pharmaceutical Sciences. 
6. Management Sciences. 
7. Social Sciences & Technology. 
The University was proposed to have a Science & Technology orientation. 
3. In pursance of the above enactment the State Government has acquired about 244 acres ot 
.land on Lucknow -Rai Bareili H1ghway near Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate lnstitrte of medical sciences, 
Lucknow. No. The cost of the project was estimated by the State Government at Rs.200.00 Crores. 
The State Government has already spent about Rs. 14.00 Crores on the Project. A boundary wall has 
been constructed around the campus of the University and a life-size bronze statue of Babasaheb 
Bhimrao Ambedkar was InStalled on 14.4.199~ . by Shri Mulayam Smgh Yadav, the then Chief Minister 
of Uttar Pradesh. Some other works , like temporary supply of electnc1ty. water supply and tree plantation 

in the campus have also been done. However. further work has not been carried out due to financial 
constraints. · 
4. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav, the then Chef Minister of Uttar Pradesh has on 1.6.1990 requested 
the Prime Minister that in view of the limited resources of the State, the Centre should provide financial 
assistance to the extent of 50% of the estimated cost lor establishing the University. There were also 
requests from other quarters lor the conversion of the Doctor Bhmirao Ambedkar University into a ' 
Central University . Shri Kalyan Singh, the then Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh had on 18.5.1992 written 
to the Prime Minister that the Centre should either convert Doctor Bhimrao Ambedkar University into· _.:.:-. 
a Central University or agree to bear 50% of the projected cost for establishing the University. Requests •· 
from any eminent persons. including Dr. (Mrs.) Savita Ambedkar. Parliamentarians and publicmen were 
also recived for conversion of doctor Bhimrao Ambedkar University at Lucknow into a Central University. 
The Minister of welfare had also written to HRM on 22.8.1992 to consider the proposal of the State 
Government favourably. The Standing Committee for the Celebration of the Centenary year of 
Babasahib Or. B.R. Ambedka r had also resolved that this University be converted into a Central 
University and that it may specialise in Technology courses and provide for a higher percentage of 
seats for SCs and ST s. 
5. The r.aatter regarding the conversion of Doctor Bhimrao Ambedkar University into a Central • 
University was considered by the Cabinet in its meeting on 6.4.1993. It was submitted to the Cabinet 
that the conversion of Dr.B.R. Ambedkar University into a Central University cannot be considered at 
par with other demands for conversion of State Universities because of the uniqueness of this proposal. 
The fact that this will be a technological University and would make special efforts towards imparting 
of technical education. in particular to the weaker sections, makes this proposal unique. 
6. In pursuance of the above decision , the Department of Education processed the matter in 
consultation with the officials of the Government of Uttar Pradesh and of the Ministry of Law. 
7. The Governme nt of Uttar Pradesh have since sent their commitment to repeal the existing State 
Act. The State Government has also intimated that the assets to be transferred to Central University 
are being identified. 
8. The Cab1net at its meeting on 6th April. 1993 approved that the Qr. B.R. Ambedkar University, 
as a Central University. would be a technological University and w.ould make special efforts towards 
imparting technical educat1on m particular to the weaker sections. In keeping with this, it is proposed 
to provide authority to the proposed University for a higher percentage of seats for SCs and Sts. 
9 Since the Or. B.R. Ambedkar Un1vers1ty would be specialising in technology courses the cost 
of setting up this Umversity would be more than that of a conventional University. Though the cost 
of the project has been estimated by the State Government of Uttar Pradesh at Rs.200 crores, precise 
est1mates of funds requ1red for setting up the University is not possible as the development of any 
Univers1ty continues for 12 to 15 years. It has been decided that the UGC will approve developmental 
proposal of the proposed Un1vers1ty on a 5 year basis with a view to ensuring its optimum development. 
10. In view of the Cabinet's approval at its meeting on 6.4.93 for conversion of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 
University. Lucknow. into a Central UniverSitY. in principle as also the comm itment of the Government 
of Uttar Pradesh. The cabinet at its meeting .held on 4.5.94 approved the proposal to convert Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar University at Lucknow into a Central University. 