Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
REPORT NO.
307
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on st December, )31 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on st December, )31 2018
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTH REPORT
December, 2018/Pausha, 1939 (Saka)
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Three Hundred Second Report
on  the  Demands  for Grants  2018-19 of  the
Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Department of Higher Education

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

28
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Three Hundred Second Report
on the Demands for Grants 2018-19 of the
Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Department of Higher Education
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31st December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Pausha, 1939 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... ....... 1-20
Chapter I : Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government .............................................................................................. 2
Chapter II : Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ........................... 3-12
Chapter III : Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 13-19
Chapter IV : Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government is still awaited .................................................................. 20
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ............................................................... 21-22
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... ..... 23-26

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2018)
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya    —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
5. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
6. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Dr. Sasikala Pushpa Ramaswamy
9. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
10. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
12. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
13. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
14. Ms. Bhawana Gawali (Patil)
15. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
16. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
17. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
18. Shri Ramachandran Mullappally
19. Shri Hari Om Pandey
20. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
21. Shri N.K. Premachandran
22. Shri Krishnan Narayanaswamy Ramachandran
23. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
*24. V acant
25. Dr. Nepal Singh
26. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
27. Shri Satya Pal Singh
28. Shrimati Neelam Sonker
29. Shri P.R. Sundaram
30. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
31. Shrimati Tabassum Begum
(i)
* Member expired.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Mishra, Committee Officer
Shrimati Suman Khurana, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this Three Hundred Seventh Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Three Hundred Second Report on the Demands For
Grants (2018-2019) of the Department of Higher Education.
2. Three Hundred Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2018 and simultaneously
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2018. Replies of the Government to the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on
the 28th December, 2018.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 28th
December, 2018.
DR. SA TYANARAY AN JATIYA
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
28th December,  2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Pausa 7,  1940 (Saka) Committee on Human Resource Development,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in its 302 nd Report on the Demands for Grants 2018-19 of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development, Department of Higher Education, which was presented in both the Houses
of Parliament on 8
th March, 2018.
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of observations/ recommendations contained in above
mentioned Report were received from the Department of Higher Education vide their communication
dated 25 th September, 2018. These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I: Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government
Paras – 2.5, 2.6, 2.7
TOTAL – 3
Chapter II: Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies-
Paras – 3.4, 4.10, 5.5, 5.6, 6.6, 7.10, 9.4, 10.3. 11.4, 11.5, 11.6, 12.8, 12.9,
14.2, 15.2
TOTAL – 15
Chapter III: Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee –
Paras – 7.9, 8.10, 8.11, 127, 134
TOTAL – 5
Chapter IV: Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited-
Paras – Nil
T
OTAL – Nil

CHAPTER-I
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
GOVERNMENT
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Observation/Recommendation
1. The Committee finds that there is a huge gap between the projected demands and actual
allocations made for the Department. Moreover, this reduced allocation of funds do not match with
the objectives of expansion and growth of Higher Education Sector in the country and this would
also defeat the endeavor to bring excellence in Higher Education. The Committee views that the
allocation needs to be enhanced. (Para 2.5)
Further as regards the widening of gap between the projected demand and outlay for the FY
201819 the Committee conceives that Department should reconsider/review its overall mechanism
right from making the proposed demand till the final expenditure is incurred and also assess the
impact thereof in so far as the implementation of various schemes is concerned. This would be
helpful in making the budget more realistic and making its presence felt on the plan outlay to be
formulated for the Department. (Para 2.6)
The Committee notes that the allocation for Central Universities is inadequate as compared
to their infrastructure, faculty and number of students enrolled. The Committee further notes that
Central Universities have a larger number of students enrolled in them as compared to the technical
and management institute. Therefore, the Department should make efforts for increase in the
funding for the Central Universities at appropriate level, the Committee feels. (Para 2.7)
Action Taken
The Actual allocation for D/O Higher Education for the year 2018-19 is Rs 35010.43 crore.
In addition to this, another Rs 21,000 crore (tentative) will be provided through Higher Education
Financing Agency (HEFA) for rebuilding of Central Education Institutions (CEIs). The allocation of
Budget for Central Government/ Ministries is decided by Department of Expenditure, Ministry of
Finance, on the basis of available resources, expenditure trend and absorptive capacity and other
competitive demands. Based on the actual allocation to the Department of Higher Education, the
scheme-wise allocation is done in consultation with the programme division so as to ensure the
optimum utilization of the resources available.
2

CHAPTER-II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO
Observation/Recommendation
1. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Department for the increase of Gross
Enrolment Ratio. The Committee notes that Gross Enrolment Ratio of SC/ST students at 21.1 and
15.4 respectively, is below the national average of 25.2. This in view, of the Committee, needs to
be further improved by augmenting necessary measures by the Department. The Committee desires
that the Department should ensure that the benefit of scholarships and reservation being provided
to SC/ST/OBC and minority students reach them and thereby result into enhanced GER in these
categories. The Committee, would further like to reiterate that the Department should not only take
steps to bridge the gap between the general category students and the SC/ST/OBC and minorities
students but also take initiatives so that students from these sections do not leave their education
in between. (Para 3.4)
Action Taken
Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship is for College and University students belonging to
economically weaker sections of the society. Under the scheme Central Reservation Policy is
adopted, wherein 15%, 7.5% and 27% of the scholarship is earmarked for SC, ST and OBC
students respectively. Since the inception of the scheme 78633 and 27413 ST students have
benefitted under scheme.
The Government is providing interest subsidy on education loan during the period of moratorium
to the students belonging to economically weaker sections of the society including SC, ST & OBC.
Since the inception of the scheme, 2,16,369 SC students, 66,494 ST students & 9,98,094 OBC
students have benefitted under the scheme.
UGC is implementing the following schemes exclusively for the SC and ST category students:-
1. Post-Doctoral fellowship for SC/ST Candidates
2. PG Scholarship for professional courses for SC/ST candidates
3. Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SC Candidates
4. Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for ST candidates
Central Sector Interest Subsidy Scheme is for economically weaker sections of the society
enveloping all categories of the candidates. However it is brought to the notice that all interest
subsidy claims received from Nodal bank (Canara Bank) in respect of SC/ST categories are fully
settled by MHRD. Various proactive measures have been taken by the Ministry as well as IITs to
increase GER. Some of these are as under:
(a) The SC/ST/PH students are getting complete fee waiver.
(b) Reservation of seats as per the GoI norms is followed for admission to various
courses in IITs.
3

4
(c) Relaxation of upper age limit upto 5 years is granted to SC/ST candidates for
admission through JEE.
(d) In case the seats reserved for SC/ST/PwD candidates are not filled completely, a
limited number of candidates are admitted to a one-year Preparatory Course on the
basis of further relaxation of admission criteria. On successful completion of the
course, the students are offered direct admission to the already allotted undergraduate
course without having to appear in JEE(Adv) again.
(e) Free Book Bank facility for a semester is provided to SC/ST students.
(f) Appointment of Liaison Officer to redress the grievance of SC/ST Students.
(g) Basic English language course to improve English competency of weak students
RASHTRIYA UCCHTAR SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RUSA)
Observation/Recommendation
2. The Committee appreciates that RUSA aims to improve overall quality of existing higher
educational institutions in States by ensuring their conformity to prescribed norms and standards
and adoption of accreditation as a mandatory quality assurance framework. The Committee suggests
that the State Higher Education Council should undertake this process of planning, execution and
evaluation, in addition to other monitoring and capacity building functions and greater emphasis
should be laid on the improvement of the quality of teaching-learning processes in order to produce
employable and competitive graduates, post-graduates and PhDs. The Committee impresses upon
the Department of Higher Education to pursue with the respective State Higher Education Councils
to ensure for development of overall quality of Higher Educational Institutions in the respective
States. (Para 4.10)
Action Taken
RUSA lays great importance on improving quality of higher education in the States. Towards
this end, the Department of Higher Education urges State Governments to undertake various
reforms. These reforms include creation of a State Higher Education Council (SHEC) through an
Act of Legislature in every State. The SHEC plays a pivotal role in the process of analyzing the
States’ higher education needs, State Higher Education Plans, implementation of the scheme and
monitoring its performance in the State.
Under RUSA, the proposals of the States are approved by the SHECs before they are uploaded
on the RUSA portal. RUSA also has various monitoring mechanisms such as RUSA fund tracker,
geotagging etc. which can be utilized by the SHECs for tracking the implementation of the scheme
in the respective States.
SHECs are encouraged to have regular meetings and to ensure the State undertakes reforms
in higher education. The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed by the States with MHRD
clearly lays down the expectations from the States under the scheme.
SW AYAM, E-SHODH SINDHU AND NMEICT
Observation/Recommendation
3. The Committee observes that Knowledge modules based on the personalized needs of the

5
learner would need to be delivered to him /her at the right time with the right content interactively
to take care of his / her aspirations. In due course of time there would be a need to develop and
maintain the knowledge and capability profile of every individual learner / worker. Such a system
would have to be developed in a cost effective manner over a period of time. A proper balance
between content generation, research in critical areas relating to imparting of education and connectivity
for integrating our knowledge with the advancements in other countries is to be attempted. For
this, what is needed is a critical mass of experts in every field working in a networked manner
with dedication. This Mission should ensure the support to such initiatives and build upon the
synergies between various efforts by adopting a holistic approach. (Para 5.5)
Action Taken
SWAYAM-MOOCs -  As per ‘Digital India’ Initiative & Electronic Delivery of Services; the
thrust areas assigned to MHRD is to develop & make available ‘Massive Online Open Courses
(MOOCs)’ to the learners throughout the country. The Ministry of HRD, has accordingly embarked
on a major and new initiative called ‘Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds’
(SWAYAM), which provides one integrated platform and portal for online courses, using information
and communication technology (ICT) and covering all higher education subjects and skill sector
courses to ensure that every student in the country has access to the best quality higher education
at affordable cost. Total courses – 1543, Student Registered – 2250383, Student Enrolled – 3639979.
e-Shodh Sindhu -  The main objective of the e-ShodhSindu: Consortia for Higher Education
E-Resources is to provide access to qualitative electronic resources including full-text, bibliographic
and factual databases to academic institutions at a lower rates of subscription. The major aims and
objectives of the e-Shodh Sindhu are as follows:-
 Setting-up e-Shodh Sindhu: Consortia for Higher Education E-Resources by augmenting
and strengthening activities and services offered by three MHRD-funded Consortia;
 Develop a formidable collection of e-journals, e-journal archives and e-books on perpetual
access basis;
 Monitor and promote usage of e-resources in member universities, colleges and technical
institutions in India through awareness and training programmes;
 Provide access to subscription-based scholarly information (e-books and e-journals) to
all educational institutions;
 Bridge digital divide and move towards an information-rich society;
 Provide access to selected e-resources to additional institutions including open universities
and MHRD-funded institutions that are not covered under existing consortia;
 Take-up additional activities and services that require collaborative platform and are not
being performed by existing Consortia; and
 Moving towards developing a National Electronic Library with electronic journals and
electronic books as its major building blocks.

6
 Currently 10000+ e-journals and 3135000+ e-Books are available. These e-journals and
e-resources are used by 91 CFTIs, 217 Universities, 108 Technical Institutions and
3000+ Colleges. It all has been taken from 20 Resources and 4 Databases.
The INFLIBNET Centre has been assigned the responsibility for execution and operation of
e-Shodh Sindhu. e-Shodh Sindhu (ESS) have further integrated additional features to facilitate
seamless access to e-resources such as: (a) The INFLIBNET Access Management Federation
(INFED) – Shibboleth Authentication and authorization of users. (b) InfiStats -COUNTER & SHUSHI
-Data Service usages compliance. (c) JGatePlus for Document Delivery Service (DDS), Meta
Harvesting and Discovery Services (DS).
Virtual Lab -Virtual lab is web enabled experiments which can be designed for remote
operation and viewing so as to enthuse the curiosity and innovation into students. With the present
day internet and computer technologies the above limitations can no more hamper students and
researchers in enhancing their skills and knowledge. Also, in a country such as ours, costly
instruments and equipment need to be shared with fellow researchers to the extent possible.
This would help in learning basic and advanced concepts through remote experimentation.
Physical distances and the lack of resources make us unable to perform experiments, especially
when they involve sophisticated instruments. Also, good teachers are always a scarce resource.
Web-based and video-based courses address the issue of teaching to some extent.
Conducting joint experiments by two participating institutions and also sharing costly resources
has always been a challenge. Today most equipment have computer interface for control and data
storage. It is possible to design good experiments around some of these equipment, which would
enhance the learning of a student. Internet-based experimentation further permits use of resources
– knowledge, software, and data available on the web, apart from encouraging skilful experiments
being simultaneously performed at points separated in space (and possibly, time).
National Digital Library - Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) has in collaboration
with IIT Kharagpur launched National Digital Library (NDL) on 19/06/2018 under the National
Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology (NMEICT). The objective
of the project is to integrate all the existing digitized and digital contents across educational and
cultural institutions/bodies to provide a single-window access to different groups of users ranging
across the entire population.
NDL will fetch metadata of the contents and store and index these metadata in the National
Digital Library servers so that all the e-contents can be searched and accessed in the full-text by
users through a single window. NDL does not store the actual (full-text) contents in its servers;
instead it gives to users links of respective content hosting sites as part of search results. Users
access contents from respective content hosting sites by clicking these links. As on date its content
is available in 200+ launguages, 1.78 crore content is available, 35 lakhs users are registered, 9000
institutions are using it.
e-Yantra - An MHRD initiative under NMEICT Programme, named “e-Yantra” is implemented
to incorporate Robotics into engineering education with the objective of engaging students through
exciting hands-on application of mathematics, computer science, and engineering principles. All the
projects and code are available on the e-Yantra web-site www.e-yantra.org as open source content.

7
FOSSEE -  FOSSEE project sanctioned to IIT Bombay has been promoting use of open
source software in educational institutions (http://fossee.in). It does through instructional material,
such as spoken tutorials, documentation, such as textbook companions, awareness programmes,
such as conferences, training workshops, and Internships.
SWAYAM PRABHA -  SWAY AM Prabha is an initiative of MHRD to provide 32 high quality
educational channels through DTH (Direct to Home) across the length and breadth of the country
on 24X7 bases. The subscribers of free DTH service of Doordarshan (Free dish) would be able
to view these Educational channels using the same set Top Box and TV. No additional investment
would be required.
The DTH channels of MHRD shall carry curriculum-based content and the programme is
designed in such a way that educational content besides being viewed on TV sets with no recurring
cost. These educational programmes delivered over DTH are also made available through YouTube
as archival data. The information related to channel schedules, subject, archival link etc are available
on SWAYAM Prabha portal (https://swayamprabha.gov.in/) which is developed by INFLIBNET Centre
Gandhinagar.
NKN Connectivity -  1 GBPS Connectivity to universities has been provisioned under NMEICT.
A total of 438 Universities have been connected through 1 Gbps Optical Fiber. For Campus
Connect, the Central share for each of the university in NER States is 90% and for other states
& UTs it is 75%. The remaining is to be paid by respective Universities or Institutions. The MHRD
decided that the campus of Universities having NKN connectivity shall be ‘Wi-Fi enabled’ in a
phased manner.
Observation/Recommendation
4. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that new technologies such as online teaching,
virtual class rooms etc. must be used for enhanced learning experience for the students. The
faculty must be encouraged to leverage ICT for better learning outcomes and also deployed for
assessment of student’ s performance. The information and communication technology needs to be
used as a tool across all institution and necessary infrastructure must be made available to
institutions. (Para 5.6)
Action Taken
For leveraging the potential of ICT, in providing high quality personalized and interactive
knowledge modules over the internet/intranet for all the learners in Higher Education Institutions in
anytime any where mode SW AY AM-MOOCs programme is in progress.
SWAYAM-MOOCs - As per ‘Digital India’ Initiative & Electronic Delivery of Services; the
thrust areas assigned to MHRD is to develop & make available ‘Massive Online Open Courses
(MOOCs)’ to the learners throughout the country. The Ministry of HRD, has accordingly embarked
on a major and new initiative called ‘Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds’
(SWAYAM), which will provide one integrated platform and portal for online courses, using information
and communication technology (ICT) and covering all higher education subjects and skill sector
courses to ensure that every student in the country has access to the best quality higher education
at affordable cost. Total courses – 1543, Student Registered – 2250383, Student Enrolled – 3639979.

8
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING AGENCY (HEFA) AND REVITALISING INFRASTRUCTURE
AND SYSTEMS IN EDUCATION (RISE)
Observation/Recommendation
5. The Committee welcomes the proposal for speeding up investments in research and related
infrastructure in premier educational institutions, including health educational institutions through
RISE to the tune of 
` 1 lac crore by 2022 and funding would be provided through HEF A. Further,
HEF A is also expected to fund the two new full fledged SP As and 18 more as part of well established
IITs/NITs/CUs etc and grant loans upto ` 5500 crores in FY 2018-19. The Committee is however ,
constrained to observe that the HEF A which was announced in last year’ s budget speech is yet to
take off. The Committee is not satisfied with the progress made so far . The Committee wishes that
the time lines are strictly required to be adhered to for the completion of the scheme. The Committee
is keen to know the action plan how the target set for next four years which seems to be quite
ambitious would be achieved. The Committee desires that the Department of Higher Education should
apprise it of the progress while submitting its action taken replies. (Para 6.6)
Action Taken
Higher Education Financing Agency(HEFA) is already operational and has approved loan of
` 2015.90 cr. to 6 IITs and 1 NIT. Expenditure Financing Committee (EFC) Note has been
prepared in consultation with the different Ministry/ Departments/ Organizations.
PRIME MINISTERS SPECIAL SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME FOR J & K
Observation/Recommendation
6. The Committee finds it satisfactory that a number of initiatives have been taken for integrating
the differently-abled students towards mainstream higher education. These initiatives are indeed
major steps for providing equal opportunities to such students. The Committee, however, feels that
initiatives will have more impact if awareness about such facilities is dissipated among the targeted
students. Every conceivable effort has to be made to sensitize such students towards the kind of
opportunities waiting for them. Details of all schemes for differently-abled students should be
mandatorily displayed on the websites of UGC, AICTE and IGNOU and also all categories of
universities. In addition, strict and constant monitoring at all level is also required so as to ensure
that all such initiatives for differentlyabled students are being implemented in the real sense. For
both these aspects, Department being the nodal authority for higher education in the country, will
have to take the lead role. (Para 7.10)
Action Taken
The details of the (scholarship) schemes are available on the respective website.
GLOBAL INITIATIVE OF ACADEMIC NETWORKS (GIAN)
Observation/Recommendation
7. The Committee welcomes this initiative to invite distinguished academicians, entrepreneur’s,
scientists, experts from premier institutions from across the world to teach in higher educational
institutions in India, hence promoting international collaborations and improvements in quality

9
of higher education in India. The Committee, however, would like to recommend that the
Department should provide adequate facilities and research facilities in the premier educational
and scientific institutions so that these institutions not just attract global faculty but also
international students. (Para 9.4)
Action Taken
The objective of the GIAN scheme is mainly to attract foreign faculty to deliver short term
courses and not students.
NATIONAL RESEARCH PROFESSORSHIP
Observation/Recommendation
8. The Committee feels that this scheme of National Research Professorship is a novel scheme
to promote research work in the Higher Educational Institution and widen the frontiers of knowledge
in the specialized areas. The Committee recommends that the Department should fill up the vacant
position and also increase the funding for research under the scheme. (Para 10.3)
Action Taken
The entire scheme of National Research Professorship is under re-assessment.
IISER AND IIM
Observation/Recommendation
9. The Committee would like to point out that funds for five IISERs have been reduced. The
Committee feels that the IISERs are premier institutions providing quality science education and
any decrease in funding would adversely affect their functioning. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the funding for the five new IISERs should be enhanced for the smooth functioning of these
institutes. (Para 11.4)
Action Taken
During financial year 2015-16 and 2016-17, IISERs and IISc were having a common budget
head, while from 2017-18 onwards, funds have been allocated to IISERs and IISc under separate
budget heads. The amount of funds allocated and released to IISERs from 2015-16 onwards are
as follows:
Y ear 2015-16# 2016-17# 2017-18# 2018-19#
                   (IISERs + IISc) IISERs IISERs
B E 879.09 1102.52 600 + (50) 640 +( 49)
= 650 = 689
RE 1034.09 1162.52 665 + (45.02) NA
= 710.02
Funds 645 + (5) 739.46 + (40) 735 + (45.02) 227+(11)
released  = 650 = 779.46 = 780.02 = 238 (till
to IISERs 31.08.2018)
# Figures in bracket are for IISER Tirupati, for which there is a separate budget line.

10
During previous years, the five IISERs at Pune, Kolkata, Bhopal, Mohali and Thiruvananthapuram
were in the construction phase and hence more funds were released to them for construction of
their permanent campuses. However, in 2018-19, IISER Bhopal and IISER Mohali have completed
their construction and both the projects have been closed. IISER Pune has also completed construction
and has submitted for closure of its project mode. IISER Kolkata has completed about 95% of
construction and will be closed shortly. IISER Thiruvananthapuram is about 80% complete. Therefore,
requirement of funds for construction of infrastructure has substantially decreased for these IISERS.
The Government gives adequate grant for smooth functioning of IISERS.
Observation/Recommendation
10. The Committee desires that the Department should ensure that these institutions are functioning
from permanent campuses. A timeline needs to be drawn and all efforts need to be made in co-
ordination with all stakeholders including the State Government to facilitate the setting up of the
permanent campuses for these institutions. The Committee also desires that since all these institutions
will be our premier institutions of national importance, all requisite resources, financial or otherwise
should be adequately given. (Para 11.6)
Action Taken
The seven new IIMs as mentioned in para 11.5 above are at different locations with different
topography, but the area proposed to be built is the same and the exact timelines identifying various
monthly targets cannot be firmed up at the present stage. However, broadly, the six monthly
physical project implementation schedule for Phase-I of the project for all seven IIMs has been
prepared. The phase-I of the project is proposed to be completed by June, 2021.
WOMEN EDUCATION
Observation/Recommendation
11. The Com mittee feels that the new Swami Vivekanand scholarship for research in humanities
and social sciences introduced by UGC is a welcome step to encourage women scholars to take
up doctoral studies in humanities and social science. The Committee would however like to be
apprised of the number of scholarships to be awarded and amount to be disbursed under this
scheme. (Para 12.8)
Action Taken
Keeping Swami Vivekananda’s ideas of women education and to achieve and promote girls
education, UGC has introduced Swami Vivekananda Fellowship for Single Girl Child for research
in Social Sciences with an aim to compensate direct costs of higher education especially for such
girls who happen to be the only girl child in their family.
The number of slots under the scheme of Swami Vivekananda Single Girl Child fellowship
for research in Humanities and Social Sciences was 300 at the time of introduction of the scheme.
However, later the upper limit was removed and now it has been kept open-ended to attract eligible
scholars. This scheme is implemented on DBT mode.
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
The financial assistance available under the scheme is as follows:

11
Fellowship @ ` 25,000/-p.m. for Initial two years
@ ` 28,000/-p.m. for remaining tenure
Contingency @ ` 10,000/-p.a. for initial two years
@ ` 20,500/-p.a. for remaining tenure
Escort Reader Assistance ` 2,000/-p.m. in case of PWD candidates
During the financial year 2017-18, a total of 150 beneficiaries were disbursed a grant of
` 4.70 crore.
Observation/Recommendation
12. The Committee points out that Technical education contribute a major share to the overall
education system and play a vital role in the social and economic development of our nation and
believe that women have definite role to play. Technical knowledge is becoming an indispensable
part of our living. Today the advancements made in the field of science and engineering has made
life sophisticated and moreover, has improved the quality of life. These technical fields need the
support of highly qualified experts. Technical Education is instrumental in making the remarkable
contribution to economic growth of the Developing Countries by way of suitable manpower production
according to the needs of the Industry, Society and the Global World as a whole. To produce fully
skilled manpower/ knowledgeable technocrats in the present era of science and technology is the
need of the hour . (Para 12.9)
Action Taken
The Committee’s suggestion regarding skilled manpower / knowledgeable technocrats in the
present era of science and technology is taken care by AICTE by launching outcome based model
curriculum for Under Graduate and Post Graduate students in Engineering and Technology and also
for PGDM and MBA students. AICTE has also come out with comprehensive policy for the training
of technical teachers in AICTE approved institutions, so that, trained faculty may produce fully
skilled manpower/ knowledgeable technocrats.
IITs
IITs are Institutes of National Importance governed under the Institute of Technology Act,
1961 as amended from time to time and imparting world class education in the field of science
and technology. The combined student strength in 23 IITs is 85453. To emphasize the need for
promoting research that is socially relevant and is of use to the end users, two schemes namely
Impacting Research Innovation and Technology (IMPRINT) and Uchhatar Avishkar Yojana (UAY)
have been launched. IMPRINT focuses on research in higher educational institutions, with an
allocation `487.00 crore for a period of three years beginning 2016-17. The cost of the project
is met to the extent of 50% by the MHRD and the remaining 50% by the participating Ministry/
Department. UAY promotes industry sponsored, outcome-oriented research projects with an outlay
of `475.00 crore for a period of two years beginning 2016-17. The project cost is met to the
extent of 50% by the MHRD and 25% each by the Industry and the participating Ministry/
Department. UAY is the best example of industry academia collaboration. In addition to 2 already
approved Research Parks at IIT-Kharagpur and IIT-Bombay, five new Research Parks at IIT-
Kanpur, IIT-Guwahati, IIT-Delhi, IIT-Hyderabad and IISc-Banglore have been approved under the

12
Scheme ‘Start up Initiatives in Higher Education Institutes’. To foster the research activities and
sort out the faculty shortage in CEIs, a new fellowship scheme called PMRF has been approved.
INTEREST SUBSIDY AND CONTRIBUTION FOR GUARANTEE FUNDS
Observation/Recommendation
13. The Committee appreciates the increase in the allocation of fund to this scheme to provide
interest subsidy to education loan to students from economically weaker sections. The Committee
hopes that this scheme is implemented by the Department in an effective manner. The Committee
is also of the view that this scheme would effectively increase the enrolment of students in
Technical/Professional Courses in Higher Educational Institutions across the country by increasing
the affordability. (Para 14.2)
Action Taken
SCHOLARSHIP
To improve the quality education and employability of the students the Central Sector Interest
Subsidy Scheme has been modified, wherein only those eligible students who pursue professional/
technical programmes accredited by NBA or Institutions of National Importance or Centrally Funded
Technical Institutions (CFTIs) are considered eligible under the scheme.
Observation/Recommendation
14. The Committee appreciates the increase in the budget for making 20 world class institutions
both in the public and private sectors. The Committee would also like to recommend that these
world class institutions would be able to provide quality education to domestic students at an
affordable rate and also improve the ranking the selected educational institutions. (Para 15.2)
Action Taken
The recommendations are advisory in nature.

CHAPTER-III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
PRIME MINISTERIAL SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME FOR JAMMU AND KASHMIR
Scholarship Schemes
Observation/Recommendation
1. The Committee observes that all these Schemes are meant for providing an opportunity to
students to enable them to complete higher studies and become eligible for teaching in higher
educational institutions and for getting gainful employment in Central/States/private sector services.
The objective behind all these Schemes is very laudable. The Committee can only emphasize that
these schemes need to be administered in the real sense, with the benefit reaching the targeted
beneficiaries. The Committee would like to have an impact assessment of these schemes in the
action taken replies furnished by the Department. (Para 7.9)
Action Taken
The Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship for College and University Students was evaluated
by National University for Education Planning and Administration (NUEP A) wherein it was highlighted
that the scheme has financially helped several poor and meritorious students from different social
categories to pursue higher studies.
To assess the impact of the Central Sector Interest Subsidy Scheme, a study was carried
out by the Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore. According to the report of the IIM
Bangalore, during the study period, annual growth rate of beneficiaries was 9.5%. Of the total
education loan borrowers, 37% of the borrowers are beneficiaries of the Central Sector Interest
Subsidy Scheme.
MHRD has proposed to setup an Interest Subsidy and Credit Gurantee dashboard by Nodal
Bank (Canara Bank) for the students with real time data from banks on geographical/ socio-
economic/ gender/ institution/ accreditation grade of the institution/ category/ course wise distribution
of loan applications, sanctions, subsidy released and adjusted, loan repayments etc. This dashboard
will ensure effective monitoring and enable the Ministry to measures the outcome of the scheme.
However as on date nearly 25 lakh students have benefitted with a total outlay being ` 9,504.52
crores since the inception of CSIS Scheme.
Further Recommendation
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Department about the steps taken to
provide opportunities to students from poor financial background in higher educational
institutions. The Committee, however, would like to point out that only 25 lakh students
have benefitted from these schemes. The Committee desires that the Department should
make efforts to repeatedly publicize these schemes in press and media, to augment the
dissemination of information. The Committee also suggests that the students who avail
these schemes should be encouraged to take up research and entrepreneurship.
13

14
FACULTY POSITION
Observation/Recommendation
2. The Committee has been voicing its concern from time to time on the acute shortage of
faculty in higher educational institutions across the country. The Committee is anguished to find
out that right from well established Central Universities to those set up recently, State universities
as well as private universities, premier institutions like IITs, NITs and IIMs, this problem has been
continuing as the biggest handicap for the development and growth of Higher Education vis-a-vis
maintaining the quality of education. Situation continues to be grim with no improvement forthcoming
in the near future. The Committee points out that the availability of adequate and qualified faculty
is a pre-requisite for quality education. The Committee is convinced by the steps taken by Department
like increase in the retirement age up to 65 years, improvement of salary structures etc. The
Committee also points out that there can be only two possibilities, either our young students are
not attracted towards the teaching profession or the recruitment process is a prolonged one and
involves too many procedural formalities or both. The Committee feels that both the issues need
to be addressed to on priority basis. The Department being the nodal authority for the entire
country so far as higher education sector is concerned has to take proactive role so as to expedite
the filling up a existing vacancies by drawing a practicable deadline. (Para 8.10)
Action Taken
Keeping in mind the fact that the field of higher education is currently facing an acute
shortage of teachers at all levels and also being aware of the decision of the central government
to expand the base of college and university education significantly through out the country, the
UGC Regulations on Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and Other Academic
Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of Standard in Higher Education,
2010 has extended the age of superannuation to 65 years for teachers in University and College
across the country.
UGC has allowed the University to re-employ superannuated teachers for a maximum period
of five years, i.e. up to 70 years against sanctioned vacant post, if such posts are not filled up
by regular candidates. Also Faculty recruitment has been allowed on Part time basis with the same
selection procedure which is done for regular recruitment.
Intensive efforts are being made to attract talented, bright and qualified young men and
women to college and University jobs. The entry point incentives have been substantially increased.
The UGC Regulations, 2010 has prescribed norms for improvement in service conditions for the
new entrant, in terms of better working and leave conditions, career advancement prospects,
retirement benefits etc.
University Grants Commission has been repeatedly requesting the Central Universities to fill
up the vacant teaching posts at the earliest and give top most priority for identifying the causes
for the vacancies and make concerted efforts to fill up the vacancies as per UGC norms, at an
early date to ensure that the teaching work of the university is not adversely affected. UGC vide
letter dated 27
th February, 2018 has requested the VCs of all Central Universities to prepare a time
bound action plan in addressing this issue.

15
Further Recommendation
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Department. The Committee further
suggests that the Universities and Central Educational Institutions need to evolve a strategy
to hire the best people and offer them attractive salaries and working conditions to keep
them motivated. Efforts need to be taken to encourage qualified individuals to make a
direct entry at both the Associate and Professor levels. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the impact of the efforts made by UGC and the Universities and other educational
institutions.
Observation/Recommendation
3. The Committee recommends that recruitment process should start well in advance before the
post is vacated so that after retirement the newly recruited person takes up position immediately.
The Ministry should work in tandem with Institutions to have this exercise done on yearly-basis
and recruitment must be complete in advance so that shortage does not develop into crisis. At
the same time, the Department should work out a strategy so as to attract the bright students
to the teaching profession. The Committee also suggests that in order to make the teaching
profession more attractive, the faculty should be encouraged to undertake consultancy and are
given start-up financial support. (Para 8.11)
Action Taken
IITs
As per existing norms, students / Faculty ration in IITs is 10:1. Arising of vacancies and
filling up thereof is a continuous process and the Institutes have been taking various initiative to
attract outstanding candidates for faculty positions. Some of these measures include year round
open advertisements, holding of selection committee meetings through video conferencing, invitation
to alumni, scientist and faculty to reach out to potential candidates, advertisement in international
journals, outstanding young faculty awards, etc. IITs also appoint NRIs and OCIs to the faculty
positions on the same terms and conditions as those of regular faculty. Mobility of faculty from
one Central Educational Institute to another has also been allowed from October, 2014. The
institutions are engaging contract, adjunct and visiting faculty as well as using the online mode of
teaching to overcome these shortages. The salary limit for employment visa to foreign faculty has
also been reduced from US $ 25000 to US$ 14000. Recently government has also approved the
Scheme “Prime Minister Research Fellows (PMRF)” in order to attract bright students into Ph.D.
programmes in IITs and IISC Bangalore. This will address out National priorities at the one hand
and shortage of quality faculty in the premier educational institutions on the other.
NITs
The new Recruitment Rules for faculty in NITs have been amended to accelerate the recruitment
process. Against the vacancy of 3484, NITs have initiated steps to fill up approximately 3254
positions of faculty on regular basis. The institutes are at various stages on recruitment. Six NITs
have completed their recruitment process namely, NIT at Rourkela, Allahabad, Tiruchrappalli, Warangal,
Nagpur and Meghalaya.

16
The recruitment of faculty is a continuous process and the vacancies keep arising due to
retirement, resignation and additional requirement on account of enhanced students’ strength, However
all the NITs are at present in the process of recruiting the vacancies as per the decision of Council
of NITSER on regular intervals. There were some court cases filed by faculty associations of
NITs, which had halted the recruitment process in some of the NITs.
IIMs
Recruitment of faculty posts is a continuous ongoing process in Indian institutes of managements
(IIMs) and institutes recruit the faculty as per their individual requirement and make optimum use
of faculty by mix of permanent, contract and Visiting/Guest faculty. The institutions publish a year
round rolling advertisement to attract faculty. Some of the steps taken by them to fill up the posts
are invitation to alumni, scientists/experts and faculty from India and abroad, advertisements in
international journals, etc. Further, Government has decided to allow faculty working under the
Central Government or Central Autonomous Bodies, to join the newly set up Central Education
Institutes on long-term deputation, for a period of ten years.
Further Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Department to attract faculty to
the elite engineering and higher educational institutions. The Committee, however, out
witnessing the receipt of low number of applications would like to point that real challenge
is in respect of recruiting faculty for engineering discipline. The Committee recommends
that one of the solutions for attracting talented minds to teaching in Engineering institutions
would be to provide a good initial package and other benefits at par with a corporate job.
Observation/Recommendation
4. The Committee is happy to note that new IIMs have been opened in the last few years to
cater to the increasing demand for quality higher technical educational institutions. The Committee,
however, would like to point out that while creating new IIMs, the Department should also ensure
provision of adequate funds for the development of infrastructure in these higher educational
institutions. (Para 11.5)
Action Taken
The six new IIMs have been established namely IIM Amritsar, IIM Bodhgaya, IIM Nagpur,
IIM Sambalpur, IIM Sirmaur, IIM Visakhapatnam during 2015-16 and IIM Jammu which was
established during 2016-17. All these IIMs started operationalization from transit campus in the
same year in which they were established. These IIMs are fully funded by the Central Government
for development of infrastructure.
Further Recommendation
The Committee observes that the Department should have provided the details of
funding of the new IIMs and also the time line for the operationalization of the campuses
from their own buildings. The Committee would like the Ministry to furnish a detail notes
giving the details of funding and the time line ensuring the operationalization of these IIMs
from their new campuses.

17
WOMEN EDUCATION
Observation/Recommendation
5. The Committee observes that Higher education provided to women would mean independence
in decision making and economic independence. It would develop capabilities to discharge duties and
responsibilities in the fields of social, economic, political and cultural grounds. (Para 12.7)
Action Taken
Schemes being run by UGC with a specific focus on women:
Scheme 1 :  “Development of Women’s Studies in Indian Universities and Colleges”
The University Grants Commission (UGC) has promoted, strengthened and given direction to
the Women’s Studies Programme in the country since the VII Plan period. Women’s Studies
Centres have been established in the University System in the VII Plan and have been continued
in the subsequent plan periods.
The main objectives of the scheme are to provide financial assistance to Women Studies
Centres for expansion of Women Studies through teaching, research and field action. Inter disciplinary
approach and theoretical grasp to enhance the understanding of society by highlighting feminist
perspectives on social transformation, development, processes of exploitation and constant interaction
with field reality through field action programmes that feed into academic activity.
At present, 161 Women’s Studies Centres are in existence in various Universities and Colleges.
Scheme 2 : Post Doctoral Fellowship for Women:
The objective of this scheme is to provide an opportunity to unemployed women candidates
having Ph.D Degree to carry out the higher and advanced studies and research in science, engineering
and technology/ humanities and social sciences. The total No. of slots available under the scheme
is 100 per year. The total duration of the fellowship is five years.
The financial assistance available under the scheme is as follows:
Fellowship @ ` 38,800/-p.m.
@ ` 46,500/-p.m. after two years
Contingency @ ` 50,000/-p.a.
Escorts/Reader @ ` 2000/-p.m. (fixed) in cases of PWD (Person with
Assistance disability)
HRA As per Government of India norms
AICTE
PRAGATI Scheme being implemented by AICTE is aimed at providing assistance for advancement
of girls pursuing technical education. Total number of Scholarship are 4000 per Annum (2000 for
Degree and 2000 for Diploma). Two girl child per family are eligible, whose family income is not

18
more than ` 8.00 lakh per annum during the preceding financial year (in case of married girl, the
income of parents/ in-laws, whichever is higher will be considered). The selection of candidate is
made on merit, on the basis of qualifying examination to pursue the respective Technical Degree/
Diploma course from any of the AICTE approved institution.
Amount of Scholarship: Tuition Fee of ` 30000/- or at actual, whichever is less and
` 2000/-per month for 10 months as incidentals charges each year. In case of tuition fee waiver/
reimbursement, students are eligible to get an amount of ` 30000/-for the purchase of Books/
Equipment/Software’s/Laptop/Desktop/Vehicle/Fee paid towards competitive examinations forms/exam.
Reservation-15% for SC, 7.5% for ST and 27% for OBC candidate/applicant.
In IITs also, with a view to improve female enrolment in the B.Tech. Programmes, MHRD
vide Order dated 13-7-2017 issued guidelines to increase female enrollment from the 8% in 2016
to 14% in 2018-19, 17% in 2019-20 and 20% in 2020-21 by creating supernumerary seats.
Further Recommendation
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department and UGC to increase the
enrolment of women in Higher Education. However, the Committee desires that apart from
the above schemes, the Government should also encourage women pursuing research in
science, and technology to take up entrepreneurship and generate employment.
PANDIT MADAN MOHAN MALVIYA NATIONAL MISSION ON TEACHERS AND TEACHING
(PMMMNMTT)
Observation/Recommendation
6. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department through this mission to address
the issues relating to teachers and improving the quality of education being imparted. The Committee
further recommends that the Department should provide pre-service and in-service training through
existing and new institutional structures new academic programmes and courses, strengthened post-
graduate and doctoral programmes and online training. (Para 13.4)
Action Taken
A total of 64 proposals from various Universities/Institutes from all over the country have
been approved till now by Ten Project Approval Board (PAB) meetings held so far; for setting up
institutional arrangements under various components of the Scheme Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya
National Mission on Teachers and Teaching (PMMMNMTT). Some of the gainful outcomes and
benefits that have accrued from the Scheme are:
 Pre-Service Training of Teachers in Central Universities
 Specialised research in teacher education undergoing in Central Universities
 Professional development, In-Service teacher/faculty training and capacity building done
which were propelled by different training programs conducted by the Centres of Excellence
in Curriculum and pedagogy
 Teaching Resources being developed which can be categorized into ICT enabled, low
cost infrastructure, e-content, course modules, etc.

19
 Inclusive education and Special focus areas in Disability Studies, focus on women’s
University, teacher education in tribal areas, NER and educationally backward regions
 Subject Based Networks setup
 Academic Leadership development training programme for Vice-Chancellors, Principals,
HoDs, Registrars etc.
Induction training programmes for Faculty and Academic Staff in Central and State Universities,
CFTIs and Degree and PG Degree colleges to familiarize them in their roles as freshly inducted
university teachers.
Further Recommendation
The Committee notes the steps Department has taken to train teachers and improve
the education to be imparted. The Committee further recommends that the teachers should
also be trained to use activity-based teaching tools and be encouraged to use low cost
materials to convey concepts to students.
The Committee would like to reiterate that training teacher is a crucial aspect to
maintain the quality in our education system and therefore, more efforts are required to
be taken up by the Department to train teachers at higher education levels.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
20

OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Department about the steps taken to provide
opportunities to students from poor financial background in higher educational institutions. The
Committee, however, would like to point out that only 25 lakh students have benefitted from these
schemes. The Committee desires that the Department should make efforts to repeatedly publicize
these schemes in press and media, to augment the dissemination of information. The Committee
also suggests that the students who avail these schemes should be encouraged to take up research
and entrepreneurship. (Para 7.9)
FACULTY POSITION
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Department. The Committee further
suggests that the Universities and Central Educational Institutions need to evolve a strategy
to hire the best people and offer them attractive salaries and working conditions to keep
them motivated. Efforts need to be taken to encourage qualified individuals to make a
direct entry at both the Associate and Professor levels. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the impact of the efforts made by UGC and the Universities and other educational
institutions. (Para 8.10)
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Department to attract faculty to
the elite engineering and higher educational institutions. The Committee, however, out
witnessing the receipt of low number of applications would like to point that real challenge
is in respect of recruiting faculty for engineering discipline. The Committee recommends
that one of the solutions for attracting talented minds to teaching in Engineering institutions
would be to provide a good initial package and other benefits at par with a corporate
job. (Para 8.11)
The Committee observes that the Department should have provided the details of
funding of the new IIMs and also the time line for the operationalization of the campuses
from their own buildings. The Committee would like the Ministry to furnish a detail notes
giving the details of funding and the time line ensuring the operationalization of these IIMs
from their new campuses. (Para 8.15)
WOMEN EDUCATION
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department and UGC to increase the
enrolment of women in Higher Education. However, the Committee desires that apart from the
above schemes, the Government should also encourage women pursuing research in science,
and technology to take up entrepreneurship and generate employment. (Para 12.7)
PANDIT MADAN MOHAN MALVIYA NATIONAL MISSION ON TEACHERS AND TEACHING
(PMMMNMTT)
The Committee notes the steps Department has taken to train teachers and improve
the education to be imparted. The Committee further recommends that the teachers should
also be trained to use activity-based teaching tools and be encouraged to use low cost
materials to convey concepts to students.
21

22
The Committee would like to reiterate that training teacher is a crucial aspect to
maintain the quality in our education system and therefore, more efforts are required to
be taken up by the Department to train teachers at higher education levels.

MINUTES

25
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.00 A.M., on Friday, the 28th
December, 2018 in Committee Room No. ‘67’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya     —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
6. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
7. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
8. Shri N.K. Premachandran
9. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
10. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
12. Shri P.R. Sundaram
12. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Mishra, Committee Officer
Shrimati Suman Khurana, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the draft 307th Report on the Action Taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Three Hundred Second Report on the
Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Department of Higher Education and draft 308th Report
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the three
Hundred Fourth Report on the Demands for Grants (2018-2019) of the Ministry of Women and
Child Development.
2. The Committee discussed the draft 307th Report and raised some issues regarding the
comments/clarification given by the Department of Higher Education on the observations/
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee thereafter adopted the draft 307th report
with certain modifications. The Committee further considered the draft 308th Report and adopted
it after some discussion.

26
3. The Committee, decided to present/lay the 307th and 308th Report to both the Houses of the
Parliament on 31st December, 2018. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence,
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe, Member, Rajya Sabha to present these Reports to the Rajya Sabha and
Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, Member, Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri N. K. Premachandran,
Member, Lok Sabha to lay these Reports in the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.40 A.M.