180th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/180threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED EIGHTIETH REPORT
ON
THE TRIPURA UNIVERSITY BILL, 2006
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD NOVEMBER, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 23RD NOVEMBER, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2006/ AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                             
2.         INTRODUCTION
3.                  REPORT
4.         OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE          
5.         MINUTES
6.         ANNEXURES  
7.         T
he Tripura University Bill, 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                       
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2006-07)
 
         
Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
            MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
Smt. Brinda Karat
Shri S. Anbalagan
Shri Uday Pratap Singh
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri Ali Anwar
LOK SABHA
Shri Ashok Argal
Shri Basudeb Barman
Shri Harishchandra Chavan
Shri Harisinh Chavda
Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan

180th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/180threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
Shri R. L. Jalappa
Shri Ramswaroop Koli
Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
Smt. Archana Nayak
Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
Shri Chengara Surendran
Dr. Thokchom Meinya
Shri K. Virupakshappa
Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
Shri Francis K. George
Shri Anantkumar Hegde
Shri Rahul Gandhi
Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
            SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji, B., Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorised by the Committee, present this Hundred Eightieth Report of the Committee on the Tripura
University Bill, 2006.
 
2.         In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman,
Rajya Sabha, referred the Tripura University Bill 2006, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 31 st July 2006, and
pending therein, to the Committee on the 4th August, 2006 for examination and report.
3.         The Committee considered the Bill in two sittings held on the 8th September and the 18th September, 2006.
4.         On the 18 th September 2006, the Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Secondary and Higher
Education on the Tripura University Bill, 2006.  The Committee also took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill
and adopted the draft report with amendments in clauses 6(ix), 6(xix), 22(1), 23(2), 24(2), 25(2), 26, 27, 31(1)(i), 31(1)
(k), 36(3), 40, 43 and 47 of the Act and clauses 2(1), 2(2), 9, 17, 18(2), 29(1) and 39(1) of the Statutes.
5.         The Committee while considering the report, relied on the following:
Background Note on the Bill received from the Department of Secondary and Higher Education;
(ii)        Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the Department of Secondary & Higher Education;
 
Verbatim record of the oral evidence taken on the Bill; and
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2 dated 31st July, 2006.
2. Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 43348 dated 4th August, 2006.
 
Presentation made and clarification given by the Secretary of the Department of Secondary and Higher Education.
 
6.         On behalf of the Committee, I would like to thank the officials of the Department of Secondary and Higher
Education for providing necessary inputs and clarifications during the consideration of the Bill.
 
7.         For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
at the end of the report.
NEW DELHI;
September, 2006
JANARDAN DWIVEDI
Chairman,

180th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/180threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
Asvina,1928 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development
 
REPORT
            The Tripura University Bill, 2006 seeks to convert the existing Tripura University, Agartala, into a Central
University with a view to cater to the needs and aspirations of the people of the State and to minimize the imbalance in
educational facilities in the North Eastern Region.
2.         The Tripura University was established at Agartala in 1987, under the Tripura University Act, 1987 enacted by
the Tripura Legislative Assembly. 
3.         According to the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, the Arunachal Pradesh government, with its
limited resources, is not in a position to provide adequate funding for development of the Tripura University.  Besides,
existence of a good number of central universities in other States of the region, viz., at Kohima, Silchar, Tezpur, Aizawl,
Imphal and Shillong has caused a huge imbalance in educational facilities within the region, and a consequent migration
of teachers, students and researchers in search of better infrastructural and academic facilities to other States.  There has,
therefore, been persistent demand for conversion of the Tripura University into a central university.   
4.         The Committee was informed that the University Grants Commission (UGC) had constituted a Committee to
consider the issue of conversion of Tripura University into a central university and to estimate the quantum of funds
required for up-gradation of its existing facilities and staff.  The UGC Committee visited the University and had
discussions with the authorities/officers of the State government, the Vice-Chancellor, teaching and non-teaching
employees as well as the students of the University. The Committee after taking stock of the existing infrastructure,
recommended conversion of the Tripura University into a             full-fledged central university through an Act of
Parliament. 
5.         Accordingly, the Tripura University Bill 2006 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha for the establishment and
incorporation of Tripura University as a central university and for repealing of the existing Tripura University Act,
1987, enacted by the Tripura Legislative Assembly. 
6.         The salient features of the aforesaid Bill are as under:-
The Bill seeks to establish and incorporate the existing Tripura University, a state university of Tripura, under the
proposed Central Act by the same name of 'Tripura University' with perpetual succession and common seal and to
provide for the matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
The University would be a teaching and affiliating university with its Headquarters at Agartala and territorial
jurisdiction extending to the whole of the State of Tripura.
It would function broadly on the pattern of the existing central universities, particularly of those of the North-Eastern
region.
All colleges, Institutions, Faculties and Departments affiliated to, or admitted to the privileges of, or maintained by, the
existing Tripura University shall stand affiliated to, or admitted to the privilege of, or maintained by the University.
The annual accounts of the University shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and shall be
laid before both Houses of Parliament along with the audit report and the annual report of the University.
During the transitional period, the appointment of the first Officers and the constitution of the first Authorities of the
University would be made by the Visitor for specified terms.
7.         The Committee after going through all the papers and documents and hearing the Secretary, Department of
Secondary and Higher Education took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.   It suggested the following
amendments/additions to various clauses of the Bill.
 
Clause 6(ix)
8.1       Clause 6(ix), page 4, provides that the University shall have the power ‘to appoint persons working in any other
University or organization as teachers of the University for a specified period.’
8.2       The Committee is of the considered opinion that the word ‘organization’ in this clause leaves some scope for
different interpretations. The Department clarified that the word ‘organization’ generally meant ‘a teaching or a research
institution, other than a university.’  The Committee feels that this needs to be specified in the Bill with a view to
remove any ambiguity about the nature of the organization.
Clause 6(xix)
9.1       Clause 6(xix), page 5, provides that the University shall have the powers ‘to confer autonomous status on a
College or an Institution or a Department, as the case may be, in accordance with the Statutes.’

180th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/180threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
9.2       The Committee feels that the provision of the clause amounts to giving unbridled powers to the University for
conferring autonomous status on a College, an Institution or a Department.  The Committee is of the opinion that some
kind of requirements and conditions necessary for making an institution autonomous may be specified. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Clause 6(xix) may be suitably amended. 
Clause 22 (1)
10.1     Clause 22(1), page 8, provides that the constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.  The Committee however, notes that the Statutes appended to the Bill do not provide for the
constitution of the Court as well as the term of office of its members. 
10.2     The Committee feels that the Court being the apex body of the university, provision for its constitution and term
of office of its members be provided in the first statutes itself.
Clauses 23(2), 24(2), 25(2), 26 and 27
11.1     Clause 23(2), page 9 provides that the constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members
and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
11.2     Clause 24(2), page 9 provides that the constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members
and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
11.3     Clause 25(2), page 9 provides that the constitution of the College Development Council, the term of office of its
members and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
11.4     Clause 26, page 9 provides that the constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.
11.5     Clause 27, page 9 provides that the constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.
11.6     The Committee notes that the Executive Council, Academic Council, College Development Council, Board of
Studies and Finance Committee are the important decision-making bodies of the University.  The Statutes appended to
the Bill contain provisions only about the powers and functions of these bodies but are silent about their constitution and
term of office.
 
11.7     The Committee, therefore, recommends that the provisions for the constitution and term of office of the
Executive Council, Academic Council, College Development Council, Board of Studies and Finance Committee, also
be included within corpus of the first Statutes itself.                
Clause 31(1)(i) 
12.       Clause 31, page 11 deals with power to make Ordinances. The Committee finds that this sub-clause provides for
making special arrangements ‘for the residence, discipline and teaching of women students.’  The Committee is of the
considered opinion that while this is valid in terms of residence and specific courses for women students, the word
‘discipline’ in this clause appears to be discriminatory; hence unnecessary. Accordingly, the Committee recommends
that the word ‘discipline’ be deleted from clause 31 (1) (i) of the Bill.
Clause 31(1)(k)
13.       This clause provides for co-operation and collaboration by the proposed University with other universities,
institutions and other agencies. The Committee feels that the words ‘other agencies’ leave ample scope for associating
with agencies which might be private and for profit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words ‘not for
profit’ may be appropriately added in page 11, line 17 of Clause 31 (1) (k).
Clause 36(3)
14.1     Clause 36(3), page 12, provides that the decision of the Tribunal, in respect of any dispute arising out of the
contract between the University and an employee, shall be final and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the
matters decided by the Tribunal.
14.2     The Committee feels that Clause 36(3) gives an impression that the employees are debarred from all other
judicial remedies against the decision of the Tribunal.  The Committee is aware that no Act can debar the remedies
available under Articles 226 and 32 of the Constitution.  The Bill also does not intend to do this.  The Committee,
however, recommends that the following explanation may be added in the said Clause for removing the erroneous
impression in this regard.
‘This does not preclude the employees from availing the remedies provided under Articles 226 and 32 of the
Constitution’
Clause 36 (3) may, accordingly, be amended. 
 
Clause 40

180th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/180threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
15.       Clause 40, page 13 provides for the final authority in respect of any question regarding election or appointment
of a member of any authority or other body of the University.  The Committee notes that the Bill nowhere mentions
about an elected membership of any authority of the University.  The Committee is of considered opinion that ideally,
the composition/membership of these bodies should have been provided in the Statute itself as was done in the case of
Allahabad University. In view of the fact that the composition of authorities of the university would be subsequently
decided by the university bodies, the Committee wishes to emphasize the need for having elected elements in all the
bodies/authorities of the university.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable mention for the purpose be
made in the Bill at appropriate places.  The Committee further recommends that an enabling provision must be provided
in the Act itself to ensure democratization of various bodies of the University.
Clause 43
16.1     Clause 43, page 13, provides that no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer or other employee
of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions
of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
16.2     The Committee feels that the words ‘good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of
this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances’ are vague and leave scope for misuse as interpretation of ‘good faith’ could be
subjective. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ambit of the words ‘good faith or intended to be done in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances’ may be spelt out in clear terms. 
Clause 47
17.       Clause 47, page 14, pertains to Transitional Provisions. The Committee is of the considered opinion that since
the first officers and authorities of the university are to be appointed or nominated by the Central Government, their
term of offices as provided in transitional provisions should not be long enough. The Committee notes that in some
cases it is five years and in others it is three years.  It, therefore, recommends that the term of office of the first
Chancellor, the first                 Vice-Chancellor as well as other officers and bodies provided in various            sub-
clauses of Clause 47 on page 14 should be reduced from five and three years to three and two years respectively.   
THE SCHEDULE
Clauses 2(1) and 2(2) of the Statutes
18.1     Clause 2(1), page 15 of the Statutes provides for the appointment of the                         Vice-Chancellor by the
Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under
clause (2).
18.2     Clause 2(2), page 15 provides that the Committee referred to in clause (1) shall consist of three persons, out of
whom two shall be nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall be
the Convenor of the Committee. 
18.3     The Committee finds that the Statute is silent about the background of the persons to be placed on the panel for
appointment as Vice-Chancellor. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the background of the persons who could
be placed on the panel for appointment as Vice-Chancellor of the University may be indicated in the Bill itself.  The
Committee further recommends that a nominee of the Court should also be included in the Selection Committee for
appointment to the post of Vice-Chancellor.
Clauses 9 of the Statutes
19.       Clause 9, page 20 of the Statutes provides for the appointment of a Librarian of the University.  The Committee,
however, notes that the retirement age for the post of Librarian has not been provided for in the Clause.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Librarian’s retirement age should also find place in the Bill.
Clause 17 of the Statutes
20.       The Committee notes that in case of the ‘Finance Committee’, while its composition has been given, there is no
representation from the University Court in this Committee.  The Committee opines that University Court being an
important body should have representation in the Finance Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a
new sub-clause ‘at least one person to be nominated by the Court’ may be added immediately after line 6 of Clause 17
of the Statutes on page 23 of the Bill.
 
Clause 18(2) of the Statutes
21.1     Clause 18 (2), page 23 provides that a Selection Committee for appointment to the post of Professor shall consist
of the Vice-Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor, Dean of the Faculty and Head of the Department. 
21.2     The Committee is aware that the Heads of the Department are appointed generally by seniority and rotation. It
could, therefore, be possible that a Reader happens to be the Head of the Department when the process for appointment
to the post of Professor is underway.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words ‘if he is a professor’ may

180th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/180threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
be appended to (ii) of Column 2 of Table against the heading ‘Professor’.
Clause 29 (1) of the Statutes
22.1     Clause 29(1), page 27, provides that all powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and disciplinary action
in relation to the students of the University shall vest in the Vice-Chancellor.
22.2     Clause 37(1), page 12, of the principal Act provides that any student or candidate for an examination whose
name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the orders of the Vice-Chancellor, Discipline Committee or
Examination Committee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the
University for more than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution
by him, appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify and reverse the decision of the
Vice-Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be. 
22.3     The Committee feels that the provisions of Clause 29(1) of the Statutes and Clause 37(1) of the Principal Act
appear to be contradictory. 
22.4     The Committee, therefore, recommends that the provisions of the Clauses may be suitably re-drafted to remove
the inherent contradictions, if any. 
Clause 39 (1) of Statutes
23.       The Committee is of considered opinion that the Act must provide for elected representation of students,
teachers and non-teaching staff in all authoritative bodies of the University and ensure their right to form associations. 
However, the Committee found no such provision for students.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words
‘two elected representatives of students” should find place in the constitution of the Student Council and Clause 39,
page 30 be re-drafted accordingly.
24.       The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
25.       The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
26.       The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amendment additions suggested
by it. 
27.       The Committee would like the Department to submit a note with reasons on the recommendations/suggestions,
which could not be incorporated in the Bill.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
Clause 6(ix)
The Committee is of the considered opinion that the word ‘organization’ in this clause leaves some scope for different
interpretations. The Department clarified that the word ‘organization’ generally meant ‘a teaching or a research
institution, other than a university.’  The Committee feels that this needs to be specified in the Bill with a view to
remove any ambiguity about the nature of the organization.                                                                     (para 8.2)
Clause 6(xix)
The Committee feels that the provision of the clause amounts to giving unbridled powers to the University for
conferring autonomous status on a College, an Institution or a Department.  The Committee is of the opinion that some
kind of requirements and conditions necessary for making an institution autonomous may be specified. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Clause 6(xix) may be suitably amended.                                                         (para 9.2)
Clause 22 (1)
The Committee feels that the Court being the apex body of the university, provision for its constitution and term of
office of its members be provided in the first statutes itself.                           (para 10.2)
Clauses 23(2), 24(2), 25(2), 26 and 27
The Committee notes that the Executive Council, Academic Council, College Development Council, Board of Studies
and Finance Committee are the important decision-making bodies of the University.  The Statutes appended to the Bill
contain provisions only about the powers and functions of these bodies but is silent about their constitution and term of
office. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the provisions for the constitution and term of office of the
Executive Council, Academic Council, College Development Council, Board of Studies and Finance Committee, also
be included within corpus of the first Statutes itself.           paras 11.6 and 11.7)
Clause 31(1)(i) 
The Committee finds that this sub-clause provides for making special arrangements ‘for the residence, discipline and
teaching of women students.’  The Committee is of the considered opinion that while this is valid in terms of residence
and specific courses for women students, the word ‘discipline’ in this clause appears to be discriminatory; hence
unnecessary. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the word ‘discipline’ be deleted from clause 31 (1) (i) of the
Bill.          para 12)
Clause 31(1)(k)

180th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/180threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
The Committee feels that the words ‘other agencies’ leaves ample scope for associating with agencies which might be
private and for profit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words ‘not for profit’ may be appropriately added
in page 11, line 17 of Clause 31 (1) (k).                  (para 13)
Clause 36(3)
The Committee feels that Clause 36(3) gives an impression that the employees are debarred from all other judicial
remedies against the decision of the Tribunal.  The Committee is aware that no Act can debar the remedies available
under Articles 226 and 32 of the Constitution.  The Bill also does not intend to do this.  The Committee, however,
recommends that the following explanation may be added in the said Clause for removing the erroneous impression in
this regard.
‘This does not preclude the employees from availing the remedies provided under Articles 226 and 32 of the
Constitution’
Clause 36 (3) may, accordingly, be amended.                           (para 14.2)
Clause 40
The Committee notes that the Bill nowhere mentions about an elected membership of any authority of the University. 
The Committee is of considered opinion that ideally, the composition/membership of these bodies should have been
provided in the Statute itself as was done in the case of Allahabad University. In view of the fact that the composition of
authorities of the university would be subsequently decided by the university bodies, the Committee wishes to
emphasize the need for having elected elements in all the bodies/authorities of the university.  The Committee,
therefore, recommends that suitable mention for the purpose be made in the Bill at appropriate places.  The Committee
further recommends that an enabling provision must be provided in the Act itself to ensure democratization of various
bodies of the University.(para 15)
Clause 43
The Committee feels that the words ‘good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act,
the Statutes or the Ordinances’ is vague and leaves scope for misuse as interpretation of ‘good faith’ could be
subjective. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ambit of the words ‘good faith or intended to be done in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances’ may be spelt out in clear terms. 
(para 16.2)
Clause 47
The Committee is of the considered opinion that since the first officers and authorities of the university are to be
appointed or nominated by the Central Government, their term of offices as provided in transitional provisions should
not be long enough. The Committee notes that in some cases it is five years and in others it is three years.  It, therefore,
recommends that the term of office of the first Chancellor, the first Vice-Chancellor as well as other officers and bodies
provided in various sub-clauses of Clause 47 on page 14 should be reduced from five and three years to three and two
years respectively.   
(para 17)
THE SCHEDULE
Clauses 2(1) and 2(2) of the Statutes
The Committee finds that the Statute is silent about the background of the persons to be placed on the panel for
appointment as Vice-Chancellor. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the background of the persons who could
be placed on the panel for appointment as Vice-Chancellor of the University may be indicated in the Bill itself.  The
Committee further recommends that a nominee of the Court should also be included in the Selection Committee for
appointment to the post of Vice-Chancellor.                                              (para 18.3)
Clauses 9 of the Statutes
The Committee recommends that the Librarian’s retirement age should also find place in the Bill.                        (para
19)
Clause 17 of the Statutes
The Committee opines that University Court being an important body should have representation in the Finance
Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a new sub-clause ‘at least one person to be nominated by the
Court’ may be added immediately after line 6 of Clause 17 of the Statutes on page 23 of the Bill.                      (para 20)
Clause 18(2) of the Statutes
The Committee is aware that the Heads of the Department are appointed generally by seniority and rotation. It could,
therefore, be possible that a Reader happens to be the Head of the Department when the process for appointment to the
post of Professor is underway.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words ‘if he is a professor’ may be
appended to (ii) of Column 2 of Table against the heading ‘Professor’.                                   (para 21.2)

180th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/180threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
Clause 29 (1) of the Statutes
The Committee feels that the provisions of Clause 29(1) of the Statutes and Clause 37(1) of the Principal Act appear to
be contradictory. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the provisions of the Clauses may be suitably re-drafted
to remove the inherent contradictions, if any.  (paras 22.3 and 22.4)
Clause 39 (1) of Statutes
The Committee recommends that the words ‘two elected representatives of students’ should find place in the
constitution of the Student Council and Clause 39, page 30 be re-drafted
accordingly.                                                             (para 23)
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 II
        SECOND MEETING
         The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Monday, the 18
th September 2006 in
Committee Room `D', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.                     
          MEMBERS  PRESENT
           
Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
           
            RAJYA SABHA
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
Smt. Brinda Karat
Shri S. Anbalagan
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
            LOK SABHA
 Shri Ashok Argal
Shri Basudeb Barman
Shri Harishchandra Chavan
Shri Harisinh Chavda
Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
Shri Ramswaroop Koli
Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
Smt. Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
Shri Chengara Surendran
Dr. Thokchom Meinya
Shri K. Virupakshappa
Dr. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
Shri Francis K. George
Shri Anantkumar Hegde
            SECRETARIAT
            Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
            Shri N.K. Singh, Director
            Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
            Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
            WITNESSES
***
Department of Secondary and Higher Education
            1.         Shri Sudeep Banerjee               Secretary

180th Report of Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/180threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:28:48]
2.         Shri Sunil Kumar                      Joint Secretary
3.         Shri R.D. Sahay                        Deputy Secretary
4.         Shri S.S. Mahlawat                   Under Secretary
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the new Members who were recently nominated to the Committee.        
                                    ***
3.                                                                     ***
4.                                                                     ***
 
5.         The Committee reassembled at 2.30 p.m. and heard the Secretary, and other representatives of the Department of
Secondary and Higher Education on different clauses of the (i) Rajiv Gandhi University Bill, 2006; (ii) Sikkim
University Bill, 2006; and (iii) Tripura University Bill, 2006. The Chairman and Members of the Committee sought
clarifications from the representatives of the Department of Secondary and Higher Education on Bills under
consideration, to which the officials responded.  The Committee adopted the Reports on the said Bills with some
modifications.  
6.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.05 p.m.
______________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matter.