 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA       235 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 TH  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 25 TH  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932  (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 TH  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 25 TH  FEBRUARY, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI  
FEBRUARY, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932  (SAKA)  
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS  
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. P REFACE ......................................................................................................................... (iii) 
3. R EPORT ........................................................................................................................... 1-7 
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS /O BSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE   ––    AT A GLANCE ............................... 8-9 
5. M INUTES ....................................................................................................................... 11-15 
6. A NNEXURE ....................................................................................................................... 17-24 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON HRD  
(2010-11)  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes   ––   Chairman  
 2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai  
 3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
 4. Shri Prakash Javadekar  
 5. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 6. Shri Pramod Kureel 
 7. Shri N.K. Singh  
 8. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
 9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  
 10. Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK SABHA  
 11. Shri Kirti Azad 
 12. Shri P.K. Biju 
 13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela  
 14. Shri Angadi Suresh Chanabasappa  
 15. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 16. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 17. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 18. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
 19. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhao  
 20. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
 21. Shri P. Kumar 
 22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 23. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 24. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola 
 25. Shri Tapas Paul 
 26. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 27. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 28. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 29. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’  
 30. Shri P. Viswanathan 
 31. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri N.S. Walia, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 

 
PREFACE  
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliam entary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee on  the Juvenile Justice 
(Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Bill, 2010*. 
2. The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Chi ldren) Amendment Bill, 2010 was introduced in the R ajya Sabha on 16 
November, 2010. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating t o Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha referred ** the Bill to the Committee on 1 December, 2010 for examination and report within two months. 
3. The Committee considered the Bill in two sitting s held on 31 January 2011 and 22 February, 2011. 
4.  On 31 January, 2011, the Committee heard the Se cretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development on  various 
provisions of the Bill. 
5. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied  on the following:- 
(i) The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Ch ildren) Amendment Bill, 2010; 
(ii) The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of C hildren) Act, 2000; 
(iii) Background Note on the bill; 
(iv) Detailed clause by clause note on various prov isions of the Bill; 
(v) Mental Health Act, 1987; 
(vi) Copy of the Delhi High Court Judgement (writ p etition (civil) No. 8112/2007); 
(vii) Report of the Rajya Sabha Committee on Petiti ons for Integration and Empowerment of Leprosy Affected Persons; 
and 
(viii) Summary of consultations. 
6. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the  Bill and adopted the same in its meeting held on 22nd February, 2011. 
7. For facility of reference, observations and reco mmendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end 
of the Report. 
OSCAR FERNANDES 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
February  22, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary  
Phalguna  4, 1932 ( Saka ) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT  
I. INTRODUCTION  
1.1  The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of C hildren) Amendment Bill, 2010 was introduced in the  Rajya Sabha on 16 
November, 2010 and referred to the Department-relat ed Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resour ce Development 
on 1 December, 2010 for examination and report thereon. 
1.2 The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Ch ildren) Act, 2000 was enacted to provide a juvenile  justice system for 
juveniles in conflict with law and children in need of care and protection, by providing for proper care, protection and treatment 
by catering to their development needs, and by adopting a child friendly approach in the adjudication and disposition of matters 
in the best interest of children and for their ultimate rehabilitation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. This 
Act was amended in 2006 to make it more effective b y providing time-lines for setting up of Juvenile J ustice Boards and Child 
Welfare Committees which are very basic institution s for management and governance under the Act and c ompulsory 
registration of Homes. The scope of the Act was als o widened to include working children, children liv ing on the streets or 
those found begging. 
1.3  The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of C hildren) Amendment Bill, 2010 seeks to amend the Ju venile Justice (Care 
and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 with a view t o remove discriminatory provisions in the said Act against children so as to 
ensure that a juvenile/child suffering from leprosy  or sexually transmitted diseases or Hepatitis B or  Tuberculosis or is of 
unsound mind enjoys equal status as other children. 
1.4  The Secretary, Ministry of Women & Child Devel opment during his presentation before the Committee  stated that his 
Ministry received a reference for amendment of Section 48 regarding committal to approved place of juvenile or child suffering 
from dangerous diseases and his future disposal of the Juvenile Justice Act from the Ministry of Healt h and Family Welfare in 
October, 2008. This reference followed the first or der given by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi in a c ase filed by Kushtha 
Asha Deep Federation vs. the Union of India. The Se cretary explained that at that point of time, the M inistry was of the view 
that this provision did not classify leprosy as a c ommunicable and inherently risky disease. The inten tion of the provision was 
rather to ensure proper treatment of the disease an d, therefore, segregation was not envisaged under t he provisions of the Act. 
This interpretation of the Ministry was accepted by the Ministry of Law and Justice and, accordingly, no change was considered 
to be made at that point of time. Later in December  2008, the Ministry received another reference foll owing the 
recommendations made by the Rajya Sabha Committee o n Petitions for integration and empowerment of lepr osy affected 
persons in its 131st Report. The Committee observed  that the discriminatory provisions in the statutes  have hampered the 
empowerment of this marginalized section of the soc iety. The Committee recommended that discriminatory  references against 
leprosy affected persons from all the Acts should b e removed including the Juvenile Justice Act to ens ure integration of such 
persons in the mainstream. This recommendation was further reinforced by the order of the Hon’ble High  Court of Delhi in 
February 2009 that immediate steps for removal/amen dment of discriminatory provisions against persons affected by leprosy 
from all legislations and for ensuring that such pa tients/persons enjoy equal status with other citize ns. Tracing the process of 
amendments, the Secretary informed the Committee th at the matter remained under consideration of the M inistry in 
consultation with the Ministries of Health and Fami ly Welfare and Law and Justice. During this exercis e, the scope of the 
amendment was enlarged to include, besides leprosy affected children, children affected by other disea ses like Tuberculosis, 
Hepatitis B, Sexually transmitted diseases, mental disorder etc. The Cabinet Note was circulated in Ju ne, 2010 and with all the 
points resolved, the approval was received in August 2010. 
1.5 On a specific query of the Committee regarding the status of implementation of the Juvenile Justic e Act, 2000 so far, the 
Secretary admitted that the implementation of the A ct had not been on the desired lines. He further in formed that the Supreme 
Court in February, 2010, gave an order to the State s to set up Juvenile Justice Boards and Child Welfa re Committees as these 
were the principal institutions mandated to administer the Act. However, the States had not been very forth coming in setting up 
these institutions mainly due to resource crunch. I n order to facilitate the setting up of these insti tutions, the Ministry started a 

new composite scheme ‘Integrated Child Protection Scheme’ in 2009-10. Since then Juvenile Justice Boards and Child Welfare 
Committees have been set up in 511 and 493 district s respectively. The Secretary assured that the Inte grated Child protection 
Scheme when implemented as envisaged would facilitate the implementation of the Act. 
1.6 The Committee was informed that under the Integ rated Child Protection Scheme, 1396 Juvenile Homes in the country 
have been assisted. However, state-wise break-up of such Homes indicates that maximum concentration is in Maharashtra (738) 
and Andhra Pradesh (102). Very crucial States/UTs l ike Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, Andama n & Nicobar 
Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep have no Homes for juveniles. Si milarly, North-
East States like Arunachal Pradesh (1), Sikkim (1),  Meghalaya (4), Mizoram (4) and Nagaland (2) have v ery few Homes. An 
evaluation was carried out in 2007 of the scheme ‘A  Programme for Juvenile Justice’ under which grants  were being given to 
State Governments for setting up and maintaining Ho mes of various types for children under the Juvenil e Justice Act. It 
emerged from this evaluation that significant improvements were required in the quality of care being provided in these Homes. 
The recommendations included, inter alia , provision of adequate and trained staff; improvem ent in quality of infrastructure; 
provision of special care for special needs childre n; provision of age appropriate education and suita ble vocational training and 
a focus on non-institutional care. The Ministry in 2009-10 introduced a new comprehensive Centrally Sp onsored Scheme 
namely, the Integrated Child Protection Scheme by m erging three earlier schemes for improving the qual ity of care and 
rehabilitation services for children in difficult c ircumstances. ‘Elaborate staffing and financial nor ms for the component of 
‘institutional care’ under ICPS were laid down and the responsibility for ensuring proper standards an d quality of services in 
these Homes was entrusted upon the State Government s/UT Administrations as mentioned in the Juvenile J ustice Act. The Act 
also requires the State Government to set up Inspec tion Committees for Children’s Homes at State, Dist rict or City Level. The 
Child Welfare Committees (CWCs) and Juvenile Justic e Boards (JJBs) to be set up under the said Act are  also required to 
monitor the Homes for proper functioning in addition to the setting up of Management Committee for eac h Home to be headed 
by the District Child Protection Officer of the District Child Protection Unit. 
1.7 The Committee in its 219th Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 had appreciated the targets set by the Ministry 
with an allocation of Rs. 300 crore mainly for sett ing up of Juvenile Justice Board, Child Welfare Com mittee, Special 
Juvenile Police Units Child Protection societies etc. The Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation of 
a speedy and accelerated implementation of the sche me so that the institutional set-up is in place for  effective 
implementation of the scheme and of the JJ Act. 
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS  
2.1  The Committee has been given to understand tha t the Ministry of Women & Child Development has onl y consulted the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare who consulted  experts/doctors in addition to consultation with C entral T.B. Division, 
NACO and Mental Health Division and Central Leprosy  Division regarding the discriminatory Acts against  leprosy. The 
Ministry of Women & Child Development did not feel necessary to consult the States/NGOs as similar rec ommendations of 
removing the discriminatory provisions were highlighted in the order of the Hon’ble High Court in a PIL filed by Kushtha Asha 
Deep Federation which was later endorsed by the Raj ya Sabha Committee on Petitions in its 131st Report  supported by the 
advice of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare . The Ministry of WCD, accordingly, decided to move  the amendments 
expeditiously so that the children affected by such  diseases in the Homes do not suffer the stigma tra ditionally associated with 
such diseases. 
2.2 The Committee appreciates the intention of the Mini stry in bringing about this amendment for removing 
discriminatory provisions in the JJ Act as early as possible. However, the Committee is of the opinion that views of State 
Governments and NGOs should have been taken as the implementation of the Act lies in their hands. The practical 
difficulties faced in the proper functioning of Hom es along with their monitoring through Child Welfar e Committees 
and Juvenile Justice Boards should be taken into co nsideration as this amendment is likely to result i n increase in the 
number of juveniles/children affected by the above mentioned diseases in the Homes. It is the responsi bility of State 
Governments/UT Administrations to set up, maintain and upgrade the Homes for children either by themse lves or 
through voluntary organization. The Committee, ther efore, is of the opinion that views of at least tho se States having 
large number of Homes may be sought so as to initia te required action along with enforcement of propos ed 
amendments. 

III. Section 48 (2)  
3.1 Clause 2 of Section 48 dealing with “Committal to approved place of Juvenile or child suffering from dangerous diseases 
and his future disposal” reads as follows:- 
‘Where a juvenile or the child is found to be suffe ring from leprosy, sexually transmitted disease, Hepatitis B, open cases 
of Tuberculosis and such other diseases or is of un sound mind, he shall be dealt with separately throu gh various 
specialized referral services or under the relevant laws as such’. 
 It is proposed to delete this section of the Act w hich provides that a child affected with diseases such as leprosy, sexually 
transmitted diseases, Hepatitis B, open cases of TB and any other such diseases should be segregated from other children in the 
special home or institution. The Ministry clarified that all these diseases were treatable either in a domiciliary environment or in 
a controlled environment. That being the case, ther e was no need to deal with such children separately . It was clarified that the 
spirit behind the recommendation was to remove possibility of any discrimination against the children solely on account of their 
being affected by a disease. Attention of the Committee was drawn to the fact that similar to segregat ion on account of leprosy, 
segregation of children on account of other diseases could also result in their developing a feeling of isolation thus impacting on 
their personality or future life. It was also clari fied that this proposed action of the Ministry was based on the opinion of the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. 
3.2 The Committee takes note of the following justi fication in support of inclusion of these diseases widening the scope of 
this amendment so as to cover not only leprosy but other diseases as well as furnished by Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare:- 
(i) Leprosy:  With introduction of Multi Drug Therapy, leprosy i s cured within a period of six months or one year. As 
per WHO Publications, a single dose of Rifampicin i s capable of killing 99.9% or more of viable organi sms. Thus, 
there is no need for segregation of the leprosy pat ient under treatment and also it does not help in q uickening 
curability. 
(ii) TB:  Series of studies carried out by TB Research Centre (TRC), an ICMR Institute with the assistance of the British 
Medical Research Council, the World Health Organiza tion (WHO) and the Government of India (GOI) 
demonstrated that the time-honoured virtues of segr egation, sanatorium treatment such as bed rest, wel l balanced 
diet and other sanatoria based measures, were unimp ortant provided patients were diagnosed early and a dequate 
chemotherapy was prescribed and fully taken. Furthe r, there was no evidence that close family contacts  of patients 
treated at home incurred an increased risk of conta cting TB. Therefore, it would be appropriate to tre at TB patients 
in their own homes. Certain types of TB patients wh ose sputum smear is positive for TB bacteria are mo re 
infectious than others. Once they are diagnosed and  initiated on TB treatment, the infectiousness come s down 
drastically. However, segregation is not recommended based on the series of studies indicated above. 
(iii) STD:  Transmission is through sexual contact. Segregatio n per se has no role in preventing transmission of the 
disease. 
(iv)  Hepatitis B:  Viral Hepatitis B is transmitted from one person t o another either by sexual contact or by transfusio n 
of blood and blood products. It is never transmitte d by casual contact or by droplet infection. Accord ingly, there is 
no need to segregate the children suffering from Hepatitis B. 
(v)  Mental Health:  The treatment of mental disorders in community settings as against institutional care is encouraged 
under National Mental Programme. Further, it may be  mentioned that mental illness has been recognized as a 
disability in United Nations Convention on Rights o f Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD), of which Indi a is a 
signatory, as well as Persons with Disabilities Act , 1995. UNCRPD mandates that appropriate action sho uld be 
taken to mainstream and empower disabled persons. T herefore, any provision which requires segregation of the 
child/juvenile with disabilities, including mental illness which includes drug addiction, needs to be removed. 
3.3 The Ministry also clarified that a case where c hild or juvenile suffering from a disease requiring  prolonged medical 
treatment or physical or mental complaint may be se nt to an approved place for the required treatment by the competent 

authority as in Section 48 (1). Thus, if a child is  suffering from acute mental disorder which may som etimes be violent in 
nature, he/she could be sent to the psychiatric hos pital or nursing home for treatment arid, then, wou ld not be a threat to other 
children in the Home. As regards sexually transmitt ed infections, the Ministry submitted that these ar e transmitted by sexual 
route. Thus, a child with such diseases may not hav e an adverse impact on normal or healthy children, unless they have sexual 
relations with the infected child. 
3.4 The Committee welcomes the amendment of the Ministry in JJ Act which seeks to do away with the discriminatory 
provisions so that a child/juvenile suffering from leprosy or sexually transmitted diseases or Hepatitis B or open cases of 
Tuberculosis or is of unsound mind and such other diseases enjoys equal status as other citizens without any segregation 
or isolation. However, the Committee expresses its concern regarding the likelihood of adverse impact of juveniles who 
may be suffering from acute mental disorder (someti mes of a violent nature) or suffering from sexually  transmitted 
diseases on the other normal healthy children. Comm ittee’s apprehensions are based on the ground reali ties prevailing 
in the Shelter Homes. Nobody would deny that fact t hat they cannot be equated with normal families res iding in an 
overall atmosphere of hygiene and healthy conditions supplemented with love and affection of family me mbers for each 
other. The Committee, therefore, is of the firm opi nion that a close watch and monitoring of such juve niles needs to be 
kept, if they are not segregated from the other hea lthy children, to avoid any infection or adverse im pact. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to devise ways for proper monitoring of such children without their segregation.  
3.5 Another area of concern highlighted by the Committe e was the discrimination against the HIV affected c hildren 
all over the country. Various cases of discriminati on keep on being reported from different States at regular intervals 
where HIV affected children were boycotted in the s chools. The Committee strongly feels that discrimin ation against 
HIV affected children also needs to be removed by i ncorporation of necessary provisions in the JJ Act.  The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Ministry to make approp riate amendments after necessary consultations with  respect to 
HIV affected children so that equality and dignity of such children is also maintained. 
IV. Section 58  
4.1 Section 58 which relates to transfer of juvenil e or child of unsound mind or suffering from lepros y or addicted to drugs 
reads as follows: 
‘Where it appears to the competent authority that a ny juvenile or the child kept in a special home or a children’s home or 
shelter home or in an institution in pursuance of this Act, is suffering from leprosy or is of unsound mind or is addicted to 
any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, the co mpetent authority may order his removal to a leper asylum or mental 
hospital or treatment centre for drug addicts or to  a place of safety for being kept there for such pe riod not exceeding the 
period for which he is required to be kept under th e order of the competent authority or for such furt her period as may be 
certified by the medical officer necessary for the proper treatment of the juvenile or the child’. 
4.2 The above provision is proposed to be substitut ed by the following provision: 
58(1) Where it appears to the competent authority that any juvenile or child kept in a special home or a observation home 
or a children’s home or a shelter home or in an ins titution in pursuance of this Act, is a mentally il l person or addicted to 
alcohol or other drugs which lead to behavioral cha nges in a person, the competent authority may order  his removal to a 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home in  accordance with the provisions of the Mental Healt h Act, 1987 or the 
rules framed thereunder. 
58(2) In case the juvenile or child had been remove d to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home under sub-
section (1), the competent authority may, on the ba sis of the advice given in the certificate of disch arge of the psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home, order to remo ve such juvenile or child to an Integrated Rehabili tation Centre for 
Addicts or similar centres maintained by the State Government for mentally ill persons (including the persons addicted to 
any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance) and su ch removal shall be only for the period required fo r the in-patient 
treatment of such juvenile or child. 
 

Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section,---- 
(a) “Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts” shall have the meaning assigned to it under the sch eme called 
“Central Sector Scheme of Assistance for Prevention  of Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse and for Social 
Defence Services” made by the Government of India i n the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment or  any 
other corresponding scheme for the time being in force; 
(b) “mentally ill person” shall have the meaning as signed to it in clause (1) of section 2 of the Mental Health Act, 1987; 
(c) “psychiatric hospital” or “psychiatric nursing home” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clau se (q) of section 2 
of the Mental Health Act, 1987. 
4.3 The reason given by the Ministry for bringing a n amendment in this section was that certain derogatory terms like ‘lepers’ 
and ‘leper asylums’ needed to be deleted and terms like ‘of unsound mind’ and ‘drug addict’ be replace d with ‘mentally ill 
person’ and ‘addicted to alcohol or other drugs whi ch lead to behavioral’ change in a person’ which we re socially acceptable 
and suitable ones and also in consonance with the Mental Health Act, 1987. 
4.4 The Committee is in agreement with the proposed ame ndments in Section 58. The spirit of the amendment lies in 
making the transfer of juvenile or child of unsound  mind or child suffering from leprosy or addicted t o drugs from a 
special home or institutions to a place of safety a nd proper treatment in a dignified manner. Removing  the derogatory 
terms and replacing others in consonance with the Mental Health Act, 1987 is a welcome amendment.  
4.5 The Committee would also like to point out that ini tiative will have to be taken by the Ministry to se nsitize the 
State Governments/concerned authorities running the  Shelter Homes for providing specialized medical ca re to such 
children. At the same time, staff of Shelter Homes will also have to be made aware about the specific needs of these 
children and handling them accordingly. The Committ ee would appreciate if the Department takes the req uired steps 
for providing the necessary funds and training of staff in co-ordination with the concerned State Governments.  
5. The enacting formula and the title are adopted w ith consequential changes. 
6. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be pa ssed after incorporating the amendments/additions suggested by it. 
7.  The Committee would like the Ministry to submit  a note with reasons on the recommendations/suggest ions which could 
not be incorporated in the Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ---- AT A GLANCE  
I. INTRODUCTION 
 The Committee in its 219th Report on Demands for G rants 2010-11 had appreciated the targets set by the Ministry 
with an allocation of Rs. 300 crore mainly for sett ing up of Juvenile Justice Board, Child Welfare Com mittee, Special 
Juvenile Police Units Child Protection societies etc. The Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation of 
a speedy and accelerated implementation of the sche me so that the institutional set-up is in place for  effective 
implementation of the scheme and of the JJ Act. (Para 1.7)  
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS 
 The Committee appreciates the intention of the Min istry in bringing about this amendment for removing  
discriminatory provisions in the JJ Act as early as possible. However, the Committee is of the opinion that views of State 
Governments and NGOs should have been taken as the implementation of the Act lies in their hands. The practical 
difficulties faced in the proper functioning of Hom es along with their monitoring through Child Welfar e Committees 
and Juvenile Justice Boards should be taken into co nsideration as this amendment is likely to result i n increase in the 
number of juveniles/children affected by the above mentioned diseases in the Homes. It is the responsi bility of State 
Governments/UT Administrations to set up, maintain and upgrade the Homes for children either by themse lves or 
through voluntary organization. The Committee, ther efore, is of the opinion that views of at least tho se States having 
large number of Homes may be sought so as to initia te required action along with enforcement of propos ed 
amendments.   (Para 2.2)  
III. SECTION 48 (2) 
 The Committee welcomes the amendment of the Minist ry in JJ Act which seeks to do away with the discriminatory 
provisions so that a child/juvenile suffering from leprosy or sexually transmitted diseases or Hepatitis B or open cases of 
Tuberculosis or is of unsound mind and such other diseases enjoys equal status as other citizens without any segregation 
or isolation. However, the Committee expresses its concern regarding the likelihood of adverse impact of juveniles who 
may be suffering from acute mental disorder (someti mes of a violent nature) or suffering from sexually  transmitted 
diseases on the other normal healthy children. Comm ittee’s apprehensions are based on the ground reali ties prevailing 
in the Shelter Homes. Nobody would deny that fact t hat they cannot be equated with normal families res iding in an 
overall atmosphere of hygiene and healthy conditions supplemented with love and affection of family me mbers for each 
other. The Committee, therefore, is of the firm opi nion that a close watch and monitoring of such juve niles needs to be 
kept, if they are not segregated from the other hea lthy children, to avoid any infection or adverse im pact. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to devise ways for proper monitoring of such children without their segregation. 
     (Para 3.4)  
 Another area of concern highlighted by the Committ ee was the discrimination against the HIV affected children 
all over the country. Various cases of discriminati on keep on being reported from different States at regular intervals 
where HIV affected children were boycotted in the s chools. The Committee strongly feels that discrimin ation against 
HIV affected children also needs to be removed by i ncorporation of necessary provisions in the JJ Act.  The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Ministry to make approp riate amendments after necessary consultations with  respect to 
HIV affected children so that equality and dignity of such children is also maintained.  (Para 3.5)  
IV. SECTION 58 
 The Committee is in agreement with the proposed am endments in Section 58. The spirit of the amendment  lies in 
making the transfer of juvenile or child of unsound  mind or child suffering from leprosy or addicted t o drugs from a 
special home or institutions to a place of safety a nd proper treatment in a dignified manner. Removing  the derogatory 
terms and replacing others in consonance with the Mental Health Act, 1987 is a welcome amendment.    (Para 4.4)  

 The Committee would also like to point out that in itiative will have to be taken by the Ministry to s ensitize the 
State Governments/concerned authorities running the  Shelter Homes for providing specialized medical ca re to such 
children. At the same time, staff of Shelter Homes will also have to be made aware about the specific needs of these 
children and handling them accordingly. The Committ ee would appreciate if the Department takes the req uired steps 
for providing the necessary funds and training of staff in co-ordination with the concerned State Governments.      
             (Para 4.5)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING  
 The Committee on Human Resource Development met at  3.30 P.M. on Monday, the 31st January, 2011 in Committee 
Room. ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai  
 3. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
  LOK  SABHA  
 4.  Shri Kirti Azad 
 5.  Shri P. K. Biju 
 6.  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 7.  Shri P.C Gaddigoudar 
 8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 9.  Shri P. Kumar 
 10.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 11.  Shri Sheesh Ram Ola 
 12.  Shri Joseph Toppo 
 13.  Shri Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’  
 14.  Shri P.Vishwanathan 
 15.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
  LIST  OF WITNESSES  
 I. MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT ON THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE  
  AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) AMENDMENT BILL, 2010  
1. Shri D.K. Sikri, Secretary 
2. Shri Sudhir Kumar, Additional Secretary  
3. Ms. Preeti Madan, Joint Secretary 
4. Ms. Kalyani Chadha, Director 
 II. DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION ON THE FOREIGN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  
  (REGULATION OF ENTRY AND OPERATIONS) BILL, 2010  
1. Smt. Vibha Puri Das, Secretary 
2. Shri Sunil Kumar, Additional Secretary  
3. Dr. Ved Prakash, Vice-Chairman, UGC 
4. Shri R.P. Sisodia, Joint Secretary 
5. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary, Legislati ve Counsel, Ministry of Law & Justice 
6. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel, Ministry of Law & Justice 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri N.S. Walia, Director 

Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting of the Committee convened to hear the Secretary, 
Ministry of Women and Child Development on the Juve nile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amen dment Bill, 2010 
and the Secretary, Department of Higher Education o n the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry and 
Operations) Bill, 2010. The Chairman informed the m embers that the 229th Report of the Committee on th e Architects 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 was presented to Hon’ble Cha irman, Rajya Sabha on 24th January, 2011. He, then,  thanked the 
members for their co-operation during the study vis it of the Committee from 17th to 23rd January, 2011  to 
Thiruvananthapuram, Bengaluru and Chennai. 
3.   The Committee, then, heard the views of the Se cretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development on  the Juvenile 
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Bill, 2010. The Chairman and members raised certain queries which were 
replied to by the Secretary. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire to the Ministry for detailed replies. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew). 
4. * * * 
5.  Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
6.  The Committee then adjourned at 6.10 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH-MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd February, 2011 in Committee 
Room. ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
 3. Shri Prakash Javadekar  
 4. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 5. Shri N.K. Singh 
 6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7.  Shri P. K. Biju 
 8.  Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi  
 9.  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 10.  Shri Tapas Paul 
 11.  Shri Ashok Tanwar 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri N.S. Walia, Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
1.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the membe rs to the meeting of the Committee. Thereafter, the  Committee took up 
for consideration draft 235th Report on the Juvenil e Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amendme nt Bill, 2010 adopted 
the same after some discussion. 
2.   Thereafter, the Chairman nominated Shri Keshav a Rao, Member, Rajya Sabha and Shri P.K. Biju and S mt Helen 
Davidson, MPs, Lok Sabha to present/lay the 229\234 th and 235th Reports of the Committee on the Archit ects (Amendment) 
Bill, 2010 the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Bill, 2010 respectively in both Houses of Parliament 
on the 25th February, 2011. 
3.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. LXXIII of 2010  
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)  
AMENDMENT BILL, 2010 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
Short title and commencement. 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 48. 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of new section for 
section 58. 
 
Transfer of juvenile or child as 
are mentally ill or addicted to 
alcohol or other drugs. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year o f the Republic of 
India as follows:– 
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (C are and 
Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2010.  
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the C entral 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2.  In the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Ch ildren) Act, 2000 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 48, sub-
section (2) shall be omitted. 
3.   For section 58 of the principal Act, the followin g section shall be 
substituted, namely:-  
 '58. ( 1) Where it appears to the competent authority that any 
juvenile or child kept in a special home or an obse rvation home or a 
children’s home or a shelter home or in an institut ion in pursuance of 
this Act, is a mentally ill person or addicted to a lcohol or other drugs 
 

  
which lead to behavioural changes in a person, the competent 
authority may order his removal to a psychiatric ho spital or 
psychiatric nursing home in accordance with the pro visions of the 
Mental Health Act, 1987 or the rules made thereunder. 
 ( 2) In case the juvenile or child had been removed to a psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home under sub-sect ion (1), the 
competent authority may, on the basis of the advice  given in the 
certificate of discharge of the psychiatric hospita l or psychiatric 
nursing home, order to remove such juvenile or chil d to an Integrated 
Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts or similar centres maintained by the 
State Government for mentally ill persons (includin g the persons 
addicted to any narcotic drug or psychotropic subst ance) and such 
removal shall be only for the period required for t he in-patient 
treatment of such juvenile or child. 
 Explanation. -For the purposes of this sub-section,– 
 ( a) “Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts” sh all have the 
meaning assigned to it under the scheme called “Cen tral Sector 
Scheme of Assistance for Prevention of Alcoholism a nd Substance 
(Drugs) Abuse and for Social Defence Services” made  by the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Social Justi ce and 
Empowerment or any other corresponding scheme for t he time being 
in force; 
 ( b) “mentally ill person” shall have the meaning assi gned to it in 
clause (I) of section 2 of the Mental Health Act, 1987; 
 ( c) “psychiatric hospital” or “psychiatric nursing ho me” shall 
have the meaning assigned to it in clause (q) of se ction 2 of the 
Mental Health Act. 1987.’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
 The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Child ren) Act, 2000 was enacted to provide a juvenile ju stice system for 
juveniles in conflict with law and children in need of care and protection, by providing for proper care, protection and treatment 
by catering to their development needs, and by adopting a child-friendly approach in the adjudication and disposition of matters 
in the best interest of children and for their ultimate rehabilitation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
2.  Section 48 of the said Act provides for committ al to approved place of juvenile or child suffering from dangerous diseases 
and his future disposal. Sub-section (2) of this se ction provides that where a juvenile or the child i s found to be suffering from 
leprosy, sexually transmitted disease, Hepatitis B, open cases of Tuberculosis and such other diseases or is of unsound mind, he 
shall be dealt with separately through various specialized referral services or under the relevant laws as such. 
3.  Section 58 of the Act, inter alia , provides for the transfer of juvenile or child of  unsound mind or child suffering from 
leprosy or addicted to drugs from special home or c hildren’s home or shelter home or an institution to  a mental hospital or a 
leper asylum or treatment centre for drug addicts or to a place of safety for being kept there for a period as may be required. 
4.  The provisions referred to in the preceding par agraphs 2 and 3 provide for segregation of such chi ldren from other 
children in the special home or children home or sh elter home or an institution which appear discrimin atory in nature. In the 
opinion of experts also, segregation is no more nec essary for the treatment of such children. The Unio n Ministry of Health has 
also recommended for amendment of the aforesaid Act for removing the discriminatory provisions. 
5.  Hon’ble High Court of Delhi vide  an interim order dated 4th February, 2009 in a Pub lic Interest Litigation filed by Kusth 
Asha Deep Foundation, [Writ Petition (Civil) No. 81 12/2007 against Union of India and Others] held tha t there is urgency and 
need for immediate steps to be taken both to remove /amend discriminatory legislations and to ensure th at the patients/ persons 
suffering from leprosy enjoy equal status as other citizens. 
6.  Rajya Sabha Committee on Petitions for Integrat ion and Empowerment of Leprosy Affected Persons, in  its 131st Report 
presented on 24th October, 2008 has also recommende d that there is a need to amend the relevant provis ion of the Act so that 
the juvenile or child is not subjected to segregation or discrimination. 
7.  In view of the position stated in the foregoing  paragraphs, the Central Government has decided to amend the Juvenile 
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 , inter alia , to remove discriminatory provisions in the said A ct against 
children and to– 
(a)  omit sub-section (2) of section 48 which requi res a juvenile or child suffering from leprosy, sex ually transmitted 
disease, Hepatitis B, open cases of Tuberculosis an d such other diseases or of unsound mind, to be dea lt with 
separately through various specialised referral services or under the relevant laws as such; and 
(b) substitute section 58 by a new section to provide that– 
(i)  where it appears to the competent authority th at any juvenile or child kept in a special home or an observation 
home or a children’s home or a shelter home or in a n institution in pursuance of this Act, is a mental ly ill 
person or addicted to alcohol or other drugs which lead to behavioural changes in a person, the compet ent 
authority may order his removal to a psychiatric ho spital or psychiatric nursing home in accordance wi th the 
provisions of the Mental Health Act, 1987 or the rules framed thereunder; 
(ii)  in case the juvenile or child had been remove d to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home as 
mentioned in (i) above, the competent authority may , on the basis of the advice given in the certifica te of 
discharge of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home, order to remove such juvenile or child to an 
Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts or sim ilar centres maintained by the State Governments fo r 
mentally ill persons (including the persons addicted to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance) a nd such 
removal shall be only for the period required for the in-patient treatment of such juvenile or child. 
 
 

8.  This Bill seeks to amend the Juvenile Justice ( Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 to achieve the above objects. 
 
 
   NEW DELHI; 
The  6 th October , 2010.          KRISHNA TIRATH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ANNEXURE  
EXTRACTS FROM THE JUVENILE JUSTICE  
(CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) ACT, 2000 
(56 OF 2000)  
 
 
Committal to approved place of 
juvenile or child suffering from 
dangerous diseases and his future 
disposal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transfer of juvenile or child of 
unsound mind or suffering from 
leprosy or addicted to drugs. 
 
* * * * * 
48.  (1) * * * * * 
 (2) Where a juvenile or the child is found to be s uffering from 
leprosy, sexually transmitted disease, Hepatitis B,  open cases of 
Tuberculosis and such other diseases or is of unsou nd mind, he shall 
be dealt with separately through various specialise d referral services 
or under the relevant laws as such. 
* * * * * 
58.  Where it appears to the competent authority that a ny juvenile 
or the child kept in a special home or a children’s  home or shelter 
home or in an institution in pursuance of this Act,  is suffering from 
leprosy or is of unsound mind or is addicted to any  narcotic drug or 
psychotropic substance, the competent authority may  order his 
removal to a leper asylum or mental hospital or tre atment centre for 
drug addicts or to a place of safety for being kept there for such period 
not exceeding the period for which he is required t o be kept under the 
order of the competent authority or for such furthe r period as may be 
certified by the medical officer necessary for the proper treatment of 
the juvenile or the child. 
* * * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
RAJYA  SABHA  
–––––––– 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 
 
 
–––––––– 
 
[Shrimati Krishna Tirath, Minister of State (Independent Charge) of the Ministry of  
Women and Child Development ] 
 