PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT

DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY WELFARE
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02.06.95)
(Laid onthe Table of Lok Sabha on 02.06.95)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
June, 1995/Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)


Brrata to the Twenty-Bighth Report of the Department of
Pamily Welfare on the Action Taken by Govt. on the

On page 4 para No. 29(a) under the head recommendations line 6
for ‘fo* read ‘of'.


RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT

DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY WELFARE
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02.06.95)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 02.06.95)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
June, 1995/Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)


C.0 NE NUTS.

ComposiTION OF THE COMMITTEE

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER
CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

MINUTES

I
IL

Il

IV

Vv

Report

Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited

PaGEs
6)--00)
(iii)
1—6
7-11
12—16

17—18

19:


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri 0.7, Kohli

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
. Shri ५, Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. 1.0, Sanadi

11, Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

12, Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14, Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi |

17, Dr. ५. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

21. Prof P.J. Kurien

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole !
25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T Vandayar

28. Shri Aslam Sher. Khan

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33, Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

-36:,Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

७9०5३ 9 (० + ०

@



Gi)
42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

44. Shri Suraj Mandal
45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer



INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee, to submit the report on
its behalf, present this Twenty Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its 8th Report on “Demands for Grants” (1994-95) of
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Family Welfare).

2. The Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 18th April, 1994 and laid
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 1994. Replies of Government on all the
recommendations contained in the report, received from the Deptt. of Family Welfare were
considered by the Committee and this report was adopted at its sitting held on 1st June,
1995.

New Deni; ५ P. UPENDRA
Ist June, 1995 Chairman,
Committee on Human Resource Development.

11, Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)

(iii)



CHAPTER-I

REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Eighth Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare (Department of Family Welfare) for the year 1994-95 which was
presented to Rajya Sabha on 22.4.94 and the Lok Sabha on 22.1.94.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: Para
4, 5, 7), 8, 13; 14, 16, 19, 20, 23, 32-35, 38-42; 45.

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: Para 6, 11, 12, 15, 17, 18, 21, 22, 25, 27, 29, 36, 37A.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 9, 24, 26, 29A, 30.

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited nil.

3. The Committee will not deal with the Action Taken by the Government on’ some of
its recommendations.

Work Culture
Recommendation (Para No. 9)

The Committee also agrees with the assessment of the Deptt. that “the work culture,
particularly among the field level functionaries, is not conducive to generating confidence
among prospective acceptors of contraceptives. Problems like non-availability of staff at
headquarters, failure to tour, indulgence in private practice, unwillingness to work in remote
areas, etc., contribute to decline in quality of service or non-availability of services. Part of
the problem is evidently attributable to weak managment, supervision and personnel
policies”. But, the Committee is disappointed that the Department has not indicated any
plan of action to remove these inherent weaknesses in the implementation of the Family
Planning programmes. The Committee recommends that a time-bound and innovative plan
of action be devised urgently to remove the deficiency narrated above and make the
programme more effective and result-oriented.

Reply of the Government

“The management and supervision problems cited in this paragraph are in the notice of
the Department of Family Welfare. While the National Family Welfare Programme is a cent
percent centrally funded scheme, implementation lies in the hands of state Governments and
Union Territory Administrations. The infrastructure, including the staff, is under the control
of the State Govts./UT Administrations. The State Governments/U.T. Administrations are
being sensitised through correspondence, review and meetings on there problems and the
need to improve management, so as to improve the quality of care. While certain States like
Kerala and Tamil Nadu have shown impressive results in the implementation of the National

i



2

Family Welfare Programme, the problems mentioned in this paragraph are of serious
concern in the Hindi-speaking belt, particularly in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. Efforts will continue with the State Governments to
improve management and supervision.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels, even though the department admitted that problem of manage-
ment exists in certain States, it has failed to initiate any effective steps to remove it.

The Committee reiterates that in order to make the programme more positive and
result-oriented, there is urgent need to devise a time-bound and innovative plan of action to
remove the weaknesses of management in these States at the earliest. This matter should be
specifically discussed at a meeting of the State Ministers dealing with the subject, to be
convened by the Centre.

Urban Family Welfare Centres
Recommendation (Para No. 13)

The Committee expresses its concern over stagnation in the budget allocation for Urban
Family Welfare Centres for 1994-95. The population of major cities, particularly the
metropolitan cities, is increasing at a very fast speed. Slums are proliferating rapidly. In such
a situation, how the Department would be able to provide Family Welfare Services, where
outbursting of epidemics is quite frequent, is not understood. The Committee recommends
that allocation for the scheme should be increased.

Reply of the Government

“The existing allocation of Rs. 1500 lakhs for Urban Family Welfare Centres and Rs.
1300 lakhs for Urban Revamping Scheme i.e. Rs. 2800 lakhs for the Urban Family Welfare
set up is not even sufficient for the existing Centres. If additional budget is allocated the
urban Revamping Scheme can be expanded to cover the slum areas of the major cities
having population of more than 2 lakhs.

As recommended by the Committee, an amount of Rs. 63.59 crores has been included
in the projections of the Department in the Annual Plan 1995-96.”

Comments of the Committee

In view of the fact that slums are proliferating rapidly in urban areas, the Committee
feels, the urban revamping scheme should be expanded and recommends that department
should urge both the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance to allocate sufficient
funds to maintain the existing centres and for further expansion of the scheme.

Supply of Contraceptives
Recommendation (Para No. 14)

Nirodh is supplied free to the users through Family Welfare Centres, MCH Centres,
Hospitals and Dispensaries, Sub-Centres, Public Health Centres, Post Partum Centres, etc.
under the scheme 11 distribution of conventional contraceptives. The total sales and supply
of Nirodh in 1992-93/ were around 278 million pieces. A target of 324 million pieces was set
for the year ‘1993-94’ but only 69.6 million pieces were distributed during the period April to
August, 1993. Again, a target of 320 million pieces has been set for the current year. The
Committee feels that greater attention should be paid to the availability of the contraceptives
in remote areas and these should also be made available even at fair price shops.

Reply of the Government

“A scheme for distribution of Nirodh through public distribution system has been
implemented in Punjab, Haryana, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Himachal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Bihar, Tamil Nadu and Delhi”.


Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that the remaining States should also be persuaded to make
available contraceptives through public distribution system.
Village Health Guide Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 20)

Village Health Guide Scheme was launched in 1977 as a 100 per cent centrally
sponsored scheme, with the objective of training a person selected for the community
primary health care. The salient feature of the scheme is that, females below 30 years of age
should be selected as Health Guides. There are 3,24, 727 Village Health Guides as on
30.6.93. Since the scheme motivates socially inclined people for providing primary health,
the Committee feels that the sum provided in B.E. for 1994-95 is inadequate and must be
increased. The Committee is surprised that the allocation made this year has been reduced
to less than half of the R.E. of 1993-94. The Committee further notes that the rate of
honorarium paid continues to be meagre Rs. 50. The Committee feels that it should be
raised to a minimum of Rs. 150. The Committee is. of the view that since the scheme is
good, all the villages should be brought under the scheme.

Reply of the Government

“The Scheme was reviewed with the State Health Secretaries on 7th January, 1993:
Most of the State Governments were of the view that the Scheme is serving no useful
purpose for health or for family welfare. The Scheme has been stopped in Goa. Daman &
Diu and Delhi. The States of Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and UT of Andaman &
Nicobar are not in favour of continuation of the scheme. Andhra Pradesh has already
stopped payment of honorarium to VHGs w.e.f. 1.10.93 as it was not serving any useful
purpose. Only the States like Maharashtra, Punjab, Mizoram and West Bengal feel that the
VHGs are doing good work.

In view of the above, the proposal to transfer the scheme to the state sector is under
consideration.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is of the opinion that the difficulties of each State should be analysed
and the Scheme should be modified so that all the States could adopt it, instead of some
States implementing it and some abandoning it.

Role and Performance of States
Recommendation (Para No. 24)

_ The National Family Welfare Programme is a 100% Centrally funded programme.
Political commitment and zeal in implementation by the State Governments is essential. It is
necessary to secure full political commitment at the highest levels of the State administra-
tions. It is found that States in general, and certain States in particular, fail to release funds
timely under the National Family Welfare Programme. This results in a rush to make up the
backlog of sterilization towards the end of the year and neglect of other activities like
promotion of spacing methods, IEC and immunization, which have to run throughout the
year to be successful. The Committee feels that this should be rectified.

Reply of the Government

“A letter has been written by the Union Minister of Health & Family Welfare to all the
Chief Ministers of the States requesting them to ensure that the funds released by the
Government of India to their States for the implementation of the Family Welfare
Programme is released, in time, by the State Finance Departments to Health and Family



4

Welfare authorities. Replies have been received from States that they have issued necessary
instructions for streamlining the procedure to ensure that there is no bottlenecks in the
smooth flow of funds meant for the Family Welfare Programme in their States.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is of the view that the Department should not satisfy itself with the
replies received from the State Governments stating that necessary instructions have been
issued but it should verify whether this is being done or not.

Recommendation (Para No. 26)

The Committee noted the statement of Secretary, Department of Family Welfare, that
as the States are expected to bear the cost of multi-purpose workers (male), they are not
filling up these posts. This is reducing access to the acceptability of family welfare
programme to males in the reproductive age group, as reflected in the falling percentage of
vasectomy in total sterilization. In the existing social and cultural environment, it is not
possible for the female ANM to promote family planning among males.

Reply of the Government

“Efforts are on, through reviews and discussion with State Governments, to have the
vacant posts of MPWs (Male) filled up.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels the Department should urge the States to fill up all the posts of
MPWs, which are vacant, at the earliest in view of the fact that there is a fall in percentage
of Vasectomy Operations performed. Release of further grants may be made conditional on
the filling up of the vacant posts.

Area Development Projects
[Recommendation Para No. 29(a)]

Eleven Area Development Projects have been taken up in different States, at a cost of
Rs. 1190 crores, and with financial assistance from external funding agencies like the World
Bank, United Nations fund for Promotion Activities (UNFPA), overseas Development
Agency (ODA) and Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA) with the aim of
reducing maternal and child mortality and morbidity and birth rates. There have been
complaints about delay in the disbursement fo external assistance under various schemes and
the Committee wants the Department to take necessary steps to ensure timely release of
funds.

Reply of the Government

“The Department of Family Welfare has made enhanced allocation for the Area
Projects over the years and adequate funds have been released to the States to ensure full
utilisation of committed assistance. However, due to financial difficulties of the State
Governments, these funds are not often passed on to the Project Administration by the State
Finance Department. The matter has been taken up with the State Governments at various
levels and the State Governments have been requested to ensure timely release of funds to
the Project administration for fully utilising the external assistance. The State Governments
have also been requested to expedite the project activities and to gear up administrative
machinery for the implementation of project to ensure full utilisation of external assistance.”

Comments of the Committee ’

The Committee feels that the matter should be closely followed up to ensure that the
States release the funds on time.



5

Family Welfare Programme through other Ministries
Recommendation (Para No. 30)

The Secretary, Deptt. of Family Welfare, in her oral evidence before the Committee,
has stated that the NDC Committee on Population had recommended that Family Welfare
Programme is all pervasive and all Departments should have provisions for such program-
mes. The Committee notes that almost all Ministries have failed to implement the NDC’s
recommendations. The Committee also endorses the views of the NDC Committee and
recommends that the Department of Family Welfare should pursue the matter vigorously
with other Ministries and Departments.

Reply of the Government

“In the follow up action of the NDC’s recommendations, Secretary (FW) had written to
Addl. Secretary, Ministry of Defence, on 1.2.1994 and to Chairman, Railway Board, and
Director General (Posts) on 1.3.1994 informing them of the decision of the Department of
Family Welfare to discontinue funding support towards the salary of family welfare staff and
requested them to make necessary provision for the same in their own budget. Secretary
(FW) also wrote a letter to the Defence Secretary on 31.5.1994 reiterating its earlier
decision. A similar letter has been written by the Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser to
‘the Executive Director (Health), Ministry of Railways. Further, in view of the recommenda-
tions, only a token provision towards this component has been kept during 1994-95.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels that simply writing letters is not sufficient but the Department

should ensure that the Departments make provision in this regard in their budgets.
Role of Panchayats
Recommendation (Para No. 38)

States should take advantage of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment and mobilise the
Panchayats in the implementation of the National Family Welfare Programme. The provision
for 30% reservation for women in Panchayat Raj institutions can be utilised for involving
more and more women leaders in this programme. Zilla Parishads must also be given some
amount for conducting orientation camps by the Centre. In fact, Panchayats can be given

specific targets relating to family welfare programme and those fulfilling the targets may be
given special awards and incentives in the forms of grants for developmental works.

Reply of the Government

“The Department of Family Welfare is in agreement with the proposal to involve the
Panchayat Raj institutions in the National Family Welfare Programme. The modalities will
be worked out.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is of the opinion that the modalities should be worked out as early as
possible because the new Panchayat system has already come into existence is many of thé
States.

Recommendation (Para No. 41)

Based on the endorsement of the NDC Committee on population, a Committee on
National Population Policy was set up under the Chairmanship of Dr. M.S. Swaminathan,
for framing the National Population Policy.



6

Even though the Committee has been formed, it is not known how far it has reached in
framing the policy. The Committee expresses its unhappiness over the same and feels that it
should be finalised as early as possible. there should be a national debate on the draft policy
before it is finalised.

Reply of the Government

“The Group of Experts chaired by Dr. M.S. Swaminathan, constituted by the Deptt. of
Family Welfare to prepare a preliminary draft of the National Population Policy, has
submitted its report on 24.5.1994. The Report has been tabled in both Houses of Parliament
on 14.6.1994. Comments of the State Govts/U.T. Administrations and of various
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India have been sought.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that a meeting of the National Development Council should be
convened at an early date to finalise the Draft National Population Policy. Thereafter
Government should place the policy document before Parliament for approval.


CHAPTER-II ;
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Para No. Observations/Recommendations

4, It is pertinent to note from the above table, that Infant
Mortality Rate (per 1000 live births) and Crude Birth
Rate (per 1000 population), have come down consider-
ably. It seems that IMR and CBR go side by side. The
Deptt. Claims that the Universal Immunisation Program-
me, which covers 90% of the children, is successful. By
taking into account the above factors, the Committee is
of the opinion that present thrust on Family Welfare
Programme to achieve the set targets should continue.
Simultaneously, adequate attention should be paid for
improvement of welfare of mother and child. In this
connection the Committee notes with concern the reduc-
tion in allocations for welfare programmes.

5, The Committee feels that, keeping in view the rising
prices and enormity of the problem of rising population,
the allocation seems to be insufficient, particularly for
achieving the target of NRR-One by 2000 A.D. The
Secretary, Department of Family Welfare, has herself
stated in her oral evidence that the target period has
been revised first to 2006-2011 in the Seventh Plan and
2011-2016 in the Eighth Plan. The Committee expresses
its deep concern over the failure of the Deptt. im
reaching the goals. The Committee feels “one child on
family norm” should be kept as an ultimate goal.

7. The Committee fully endorses the view expressed above,
and recommends that the Department of Family Welfare
in consultation with the Planning Commission, should
revise the norms of funds for various items, commensu-
rate with the rise in cost so as to ensure quality of
service, ;

Action Taken

4. In keeping with the observations of the committee in the
Annual Plan for 1995-96 an amount of Rs. 2185.83 has been
projected as the realistic requirement of the Deptt. of
Family Welfare against Rs. 1430 crores provided during
1994-95. The Committee’s observation that the present
thrust on Family Welfare Programme to achieve the. set
targets should continue has been noted for compliance.
Regarding the recommendation for paying adequate atten-
tion to improvement of mother and child health, the Child
Survival and Safe Motherhood (CSSM) Programme, which
was launched in 1992, underlines the high priority for
improving the health Status of women and children and
reduction of maternal, infant and child morbidity and
mortality rates. Many of the on-going interventions have
been integrated in the CSSM Programme along with sustain-
ing and improving immunization coverage levels, improving
the quality of services through supply of additional equip-
ments, regular supply of essential drugs and retraining of
medical and para-medical personnel. The treatement of
acute respiratory infections (ARI) and new born care for
children and strengthening of emergency obstetric care
(EOC) are the new thrust areas. The Planning Commission
has, agreed that adequate attention should be paid to the
Mother and. Child Health Care Component of the Prog-
ramme.

5. In keeping with the observations of the Committee, and
amount of Rs. 2185.83 crores has been projected in the
Annual Plan 1995-96 as the realistic requirement of the
Department of Family Welfare against Rs. 1430 crores
provided during 1994-95,

While the “One family - One child” norm is: laudable as
the ultimate goal, it is not capable of being adopted by law
or as official policy immediately in view of the. prevailing
Infant Mortality Rate (79 per 1000 live births as per SRS
1992) and the absence of a comprehensive national social
secruity system, as a result of which children are regarded as
‘a source of support in old age.

7. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and Planning
Commission endorse the recommendations of the Commit-
tee for raising the allocations and revision of norms. The
Planning Commission has, however, observed in this con-
nection that the final allocation each year depends upon the
total resources available for all the sectors together.



Observations/Recommendations

Para No.

8. The provision in 1994-95 for payment of arrears is
Rs. 150 crores. Norms of expenditure for items like
maintenance of vehicles, drugs for sub-centres, rents,
contigencies, etc. have not been revised from 1986,
despite a rise in costs. This restricts mobility in the field
and the Committee recommends that sufficient funds be
provided to clear the arrears.

URBAN FAMILY WELFARE CENTRES

13, The Committee expresses its concern over stagnation in
the budget allocation for Urban Family Welfare Centres
for 1994-95. The population of Major cities, particularly

the metropolitan cities, is increasing at a very fast,

speed. Slums are proliferating rapidly. In such a situa-
tion how the Department would be able to provide
Family Welfare Services, where outbursting of
epidemics is quite frequent, is not understood. The
Committee recommends that allocation for the scheme
should be increased.

Supply of Contraceptives

14. Nirodh“is supplicd free to the users through Family
Welfare Centres, MCH Centres, Hospitals, and dispen-
saries, sub-centres, public Health Centres, Post Partum
Centres, etc. under the scheme for distribution of
conventional contraceptives. The total sales and supply
of Nirodh in 1992-93 were around 278 million pieces. A
target of 324 million pieces was set for the year ‘1993-
94, but only 69.6 million pieces were distributed during
the period April to August, 1993. Again a target of 320
million pieces has been set for the current year. The
Committee feels that greater attention should be paid to
the availability of the contraceptives in remote areas
and these should also be made available even at fair
price shops.

16. The Committee is further of the opinion that campaign
to generate awareness about the usage, of Nirodh in the
rural areas should be carried out.

Mother and Child Health Programme

19. The Programme was launched in 1985-86. The object of
MCH Programme is to prevent the incidence of com-
mon diseases such as diphtheria, tetanns, Polio, T.B.,
Typhoid and Whooping cough among 4il eligible chil-
dren and pregnant mothers. The Committee expresses
its concern over the decrease in achievement of targets
of this Programme. The Secretary, Department of
Family Welfare, in her oral evidence, stated it is

8. This Ministry endorse the recommendations of the Com-
mittee that the old norms need required to be revised.

In the Annual Plan projections for 1995-96, it has been
proposed to revise the 1986 norms of maintenance grants for
Family Welfare vehicles from Rs. 15000 per annum for
petrol driven vehicles and Rs. 9500 per annum for diesel
driven vehicles to Rs. 20000 per vehicle per annum for
petrol driven vehicles and Rs. 15000 per vehicle per annum
for diesel driven vehicles. This revised norm has already
been implemented for North-eastern States keeping in view
the difficult terrain. It is also proposed to revise the norms
relating to supply of medicines to syb-centres from the
present level of Rs. 2000 per sub-centre per year to Rs.
5000 per sub-centre,

13. The existing allocation of Rs. 1500 lakhs for Urban
Family Welfare Centres and Rs. 1300 lakhs for Urban
revamping Scheme i.e. Rs. 2800 lakhs for the Urban Family
Welfare set up is not even sufficient for the existing
Centres. If additional budget is allocated the Urban Re-
vamping Scheme can be expanded to cover the slum areas
of the major cities having population of more than 2 lakhs.
As recommended by the Committee, an amount of Rs.
63.59 crores has been included in the projections of the
Department in the Annual Plan 1995-96.
(Committee's Comments on this reply may be seen in
Chapter-I)

14. A scheme for distribution of Nirodh through public
distribution system has been implemented in Punjab, Harya-
na, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Himahcal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan,
Bihar, Tamil Nadu and Delhi.

(Committee's Comments on this reply may be seen in
‘Chapter-I)

16, The need to generate awareness about usage of Nirodh
in rural areas will be kept in view while formulating the
campaign plan.



Para No. Observations/Recommendations

Action Taken

Village Health Guide Scheme

20. Village Health Guide Scheme was launched in 1977 as a
100 per cent centrally sponsored scheme, with the
objective of training a person selected for the communi-
ty Primary Health care, The salient feature of the
scheme is that, females below 30 year of age should be
selected as Health Guides.There are 3,24,727 Village
Health Guides as on 30.6.93 Since the scheme motivates
socially inclinded people for providing Primary Health
Care Services, and is playing a vital role in creating
awareness among the rural masses about Primary
Health, The Committee feels that the sum provided in
8.8, for [1994-95 is inadequate and must be increased.
The Committee is surprised that the allocation made
this year has been reduced to less than half of the R.E.
of 1993-94. The Committee further notes that the rate
of honorarium paid continues to be a meagre Rs. 50.

The Committee feels that it should be raised to a
minimum of Rs. 150, The Committee is of the view that
since the Scheme is good, all the Villages should be
brought under the Scheme.

Role and Performance of States

23, The Department of Family Welfare has initiated a
number of schemes which are implemented by the State
Governments. Although all the Schemes are being
formulated at the Centre, at the grassroot level there
are so’many variations in the literacy rate topography,
climate, birth rate, death rate, that is very difficult to
formulate one effective scheme for the entire country.
The Committee, therefore, feels that instead of framing
a single scheme for the whole country, different
schemes should be formulated for different variables, in
consultation with the States,

32. In ICMR, the Human Reproductive Research Centre is
carrying research on new contraceptives. There are
about 250 volunteers on whom research is being carried
on by PRRC and the results are being observed by the
Deptt. The Committee feels that the state of health of
the Volunteers should be kept in mind when such type
of research is being carried. The Committee expresses
its deep concern over the cases of some of the migrant
labourers of U.P. on whom Nor Plant II implantation
were carried out but no records are kept about their
present’ residence and the effect of research on them.
The Committee is of the opinion that the department
should have some follow up measures in this regard, so
that the scheme is effectively monitored.

20. The Scheme was reviewed with State Health Secretaries
on 7th January, 1993. Most of the State Govts. were of the
view that the scheme is serving no useful prupose for health
or for F.W. The Scheme has been stopped in Goa, Daman
& Diu and Delhi. The States of ‘Andhra Pradesh Orissa,
Rajasthan and UT of Andaman & Nicobar are not in favour
of continuation of the Scheme. Andhra Pradesh has already
stopped the payment of honorarium to VHGs w.e.f. 1.10.93
as it was not serving any useful purpose. Only the States
like Mahrashtra, Punjab, Mizoram and West Bengal feel
that the VHGs are doing good work.

In view of the above, the proposal to transfer the scheme to.
the State Sector is under consideration.

(Committee’s Comments on this reply may be seen in
Chapter-I)

के

23, While the National Family Welfare Programme fol-
lows the same guide lines throughout the country, sufficient
flexibility does exist and initiatives emanating at State or
district level’are always welcome. Differential approaches
are accepted policy of the Deptt. of Family Welfare. To
give examples, 11 Area Projects with an outlay of Rs.
1409.97 crores are under implementation in 16 States and
the NCT of Delhi for improving the health infrastructure
and delivery systems in identified areas of these States/
U.Ts, Similarly, additional inputs area being provided to 90
identified districts in the country with adverse demogr
parameters, The schemes for NGOs also have sufficient
flexibility, and allow NGOs to design their own projects
around model schemes formulated.

32. With the idea of improving the follow up of Norplant
acceptors in the present third phase clinical trials with
Norplant I the under-mentioned actions have been taken:—

(a) Local coordination committees have been constituted
at each centre where the trial is being conducted. The
members of this committee consist of representatives from
the groups concered with health issues, The help of these
members would be sought for health education, motivation,
counselling to enable the potential users to make an
informed choice for accepting a particular contraceptive
method in addition to their assistance for follow up services
for contraceptive users.

(0) Follow up visits would be undertaken on the 7th day,
Ist, 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th months and then 6 monthly
intervals thereafter for a period of 5 years of contraceptive
use.



2S EE hay

Sy

9003 % हे 54) grilles ः ee ane gers
Swinson p07 sie 30) 30204 i“ शक i ao pass eld
: है हा: ror een ; कली

}
if
i
i

2 naan scat



10

Para No. Observations/Recommendations Action Taken

Essential Maternal Care, Dais Training. Their Reporting
fees and Disposable Delivery Kits for the Pregnant Women

33. The proportion of deliveries attended by untrained 33. Rs. 7.50 crores have been provided for Dais’ training
hands is still very high in our country, particularly in during 1994-95 under Dais Training Head of Account. As a
rural areas of states of Assam, Bihar, M.P., Orissa, large number of Dais are untrained, a programme for their
Rajasthan and U.P. During 1992-93 the States were training will be taken up in a phased manner. Requirement
reported to have trained 9382 Dais, which was insig- of Rs. 8.00 crore has been projected for this scheme in the
nificant keeping in view the,size of their population. Rs. Annual Plan 1995.96.

7.50 crores have been provided in the Budget Estimates
for training of dais for 1994-95. The Committee feels
that it is inadequate and should be enhanced.

Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techinques (Regulation and
Prevention of Misuse) Bill, 1991.

34. The Committee notes with concern., the deteriorating 34. The Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and
ratio between male and female in the country’s Popula- Prevention of Misuse) Bill, 1994 has been passed by the
tion as reflected in the census. The Government has, Parliament (by the Lok Sabha on 26.7.94 and Rajya Sabha
therefore, introduced a Bill in the Lok Sabha on on 4.8.94). The President of India has given his assent to
12.9,91, A Joint Committee has also considered the Bill the Bill on 20th September, 1994. The corresponding Act
and has given its Report to the Parliament in De- has been published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary
cember, 1992. The Committee recommends that Gov- Part II, Section I, dated the 20th September 1994 as Act
ernment should get the said bill passed by the Parlia- No. 57 of 1994. Action for framing the Rules and constitu-
ment at the earliest preferably in the current budget tion of the Central Supervisory Board has been initiated.
session.

Technology Mission on Family Welfare

35. The Committee has noted that there are wide variations 35. The proposal for a Technology Mission on Family
between States in demographic and Performance indi- Welfare in the States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan
cators like Crude birth rate, crude death rate, total and Uttar Pradesh has been formulated. Consultation has
fertility rate, infant mortality rate and couple protection also been held with the State Governments concerned, and
rate. The Committee is very much perturbed over the they have agreed to the constitution of the Technology

slow progress of Family Welfare Programme in the four Mission. The proposal is to be discussed by a Committee of
States of U.P., Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, Secretaries.

which account for 40% of the country’s population, and

suggests creation of a technology mission for these four

States,

Role of Panchayats

38. States should take advantage of the 73rd Constitutional 38. The Department of Family Welfare is in agreement
Admendment and mobilise the Panchayats in the im- with the proposal to involve the Panchayat Raj institutions
plementation of the National Family Welfare Program- in the National Family Welfare Programme. The modalities
me. The provision for 30% reservation for Women in will be worked out.

Panchayat Raj institutions can be utilised for involving
eared d more women leaders in this programme. Zilla
Pari must also be given some amount for conduct- ५

ing orientation camps, by the Centre. In fact, Panchay-
ats can be given specific targets relating to family
welfare programme and those fulfilling the targets may
be given special award, incentives in the form of grants
for developmental works.

39. National Development Council, based on National 39-42. The Group of Experts chaired by Dr. M.S.
Health Policy (1983), endorsed the view that a National ‘Swaminathan, constitute by the Deptt. of Family Welfare to
Population Policy should be framed, in view of the vital Prepare a preliminary draft of the National Population
importance in securing a balanced growth of population. Policy, has submitted its report on 24.5194. The Report
Accordingly, a Committee was constituted by the Plan- has been tabled in both Houses of Parliament on 14.6.1994.
ning Commission under NDC. Comments of the States Govts/U.T. Administrations and Ss

of various Ministries/Departments of the Government of
India have been sought.



7६२! हट
li 3०० She i i
Saiol १० salt a) sien, es eR ainaltin
५ (00750७७4 Head aes eae 02
air ACRE ४) Bet ३७ gestnten 36)

“कएभा०) ३६ AL i
ब्रज! po
aaillabont iF 5

i ape angi ald ५०0, At
ia Porting techy ccna Hy
कि नि २आ 5 ऋफे:
fags 18 Abetaay 1097७ ७ 007३7 २:
ao

Be

1
|
|
|
'
}
1
|
ne
i
|
|
|



Para No. Observations/Recommendations

Action Taken

40. The Committee was entrusted with the task of recom-
mending appropriate formulations for NPP, identifying
effective intervention strategies, both at macro and
micro levels, on a holistic and multi-sectoral bases, and
to suggest mechanism for securing commitment and
supoort of leadership at all levels.

41. Based on the endorsement of the NDC Committee on
population, a Committee on National Population Policy
was set up under the Chairmanship of Dr. M.S.
Swaminathan, for framing the National Population
Policy.

42, Even though the Committee has been formed, it is not
known hdw far it has reached in framing the Policy. The
Committee expresses its unhappiness over the same and
feels that it should be finalised as early as possible.
There should be a national debate on the draft policy
before it is finalised.

45. The Committee feels that the above measures should
continue and more emphasis should be given for
information, education and communication.

45. Greater emphasis on Information, Education and
Communication (IEC) will be given during 1994-95. Alloca-
tion for LE.C. has been enhanced from RS. 2580.00 lakhs
for 1993-94 to Rs. 3086.00 lakhs for 1994-95. Intensive area
specific educational activities will be organised in the de-
mographically weak district with the involvement of opinion
leaders, youth, voluntary organisations and local folk cultur-
al groups. Appropriate print and audio-visual aids will be
designed, produced and distributed.

Population Education activities will be extended in a more
informal way to reach the out of school youth, while
women’s organisations will be expanded and activated to
promote reproductive health and child survival measures.

Imagniative enter-educate films and video-films will be
produced and distributed for use in rural and semi-urban
population. Outdoor media will continue to be used and
further intensified.



CHAPTER-III

OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVT. REPLIES

Para No. Recommendation

Reply

6. The Ministry, in its Performance Budget report, has
explained the funds problem in the following terms: The
Population Control Programme, being a national priority,
deserves due financial support and the situation in which
the programme could not be given a major thrust due to
shortage of funds, needs to be corrected urgently. Family
Welfare Programme is almost entirely in the plan sector
and unlike other sectors, maintenance activities do not
get transferred to non-plan after each successive Five
Year Plan. As a result, the plan of the Family Welfare
Department becomes practically a maintenance effort,
with little scope for new activities. The programme is 100
percent centrally funded and States are entitled to full
assistance for implementation of different Family Welfare
schemes on the basis of settled norms and yardsticks.
Due to the consistent short funding of the F.W. sector
over the last few years, legitimate entitlements of the
States are not reimbursed fully, resulting in the accumu-
lations of huge arrears and consequent erosion in the
credibility of the Central Government. Many States also
do not provide adequate funds in their budgets for want
of matching assistance from the Central Government
and, as a result, the Programme suffers. The situation
calls for adequate need-based funding for the F.W.
Sector. It is ironical that the share of F.W. Sector, which
was 1.8 per cent of the total public sector outlay during
the 7th Plan, has come down to 1.5 per cent during the
8th Plan. It needs to be stepped up to at least 3 per cent
of the total public sector outlay, keeping in view the
nature and size of the population problem and the fact
that a large portion of the F.W. Plan accounts for health
infrastructure and services at the grass root level, which
are of vital importance for improving the lot of the
poorer and weaker sections of ‘the society.

Rural Family Welfare Centres

11, These Centres were originally started to provide Family
Planning and Maternal and Child Health Programme
Services to mothers and children at the doorstep,
motivating the rural people to adopt family planning
methods and to maintain and update data relating to
Family Welfare Programme. The number of these
centres has been stagnating at 5435 since 1980. The
Committee notes, that the department is proposing to
conduct a study, to evaluate the role of these centres
and to decide on their continuance. The Committee
recommends that the study should be completed
quickly as possible, Meanwhile, allocation for fami
welfare programmes should not be curtailed but should
be increased. The Committee further feels that since
PHC’s are being run by the States and if Rural Health
Family Welfare Centres are going to be integrated into
them, the States will be over burdened. The Committee
is of the opinion that pending study of the centres, the
existing allocations should continue, and there should
not be any extra burden on the States precluding them
from continuing with the programme.

6. An outlay of Rs, 2185.83 crores has been sought for the
Annual Plan 1995-96,

11 & 12. A study cum survey to evaluate the functioning of
Rural Family Welfare Centres in 7 States had been ¢n-
trusted to Institute of Research in Medical Statistics, a unit
of ICMR. Based on the recommendations of the study and
its acceptance, further action will be taken.

As per recommendations of the Committee, Ministry of
Finance has been approached for providing additional Rs.
200.00 crores required for the maintenance of the existing
5435 Rural Family. Welfare Centres in the Revised Es-
timates for 1994-95, The realistic requirement of funds to
the turn of Rs. 334.25 crores for this Scheme has also been
projected in the Annual Plan 1995-96.

12



Para No. Recommendation

13

Reply

12. Regarding decrease in the allocation for the centres
during 1994-95, the Secretary, Department of Family
Welfare, has stated that some States have started using
the staff of Rural Family Welfare Centres for their
Primary Health Centres and are using the buildings of
Rural Health Centres as godowns etc. Because of these
factors, the Department has stopped financing Centres
where such malpractices have been resorted to. It
explains the low budget allocation. The Committee is,
however, concerned about the reduced allocation for
Rural Family Welfare Centres and recommends that the
Department of Family Welfare, instead of stopping the
grants altogether, should evolve some mechanism to
curb this practice and to ensure proper utilisation of
funds, manpower etc. Reduced allocation will deprive
the rural masses of the benefits of Family Welfare
Schemes.

15. The Committee, while noting that there is an increase in
allocation this year, feels a mere increase in allocation is
not enough but more attention should be paid towards
distribution, storage etc., of Nirodh particularly in rural
areas. Since, Nirodh is being distributed not only as part
of Family Welfare but also for prevention of transmis-
sion of AIDS, the allocation should be increased.

17. The Secretary also informed the Committee that. the
standard of condoms manufactured in India is being
upgraded to international specifications, as recom-
mended by the W.H.O. but no details have been made
available to the Committee.

18. The Committee also feels that there is inadequate
emphasis on spacing methods, which ought to be
promoted more vigorously in view of the younger
cohort in the reproductive population, and the import-
ance of spacing in maintaining the health of women.

15. Under the Social Marketing Scheme, the marketing
companies are persuaded to penetrate into rural markets
also. Distribution, storage etc. of Nirodh under the Free
Supply Scheme are being attended to While additional
allocation will be required for the Social Marketing Scheme
of Condoms, no increase is required in the allocation for
Free Supply Scheme of Nirodh during 1994-95. However,
allocation for these two schemes need to be increased in the
8th Plan over and above the outlay provided, for imple-
menting these schemes as per targets laid down.

Standard of Condoms in India is governed by Schedule ‘R’
of Drugs & Cosmetics Act. WHO has recommended im-
proved specifications for various quality parameters so as to
make condoms effective in controlling the spread of HIV/
AIDS viruses. These specifications are under consideration
for being included in the revised Schedule ‘R’

18. It is estimated that out of the 45.4% eligible couples
(whose wives are in the age group 15-44 years) have been
effectively protected “as on 31st March, 1944 under the
Family Planning Programme, Sterilisation accounts for
30.3% Remaining 15.1% of couples have been practising
one or the other spacing method. Among the annual
acceptors of all contraceptive methods, proportion going in
for spacing method has been on the increase in recent years.
It is estimated that there were about 155.02 million eligible
couples as on 31.3.1994 in the country and out of them
approximately 55% come from the younger age group of
below 30 years. This number keeps on increasing year after
year owing to new marriages and this group may not be
ready to accept terminal method. Consequently, there is a
need for vigorous promotion of spacing methods in this
group of couples which have maximum fertility potential.
Under the spacing methods presently IUDs, Condoms and
Oral Contraceptive Pills are being offered to the interested
couples. The focus under the programme is to promote
spacing methods, specially amongst the younger couples
with high fertility potential. The share of three spacing
methods taken together among the annual acceptors of all
contraceptive methods have gone up from 64% in 1982-83
to 85% (provisional) in 1993-94.



14

Para No. Recommendation

Reply

Aid to Voluntary Organisations

21, Family Welfare Programme is essentially a people's
programme, and greater involvement of the people is
necessary to make the programme a success, The
Department says that efforts have been made during the
last one year to involve more and more voluntary
organisations in this task, But in the Committze's view,
the aid given to voluntary organisations is not adequate
and does not*help them to carry out the programme in
an effective manner. It may be true that grants given to
some voluntaty. organisations are being misused.

22. Notwithstanding this, the Committee is of the view that
since the role of voluntary organisations in family
welfare is increasing, the kind of work to be entrusted
to them should be clearly spelt out by the Government
before the aid is given and periodical evaluation and
fegular monitoring should be done. Further, the Com-
mittee feels that the funds given to voluntary organisa-
tions should be audited by a competent firm approved
by the Government. The Committee also feels that the
monitoring system be strengthened by involving people’s
representatives, Panchayats, teachers and other prot
nent leaders in the area where the voluntary organisa-
tion carries on its programmes.

-In the current year 1994-95, the share of’ spacing methods.

among the ELAs of all contraceptive methods at national
level has been kept at 86.7% as may be seen from the table
below:

FP Method ELA (1994 % to total ELAs
95)
(in tailtion)
Sterilisation 5.41 13.26
IUD Insertion ToT 19.53
CC Users 21.92 53.73 86.74
OP Users 5.50 13.48
Torat 40.80 100.00

ELA: Expected Level of Achievements

21. The involvement of NGOs in the Family Welfare
Programme has increased considerably in the last two to
three years. The number of organisations given funding
support has increased from 91 in 1991-92 to 340 in 1993-94.
The level of releases made has also gone up from Rs. 3.29
crores to Rs. 12.00 crores. Grants-in-aid under various
Family Welfare Schemes are sanctioned only to those NGOs
who are registered under Indian Societies Registration Act
of 1860, Public Trust Act or any other equivalent Act, and
have some experience in Family Welfare activities and good
financial standings against specific schemes to avoid misuse
of grants.

22, The grants-in-aid to voluntary organisations for family
welfare work is being released only against specific schemes
in which full details of the work to be done, staff to be
supported and other financial assistance available are given.
The work of the voluntary organisations so supported is
always monitored and evaluated by district level authorities
or other agencies specially deputed for this purpose, The
accounts of these organisations are audited by the Chartered
Accountants as per the provisions of the General Financial
Rules of the Government. These are also further audited by
the Central Internal Audit Parties of the Chief Controller of
Accounts Department of the Ministry.

As detailed arrangement for monitoring of these schemes
ive. at the concurrent level by the Medical Officer of the
Primary Health Centre/Chief Medical Officer of the district,
at the mid-term level by the Sub Divisional Officer (Ci
Deputy Commissioner and at the final level by the Popula-
tion Research Centres exist in the schemes. No further
support in this regard is considered essential from any dine
quarter. The, Ministry: agrees that Panchayats can be in-

. volved in the: Pregfamme,

a



Para No. Recommendation

15

Reply

25. The Secretary, Deptt. of Family Welfare, in her oral
evidence before the Committee, has, stated that the
" State Governments are snot, appointing multipurpose
health workers, jn, th
auxilliary , nursing. midwil
there, keeping the posts of MPWs vacant results in the
Programme not being accessible to mares in the
reproductive stage and this is reflected in the steadily
falling percentage of vasectomy cases. The percentage
of acceptors of vasectomy among total: acceptors of
sterilisation had fallen to 3.5 per cent in- 1992-93. The
Secretary, Deptt. of Family Welfare, conceded that they
are unable to reverse this trend. To induce more and
more men to undergo vasectomy, the Committee feels
that the department should take effective steps to
popularise- the!new form of vasectomy operation i.e.
non-scalpel vasectomy. Safety standards and follow-up
measures should be improved, both’ in vasectomy and
tubectomy.

27.' The ‘allocation for Family Welfare schemes as well as
other ‘centrally sponsored schemes, is generally
sponsored schemes, is generally based on the population
of the State. In the allocation of Central Plan assistance
to States 60% weightage is given to the population of
the State at 1971 level, while only 1% weightage is
given to performance of the State in reducing crude
birth rate and infant mortality rate. So, States with high
population figures get a major portion of allocation,
despite not achieving any success in controlling
population ‘growth. On the other side, there are states
which are achieving the target and showing good results

29. The Secretary, Deptt. of Family Welfare, in her oral
evidence béfore the Committee, has stated that Grants
received from-External agencies are spent in a very slow
manner by the States. The Committee feels that such
States should be prevailed upon be the Department.to
utilise the funds in time.

36. The Committee has noted the observation of the
Secretary that to implement any such Technology
Mission, the Deptt. should have the full complement of
staff. The Committee is surprised that a number of
posts, including one at thie Jt. Secretary level, remains
vacant in the Department.

_ health centres in the new

25-28. A new propasal for braining surgeons pre-
medical colleges, district level hospitals and community
jue of no-scalpel vasectomy
is ‘under consideration of thig Ministry. This new scheme is
likely to give a boost to the’ vasectomy programme and thus
involving of the male iti the national family welfare
Progr we

27. The Planning Commission has stated ‘that “The
Central Plan assistance to States based on the population
level of 1971 clearly indicates that the States which are

Formula) but before doing that we should have cumulative
experience over the next few years of the actual working of
the revised Gadgil Formula before any modification to link
higher allocation with better performance, as

Based on the experiences gained the revision of Gadgil
Formula can be submitted to NDC”.

29. The matter has been taken up with the State
Governments at various level to ensure timely release of
funds to the Project administration for gearing up of the
Project activities and toning up the administrative mechinery
so that the external assistance is fully utilized. The Union
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has also written to the
Governor and Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh for USAID
assisted U.P. project where the progress is slow. The Chief
Ministers of Other States have also been addressed by the
Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare for timely
release of funds for the implementation of Family Welfare
related Schemes, including externally aided Projects.

36. Action to fill up vacant posts is being taken as per
procedure. The post of Joint Secretary in the Department of
Family Welfare has not been filled in pursuance of the
decision to abolish one post of Joint Secretary in the
Department of Family Welfare. No other post of Joint
Secretary is vacant in the Department of Family Welfare.



16

Para No. Recommendation

Reply

37-A.

Family Welfare Infrastructure

The Committee expresses its concern over the fact
that even though the population is incredsing, the
Department has not been able to ensure establish-
ment of new infrastruture, both in rural and urban
areas, commensurate with the rise in Population, as
per the population norms for providing family welfare
services, particularly in slum areas, which are pro-
liferating rapidly.

37-A. The Rural Health & Family Welfare infrastructure
consists of Community Health Centres, Primary Health
Centres and Sub-Centres. The opening and maintenance of
Community Health Centres and Primary Health Centres is
in State Sector. Funds are provided to the States under
Minimum Needs Programme as per annual targets set by
Planning Commission.

Establishment of Sub-centres is, however, a 100% Cent-
rally Sponsored Scheme (except-salary of male Health
workers and construction of sub-centres) w.e.f. 1.4.1981.
Due to non-availability of funds for opening of new Sub-
Centres targets were not allotted to the States/UTs during
the years 1990-91 to 1994-95. Nevertheless, the States/UTs
have opened 1135 sub-centres during 1990-91 to 1993-94
under M.N.P. The position regarding opening of Sub-
Centres Primary Health Centres, and Community Health
Centres during 1992-93 to 1994-95 and in position as on
32A3 is as under:

Required In Position 1992-93 1993-94 1994-95,
Number (31.12.93) Achieve- Achieve- Targets
ment ‘ment

Sub-Centre —1,34,105° —1,31,471 6 I+ =a
P.H.C. 25,169°* 21,040 290 87+ 780
C.H.C. 3,462°° 2,297 | 28+ 157

* As per norms on 1991 population
** As per Planning Commission targets.
+ Provisional

Regarding setting up of Health Posts under the Urban Revamping
Scheme. no expansion could be undertaken owing to paucity of
funds. In the Annual Plan for 1995-96 Rs. 63.59 crores have been
projected against the current allocation of Rs. 28.00 crores. If
additional budget allocation is made, the Urban Revamping Scheme
can be expanded to cover the slum areas of the major cities.



CHAPTER-IV

OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Para No. Recommendation

Reply

9. The Committee also agrees with the assessment of the
Deptt. that, “the work culture, particularly among the
field level functionaries, is not conducive to generating
confidence among prospective acceptors of contracetives,
Problems like non-availability of staff at headquartes,
failure to tour, indulgence in private practice, unwilling-
ness to work in remote areas, etc., contribute to decline
in quality of service is evidently attributable to weak
management, supervision and personnel policies”. But,

» the Committee is disappointed that the Deptt. has not
indicated any plan of action to remove these inherent
weaknesses in the implementation of the Family Planning
Programmes. The Committee recommends that a time-
bound and inovative plan, of action be devised urgently
to remove the deficiencies narrated above and make the
programme more effective and result oriented.

24, The National Family Welfare Programme is a 100%
Centrally funded programme. Political commitment and
zeal in implementation by the State Governments is
essential. It is necessary to secure full political commit-
ment at the highest levels of the State administrations.
It is found that states in general, and certain States in

lar, fall to release funds timely under the Nation-
ily Welfare Programme. This results in a rush to
make up the backlog of sterilisation towards the end of
the year and neglect of other activities like promotion of
spacing methods, IEC and immunization, which have to
run throughout the year to be successful. The Commit-
tee feels that’ this should be rectified.

26. The Committee noted the statement of Secretary,
Deptt. of Family Welfare, that as the States are
expected to bear the cost of multi-purpose workers
(male), they are not filling up these posts. This is
reducing access to the acceptability of family welfare
Programme to males in the reproductive age group, as
reflected in the falling percentage of vasectomy in total

in. In the existing social and cultural environ-

is not possible for the female ANM to promote
family planning among males.

9. The management and supervision problems in this para-
graph in the notice of the Deptt. of Family Welfare the
National Family Welfare Programme is a cent perceit
Centrally funded scheme implementation lies in the hands of
State Governments and Union Territory Administration.
‘The infrastructure, including the scare under the control of
the State Governments/Administrations. The State Govern-
ments/U.T. Administrations are being sensitised through
correspondence review and meetings as these problems and
it need to improve management, so as to improve the
quality of While certain States like Kerala and Tamil Nadu
have shown impressive results in the implementation of the
National Family Welfare Programme the problems men-
tioned in this paragraph are of serious concern Hindi
speaking belt, particularly in the States of Uttar Pradesh,
Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, Efforts will continue with
the State Government to improve management and, supervi-
sion,

(Committee's comments in this reply may be seen in
Chapter-I)

24. A letter has been written by the Union Minister of
Health and Family Welfare to all:the Chief Ministers of the
States requesting them to ensure that the funds released by
the Government of India to the their States for the
implementation of the Family Welfare programme, is re-
leased, if time, by the State Finance Departments to Health
and Family Welfare authorities. Replies have been received
from States that they have issued necessary instructions for
streamlining the procedure to ensure that “there is sno
bottlenecks in the smooth flow of funds meant for the
Family Welfare Programme in their States.

(Committce’s comments on this reply may be seen in
Chapter-I)

Efforts are on, through reviews and discussion with State
Governments, to have the vacant posts of MPWS (Male)
filled up.

(Committee’s comments on this reply may be seen in
Chapter-I)

17

\


Para No, Recommendation

Reply

Area Development Projects

29 (a) Eleven area Development Projects have been taken
up in different states, at a cost of Rs. 1199 crores,
financial assistance from external funding agencies
like the World Bank, United, Nations Fund for
Promotion Activities (UNFPA), Overeseas Develop-
ment Agency (ODA) and Danish International De-
velopment Agency (DANIDA) with the aim of
reducing maternal and child mortality and morbidity
and birth rates, There have been complaints about
delay in the disbursement of external assistance
under various schemes and the Committee wants the
department to take necessary steps to ensure’ timely
release of funds. requested to expedite the project
activities and to gear up administrative machinery for
the implementation of the project to. ensure full
utilisation of external assistance.

Family Welfare Programme through other Ministries

३0. The Secretary, Deptt, of Family Wefare, in her oral
evidence before, the Committee, has stated that the
NDC Committee on Population had recommended that
Family Welfare Programme is all pervasive and all
Departments should have provisions for such program-
mes. The Committee notes that almost all Ministries
have failed to implement the NDC’s recommendations.
The Committee also endorses views of the NDC Com-
mittee and recommends that the Deptt, of Family
Weltare should pursue the matter vigorously with other
Ministries and Departments.

29 (a) The Department of Family Welfare has made
enhanced allocation for the Area Project over the years and
adequat le Funds have been released to the States to ensure
Full utilisation of committed assistance. However, due to
Financial difficulties of the State Governments these Funds
are not often passed on to the Project Administration by the
State Finance Department. The matter has been taken up
Governments have been requested to ensure timely release
of funds to the project administration for fully utilising the
external assistance. The State Governments have also been.

(Committee’s comments on this reply may be seen in
Chapter-I)

30. In the follow up action of the’NDC’s recommenda-
tions, Secretary (FW) had written to Addl. Secretary,
Ministry of Defence on 1.2.1994 and to Chairman, Railway
Board and Director General (Posts) on 1.3.1994 informing
them decision of the Department of Family Welfare to
discontinue funding support towards the salary of Family
Welfare staff and requested them to make necessary provi-
sion for the same in their own budget, Secretary (FW) also
wrote a letter to Defence Secretary on 31.5.1994 reiterating
earlier decision. A similar letter has beer written by Joint
Secretary and Financial Adviser to Executive Director
(Health), Ministry of Railways. Further, in view of the
recommendations, only a token provision towards this
component has been kept during 1994-95.

(Committee's comments on this reply may be seen in
Chapter-1)

i
|
|
i
|
}
it
|
i


CHAPTER-V

RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED

Para No Recommendation Reply

— Nil —

19


MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

Ix
*NINTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 1st June, 1995 in Committee Room No.

67, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT

1, Shri P, Upendra — — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram
Shri O.P. Kohli
Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
Shri Md. Salim (
Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. I.G. Sanadi

8. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
10. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

11. Shri Inder Jit

12. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

13. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

14. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
“15. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
16. Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT

SS Se

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

Shri 'N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Twenty-Fourth and Twenty-Eighth Reports on the
‘action Taken by the Government on the recommendations made by the Committee in its
Ninth and Eighth Reports on the Demands for Grants, 1994-95 of the Departments of
Health and Family Welfare. After some modifications the Committee adopted the same.

3. The Committee then decided to present the Action Taken Reports to both the houses
of Parliament on 2nd June, 1995.

4. The Committee then authorised its Chairman, and in his absence करा Pravat Kumar
Samantaray and Shri O.P. Kohli to present the reports in Rajya Sabla and Prof. Malini
Bhattacharya and in her absence Shri Inder Jit to lay it on the table of Lok Sabha.

5. The Committee, then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

*Minutes of Ist—VIlIth meeting relate to matters not included in this regard.

20