 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS. 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
  February, 2021 /Magha, 1942, (Saka) 
  
REPORT NO 
322 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Notes on 313th  Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports on Demand 
for Grants (2020-21) of the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education. 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02nd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 02nd February, 2021) 
 


 
Hindi version of this publication is also 
available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS. 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Notes on 313th  Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports on Demand for Grants 
(2020-21) of the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education, 
  
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02nd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 02nd February, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
    February, 2021 /Magha, 1942, (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …...........................................................    
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  
3.  ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................... 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…............................  
Chapter-I  -   Observations/recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ...................................................................  
Chapter -II  -  Observations/recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies.............  
Chapter-III -  Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee...  
  Chapter-IV Observation/recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government is still awaited… 
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE….  
6. MINUTES.............................................................................................................................  
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                           COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Arpita Ghosh  
3. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
6. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
7. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
8. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
10. Shri G.K. Vasan 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. * Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
17. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21 Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
29. Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
 
____________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f. 30.12.2020. 
 
i 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
MS. Chitra G. , Deputy Secretary 
Shri. Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
Smt. Meera Nair, Assistant Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ii 
 
  

PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth And Sports , having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Twenty Second Report 
of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred and Thirteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the 
Department of Higher Education . The Action Taken Notes were received from the Department of 
Department of Higher Education 28th September, 2020.   
2.  Three Hundred and Thirteenth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth And Sports was presented to Rajya Sabha on  
5th March, 2020 and simultaneously laid on the Table of Lok Sabha  on 5th March, 2020.  Replies 
of the Government to the observation s/recommendations contained in the Report were considered 
by the Committee at its meeting held on the 21st January, 2021. 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on  
21st January, 2021.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii 
 
  
NEW DELHI  
21st January, 2021. 
Magha/ 1942 (Saka) 
  
 
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing  Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
1. AICTE:          All India Council for Technical Education  
2. AISHE : All India Survey on Higher Education 
3. UGC:   University Grants Commission 
4. GER:   Gross Enrolment Ratio 
5. ICT:  Information and Communication Technology 
6. GIAN:  Global Initiative of Academic networks 
7. EQUIP:  Education Quality Upgradation and Inclusion Programme 
8. RUSA:  Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
9. UBA:   Unnat Bharat Abhiyan 
10. UAY:   Uchchatar Avishkar Abhiyan 
11. HEFA:  Higher Education Financing Agency 
12. IIIT:  Indian Institute of Information Technology 
13. IIM :  Indian Institute of Management 
14. IISER:  Indian Institute of Science Education and Research 
15. IIT:   Indian Institute of Technology 
16. MOOCS: Massive Online Open Courses 
17. NIT:  National Institute of Technology 
18. NMEICT: National Mission On Education Through  ICT 
19. ICT:   Information and Communications Technology 
20. PMMMNT: Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya National Mission on Teachers and Teaching 
21. SWAYAM: Study Webs Of Active-Learning For Young Aspiring Minds 
22. NPE:  National Policy on Education  
 
 
 
 
 
iv 
  

 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth And Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the observations/recommendations contained in its 313th  Report on the Demands for Grants 2020-
21 of the Department of Higher Education , which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on 
the table of Lok Sabha on 5th March, 2020. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of observations/recommendations contained in above 
mentioned Report were received from the Department of Higher Education  on28th September, 
2020.  These have been categorized as follows:-  
 Chapter I: Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras- 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 12.7, 12.8 
Total- 5 
Chapter II: Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of Government's replies:- 
Paras- 5.5, 6.5, 6.6,9.6,11.5,11.6,13.1,13.2,13.3 
Total- 9 
Chapter III:  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:-  
Paras- 3.5, 4.14,4.18,7.5,7.6,7.7,7.8,8.3,10.4 
Total- 9 
       Chapter-IV:  Observation/recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government is 
still awaited:- 
Paras- Nil  
Total-   Nil  
 
 
 
 
v 
 
 

CHAPTER-I 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Observation/recommendation 
1. The Committee notes that the allocation for Central Universities is inadequate as 
compared to their infrastructure, faculty and number of students enrolled. The Committee further 
notes that Central Universities have a larger number of students enrolled in them as compared to 
the technical and management institutes. Therefore, the Department should make efforts for 
increase in the funding for the Central Universities at appropriate level.  
(Para-2.9) 
The Committee strongly feels this trend is certainly affecting the implementation of various 
schemes in the Ministry. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Department should 
reconsider/review its overall mechanism right from making the proposed demand till the final 
expenditure is incurred and also assess the impact thereof in so far as the implementation of 
various schemes is concerned.  
(Para-2.10) 
The Committee, in view of the declining allocations combined with underutilization of 
budget allocations, expresses its serious concerns and recommends that the Department should 
reconsider/review its overall mechanism in so far as the implementation of various schemes is 
concerned and bring in new ideas. This is high time to show high achievements in the 
growth/development of Higher Education Sector, if India were to compete with advanced countries 
in this regard. We have to achieve equity, access and excellence in Higher Education to overcome 
the existing inequality prevailing in the country as well as to bridge the urban/ rural d ivide. The 
Committee, however, also recommends to the Government to take seriously the growth and 
development of this sector and increase budgetary allocations as they are serving the needs of the 
society.  
(Para- 2.11) 
  

Action Taken 
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  
All the Central Universities (CUs) were following the pace of expenditure within the 
budgetary support allocated by MHRD/UGC. However, after implementation of 7 th CPC, the 
expenditure on salary grant and pen sionary benefits were drastically increased but the funds were 
not allocated to the Ministry as per actual requirement of the CUs. Ministry proposes every year 
funds requirement of the Central Universities as assessed by UGC for allocation in Budget 
Estimate (BE) under the Scheme “Grants to Central Universities” to Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance through IFD (MoE). During the year 2019 -20, grant allocated under the 
scheme “Grants to Central Universities” is  Rs.6843.40 crore (BE) which was ins ufficient to meet 
the committed liabilities towards the salary arrear s and pensionary benefits etc. o f employees of 
CUs. However, Ministry released funds Rs .7988.83 crore to Central Universities during the 
financial year (2019-20) to meet the committed lia bilities towards the salary arrears and pensioner 
benefits etc. The Ministry is committed to constant improvement of the quality of higher education 
and defining excellence in the processes of teaching, learning and research. Paradigms of quality 
and excellence in higher education have been shifted due to roll out of a number of regulations and 
schemes by UGC.  
 The schemes under quality and excellence are: 
 Potential for Excellence – Teaching and Research  
 Establishment of New Centers / Institutes  
 Special Assistance Programme (SAP)  
 Autonomous Colleges  
 Human Resource Development Centers - (HRDC) & Regional Centers of Capacity 
Building (RCCB)  
 Bilateral Cultural and Educational Exchange  
 Travel Grant  
 Inter University Centers (IUC) National Facilities Centers  
 Development of Sports Infrastructure and Equipment in Universities  
 Institutions of Eminence (IOE) In order to ensure that the quality of higher education is 
sustained and further streamlined, UGC has notified the following regulations which are 
mandatory for compliance by every institution of higher education including Central 
Universities across the country.  

 UGC (Establishment of and Maintenance of Standards in Private Universities) Regulations, 
2003. 
 UGC (Minimum Standards of Instruction for the Gran t of First Degree through Formal 
Education) Regulations,2003. 
 UGC (Minimum Standards of Instruction for the Grant of the Master‟s Degree through 
Formal Education) Regulations, 2003. 
 UGC (Grant of Degrees and Other Awards by Universities) Regulations, 2008. 
 UGC (Affiliation of Colleges by Universities) Regulations, 2009. 
 UGC (Curbing the Menace of Ragging in Higher educational Institutions) Regulations, 
2009. 
 UGC (Recognition and Monitoring of Assessment & Accreditation Agencies) Regulations, 
2014. 
 UGC (Affiliation of Colleges offering Technical Education by Universities) Regulations, 
2014. 
 UGC (Promotion and Maintenance of Standards of Academic Collaboration between 
Indian and Foreign Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2016.  
 UGC (Minimum Standards and P rocedure for Award of M.PHIL./PH.D Degrees) 
Regulations, 2016  
 UGC (Open and Distance Learning) Regulations, 2017. 
 UGC (Institutions of Eminence Deemed to be Universities) Regulations, 2017. 
 UGC Grievance Redressal Regulations, 2018. 
 UGC (Recognition and Monitoring of Assessment Accreditation Agencies) Regulation, 
2018  
 UGC Regulations on Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and other 
Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for The Maintenance of 
Standards in Higher Education, 2018 
 UGC (Promotion of Academic Integrity and Prevention of Plagiarism in Higher 
Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2018. 
 UGC [Categorisation of Universities (only) for Grant of Graded Autonomy] Regulations, 
2018. 
 UGC (Online Courses or Programmes) Regulations, 2018. 
 University Grants Commission (Conferment of Autonomous Status Upon Colleges and 
Measures for Maintenance of Standards in Autonomous Colleges) Regulations, 2018. 

 UGC [Institutions Deemed to be Universities] Reg ulation, 2019 The Quality Mandate of 
the UGC was adopted in the National Conference of Vice -Chancellors and Directors 
Conference held during 26-28July, 2018 having five objectives and 10verticals.  
In addition, the following academic and administrative reforms are being implemented by 
the UGC for improving quality and excellence in higher education: 
1. National Academic Depository: It is an online storehouse of academic awards (Degrees, 
Diplomas, Certificates, Mark -Sheets, etc) lodged by the academic instituti ons / 
boards/eligibility assessment bodies in a digital format. It is a 24*7 online mode for making 
available academic awards and shall help in validating their authenticity, their safe storage, 
and easy retrieval.  
2. Consortium for Academic & Research Ethic s – A recent initiative taken up by UGC is the 
periodical notification of the  list of approved journals to be considered for the purpose of 
computation of API scores of university and college faculty. UGC has started notifying the 
list of approved, non-predatory and good quality journals from time to time. 
3. Student Induction Program: DEEKSHARAMBH - A Guide to student Induction Program 
designed to make the transition from secondary to college/ university.  
4. Learning Outcome Based Curriculum Framework (LOCF): M odel curriculum in 19 
subjects have been uploaded. 
5. Mentoring of institutions for accreditation: UGC has developed the scheme of 
“Paramarsh”- new initiatives for mentoring the non -accredited institutions to enable them 
get accredited. 
6. Evaluation Reforms: Th e UGC has introduced Evaluation Reform envisaging scientific 
methodology for comprehensive assessment of the students including critical thinking and 
unleash their potential to take the baton of change and growth. 
7. Use of ICT: Use of ICT based learning tool s for effective teaching -learning process 
including MOOCs and online degrees has been enabled. 
8. Social and Industry connects for every institution: University -Industry linkages to be 
promoted to improve employability whereby every institution shall adopt at  least 5 villages 
for exchange of knowledge and for the overall social/economic betterment of the village 
communities. 
9. Student Career Progression and Alumni Network: The policy document on Student Career 
Progression and Alumni Network has been uploaded on UGC website for seeking 
comments from stakeholders. 

10. Jeevan Kaushal (Life Skills): Curriculum of course on Jeevan Kaushal  (Life Skills) has 
been uploaded on UGC  website. Handbook for Vice Chancellors: A Handbook of Vice -
Chancellors is being finalized by the UGC for expeditious implementation of academic and 
administrative reform in HEIs.  
11. Inculcation of Values & Professional Ethics: Guidelines on Inculcation of Va lues &  
Professional Ethics have been framed. 
12. Guidelines for Eco friendly and Sustainable Campus: Guidelines are being developed. 
13. Capacity Building Program: Annual Refresher Program in Teaching (ARPIT) and 
Leadership Training for Educational Administrators (LEAP) have been introduced. 
14. Faculty Induction Program: Guidelines for Faculty Induction Program “Gurudakshita” 
have been framed. Scheme for Trans -disciplinary Research for  India‟s Developing 
Economy (STRIDE): UGC  notified Scheme for Trans -disciplinary Res earch for India‟s 
Developing Economy (STRIDE) and operational Guidelines of  STRIDE were uploaded on 
UGC website. The portal for submission of online proposal under the STRIDE was 
operationalized w.e.f.31.07.2019.UGC has also a scheme of National Higher Edu cation 
Qualification framework (NHEQF)  which shall provide a basis for monitoring and 
regulating the quality and compatibility of higher education across institutions. It may thus 
become a single system of levels for all qualifications offered by higher ed ucational 
institutions across all disciplines there by making higher education qualification 
comparable nationally and internationally. 
NEW INITIATIVES  
Observation/recommendation 
2.  The Committee points out that EQUIP is going to integrate seventeen programmes under 
it. The Committee emphasizes that each of these programmes were created with particular 
segment to be targeted. The Committee would like to emphasize that if all the progr ammes are 
subsumed under a single programme, the emphasis and attention to each initiative should not get 
lost. The Committee also points out that one of the flagship programmes like RUSA which is going 
to be merged into EQUIP targets the development of st ate universities and colleges to upgrade 
themselves both in terms of academics and physical infrastructure. The Committee understands 
that this scheme was launched to help the State universities/colleges to upgrade this infrastructure 
which would go a long  way in improving the standard of Higher Education in the country. The 
Committee, therefore recommends that even after subsuming of this scheme under EQUIP, the 

Department should make sure that the required allocations are used for achieving the desired 
results. 
(Para-12.7) 
The Committee further points out that the other schemes which are going to be subsumed 
in EQUIP should be given the same importance as when they were stand alone schemes. The 
Committee also emphasizes that these schemes are necessary for  the improvement of Higher 
Education in the country and the Department should ensure that the allocation for the EQUIP 
scheme should be in line with the overall target of achieving quality, excellence and access in 
Higher Education. 
(Para-12.8) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry recognizes the concern of the raised issue and assures that this will be taken 
care of during the implementation of EQUIP. The initial focus, audience and essence of the 
different programmes being merged into EQUIP will be maintained while e nsuring that the 
purpose is being fulfilled. 
D/o Higher Education had,  on 03.09.2019 sent a draft EFC memo on EQUIP to 
Department of  Expenditure for seeking in - principal approval for formal circulation to concerned 
Ministry/Department for their comments.  In response to the Draft EFC Memo  on EQUIP the 
Ministry of Finance has stated that, “as of now, the scheme is completely unaffordable in the 
MTEF and present fiscal environment and hence in principal approval is not possible.  In view of 
the substantial budgetary support required to fund EQUIP, it would be prudent to wait for the final 
award of the 15th Finance Commission (2021-22 to 2025-26).” 
Presently, the department is re -examining EQUIP in the light of observations made by the 
Department of Expenditure . The Ministry will ensure that the various schemes supposed to be 
subsumed under EQUIP are given the same importance as when they were stand -alone schemes. 
EQUIP was aimed to be an overarching  programme delivering further on the principles of access, 
inclusion, quality, excellence and enhancing employability in higher education. These principles 
will be abided by while working out the allocations for the programme. 
  

CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
PANDIT MADAN MOHAN MALVIYA NATIONAL MISSION ON TEACHERS AND 
TEACHING (PMMMNMTT)  
Observations/Recommendations 
2. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department under PMMMNMTT to improve 
teachers training and teaching. The scheme provides them the opportunity to develop the required 
leadership and managerial skills, including skills of problem -solving, stress management, team -
building, conflict management, better communication, understanding and coping with the 
complexity and challenges of governance in financial or administrative roles. The Committee, 
however, recommends that the Department should have  clear roadmap for the amount of funds 
required for the implementation this scheme. The Committee feels that this scheme should not just 
be having four disciplines but also encompass other disciplines in social sciences, sciences & 
engineering to enhance the quality of teachers and teaching in them.     
(Para-5.5) 
Action Taken 
PANDIT MADAN MOHAN MALVIYA NATIONAL MISSION ON TEACHERS AND 
TEACHING (PMMMNMTT) 
 An allocation of Rs. 50 crores has been made as interim provision for six months and 
further provision of funds to be done at RE stage.  The Scheme was valid till 31.03.2020 and has 
been extended for a period of 1 year till 31.03.2021 vide Deptt. of Expenditure‟s OM dated 
10.01.2020. After EFC/SFC of the Scheme is done, there will be a clear approval for ti meline and 
year-wise budget allocation of the Scheme.  It is stated that the Scheme is just not focussing on 4 
disciplines. A variety of disciplines like Life Sciences, Ayurveda, Sanskrit, Environmental 
Microbiology, Hindi, Internet of Things (IoT), Social  Sciences, Sciences, Chemistry etc. have 
been covered to name a few. The Scheme may further try to encompass those subjects which 
remain uncovered till date. 
 
UNNAT BHARAT ABHIYAN & UCHCHATAR AVISHKAR ABHIYAN  
Uchchatar Avishkar Abhiyan (UAY) 

Observations/Recommendations 
3.  The Committee appreciates the objectives behind launching this educational and 
empowerment policy of Govt. As per the past studies, the students getting higher education in 
India are only having academic knowledge and lack the market exposure. Thus, they do not have a 
practical knowledge of the work that is really going on in the manufacturing units or the industrial 
plants. 
(Para- 6.5) 
The Committee feels that the Department should promote this scheme more aggressively as 
this would not only promote innovations in areas relevant to manufacturing and design but also 
spur innovative mindset in students and faculty in premier technical educational institutions. The 
Committee further recommends that the Department should also he lp the faculty and students in 
patenting new technologies and process which are developed under this scheme. 
(Para-6.6) 
Action Taken 
 Unnat Bharat Abhiyan (UBA) aims to reach out to all villages in the country within a 
span of 10 years. Initiating 1st Phase (UBA 1.0) of activities in the middle of 2014 with 142 
Institutes, the scheme has passed through 2nd Phase (UBA 2.0) which stands no w with enrolment 
of more than 2600 Higher Education Institutions PIs (technical and nontechnical). These institutes 
have adopted nearly 13,500 villages across the country. The objective of the scheme inter -alia 
include identify and select existing innovati ve technologies, enable customization of technologies, 
or devise implementation method for innovative solutions, as per the local needs. 
 Government has decided to subsume the Uchchatar Avishkar Yojana (UAY) scheme 
with the IMPRINT Scheme under the Ministr y. IMPacting Research, INnovation and Technology 
(IMPRINT), a national initiative of the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) 
designed to address all major engineering challenges relevant to India through an inclusive and 
sustainable mode of trans lational research has now reached its next phase. This national initiative 
is jointly funded and steered by Ministry of Education and Department of Science and Technology 
(DST). While any faculty member from a MoE funded Higher Education Institute (HEI) in cluding 
Centrally Funded Technical Institution (CFTI) may lead as the Principal Investigator (PI), single 
or multiple partners from stake holder ministry, institutions, PSUs, strategic agencies and industry 
are welcome as Co-PI, partner or collaborator.  

 To spur the innovative mindset and market exposure to the technologies developed by 
IITs and other Institutes, the Research Parks are established under the scheme National Initiative 
for Technology Transfer (Renamed as Start-up India Initiative for Higher Educational Institutions) 
at IIT Kharagpur and IIT Bombay and further, establishment of five new Research Parks, one each 
at IIT Delhi, IIT Kanpur, IIT Guwahati, IIT Hyderabad and IISc Bangalore were also approved. 
These Research Parks are expected to give  optimum exposure to students in these institutions.  For 
patenting new technologies, IITs have separate cell to guide students and faculties. Besides, the 
MoUs being  executed by National Coordinator under the scheme (UAY) inter -alia provide for 
safeguarding the interest of Project Investigators. 
GLOBAL INITIATIVE OF ACADEMIC NETWORKS (GIAN) 
Observations/Recommendations 
4. The Committee appreciates this new initiative to invite distinguished academicians, 
entrepreneur’s, scientists, experts from premier institutions from across the world  to teach in 
higher educational institutions in India, hence promoting international collaborations and 
improvements in quality of higher education in India. 
(Para-9.6) 
Action Taken 
Global Initiative of Academic Networks (GIAN) in Higher Education was launched on 
30th November, 2015. The Scheme envisages garnering the best international experience into our 
systems of education, enabling interaction of students and faculty with the bes t academic and 
industry experts from all over the world. The Scheme is aimed at tapping the talent pool of 
scientists and entrepreneurs internationally to encourage their engagement with the institutes of 
Higher Education in India so as to augment the coun try‟s existing academic resources, accelerate 
the pace of quality reform, and elevate India‟s scientific and technological capacity to global 
excellence. GIAN was envisaged to catalyse higher education institutions in the country and it 
initially included IITs, IIMs, Central Universities, IISc Bangalore, IISERs, NITs and IIITs 
subsequently covered good State Universities too. MHRD has constituted a GIAN Implementation 
Committee chaired by Secretary (HE) to finalize and approve the GIAN implementation throug h 
courses and also decide on budget allocation.  
Till date 2101 courses have been approved by the Apex Committee. Out of these, 1582 
courses have already been organized and completed in which 1453 foreign faculties & industry 
experts have participated. However, due to COVID-19 Pandemic, 262 courses approved during the 

year 2020, have been put on hold and will be organized on a later date after the restoration of 
normalcy. 
SCHOLARSHIPS  
Observation/recommendation 
5.  The Committee observes that all these Schemes are meant for providing an opportunity to 
students belonging to marginalized sections to get proper coaching so as to enable them to 
compete for higher studies and become eligible for teaching in higher educational institutions and 
for getting gainful employment in Central/States/ private sector services. The objective behind all 
these Schemes is laudable. The Committee can only emphasize that these schemes need to be 
administered in the real sense, with the benefit reaching the targeted beneficiaries. 
(Para-11.5) 
The Committee finds it satisfactory that a number of initiatives have been taken for 
integrating the differently -abled students towards mainstream higher education. These initiatives 
are indeed major steps for providing equal opportunities to such students. The Committee, 
however, feels that initiatives will have more impact if awareness about such facilities is dissipated 
among the targeted students. Every conceivable effort has to be made to sensitize such students 
towards the kind of oppo rtunities waiting for them. Details of all schemes for differently -abled 
students should be mandatorily displayed on the websites of UGC, AICTE and IGNOU and also 
all categories of universities. In addition, strict and constant monitoring at all levels is also 
required so as to ensure that all such initiatives for differently -abled students are being 
implemented in the real sense 
(Para-11.6) 
 
 
Action Taken 
The last 3 years data on number of beneficiary and fund spent is being annexed 
(ANNEXURE-1) to show the administration of the scheme to the targeted beneficiaries. 
Schemes for the differently -abled students are being administered by AICTE who have 
mentioned that details of their schemes are displayed on their respective websites. UGC have also 
mentioned that they have displayed all their scholarship schemes on their websites and the 
universities have been directed to display it prominently on their websites too. 

AICTE grants total of 1000 scholarships to differently -abled students (500 for degree & 
500 fo r Diploma) with financial aid.:  Tuition fee reimbursement of Rs.30,000/ - or as actuals 
whichever is less and Rs.2000/p.m for 10 months as incidental charges each year which has been 
modified w.e.f. 2020-21 to Rs.50,000 as full fee reimbursement per student. 
CONCLUSION 
Observation/recommendation  
6.  The Committee considers Higher Education as an increasingly global enterprise; hence 
Indian institutions should embrace internationalization that could provide them with new 
opportunities. While most of our uni versities and colleges are required to build human resources 
to reach desired levels of competence, we also need to go beyond this to ensure that the country 
has several institutions of higher education that strive to achieve excellence in both teaching an d 
research. Universities and colleges should be encouraged to engage more intensively than before 
with wider society and contribute to local and regional development and provide intellectual 
leadership to society. 
(Para- 13.1) 
The Committee feels that few universities and institution should be converted or upgraded 
by creating centres of excellence within the universities/institutions building on their existing 
strength. Accreditation should be at core of regulatory arrangement and must have clear 
incentives and consequences. There should be more funding for university based research and 
policies that create right incentives for quality research and promote collaboration among 
institutions. 
(Para- 13.2) 
 
The Committee further adds that quality assurance in h igher education has to become top 
of policy agenda and education has to prepare graduates with new skills, broad knowledge base 
and a range of competencies to enter a more complex and interdependent world. Quality is a 
multi-dimensional concept and several  mechanisms for quality assurance and  management at 
individual and institutional level are needed. The  Committee further points out that system of 
accountability and accreditation with a robust regulatory mechanism are essential to the process 
of sustaining and improving quality and developing performance indicators and benchmarks for 
assessing outcomes in higher education. The Committee accordingly, urges upon the Department 
of Higher Education to take all measures so as to ensure the quality in higher edu cation matches 
will the global standards. 

(Para- 13.3) 
Action Taken  
 In order to impart international edge to HEIs in India, UGC has notified University 
Grants Commission (Promotion and Maintenance of Standards of Academic Collaboration 
between Indian and Foreign Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2016 in the Gazette of India on 
11th July, 2016. Under these regulations, the Indian institutions would be able to enter into 
collaboration with foreign institutions through an instrument of twining arrangeme nt after 
approval of UGC. Expression of interest has already been invited in this regard by the 
Commission. The UGC communication can be seen  at 
http://www.ugc.ac.in/pdfnews/3825480_Foreign-Collaboration-Regulations.pdf 
 Further, the government has approv ed a new program titled Global initiative of 
Academic Networks (GIAN) in Higher Education aimed at tapping the talent pool of scientists 
and entrepreneurs, internationally to encourage their engagement with the institutes of higher 
Education in India, so a s to augment the country‟s existing academic resources, accelerate the 
pace of quality reform, and elevate India‟s scientific and technological capacity to global 
excellence. Under the scheme, Guest Lectures are arranged from international renowned experts  
in the identified universities. The faculty invited under GIAN is not exclusively for propensity 
syllabus for Indian universities and colleges. 
 In order to improve quality and standards of higher education in the country, UGC 
has made accreditation of Hi gher Educational Institutions mandatory. Further, to ensure that the 
principle of excellence is promoted in various higher educational institutions (HEIs) in different 
states of the country, UGC has rolled out the following schemes. 
 Universities with Poten tial for Excellence:  This scheme has continued since IX Plan 
wherein financial assistance is provided to eligible institutions to the tune of Rs. 60.00 crores 
which is increased to Rs. 100 crores after 5 or 10 yrs. The grant under the schemes is to be 
utilized partly (50%) for research in one / two focused area(s) and partly (50%) on holistic 
development of the university. 
 Centre with potential for excellence in particular area: (CPEPA)  - UGC introduced the 
scheme of Centre with Potential for Excellence in Particular Area (CPEPA) during IX Plan 
period, which has been continued upto XII Plan period for development of academic/research 
infrastructure to improve the programs and activities in  a chosen discipline at the selected 
university.  The CPEPA Scheme focuses on supporting the development of inter-and/or multi-
disciplinary areas and specific research projects in these areas at the selected Centers. Under 

the scheme financial assistance is given as under. 
 Rs 10.00 crores for Science/ Technology areas 
 Rs 8.00 crores for Social Sciences/ Humanities areas. 
 Further, UGC is constantly monitoring the standards of education in institutions deemed to 
be Universities and private universities by means of review and regulations. As per the UGC 
(Institutions Deemed to be Universities) Regulations, 2010, all the Deemed to be Universities are 
to be reviewed after every five years by an Expert Committee of UGC. Similarly, Private 
Universities are being regulated by the UGC as per the provisions contained in the UGC 
(Establishment of and Maintenance of Standards in Private Universities) Regulations, 2003. 
Such reviews are undertaken to ensure that quality education is provided by these universities in 
conformity with the criteria and regulations laid down by UGC and other st atutory councils. The 
review is conducted with the help of Expert Committees constituted which includes 
representatives from the concerned Statutory Council(s). These Expert Committees visit the 
Universities to assess the fulfillment of minimum criteria in  terms of programmes, faculty, 
infrastructural facilities, financial viability, etc. The reports of UGC visiting committees are also 
uploaded on the UGC website for the information of student/parents and general public at large. 
 Creation of Inter University Centres (IUC) by UGC to achieve excellence 
 To improve the standards of higher education and research, the UGC establishes Inter -
University Centres within the university system under Clause 12(ccc) of the UGC Act. The 
objectives for setting up these centres are: 
 To provide common advanced centralized facilities/services for universities which are 
notable to invest heavily in infrastructure and other inputs. 
 To play a vital role in offering the best  expertise in each field to teachers and 
researchers across the country. 
 To provide access for research and teaching community to the state -of-the-art 
equipment and excellent library facilities which are comparable to international 
standards. 
 Currently there are eight inter -university centres operating with the overall aim of 
increasing quality and sharing expertise.UGC has framed „Quality Mandate‟ with 5 objectives and 
10 verticals. Some of the verticals under Quality Mandate such as Life Skills (Jeevan Kaushal); 
Evaluation Reforms and Learning Outcomes based Cu rriculum Framework (LOCF) are aimed to 
equip country‟s next generation with vital skills, knowledge and ethics and thereby to improve 
their employability. Details of such initiatives are as below: 
 Life Skills (Jeevan Kaushal):  A curriculum on Life Skills has been formulated to empower 

graduates with the vital skills like Self Competency and Confidence, Emotional Competency, 
Intellectual Competency, Professional  Competency and Social Competency for global 
employment and for leading a successful life. 
 The curriculum comprises of four modules: 
 Communication skills 
 Professional skills comprise career skills and team skills 
 Leadership and Management including Entrepreneurial skills 
 Universal Human Values including Yoga and Service. 
 The details are available on UGC website. 
 Evaluation Reforms: UGC has initiated Evaluation reforms to  revamp the current evaluation 
system in a way that assessment driven learning with continuous evaluation may be promoted. 
The report on “Evaluation reform s in Higher Educational Institution in India” is available in 
UGC website. 
The major highlights of the report are:  The Objectives of Examination System is to test 
learning outcomes, knowledge gained, attitude developed and skills mattered, Separate 
suitable model for UG, PG, M.Phil/Ph.D to be developed, Internal and continuous 
evaluation to be emphasized without compromising quality and standards, Technological 
interventions, Digital depository of degrees and marksheets, Grading and Credit transfer: 
Ensure a minimum programme wise uniformity in all HEIs, Moderation, On -Demand 
Examination, Question Bank, Minimum Infrastructure requirement for all HEIs to be 
achieved in time bound manner and Result Declaration. 
 Learning Outcomes based Curriculum Framework (LOC F): Sustained initiatives are 
required for institutionalizing an outcome oriented higher education system and enhancing 
employability of graduates through curriculum reform based on a learning outcomes -based 
curriculum framework.  
 The basic premise of Lea rning Outcomes based approach is to align the 
attributes to be attained by a graduate, with Programme Learning Outcomes and Academic 
Standards. It is a student centric learning approach. LOCF aims to equip students with knowledge, 
skill, value and attitude . Based on this approach attributes like Disciplinary knowledge, 
Communication Skills, Critical thinking, Problem solving, Analytical reasoning, Research -related 
skills, Cooperation/Team work, Scientific reasoning, Reflective thinking, Information/digital 
literacy, Self-directed learning, Multicultural competence, Moral and ethical awareness/reasoning, 
Leadership readiness/qualities etc. 
 The Indian Institute s of Technology (IITs) are institutes of National importance 

and accordingly they strive to remain a s top ranking institutes in the country by way of achieving 
excellence in teaching and research.  They have collaboration with global institutes for exchange 
of students and research scholars through MoU / Agreements.  They intensively engaged in 
research schemes aimed at uplifting rural India and contributing to local needs.  
 Details regarding Unnat Bharat Abhiyan are already mentioned in S.No.5 above. 
 In so far as accreditation with regulatory arrangements, the IITs will be brought in 
tune with the reco mmendations of National Educational Policy (NEP -2020) aimed at raising the 
standards of higher education institutes that matches with the global standards 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO (GER) 
Observation/recommendation 
1. The Committee appreciates the work done by the Department in increasing the Gross 
Enrolment ratio. The Committee, however, notes that the Gross enrolment ratio of  SC/ST student 
is 23.0 and 17.2 respectively compared to the national average of 26.3. The Committee observes 
that in spite of various scholarships and initiatives taken up by the Department the GER of the 
SC/ST students has not reached to the level of nat ional average. The Committee would like to 
reiterate that the Department should take steps to bridge the gap between the general category 
students and the SC/ST students but also take initiatives so that students from these sections do not 
leave their education in between.  
(Para-3.5) 
Action Taken 
 As per AISHE Report (2018 -19) the Gross Enrolment Ratio in Higher Education – 
AllCategories-26.3, SC--23.0, ST -17.2. 
 The University Grants Commission is continuously monitoring the progress of 
implementation of reservation Policy for SCs,STs & OBC and Persons with Disabilities in 
teaching and non -teaching posts as well as admission to all level courses in universities an d 
colleges. In order to ensure that there is no discrimination against the SC/ST students, the 
Commission has notified UGC (Promotion of Equity in Higher Education Institutions) Regulation 
2012.  
 The objective of the regulations is to eliminate discrimina tion against or harassment / 
victimization of persons on the basis of their sexual orientation, gender (including the third gender) 
and also eliminate discrimination against or harassment/victimization of persons living with 
HIV/AIDS, or any other disease, physical or mental, with a stigma attached to it. These regulations 
were circulated amongst universities for implementation.  

 As a part of the effective implementation of the policy of affirmative action, UGC has 
launched a scheme to establish Equal Opportunity Cell (EOC) in institutions of higher education in 
the country. The EOCs are mandated to oversee the effective implementation of policies and 
programmes for the disadvantaged groups and to provide them guidance and counselling in 
academic, financial, social and other matters. A one -time grant of 2.00 lakhs is provided by UGC 
for establishing the office of the EOC in  universities and 75,000/- & 55,000 is respectively in UG 
and PG college.  
 Apart from EOCs, UGC supports research on the issue of social  exclusion, which has 
theoretical as well as policy importance. The centre approved in universities by UGC under the 
scheme of Centres for study of Social Exclusion and Inclusive Policy undertake following 
activities. 
 Teaching Courses at M.A and M.Phil levels, leading eventuality to full -fledged M.A and 
even M.Phil programmes in Social Exclusion Studies. 
 Undertaking M.Phil and Ph. D. supervision. 
 Undertaking empirical studies with theoretical perspective and build time series data bank 
for comparative studies and policy/programmes evaluation. 
 Carrying out detailed rigorous analyses based on the socio -economic data generated by 
government agencies. •Organizing conferences, seminars and symposia on the theme of 
Social Exclusion. 
 Publishing regularly the research findings of the faculty and students. 
 Organizing public lectures on the subject by eminent scholars. 
 Reaching out to scholars, especially young scholars, in other universities and colleges  
through an active programme of inviting Visiting Faculty. 
 Establishing links with Civil Society Organizations engaged in combating Social 
Exclusion. 
 Conducting short -term Orientation courses for political leaders, Parliamentarians, 
government officials, trade unionists and media personalities. 
 Education Quality Upgradation and Inclusion Programme (EQUIP): The EQUIP addresses 
the need to bridge the gap between SC/STs and General categories and has proposed the 
following initiatives for the same: 
 

 More financial assistantships Bridge course/ Student Induction programmes/ Career 
counselling support/ Grievance redressal of the students 
 Support for ensuring physical health and emotional well being of the students. 
 D/o Higher Education had, on 03.09.2019 sent a draft EFC memo on EQUIP to 
Department of Expenditure for seeking in -principal approval for formal circulation to concerned 
Ministry/Department for their comments. 
 In response to the Draft EFC Memo on EQUIP the Ministry of Finance has stated that, 
„” as of now, the scheme is completely unaffordable in the MT EF and present fiscal environment 
and hence in principal approval is not possible.  In view of the substantial budgetary support 
required to fund EQUIP, it would be prudent to wait for the final award of the 15th Finance 
Commission (2021-22 to2025-26).”  Presently, the department is re -examining EQUIP in the 
light of observations made by the Department of Expenditure. 
Further Comments of the Committee 
The Committee observes that regardless of  the umpteen number of schemes and 
initiatives explained , the share of enrolled SCs/STs still continue to be under -represented 
with respect to their share in the total population. As per the AISHE Report (2018-2019), the 
highest number of students is  enrolled at Under Graduate level across India.   Out of  the 
79.8% of the total enrolments, the  Scheduled Cast students constitute only 14.9% and 
Scheduled Tribe students  constitute only 5.5% of the total  enrolment. Further, the 
percentage of SC/ST students enrolled in Post graduate programmes and Integrated 
Ph.Ds./Ph.Ds are not known.  Most of the c olleges run only Under Graduate  level 
programmes. Only 2.5% of c olleges run Ph.D. level  programmes and 34.9% of colleges run 
Post Graduate Level  programmes. Further, there is a wider disparity in the GER in higher 
education in India across men and women and region wise, reflecting a significant imbalance 
within the higher education system . The Committee, therefore, feels that the measures and 
schemes explained by UGC remain either underutilised or un-implemented. The Committee 
therefore proposes an outcome-based approach in higher education sector. The Committee 
may also be appraised about the status of the Revitalising  Infrastructure and Systems in 
Education (RISE) Scheme which was introduced in 2018 with an aim to provide low -cost 
funds to government higher  educational institutions to expand and build new infrastructure  
and also regarding the implementation of the scheme of 10% reservation for Economically 
Weaker Section. 

NMEICT, SWAYAM, MOOCs 
Observation/recommendation 
1.  (i) The Committee notes that SWAYAM MOOCS offer a wide variety of courses to students for 
upgrading their knowledge/skills and feels that the Ministry should ensure that adequate funds and 
made available for it post merger with EQUIP so that the efforts made under it are not diluted. 
(Para- 4.14) 
(ii)  The Committee points out that SWAYAM is a platform for new India where quality education 
is affordable and self -learning is fruitful not only for enrolled but also for professio nals and 
dropouts. With quality content, best online lectures, great discussions, knowledgeable assessment 
quizzes, SWAYAM provides great opportunity to Indian students to learn without fearing from 
failure. It is a platform specifically designed to benefi t students from remote area, working 
professionals as well as college dropouts. Students will get ‘Verified Certificate’ after successful 
completion of courses. However, it is not clear if these certificates will be accepted for 
employment purposes. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Department should take 
steps to make sure that the certificate issued under SWAYAM is accepted by the industries.  
(Para-4.18) 
Action Taken 
Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young Aspiring Minds 
SWAYAM is one of the flagship projects of Ministry of Education. Sufficient funds are 
made available for its proper functioning.  The SWAYAM courses offered in engineering are very 
popular among students as well as working professional. Courses are utilised by the Industry for 
fresher on-boarding, cros-skilling and re-skilling of the existing workforce. 
  Further, the following steps were taken by SWAYAM -NPTEL, the National Coordinator  
for Engineering & Technology Courses: - Co-offered Technical & Professional Courses through 
Academia Industry alliance. Partnered with companies and conducted end -to-end soft skills 
training for certified candidates which includes employability test, group discussion skills and a 
half hour 1-1 session with a soft skills trainer where they help with resume writing, how to attend 
interviews, areas of improvement, etc. 
Further Comments of the Committee 
The Committee sincerely appreciat es the efforts undertaken by the D/o Higher 
Education in the expansion and propagation of SWAYAM courses through NPTEL. 

However, the Committee notes that the courses completed do not feed into a degree or other 
qualification, but are self -contained. The Committee therefore would like to be updated on 
the specific concern raised by it previously regarding the validity of the ‘ Verified Certificate’ 
issued after successful completion of courses online. The Committee would also like to know 
about the feasibilit y of offering online technical courses that needs physical/ practical 
exposures.  
FACULTY POSITION  
Observation/recommendation 
2. The Committee would like to point out that it may be justified to some extent large number 
of vacancies in the Central Universities set up in the past 3-4 years. But the shortage of teachers in 
old universities, some of them established many decades back clearly indicates that this issue has 
not engaged the attention of the concerned authorities in the right perspective.\ 
(Para-7.6) 
Action Taken 
University Grants Commission (UGC) is aware of the fact that there are several vacant 
teaching positions in various universities and colleges across the country and teachers on 
contractual/tenure/ ad -hoc/part-time are appointed against the vacant positions. UGC has taken 
proactive measure to address the issue and prepared the guidelines for recruitment of faculty in 
Universities, Colleges and Institutions Deemed to be Universities outlining the select ion procedure 
and the time frame for recruitment. All the universities have been requested to take steps to ensure 
that the vacancies in the University as well as in the Colleges affiliated to University are filled up 
at the earliest, vide UGC D.O. letter No.F.1-14/2019 (CPP-II) dated 4th June, 2019.  
Further, UGC vide its letter No.F.1 -14/2019(CPP-II) dated 31st July, 2019, 7 th  
August,2019, 5 th  September, 2019 and 22 nd  October,2019 again requested to ensure that vacant 
positions in University as well as  colleges affiliated to University are filled at the earliest and the 
status of the recruitment process is uploaded on the University Activity Monitoring Portal of UGC.  
To expedite the process of filling up of the vacant teaching positions UGC through its  
Regional Offices has been following it with the Universities and Colleges. To attract the young 
talented teachers, UGC Regulations on Minimum Qualification for appointment of Teachers and 
Other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of Standards 
in Higher Education 2018 has prescribed norms for improvement in service conditions for the new 
entrant, in terms of better working and leave conditions, career advancement prospects, 

superannuation benefits etc. In addition to  it the age of retirement prescribed in these regulations 
has been extended to 65  years with a provision for re -employment for 05 years upto the age of 70 
years.  
Further Comments of the Committee  
The Committee would like be appraised about the status of faculty recruitment as on 
date, the responses received from the Colleges and Universities in this regard , the number of 
vacancies filled till date and the data on contractual appointments. The Committee may also 
be apprised about the infringing factors in faculty recruitment that make the process 
difficult. The Committee feels that faculty dearth can only be resolved if the reasons and the 
consequences are clear .  It is important that the shortage of faculties in the HEIs should be 
rectified as early as possible as it may prevent education services from expanding to meet the 
rising demands. 
Observations/Recommendations 
3.   There can be only two possibilities, either our young students are not attracted towards the 
teaching profession or the recruitment process is a prolonged one and involves too many 
procedural formalities. In either case, the Department being the nodal authority for the entire 
country so far as higher education sector is concerned has to take proactive role so as to e xpedite 
the filling up a sanctioned posts. 
(Paras-7.5) 
The Committee recommends that recruitment process should start well in advance before 
the post is vacated so that after retirement the newly recruited person takes up position 
immediately. The Ministry  should work in tandem with Institutions to have this exercise done on 
yearly-basis and recruitment must be complete in advance so that shortage does not develop into 
crisis. At the same time, the Department should work out a strategy so as to attract the bright 
students to the teaching profession. The Committee also suggests that in order to make the 
teaching profession more attractive, the faculty should be encouraged to undertake consultancy 
and are given start-up financial support. 
(Para- 7.7) 
The Department along with UGC and the Universities should also provide an opportunity 
to the teachers to present papers in academic conferences seminars or participate in workshops; 
exchange knowledge and ideas; and the young faculty member to spend a short period of two 
weeks to two months at institutions of their choice for a better academic exposure. 

(Paras-7.8) 
Action Taken 
Keeping in mind the fact that the field of higher education is currently facing an acute 
shortage of teachers at all levels and also being aware of the decision of the central government to 
expand the base of college and university education significantly throughout the country, the UGC 
Regulations on Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and Other Academic Staff 
in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of Standard in Higher Education, 
2010 has extended the age of superannu ation to 65 years for teachers in University and College 
across the country. It is for the University to make all efforts to fill up the vacant posts. However, 
the UGC has allowed the University to re -employ superannuated teachers for a maximum period 
of five years, i.e. up to 70 years against sanctioned vacant post, if such posts are not filled up by 
regular candidates. Intensive efforts are being made to attract talented, bright and qualified young 
men and women to college and University jobs. The entry p oint incentives have been substantially 
increased. The UGC Regulations, 2010 has prescribed norms for improvement in service 
conditions for the new entrant, in terms of better working and leave conditions, career 
advancement prospects, retirement benefits etc.    
The academic job portal is a new initiative taken by the University Grants Commission 
which helps NET/SET/Ph.D qualified candidates to bring their academic profile to the attention of 
universities/colleges and other employers with the ultimate aim to get them a suitable job. The 
portal facilitates candidates to register and create their profile online. The academic job portal 
facilitates the employers to search and browse academic profile of candidates available on this 
portal. The Portal also facil itates employers to register and post the job vacancies on this portal so 
that candidates can apply against the vacancies.  
 INTER UNIVERSITY CENTERS (IUCS)  – To improve the standards of higher education 
and research, UGC has established Inter-University Centres within the university system under 
Clause 12(ccc) of the UGC Act. The objectives for setting up these Centres are: 
 To provide common advanced central ized facilities/services for universities which are 
notable to invest heavily in infrastructure and other inputs. 
 To play a vital role in offering the best expertise in each field to teachers and researchers 
across the country. 
 To provide access for resear ch and teaching community to the state -of-the-art equipment 
and excellent library facilities which are comparable to international standards. Collection 
of information from Universities regarding teachers The Commission is empowered under 

Section12(h) and under Section 12(i) of the UGC Act,1956 to collect information on all 
such matters relating to university education in India and other countries as it thinks fit, and 
to require a university to furnish it with such information as may be needed relating to the 
financial position of the university or the studies in the various branches of learning 
undertaken in that university, together with all the rules and regulations relating to the 
standards of teaching and examination in that university with respect to each of such 
branches of learning. In order to get timely and quality data in the education sector, which 
is having implications for human development, Ministry of Human Resource Development 
initiated an All India Survey of Higher Education to build a data base and to assess the 
overall picture of Higher Education in the country. A core team of officers from MHRD 
and UGC were involved in providing technical support, which includes preparation of Data 
Capture Format (DCF), providing training in workshops, ass isting National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) in software development etc. Nodal officers have also been appointed in each 
state to coordinate the survey work. A dedicated portal (http://aishe.gov.in) has been 
developed with the help of National Informatics Cen tre (NIC) for collection and 
compilation of the data. All the institutions need to register on the portal for accessing the 
portal and uploading the data. UGC, Information and Statistics Bureau from 2014 -15 has 
stopped collecting data directly from the Uni versities, compilation and estimation of Data 
at All India level is being made through portalhttp://aishe.gov.in and this made us to shift 
to paperless exercise.  
The University Grants Commission, on behalf of the Government of India, has been 
implementing various collaborative academic programmes between India and foreign countries. 
UGC has been running Joint Research Programmes with countries like USA,UK, Israel, Norway 
and New Zealand, and has also facilitated Indian faculty / scholars to realize their r esearch 
potential through fellowship and research programmes, such as Raman Fellowships for 
Postdoctoral research in USA, Project based Personnel Exchange Programme and Exchange of 
Scientists Programme. Fellowships, Scholarships and Exchange of Scholars: 
 Raman Fellowships for Postdoctoral 
 Research in USA 
 Commonwealth Medical Fellowships 
 Exchange of Scientists Program with Germany 
 Project Based Personal Exchange Program (PPP) 
 South Asian Institute, Heidelberg Fellowship 

 Joint Research Programs: UGC -UKIERI Th ematic Partnerships UGC -UKIERI Thematic 
Partnerships are intended to be between Institution – based research teams in UK and India 
of proven research ability. Under Thematic Partnership,18 Joint research projects were 
awarded in the year 2018 for a period of 2 years i.e. from 15thMarch, 2018 to 14th March, 
2020. 
 HIGHER EDUCATION LEADERSHIPDEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME FOR 
ADMINISTRATORS UK 
India Education and Research Initiative  (UKIERI) is a bilateral partnership between UK 
and India which aims to promote institutional excellence through academic/research linkages and 
leadership development programme. University Grants Commission (UGC) and British Council 
under the auspices of UK IERI is going to deliver a Higher Education Leadership Development 
programme focusing on training of mid and senior level educational administrators in Universities 
in India. Inaddition to leadership training being provided to top level leaders like Vice -chancellors 
and academic faculty, higher education sector also needs leadership development for mid and 
senior levels functionaries so as to bring about a professional transformation of our Universities. 
British Council has identified Advanced HE, a UK base d not-for-profit institution, specializing in 
governance and leadership development of higher education for delivering the programme. The 
programme will be jointly funded under UKIERI.  
 
 
 OBJECTIVES: 
i. Train the academic administrators so as to enable them to bring about systemic changes 
with renewed approaches, capacity, tools and skills in the higher education institutions  
ii. Identify and train potential future leadership development program trainers in order to 
provide a framework for dissemination and cascading of leadership training to other HEIs. 
iii. Create and Strengthen sustainable relationship between UK and Indian Higher Education 
Institutions and utilize UK‟s expertise in the field of Higher Educatio n Administration and 
leadership Indo -US 21st Century Knowledge Initiative UGC announced an open 
competition under Indo -US 21st Century Knowledge Initiative and invited proposals for 
Joint Research from the faculty of institutions recognized under Section2 (f) and 12B of 
UGC Act and Institutions of National Importance. Under the Initiative, there are provisions 
for exchange visits, to hold international conferences, seminars etc. Indo -New Zealand Joint 

Research Projects Under the auspices of India -New Zealand Education Council, University 
Grants Commission, India and Education New Zealand invite applications from Indian and 
NewZealand academics seeking funding for Joint Research Projects. Indo -Israel Joint 
Research Programme: The Joint Research Programme aims  to encourage research 
cooperation between Israeli and Indian scientists/faculty. The programme is activated 
through an agreement of cooperation between University Grant Commission (UGC)and 
Israel Science Foundation (ISF), and is funded by the Indian and I sraeli governments, 
through the two funding agencies, each funding its own scientists according to their 
respective regulations. The programme is open to all disciplines. UGC, India and Israel 
Science Foundation (ISF) invited proposals for Joint Research P rojects and approved 21 
Projects in the year 2014. The selection process for the second cycle has been finalized. 
Indo-Norwegian Cooperation Programme(INCP)Indo -Norway Cooperation Programme in 
Higher Education and Research (INCP) is a new initiative that a ims at enhancing higher 
education links between India and Norway. The programme is based on the MoU on 
Cooperation in Higher Education between India and Norway, signed on February 14, 2014, 
and n the Agreement on Academic Cooperation between the University  Grants 
Commission(UGC) India and the Norwegian Centre for International Cooperation in 
Education (SIU).INCP is jointly financed through matching grants by the Indian Ministry of 
Human Resource Development (MHRD) and the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affai rs 
(MFA).UGC, India and SIU, Norway are the implementing agencies for this Programme. 
Indo – German Cultural Exchange Programme Indo – German Cultural Exchange 
Programme provides for an Exchange of Scientists Programme. UGC and DAAD have 
worked out this pr ogramme to intensify cooperation between India and Germany through 
funding of scholars who would participate in co -operative exchange visits primarily in the 
fields of humanities and social sciences. This offer will be applicable to those faculty 
employed at higher educational institutions / universities approved under Section 2(f) and 
12 B of the UGC ACT. Research Project (DAAD)  TRAVEL GRANT SCHEME UGC also 
has a Travel Grant Scheme that provides financial assistance to permanent teachers and 
librarians of  colleges and vice -chancellors of state universities, deemed to be universities 
and central universities, recognized under section 2 (f) and 12 (B) of the UGC Act, to 
present research papers at international conferences abroad. Online process to submit the  
applications by Teachers / Librarian / Vice -Chancellors / Commission Members has been 
initiated under the scheme to present research papers at international conferences abroad 
with effect from 01/09/2015. 

 MAJOR RESEARCH PROJECT IN HUMANITIES, SOCIAL SCIEN CE, 
LANGUAGES, SCIENCES & ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY UGC 
The Project strives  to promote teaching and research in emerging areas in Humanities, 
Social Sciences, Languages, Literature, Pure sciences, Engineering & Technology, Pharmacy, 
Medical, and Agricultu ral Sciences etc. The universities have been the centres of research. 
Although, the Government has a network of science and technology laboratories for research 
and development, the major base of researchers in science and technology remains with the 
universities and colleges. Hence, university and college teachers need to be supported to meet 
their requirements for individual research in specialized areas. To promote innovative ideas in 
major thrust areas of research in higher education, the UGC provides s upport for to permanent 
/ retired teachers in the universities and colleges under Section 2(f) and 12 B only by way of 
inviting online Major Research Project applications in the prescribed Performa after assenting 
the proposals through the subject expert c ommittee. The Principal Investigator of the selected 
proposals are invited for making presentations before the interface meeting constituted by the 
UGC.  
 
 
 SPECIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAMME (SAP) 
The SAP scheme was initiated in 1963 by University Grants Commission keeping in view 
the recommendations of the Education Commission to facilitate the selected number of university 
departments having some potential in research and teaching. The program is intended to encourage 
the pursuit of excellence and teamwo rk in advanced teaching and research to accelerate the 
realization of international standards in specific fields. The first such program was initially started 
as the "Centre of Advanced Study (CAS)" in 1963. Some of these Canters also received 
recognition and financial support from UNDP/UNESCO. The "Department of Special Assistance 
(DSA)" and "Departmental Research Support (DRS)"programs were started in the Departments 
during 1972 and 1977 respectively to create feeder departments for CAS. The SAP Scheme is  
implemented at 3 levels: 
1. CENTRE OF ADVANCED STUDY (CAS) 
2. DEPARTMENT OF SPECIALASSISTANCE (DSA) 
3. DEPARTMENTAL RESEARCH SUPPORT ( DRS) The major objectives of the Special  
Assistance Program (SAP) are as follows:-  

 To identify and support university departments  that has the potential to undertake quality 
teaching and research in various educational disciplines including allied disciplines. 
 Program to be relevant to societal needs and have society and industry interaction.  
 To make research a catalyst for good teaching and introduction of new courses relating to 
identified thrust areas. 
 To have linkages with research organizations and to use their expertise innovatively to 
support research in the universities. 
 To enhance infrastructure facilities. 
 To utilize the output of research for the development of the nation and society.  
 To train and create quality human resource in identified thrust areas.  
 To search for newer / generic area(s), its promotion and nurturing. Basic Science 
Research: With a view to providing  an opportunity for continuance of research 
contributions in Basic Science Research by talented Science and technology scholars 
/teachers, UGC has rolled out various schemes for boosting scientific research.  
Further, UGC provides financial assistance to s elected candidates for pursuing PG in 
general/professional/technical courses, M.Phil. /Ph.D. research and post -doctoral research on 
fulltime/regular basis in universities/Institutions/Colleges in India and abroad under various 
schemes.  
Understandably, all the above efforts and initiatives contribute to development of academic 
research, the benefits of which percolates to community, society and nation at large. However, out 
of its keenness to examine the impact of UGC schemes and identify the lacunae and ga ps, if any, 
in various stages of implementation and knowledge production, the Commission has set up a 
Committee of lay out the roadmap for research schemes in UGC. The Committee is to submit its 
report very soon. The objective of the programme is to boost scientific research. The scheme 
provides for: 
 Improvement of Infrastructure in Universities 
 Support to Colleges for Up-gradation of Science Laboratories in Colleges 
 Doctoral fellowship 
 Post-Doctoral Fellowships  
 Developing Networking Centers 
 Faculty Rechar ge Program Research Award. The objective of the scheme is to provide 
opportunities to permanent teachers of universities/institutions to pursue research in their 
area(s) of specialization for a period of three years without undertaking any research 

guidance. Eligibility Criteria – Regular appointed permanent teachers who have a 
doctorate degree. They must have published papers/articles in reputed journals. 
 Strengthening Social Science and Humanities Teaching and Research Capacity The 
establishment of Academic Staff Colleges is to serve as nodal centers in certain identified 
universities for the purpose to offer orientation and refresher courses for academic and 
professional development of the faculty of universities and colleges to newer concerns in 
educational thought and pedagogy besides advanced level programs in university 
disciplines of teaching and research. The objective of the scheme is that the Tata Institute 
of Science and Economic Political Weekly would formulate a 10 days Modular Course for 
the So cial Scientists to enable them to learn Research Methodology and also motivate 
them for Research Publications.Eligibility Criteria - Each Modular Course may have 
approximately 50 participants and they may be programmed 4 times in a year with 2 
programs at e ach of the Academic Staff College(s). The invitees /participants may be 
Assistant Professor(s)/ (lecturer(s) from Undergraduate Colleges and Universities. 
In addition to above, other institutes like IITs, IIITs etc have a system of rolling 
advertisement fo r filling up of faculty position throughout the year.  The purpose of rolling 
advertisement is to attract technically qualified young research scholars in teaching profession.  
Government has approved a flexi cadre faculty -student ratio of 1:10 in IITs.  T his enables IITs to 
adjust the faculty position in accordance with student strength. Thus, they require no specific 
approval for filling up of the faculty positions within the sanctioned 1:10 ratio. 
 The Pay Level granted to Faculties of IITs are competiti vely higher to attract right talent 
into teaching profession.  Besides, the faculties are allowed to have project consultancies; they are 
eligible for Start -up grant and Cumulative Professional Development Assistance (CPDA). To 
fulfill a long perceived nee d of preparing senior faculty, such as Deans, Head of Departments for 
future governance roles as leaders in academic institutions, Leadership for Academicians 
Programme (LEAP) is also being implemented. 
Further Comments of the Committee  
The Committee is of the opinion that the current system of evaluation is ineffective 
and failed to bring in aspiring youths to teaching profession. The National Eligibility Test 
(NET), should be transformed and re -invented in order to cater to new paradigm s of 
teaching and research. Further, there should be a mechanism to monitor  Faculty Induction 
and Development, to meet the faculty dearth in par with the rise in gross enrolment ratio 

(GER). As per the All India Survey on Higher Education  2018-19, only 2.5% Colleges run 
Ph.D. programme and 34.9% Colleges run Post Graduate Level  programmes. Out of the 
79.8% of the students enrolled in Undergraduate level programme , only 0.5% students are 
enrolled in Ph.D. which indicates the relatively low number of  PhDs and post graduates in 
the country. The deficiencies in research in the higher education sector therefore need a 
priority based approach to remove the hurdles and to promote the research dimensions and 
its importance.  
WOMEN EMPOWERMENT AND EDUCATION 
Observation/recommendation 
5.  The Committee observes that Higher education provided to women would mean 
independence in decision making and economic independence. It would develop capabilities to 
discharge duties and responsibilities in the fields of social, economic, political and cultural 
grounds.  
(Para-8.3) 
Action Taken 
The National Policy on Education (NPE), 1986, as revised in 1992 and further revised New 
Education Policy in 2020, a path breaking policy document, articulates the Government of Ind ia‟s 
unequivocal commitment, that “Education will be used as an agent of basic change in the status of 
women. In order to neutralize the accumulated distortions of the past, there will be a well -
conceived edge of women. This will be an act of faith and soc ial engineering…. The removal of 
women‟s illiteracy and obstacles inhibiting their services, setting time targets and effective 
monitoring…” 
It has always been a constant endeavour of the Department of Higher Education to frame 
different schemes and projects to ensure larger participation and enrolment of women.  Therefore, 
reducing the gender gap in higher education is a focus area.  There has been a phenomenal growth 
in enrolment of women students in higher education in the country. The share of girl‟s enrolment 
which was less than 10% of the total enrolment on the eve of independence has been increased to 
46.23% in the academic year 2015 -16. The GER for both Male and Female has an  increasing 
trend. The Gender gap in GER has also decreased during the period 2010 to 2015.  
Gender Budget cell is constituted with the intention of implementation and committing to 
various Gender Responsive Budgeting (GRB) initiatives with the objective o f influencing and 
effecting a change in Ministry‟s policies, programmes in a way that could tackle gender 

imbalances, promote gender equality and development and ensure that public resources through 
the Ministry budget. 
The Gender Budget Cell should compri se a cohesive group of senior/ middle level officers 
from the Plan, Policy, Coordination, Budget and Accounts Division of the Ministry concerned. 
This group should be headed by an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary. The functions and 
working of the GRB may be reviewed at least once a quarter at the level of Secretary/ Additional 
Secretary of the Department.   
 The Gender Budget Cell in the Ministry has been re -constituted on 7th September, 2020 
with Joint Secretary (Higher Education) as Chairperson. 
 
 
Access to Higher Education 
Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan  (RUSA), 
State Governments are encouraged to address the issues of equity, access and quality of higher 
education by seeking central support under the scheme. Inter alia, central assistance is provided for 
creation of Universities either through upgradation of existing autonomous colleges or through 
clustering of colleges.  
Till date, central assistance for creation of Universities through (i) Upgrada tion of Rama 
Devi Women‟s Autonomous College, Odisha & Jamshedpur Women‟s College, Jharkhand and (ii) 
creation of Maharani Cluster University, Bengaluru through Clustering of Colleges have been 
approved under RUSA. For each of these Universities, an amount  of Rs. 55 crores has been 
approved under the scheme including both central and State share.  
Furthermore, under the scheme, various other Women‟s Universities have been supported 
under other components such as infrastructure Grants to Universities and Gra nts for Equity 
Initiatives. 
Scholarships / Aids/ Facilities for Women  
The scheme of „Swami Vivekananda Single Girl Child Fellowship for Research in Social 
Sciences‟ was started in 2014 -15 to encourage women to pursue Ph.D. in Social Sciences 
including Humanities and Languages. Since the number of slots has not been limited/fixed, all the 
applicants, who are found eligible, are given fellowship to pursue research leading to award to 
Ph.D. For the selection year 2018 -19, UGC has awarded the fellowship to 269  women. Further, to 

cover more women scholars, UGC has decided to extend the ambit of this scheme for all the 
streams, beginning 2019-20. 
The scheme namely „P.G. Indira Gandhi Scholarship for Single Girl Child‟ is in inception 
since 2006 -07 and envisaged t o provide financial assistance to selected candidates being Single 
Girl Child for pursuing Post -graduation on full time/regular basis in Higher Educational 
Institutions in India. Since this is also an incentive scheme, there is no cap on the number of 
selections. Therefore, all the eligible applicants receive scholarship under this scheme. For the 
selection year 2018-19, UGC has selected 2445 girls under the scheme.  
UGC has already initiated the process of revision of guidelines of various 
scholarship/fellowship schemes including (i) Post Doctoral Fellowship for Women Candidates (ii) 
Swami Vivekananda Single Girl Child Fellowship for Research in Social Sciences (iii) P.G. Indira 
Gandhi Scholarship for Single Girl Child‟. It is contemplated t o increase the slots to increase the 
participation of women in higher studies. 
"With a view to improving female enrollment in the B.Tech Programmes in IITs, a 
Committee under the chairmanship of Director, IIT -Mandi was constituted by the Joint Admission 
Board (JAB) to suggest suitable measures. The recommendations of the Committee were 
considered by the IIT Council in its 51st meeting held on 28.04.2017 and decided to increase 
female enrollment from 8% in 2016 to 14% in 2018 -19, 17% in 2019 -20 and 20% in 20 20-21 by 
creating supernumerary seats. As per recommendation, 800 & 1122 supernumerary seats were 
created in 2018-19 and 2019-20 respectively. 
Further Comments of the Committee 
The Committee observes that ideally when the women acquire higher education, they 
should attract higher labour force participation. However, the women’s educational status 
even today has a linear relationship with labour force participation. The Committee would 
like to know the specific steps taken by the Department to curb this situation and the frame 
work developed to adopt policies to ensure that economic and social independence of women. 
The Committee may also be appraised about the status of reservation schemes for women in 
doctoral and post doctoral streams.  
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING AGENCY (HEFA) 
Observations/Recommendations 
5. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department for building and improving 

the infrastructure in Higher Educational Institutions. However, the Committee would like to point 
out that after the disbursal of loan the Department should have a monitoring mechanism for the 
expenditure of the funds provided to institutions. The Committee further recommends that the 
funds under HEFA should not just be used for revenue generation projects but also f or enhancing 
the research output in HEI. 
(Para-10.4) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 With regard to the monitoring mechanism for the expenditure of funds provided to 
institutions through HEFA, the HEFA Board already has a Project Monitoring Committee 
(comprising of Directors in the HEFA Board and this Ministry‟s representa tives) that regularly 
monitors not only the expenditure of HEFA funds but also the execution of HEFA funded projects 
across educational institutions. The Dept. of Higher Education will be also putt ing in place a full -
fledged Project Monitoring Unit in the Ministry to monitor the financial and physical progress of 
all HEFA funded projects. Further, under the HEFA framework, funding for research and research 
related equipment is also provided to educa tional Institutions, apart from revenue generation 
projects. 
Further Comments of the Committee 
The Committee is not satisfied w ith the reply of the Department.  Firstly, it is 
gathered that a full-fledged Project Monitoring Unit in the Ministry to monitor the financial 
and physical progress of all HEFA funded projects  is yet to be constituted. However, no 
information or clarification has been given by the Department regarding the time period for 
constituting the Monitoring Unit. Secondly, the reply does not throw any light on the number 
of projects sanctioned/ funded under the HEFA. Further , there is no clarity as to whether  
the sanctioning / funding was given for research purpose or for procuring research related 
equipments . The Committee desires that the  Department may share the above details with 
the Committee.  
  
 
 

 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
NIL 
 
 
  

 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO (GER) 
The Committee observes that, regardless of the umpteen numbers of schemes and 
initiatives explained, the share of enrolled SCs/STs still continue to be under -represented 
with respect to their share in the total population. As per the AISHE Report (2018 -2019) the 
highest numbers of students are  enrolled at Under Graduate level across India.   Out of the 
79.8% of the total enrolments, the Scheduled Casts students constitute only 14.9% and 
Scheduled Tribes students  constitute only 5.5% of the total  enrolment. Further, the 
percentage of SC/ST students enrolled in Post graduate programmes and Integrated 
Ph.Ds./Ph.Ds are not known.  Most of the Colleges run only Under Graduate  level 
programmes. Only 2.5% of Colleges run Ph.D. level  programmes and 34.9% of colleges run 
Post Graduate Level  programmes. Further there is a wider disparity in the GER in higher 
education in India across men and women and region wise, reflecting a significant imbalance 
within the higher education system . The Committee therefore, feels that the measures and 
schemes explained by UGC remain either underutilised or un -implemented. The Committee 
therefore proposes an outcome-based approach in higher education sector. The Committee 
may also be appraised about the status of the Revitalising  Infrastructure and Systems in 
Education (RISE) scheme which was introduced in 2018 with an aim to provide low -cost 
funds to government higher  educational institutions to expand and build new infrastructure  
and also regarding the implementation of the scheme of 10% reservation for Economically 
Weaker Section. 
 (Para-3.5) 
NMEICT, SWAYAM, MOOCs 
 The Committee sincerely appreciates the efforts undertaken by the D/o Higher 
Education in the expansion and propagation of SWAYAM courses through NPTEL. 
However, the Committee notes that the courses completed do not feed into a degree or other 
qualification, but are self -contained. The Committee therefore would like to be updated on 
the specific concern raised by it previously regarding the validity of the ‘Verified Certificate’ 
issued after successful completion of courses online. The Committee would also like to know 

about the feasibility of offering online t echnical courses that needs physical/ practical 
exposures.  
(Paras- 4.14,4.18) 
FACULTY POSITION  
The Committee would like be appraised about the status of faculty recruitment as on 
today, the responses received from the Colleges and Universities in this regard, the number 
of vacancies filled till date and the data on c ontractual appointments. The Committee may 
also be appr ised about the infringing factors in faculty recruitment that make the process 
difficult. The Committee feels that f aculty dearth can only be resolved if the reasons and the 
consequences are clear .  It is importa nt that the shortage of faculties in the HEIs should be 
rectified as early as possible as it may prevent education services from expanding to meet the 
rising demands.  
(Para- 7.6) 
The Committee is of the opinion that the current system of evaluation is ineffective 
and failed to bring in aspiring youths to teaching profession. The National Eligibility Test 
(NET), should be transformed and re -invented in order to cater to new paradigms of 
teaching and research. Further, there should be a mechanism to mo nitor Faculty Induction 
and Development, to meet the faculty dearth in par with the rise in gross enrolment ratio 
(GER). As per the All India Survey on Higher Education  2018-19, only 2.5% Colleges run 
Ph.D. programme and 34.9% Colleges run Post Graduate Le vel programmes, indicating 
relatively low number of PhDs  and post graduates in the country. The deficiencies in 
research in the higher education sector therefore need a priority based approach to remove 
the hurdles and to promote the research dimensions and its importance.   
(Paras- 7.5, 7.7&7.8) 
WOMEN EMPOWERMENT AND EDUCATION 
The Committee observes that ideally when the women acquire higher education , they 
should attract higher labour force participation. However, the women’s educational status 
even today has a linear relationship with labour force participation. The Committee would 
like to know the specific steps taken by the Department to curb this situation and the frame 
work developed to adopt policies to ensure that economic and social independence of women. 

The Committee may also be appraised about the status of reservation schemes for women in 
doctoral and post doctoral streams. 
(Para- 8.3) 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING AGENCY (HEFA) 
The Committee is not satisfied w ith the reply of the Department.  Firstly, it is 
gathered that a full-fledged Project Monitoring Unit in the Ministry to monitor the financial 
and physical progress of all HEFA funded projects is yet to be constituted. However, no 
information or clarification has been given by the Department reading the time period for 
constituting the Monitoring Unit. Secondly, the reply does not throw any light on the number 
of projects sanctioned/ fu nded under the HEFA. Further, there is no clarity as to whether  
the sanctioning / funding was given for research purpose or for procuring research related 
equipments . The Committee desires that the Department may share the above details with 
the Committee.  
(Para- 10.4)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND 
SPORTS 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
      The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met 
at 2.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 21st January, 2021 in Committee Room 'A', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
         MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Smt. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
6. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
7. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Rajendra Agarwal 
9. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
10. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
11. Shri Balak Nath 
12. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
13. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
14. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
16. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
17. Shri S. Venkatesan 
    
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
    Dr.   Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
  Shri   Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
  Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
  Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
   
  Witnesses 
  * * *  
 
  * * *    
  * * *  
  * * *  
* * *  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members present in the sitting and 
informed about notification of Subjects identified by the Committee in Rajya 
Sabha and Lok Sabha Bulletins on 18th January, 2021. He apprised that four 
organizations have been invited for consultations on the Subject – “*    * * ”. 
The Committee thereafter took up for consideration three draft Reports relating 
to Action Taken Notes of * * *  and Department of Higher Education 
and *     * * on their respective Demand for Grants (2020-21). The 
Committee adopted those Reports without any modifications. The Committee 
then decided to present those Reports along with *     * * on 24th December, 
2020 on virtual mode, to both the Houses of Parliament on Tuesday, 2nd 
February, 2021. 
3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Dr. Sasmit 
Patra to present those Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
and in his absence, Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu to present those Reports 
to the Lok Sabha. 
 
 * Pertains to other matter 

4. * * *  
5. * * *  
6. * * *  
7. * * *  
8. * * *  
9. * * *  
10. * * * 
11. * * *  
12. * * *  
13. * * *  
14. * * *  
15. The Verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
16. The meeting adjourned at 4.30 PM. 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                      ASHOK K.SAHOO 
21st January, 2021.                                                                        
DIRECTOR  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 