PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON- HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

{Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Twenty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12.03.96)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12.03.96)

wat बने

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 1996/Phalguna, 1917 (Saka)


ae A 7 : RE Augae AYEES

पतन War. ‘

eA N10: glad ROT. 00



CONTENTS

PAGES
(COMPOSITION OF THE COMMUTTIEE<¢.<.-.:-cccssoseesssutsasdonceadacbteeastsedeveseionsvonetcseveaate (i)-(ii)
INTRODUCTION 5505 5c:ssecease5sssece दर कम पक आइना रद 4« 7४ पदक लत ea scat teen eee चित (iii)
Cuapter I have Mi 1-25
Cuarter IL Recommendations/Observations that have been accepte :
Dy: ie की 5.5055 ctssasdercekebarconsptedenecenareseaaintan 26-47
Cuapter वा Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies 48-61
CxHarTER 1५ Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies’of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee a 62
Cuarrer V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Government has not given any reply ..............००००००००००००००० 63
MINUTES | 52 oo) Waceecengsscuansostenesseveeveuscsecenensasduassccocssdsesousiegecasedaceessse 64-65


Xe 4;
Ny
i] ‘ | :
2TUSTAOD हे
के |
1)-1) 2. +ऑाककाएओ छा 40 vor204m02
{i ) f  AOMIUGOXT
AS I HETIARD
beatqaad li अ874%४७०
gine “sto 177४ gnoisevicad hnoionemanoss 5 I arn
iaaminsvOO. SIT 10 wiv mm sUzitg GI s1izs> ton’ २२००
10-8४ !, दिल मर हे py. 2४३०1
19 nsqed He sa Ape rape a. VP अ&7%#%४2
798 7950 Jon (38४73700 of} १5 बीत ५5
giv, Ya: eaqear a shoikyised Senoilnbasituno> V Mate HO
sen लक 200: vios¥yas nsvig 304 ad ingen
é 01१२२ ३५० शकिए ३०11 2100/5 शा फल ।
a

3222 500 0 द प५० ७०७० | 11१०१ हा"


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA :

2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri O.P. Kohli

6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

8. Shri Md. Salim

9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. 1.6. Sanadi

11. Shri, Ashoke Kumar Sen

12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr. ५. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

. 21. Vacant

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

24. Shri 2. M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Vacant

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

(i)



INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on
its behalf, present this Thirty-seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the ©
recommendations contained in its 22nd Report on “Demands for Grants”''(1995-96) of
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education).

2. The Twenty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 28th April,
1995 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th April, 1995. Replies of Government on the
recommendations contained in the report, received from the Department of Education were
meee by the Committee and this report was adopted at its sitting held on 11th March,
1996. : ?

New DELHI; hid UPENDRA
11th March, 1996° Chairman,
ee कक कक ३३०५०+० Committee on Human Resource
Phalguna 1917 (Saka) Development.

ii)



CHAPTER-I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Twenty-second Report on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education) for the year 1995-96,
which was presented to Rajya Sabha on 28.4.95 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
28.4.95.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Govern-
ment: Para 2.2, 2.5, 2.8, 2,10, 2.13, 2.14, 2.15, 2.19, 2.20, 2.21, 2.24, 2.25,
3.29, 3.1, 3.3, 3,8; 3,13; 307 3:18,:3:19;,3.23, 3:24; 3.00; 3-20; 3-21; 3.33
3.34,'3.35;'3.36;-3.37,:4.4, 4.7, 4.8, 5A, 5.2,'5.3,:5.4,'5.6, 6.1,.6:2, 6.3; 6.4,
6.5, 6.6, 6.8, 6.9. 46

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para 2.1, 2.3, 2.9, 2.16, 2.18,
2.22, 2:23) 2:20; 2.28, 3.6 3:0, 3.18, 3:12, 3.14. 3.15,.%33 S:2e) B18) S00),
3.40, 4.1, 4.3, 4.5, 4.6, 4.11, 5.5, 7.2. oo.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Govern-
ment have not been accepted by the Committee: Para 2.4, 2.6, 2.7, 2.11,
31॥2,1950 2.295. 2-30, 3.3, 34:%5: 44% 3.:10;.3.16, 73:20, 3:29,°3.31, 3.32;
3.38, 3.39, 4.2, 4.9, 4.10, 4.12, 5.7, 6.7, 7,1. 227

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited: nil

3. The Committee will now deal with some of its recommendations on which the Action
Taken Note of the Government has not been accepted by the Committee:

Para No. Text of the Para Comments
of the

Report

1 2 3

Elementary Education

2.4

The Committee notes that on one
side we have States such as Kerala
which have achieved Universal
literacy as well as Universal
Elementary Education (UEE) in
terms of school participation, and
on the other side we have States
like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa

The State Governments and Union
Territories have initiated a number
of steps to achieve the target of
universalisation by the turn of this
century. Massive- enrolment drives
are launched every year at the
beginning of the academic session
involving teachers, parents, Mahila



2

3

and Madhya Pradesh where the
situation is highly unsatisfactory.
The Committee feels that the efforts
made so far are not sufficient to
bring about the required change and
to achieve targets of universal
enrolment, incorporated in the 8th
Five Year Plan. The Committee
desires that steps need to be taken
to increase enrolment.

Mandals, Gram Sevikas, Anganwadi
workers and other village level
functionaries. Mass media is being
utilised to spread the message to
every nook and corner. Incentive
schemes such as supply of free
uniforms, free text books,
attendance scholarships etc. have
been launched, — specifically for
children belonging to poor families.
Micro Planning Surveys have been
conducted to identify the need for
opening new primary schools or
upgrading primary schools to upper
primary. Recruitment of teachers
has been given impetus.

On 3rd and 4th April, .1995,
Conference of Education Secretaries
and Ministers was convened to

deliberate upon the need to
streamline the delivery system so
that key Centrally Sponsored

Schemes like Operation Blackboard,
Non-formal Education, District
Institutes of Education and Training
are effectively implemented. The
States were requested to address the
problems of teacher absentism, and
teacher motivation, and work
towards improved curriculum, text
books and child-friendly school
environment. Emphasising a greater
participation of local bodies and
VECs, which might result in better
enrolment and retention, Minister of
Human Resource Development
requested the Education Ministers
of States and UTs to chalk out time-

bound action plans and set up
machinery to closely monitor
implementation. Many State

Governments have prepared these
plans. Implementation of National
Programme of Nutritional Support
to Primary Education, which was
launched on 15th August, 1995
would also provide necessary fillip
to enrolment and retention.



1

Comments of the Committee

The Committee does not find perceptible change in the gross enrolment ratio,
particularly in respect of U.P., Bihar, M.P. and Orissa and the Secretary, Education, has
agreed with this view. The Committee reiterates its recommendation for stepping up
enrolment. All the State Governments should be persuaded to chalk out action plans and
launch concerted drives to implement them.

Drop-Outs
2.6

The Committee feels that the issue
of drop-outs is a very serious
problem. The Committee observes
with disappointment that the efforts
made so far, particularly after the
announcement of the New
Education Policy, have not yielded
the desired results. In this regard,
the Committee suggests that a multi-
pronged strategy be adopted and
efforts should be made for
integration of various schemes with
those under implementation by the
Department of Women and Child
Development and the Ministry of
Rural Development.

The Minister of Human Resource
Development convened a_ special
meeting of Education Ministers on
4th April 1995 in New Delhi to
discuss the problem of drop-out and
chalk-out specific time-bound action
plans. There was a consensus in the
meeting that the problem of drop
out is a critical question which needs
to be tackled immediately and
effectively. A multi-pronged
approach needs to be adopted with
proper linkages and integration of
various schemes. Firstly, it was
decided that school environment
needs to be improved further with
better infrastructure facilities,
through proper implementation of
Operation Blackboard Scheme and
further supplementation by local
bodies. Secondly, there was a need
to review curriculum and text books
to bring about changes with specific
purpose to reduce the content and
academic burden making it more
appropriate for the relevant age and
grade in pursuance of reports of
Professor Yashpal Committee and
Dave Committee on MLLs. Thirdly,
teacher orientation programmes in
DIETs and introduction of Special
Programme like SOPT (Special
Orientation Programme for Primary
Teachers) in order to improve
teacher competency and
empowerment of teachers for better
child centred pedagogy. Fourthly,



3

Comments of the Committee

Centre should supplement the
efforts of the State Government in
provision of incentives for the
children belonging to poor families
or backward socio-economic
communities. Introduction of
National Programme of Nutritional
Support to Primary Education has
now been launched in pursuance of
the deliberations of this meeting.
Fifthly, State Governments and
Union Territories would look into
appropriate convergence between
the schemes of women and child
development and rural development
for integrated child development.

Reiterating its earlier recommendation for a multipronged strategy, the Committee
desires that the Department should implement the strategies evolved meticulously. The
Central Government should issue necessary guidelines to States for implementation of the
strategies evolved.

Resources
at

The Committee feels that
mobilisation of alternative resources
in the elementary education sector
needs to be further strengthened.
This would not only reduce the
burden on Government resources
but also create an environment of
responsibility and accountability
within the educational system,

Comments of the Committee

General.

The Commiittee’s recommendation for strengthening alternative resources in elementary
education sector has not been taken cognizance of in the reply. The Committee feels that
mobilisation of alternative resources is the ultimate solution for the problem of resource
crunch. The Committee reiterates its recommendation for identifying alternative sources.



1

Operation Black Board

ehh

The Committee, in its Fifth Report,
recommended steps to lessen the
weight of school bags at the primary,
level. The Department, while
explaining the action taken on the
recommendation, stated that wide-
ranging discussions had taken place
with Governments of States/Union
Territories on the recommendations
of the Yashpal Committee. The
Department also stated that a
consensus had already been
reached. The Committee desires
that suitable steps be taken for an
early implementation of the
recommendations of the Yashpal
Committee.

In order to closely monitor the
progress, . Ministry of Human
Resource Development constituted
a Monitoring Committee, under the
Chairmanship of Director, NCERT
to watch over the implementation of
the recommendations of the Yashpal
Committee to reduce the academic
burden on school children.

The first meeting of the Committee
was held on August 24, 1995 under
the Chairmanship of Prof. A.K.
Sharma, Director, NCERT in his
Chamber at 3 P.M. to:

(a) Discuss and finalize the draft
proforma prepared for the
purpose of monitoring.

(b) Suggest modalities for
carrying out monitoring of
implementation of recommen-
dations both with Central
and States agencies.

In this meeting the following
decisions were taken:

(i) In the = draft’ proforma
prepared for monitoring
modifications suggested by the
members should be
incorporated.

(ii) A letter should be sent to the
State Secretaries of Education
along with the proforma
requesting them to identify a
nodal person’ for the
Committee. The identified
person should be asked to
collect and submit the
information sought in the
proforma within a period of 3
weeks.



3

Comments of the Committee

(iii) The Central Agencies can be
requested to submit their
reports immediately to be
included in the first report.

(iv) Some short and quick research’
evaluation studies can be
undertaken to obtain some
empirical data in the context of
the status and impact vis-a-vis
the recommendations.

Action has already been taken on

the decisions of the Committee by

sending communications to all

StateYUTs and various agencies.

Most of the agencies have also

issued some instructions to the

schools or initiated some action with
respect to the recommendations. All
efforts are being made for an early
implementation of the
recommendations of the Committee.

Sending communications to State/Union Territories is not sufficient. The Department
should persuade them for early implementation of the recommendations of the Prof. Yash
Pal Committee.

2.12

The Committee is also unhappy to
note that only 55 percent of the
school rooms, targeted to be built
have been completed with major
backlog in Tamil Nadu. Kerala,
Assam, Gujarat. Orissa, Meghalaya
and Maharashtra. The Committee
recommends that the Department
should take up the matter with the
States concerned for early
completion of the target.

In order to accelerate the pace of
construction of school buildings, the
Department of Education — has
worked out in consultation with
Ministry of Rural Development a
funding pattern under Jawahar
Rozgar Yojana (JRY) wherein the
cost is almost equally — shared
between the Centre and the States.
Construction of School buildings has
also been made a high priority item
under the newly _ introduced
employment assurance scheme and
Intensive JRY programme. The
States have drawn up the action
plans to speed up construction
programme. As on date 1.5 lakhs
(57%) school rooms have been
constructed against the target of
2.63 lakh. 21 States have utilised



vv

3

Comments of the Committee

Rs. 181.00 crores from JRY funds
for school building construction
during the past five years.

On a clarification as to whether the funds allocated under JRY for construction of

school buildings are diverted to other purposes, the Secretary has stated that no such
diversion was reported. However, the Committee is not happy to note that out of 2.63 lakh
school rooms targeted for construction, only 1.5 lakhs have been constructed. The
Committee desires that the target should be achieved at the earliest.

Strengthening of Teacher Training Institutes

2.17

This is one of the schemes suffering
from the malady of underutilisation
of funds. During 1992-93 out of the
total allocation of Rs. 64.5 crores on
plan side. only Rs. 1.16 crores could
be utilised. Similarly. during 1994-95
out of Rs. 90 crores allocated. Rs.
83.75 crores was utilised. The
Committee feels that 1 trend
needs to be arrested. Explaining the
shortfall in the sanction of District
Institutes of Education and Training
(DIETs) during 1994-95. the
Department informed the
Committee that the shortfall was
due to lack of sufficient response
from the State Governments of
Arunachal Pradesh, Maharashtra
and West Bengal. which were the
only major States yet to be fully
covered under DIETs. The
Committee, in this regard,
recommends that the Department
should pursue the matter vigorously
with these three State Governments.

Comments of the Committee

Maharashtra are proposed to be

Comments

There has been no shortfall in the
actual expenditure incurred against
the Budget allocation in respect of
Teacher Education Scheme.

During 1992-93, against the Budget
allocation of Rs. 64.50 crores, actual
expenditure incurred was Rs. 82.96
crores and during 1993-94 the actual
expenditure was Rs. 70.04 crores
against plan allocation of Rs. 69.10
crores. There has been excess
expenditure during 1992-93 _and
1993-94 due to enthusiastic response
from States/UTs.

As regards expansion of the scheme
of DIETs to the States of Arunachal
Pradesh, Maharashtra and West
Bengal, as a result of constant
persuasion, the State Governments
of = Arunachal Pradesh and
Maharashtra have since formulated
schemes and ten DIETs in
Arunachal Pradesh and 15 in
Maharashtra are likely to ७९
sanctioned during 1995-96.

1995-96 Budget allocation of
Rs. 118.00 crore is 31% more than
previous year’s allocation of Rs. 90
crores.

The Committee has noted that 10 DIETs in Arunachal Pradesh and 15 DIETs in
ctioned in 1995-96. This target should be achieved

before the end of the current financial year. The Department should persuade West Bengal
also to fall in line.



2

Panchayati Raj Institutions and Elementary Education.

2.27

The Committee has noted that some
of the State Acts provide for
selection and appointment of
elementary school teachers,
instructors, etc. by the village
panchayats. However, many States
do not provide for this. The
Committee feels that atleast at the
elementary education level, the role
of Panchayats needs to be increased.
Explaining the steps taken in this
direction, the Secretary informed

the Committee that the Central
Advisory Board of Education had
constituted a Sub-Committee to
suggest. to the States to develop
possible models at village and taluk
levels, and its report was forwarded
to the States. The Department
should make all-out efforts,
including extending fiscal support,
to persuade the States to see that
necessary changes are incorporated.

Comments of the Committee

The Department of Education has
been monitoring and receiving
reports from the State
Governments/UT — Administrations
with respect to the establishment of
Panchayati Raj Institutions by them
and the setting up of the Village
Level Education Committees
(VECS). 13 State Governments and
3 UT Administrations have reported
that they have set up the Panchayati
Raj Institutions which — include
provision for Education. 9 State
Governments have __ established
VECs and another five have made
alternative arrangement: The
Department of Education — is
continuing to inter-act with States/
UTs in the matter further.

The Committee is constrained to note that only 9 States have established village education
Committees and another five States have made alternative arrangements. The Committee
feels that all the States should follow a uniform pattern. The Committee also desires that the
Department should pursue the matter vigorously and ensure that all the States agree to the
proposal at the earliest.

Mid-Day Meals

2.30

When the Committee drew the
attention of the Secretary,
Education, to the Mid-Day Meals
Scheme, the Secretary informed the
Committee that in pursuance of the
announcement made by the Finance
Minister in his Budget Speech, a
Committee was proposed to be set
up. He further stated that moda

A Committee under the
chairmanship of Union Education
Secretary was set up in April, 1995
to work out a _ scheme to
operationalise the Central
Government to participate in a
phased expansion of the mid-day
meal scheme. On the basis of the
recommendation of this Committee



Z

3

would be worked out in consultation
with various agence for early
operationalisation. ‘The Committee
takes note of the ‘fact
that Tamil Nadu has successfully
implemented this scheme. Earlier.
in some other statés. this, scheme
used to be handled by teachers with
the result that education suffered.
The Committee feels that the
scheme would better be handed
over to voluntary organisations/local
Mahila Mandals
Associations.

implementation.

which submitted their report in May
1995, approval of the Cabinet was
sought for launching a programme
of nutritional support 10 primary
education to cover the entire
country by 1997-98 in -a phased
manner. The Cabinet approved the
programme on July 28, 1995.

The National Programme रण
Nutritional Support to Primary
Education has been launched from
15 August 1995. Intended to give a
boost to universalisation of primary
education, by increasing enrolment,

retention und attendance — and
simultaneously impa on
nutrition of students in primary

classes (1-५), the programme is 10.
be implemented — through — local
bodies such as Panchayats and
Nagarpalikas. The programme will
cover children-in primary classes (1-
V) in all government, local bodies
and government aided schools in all
the States/UT's. Local bodies have
the flexibility to organise the
provision of — cooked/pre-cooked
wholesome food having a calorific
value equivalent to hundered grams.
of Wheat/Rice per student per day
by the schools or in association with
the school parent-teacher

committees. non government
organisations. | women/DWACRA
groups and other organisations.
Local bodies are expected 10

develop institutional arrangements
for providing cooked/pre-cooked
food within a period of two years
from the date of commencement of
the programme. However, in the
interim period, as a prelude to the
provision of cooked/pre-cooked
food. food grains at the rate of 3 kg.
per month per student may be
distributed to. all children in Ses
[1-५ subject to 8 minimum
attendance of 80%.

In 1995-96. the programme will
commence in all the 2368 Revamped



10

3

Public Distribution System (RPDS)/
Employment Assurance Scheme
(EAS) blocks and 40 Low Female
Literacy (LFL) blocks. In States like
Punjab which do not have EAS/
RPDS blocks the programme will
commence in LFL blocks, i.e.
blocks having female literacy rates
lower than the national average. In
states and UTs such as Goa, Delhi,
Pondicherry and Chandigarh, which
do not have RPDS or LFL blocks,
primary schools in notified slums
would be covered. In 1996-97, the
programme will be extended to all
the remaining 2005 LFL_ blocks,
with female literacy lower than the
national average. In 1997-98, the
programme will be extended to-.all
other primary schools.

Central support for this programme
still consists of (i) supply of food

grains free of cost, (ii)
reimbursement, through District
Rural Development — Agencies

(DRDAs), of transportation cost
from the nearest godown of the
Food Corporation of India at the
rate of Rs. 25८ per quintal and (iii)
coverage of remuneration. for
conversion of foodgrains cooked
food and expenditure on
construction of kitchen sheds
wherever necessary, under the
poverty alleviation schemes of
Ministry of Rural Development. All
the States and UTs have since
started implementation of the
Programme. While in 7. States
cooked meals are being served, in
rest of the States food grains are
being distributed. In case of Delhi,
processed food is being supplied.
States and Union Territories like
Tamil . Nadu, Gujarat, Kerala,
Karnataka and Pondicherry which
have been implementing Mid-day
Meals Programme in one form or



11

1 2 =)

the other have agreed to dovetail
the programmes with the central
programme. The States/UTs have
also been advised to shift the
resultant savings to other
programmes in elementary
education.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is of the view that distributing food grains would not serve the purpose
for which the scheme has been started and a time-bound programme is needed. Cooked hot
meals should be served in all schools. However. in the process of serving mid-day meals the
teachers should not be involved as it may affect the teaching work. The Committee
Teiterates its earlier recommendation for involvement of voluntary and women’s
organisations in the implementation of this scheme.

Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan

33 The Committee expresses its serious The present number of Kendriya
concern that out of the total 818 Vidyalayas is 838 after closure of
Kendriya Vidyalayas, only 293 one of the Project Kendriya
schools are presently in their Vidyalaya at Bhandaridah, Bihar.
permanent buildings. Out of 838 Kendriya Vidyalayas,

165 Kendriya Vidyalayas are in
Project Sector where sponsoring
agencies have to provide permanent
buildings. The present factual
position of the remaining 673
Vidyalayas which is the
responsibility of Kendriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan is as under:—
BREAK-UP
Kendriya Vidyalayas where
permanent building already
constructed by Kendriya
Vidyalaya Sangathan. 310

Kendriya Vidyalaya where
school building under
construction. 92
Kendriya Vidyalaya where
school building under
planning. 87

Kendriya Vidyalaya where
transfer of land/lease deed
execution is' pending. 184

673



1 2 3
3.4 The. Committee desires that the In respect of Kendriya Vidyalaya
construction of pucca buildings for Where land was transferred, the
the schools for which land has been construction of pucca buildings are
allotted may be started under planning and the construction
expeditiously. For those schools, for work will be initiated immediately
‘which land has not yet been allotted subject to availability of funds. At
by the sponsoring agencies, the present. 87 school buildings are
Department should make vigorous under planning. As regard transfer
and sincere efforts for early transfer of land in pending cases, sponsoring
of land. The Committee also agencies are being persuaded by
suggests that infrastructure, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan to
including play grounds should be honour their initial commitment.
provided comensurate with — the The progress is already — being
number of students. periodically reviewed in meeting

de with sponsors.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that the sponsoring agencies should be asked to provide
permanent buildings immediately. In future, no school should be opened in the project
sector unless the sponsoring agency provides permanent building.

35 The Committee is happy to’ note The funds provided under Plan
that the Planning Commission has Budget for the year — 1995-96
approved allocation of 1२६. 10.50 amounting to Rs. 10.5 crores against
crores for the Kendriya Vidyalaya the projection of Rs. 50 crores: are
Sangathan under plan budget for meagre. In view of short provision
1995-96 10 meet the expenditure of Plan funds, sufficient funds could
towards teacher training and not be allocated to various activities
creation of additional facilities in such as construction of — school
Kendriya Vidyalayas. ‘This amount buildings/staff quarters, -develop-
is meagre as compared to the ment of play grounds. General
number of schools. and. therefore. Science — laboratories, | Computer
needs to be suitably increased. Literacy Programmes, Com-

puterisation of information systems

at Headquarter, Regional Offices
and Kendriya Vidyalayas, sufficient
training facilities to the teachers
through = Training Institutes’ ete.
There is an urgent need - for
enhanced allocation under शिक्षा
Budget.

Comments of the Committee

It is unfortunate that sufficient funds could not be provided for various. activities,
including teachers training, development of play-fields, laboratories, etc. The Department
should convince. the Planning Commission about the necessity of higher allocation for
Kendriya Vidyalayas.



1

13

is)

Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti

3.9)

3.10

The pass percentage of students of
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti at the
CBSE Examination for the last two
years is as given below:

Year Class X Class XI
1993 93.70% 66.80%
1994 93.80% 78.37%

The Committee notes that even
though the Navodaya Vidyalayas
were set up with much fanfare and
high ideals, the pass percentage in
class XIL has not yet crossed even
80% while ordinary schools are
registering 90% to 95% results. The
Committee feels that effective steps
need to be taken to improve the
performance in this regard.

Comments of the Committee

Pass percentage of NVS in the
CBSE public examination of 1995
are as follows:

Class XII 82% Class X 82.6%
Both are above 80%

These are well above the
Government schools such as Delhi
Administration schools affiliated to
CBSE and are at par with KVS
results.

The Committee is concerned over the complacency of the Department regarding the

results. Navodaya Vidyalayas were started as model schools in the country and they cannot
be compared with Central schools and other Government schools by. any stretch of
imagination. The Department should ensure that these schools compete with the best public
schools, in terms of results and show better performance as is expected of them.

National Open School

3.16

The Committee has also noted that
the National Open School charges
fees from the | students. The
Committee feels that the coaching
from National Open School needs to
be made free of charge to encourage
more students.

National Open School admits
students both under the general
category as well as exempt
categories, consisting of the SC/ST,
ex-servicemen, handicapped and
women students etc. About 60% of
the students of National Open
School _ received partial _—fee
exemption. Fee concession ranges
from 26% to 38% as compared to
the general category. The subsidies
granted by National Open School to
these exempted categories in fees
amount to around Rs. 100.00 lakhs
per year at the present level of
enrolment and fee structure. If the
open school education is made free



14

1 2 3

of charge, the Government would
:need to fully support the subsidy on
this account. The National Open
School is not an organisation fully
funded by the Government. The
National Open School gets from the
Government only that amount by
which its income falls short of its
expenditure. The total of Plan and
Non-Plan grants of National Open
School from the Government is
equal to the deficit ie. the
difference between total expenditure
and total income. National Open
School generates its own funds from
fees etc. In case, free open
education to all categories of
students including general is to be
provided, the quantum of
government grants would have to be
increased with the increasing trend
of enrolment.

The present fee structure . of
National Open School is inclusive of
the cost of study material, personal
contact programmes, facility of labs,
access to video and _ audio
magazine, e lishment and
infrastructure. It is felt that whereas
the idea of making open school
education free is laudable, it may be
desirable to charge students the’ cost
of study material to ensure their
involvement and participation which
is necessary for the successful
implementation of the programme.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee has noted the view of the Department that if the open school education
is made free, the Government would need to fully meet the subsidy. However, the
Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation for making open school education free and
desires that the Government may provide subsidy on this account, if necessary.

Educational Technology

3.20 The Committee feels that the Under the Educational Technology
schools could be supplied TVs, Scheme States/Union Territories are
VCPs and Video Cassettes with being supplied with CTVs/RCCPs



15

2

3

quality programmes on education.
Such schemes may be implemented
in other parts of the country on the
pattern of the one implemented by
Andhra Pradesh. The Committee
agrees that provision of TVs, VCPs
and VCRs would involve additional
expenditure. The Committee
recommends that the Department
may work out the scheme and seek
suitable additional funds at RE
stage.

Comments of the Committee
In the modern era, TV-and new technology are part and parcel of our life style and are
.easily acceptable, media of instruction. Besides curriculum, audio-visual. programmes could
also be prepared on national leaders and national integration etc. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that the matter be examined and a detailed proposal be prepared for
consideration by the Planning Commission for funds in the 9th Five Year Plan.

N.C.E.R.T.
329.

The Committee also desires that the
final report of the Sixth All India
Educational Survey should be
completed at the earliest.

to Upper Primary and Primary
schools respectively. There .is no
provision for VCPs and Video
Cassettes and for new instrument of
service the approval of Ministry. of
Finance is to be obtained. To
comply with the recommendation of
the Committee, the matter will be
taken up with; Finance.

The matter was taken up with
Financé. The Finance observed that
the proposal involves an
additional expenditure of Rs. 124
crores and as such they wanted to

“know and as whether it is really

necessary to provide VCPs. They
further wanted to know as to’ who
will prepare programmes to be used
in VCPs on such a large scale.

Accordingly, the matter was
taken up with the CIET to examine
whether it is possible to produce
programmes on such a- large scale
and if so, how mu¢h amount will be
involved for production of these
additional Programmes. The matter
is being examined by CIET. The
recommendations made by the
Committee are being taken up for
consideration while formulating
requirements for the 1Xth Five Year
Plan.

The 6th All India Educational
Survey (AIES) is a joint endeavour
of the NCERT, NIC and the State/
UT Governments. The date of
reference of 6th AIES is 30.9.93.



16

Comments of the Committee

The computer and NICNET
facilities of the NIC are being used
in the 6th AJIES for efficient
processing and tabulation of data
and dissemination of information. In
addition to assess the present
position of educational facilities at
various school stages and bring out
the survey report in time, the Sixth
All India Educational Survey aims
to build up a database of school
education at the District and State
headquarters to facilitate annual
updating necessary for planning end
implementation of quantitative and
qualitative improvement in
variegated areas of school education
at micro and macro levels by the
Central and State/UT Govern-
ments.

The 6th ALES was to be completed
by the end of 1995, but inspite of
best efforts, various survey
operations, like data scrutiny, data
entry, error correction took more
time than visualised initially. As per
the information received from
NCERT, the data validation. is at
the final stages in 18 States/UTs
whereas the data validation may
take more time in the remaining
States/UTs. It is expected that the
Survey will be completed by the
middle of the 1996.

The Committee is not happy to note that the All India Educational Survey could not be

completed by the end of 1995 as scheduled. NCERT should stick to at least the revised

schedule and complete it by the Middle of 1996.

Vocationalisation of Secondary Education

3.31

Explaining the funding procedure,
the Department stated that under
the centrally sponsored scheme of
vocational education, funds are

The need for expeditious release of
funds at various levels and _ its
utilisation ina time bound manner
has been emphasised upon the



17

2

3

3.32

released to States/UTs on the basis
of proposals received from them,
alongwith details of utilisation of
funds released in the earlier years.

However, the Committee regrets
that several States/UTs have large
sums of unspent balance with them.
Many of the posts sanctioned at
different levels have not been filled
up. The Committee desires that suit-
able measures be taken to ensure
full utilisation of money allocated
and filling up of vacant posts at the
earliest.

Comments of the Committee

States regularly during various
review meetings and through
constant reminders. Last such
meeting was conducted in
December, 1995 and January, 1996.

As most of the States were finding it
difficult to bear their part of the
liability in creation of management
structure at various levels, the
States/UTs have been provided the
option from this year to claim 100%
Central assistance for core posts
identified at each level.

The Committee notes with concern that the extent of States’ participation is not upto

expectations. In view of the new offer of the Department for 100% Central assistance for
core posts, the Committee hopes that the States would take the initiative, atleast now. The
Department should stress upon the States to come forward with their proposals.

Physical Education

3.38

The Committee deeply regrets that
not much is being done in the field
of physical education in the schools.
In fact, the Committee is surprised
to learn that many States are
considering as to whether physical
education should be made
compulsory component of
Secondary Education or not. The
Committee has noted that the
Central Advisory Board of
Education appointed a  Sub-
Committee, presided over by Shri
K.P. Singh Deo, Minister of
Information & Broadcasting, and its
Teport has been accepted by the
CABE. The important recommen-
dations of the Sub-committee
are:

A monitoring Committee to review
the progress of implementation of
the recommendations of the CABE
Sub-Committee on Sports and
Physical Education have been set up
under the Chairmanship of Shri
A.K. Pandya, Retd. Secretary of
Government of India.

The Committee has so far met twice
and is scheduled to meet for the
third time on 30.1.96 at Jawaharlal
Nehru Stadium, sports Authority of
India. Efforts are being made to
implement the proposals in
Kendriya Vidyalayas and Navodaya
Vidyalayas first and thereafter to
extend the facilities to other schools
in the Country.



18

2

3

3.39

“Eyery student and teacher should
be subjected to a_ nationally
determined physical fitness test and
it should be a _ compulsory
requirement that every student/
teacher does indeed pass the fitness
test every year; physical education
and sports should be assigned atleast
40 minutes every day, preferably as
the first period daily, under
supervision of a trained teacher;
every school should have facilities
for a number of sports so that
students can participate regularly in
one or the other; and yoga practice
should be given a great deal of
emphasis in pre-service and in-
service teacher training courses.”

The Committee desires that these
recommendations of the  Sub-
Committee be conveyed to the
States for early implementation.

The Committee feels that many
schools do not have the basic
facilities for physical education at all
and this is the main reason for the
failure of the scheme. The
Committee recommends that the
Department should make all-out
efforts to provide the necessary
facilities. The Committee also feels
that the allocation of Rs.60 lakhs
would, in no way, be sufficient for
the purpose and needs to be suitably
increased.

Comments of the Committee

The provision of Rs. 60.00 lakhs
under the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme of Introduction of Yoga in
Schools is only for training of
teachers in Yoga through Yoga
Institutions of repute. and for
building infrastructure necessary for
the purpose in those Institutions.
The Scheme is not meant for
providing faci in schools for
Physical Education.

The Committee is of the view that not much is being done under the head Physical

Education. The Committee desires that the implementation of the recommendations of
CABE Sub-Committee should be taken up with NCERT and the State Governments and
other agencies for meticulous and early implementation.



19

if

2

University and Higher Education

4.2

When the Department was asked to
explain the measures taken on the
recommendations of Punnayya
Committee, the Committee was in-
formed that in pursuance of the

_ fecommendations thereof, the
“University Grants Commission had

constituted another Committee to
develop a specific formula in this
regard. The Committee is of the
opinion that there should be a wider
discussion on Punnayya Committee's
recommendations and an early
decision be taken on the norms to
be adopted.

Comments of the Committee

The Pylee Committee has not yet
submitted its report. UGC has been
requested to advise the Committee
to submit its report expeditiously.

The Pylee Committee should be asked to submit its report expeditiously. The proposal

to amend UGC Act to empower the Commission to regulate fee structure in higher

educational institutions is a positive step. An early decision should be taken in the matter
and the amendment be brought forward before the Parliament at the earliest.

Indian Institute of Advanced Study

49

The Plan allocation for this Institute
has been increased from Rs.35 lakhs
to Rs.93 lakhs in RE in 1994-95.
The plan allocation for BE for 1995-
96 is Rs.4 crores, when asked to
explain this quantum jump in the
allocation, the Department stated
that the Institute was housed in the
erstwhile Viceregal Lodge (now
Rashtrapati Niwas) at Shimla, and
the building developed cracks and
was generally in need of special
repairs. A programme for such
repairs has been drawn up in
consultation with the INTACH and
the Central Public Works
Department, and an amount of Rs.
3 crores was likely to be spent for
the purpose during 1995-96, the
Department added. The renovation

Indian Institute of Advanced Study,
Shimla has informed that the preser-
vation and restoration work of the
Rashtrapati Niwas building has been
planned to be executed in phases.

A Technical Committee was
constituted by the Institute under
the Chairmanship of Prof. T.R.
Natesan, had a detailed discussion
of (i) the INTACH‘S proposal for
consultancy fee and (ii) the revised
estimates of Rs. 3 crores (approx.).
In response to the 1189 request for
defining the scope of the work and
the services to be provided by them,
the Indian National Trust of Art
and Cultural Heritage (INTACH)
conveyed a detailed schedule of
services which include:



1 2 3
work should be completed as early (a) preparation of detailed
as possible to prevent further drawings for internal relocation
damage to the historic building. of spaces/rationalisation of the
uses based on _ client's
requirements;

(b) submission of detailed
solutions with working drawing
for all aspects covered in the
scope above;

(c) identifying phases of work in
the categories of “immediate”,
“urgent” and “necessary”;

(d) preparation of quantities and
specifications of the same
including preparations _ of
tender of documents;

(e) submission of tender
documents to the Institute for
implementation by CPWD.

The replacement work of the sloped

roof of the Rashtrapati Niwas

building has already been
undertaken and is likely to be

completed by March, 1996.

4.10 The Committee has noted that on The Performance Audit Committee

its recommendation made last year,
a Performance Audit Committee
under the Chairmanship of Prof.
V.C. Anantha Murthy, has been
appointed for proper evaluation of
the Institute. The Committee desires
that the evaluation may _ be
completed expeditiously.

Comments of the Committee

which was appointed by the
Governing Body of the Institute in
July, 1994 was to submit its report
by 150 November, 1994 but
the same has not been received so
far. The directions of the
Committee have been conveyed to
the Indian Institute of Advanced
Study.

The Committee has finalised its
report which is under _ their
consideration before submission to
the Institute.

The Committee is not happy with the routine reply that directions of the Committee

have been conveyed to the Institute. The department should have got the Performance
Audit Committee report by 150 November, 1994, which has not yet been received by it.
The Department should expedite the matter.



21

Dravidian University

4.12

When the Secretary was asked to
explain the latest position regarding

the proposal for setting up of a ~

Dravidian University, he informed
the Committee that it was a joint
proposal of all the four Southern
States. As there was no consensus,
there had been no progress in the
matter, he added. The Committee
feels that the Department should
bring the concerned States together
and put forward some solution
acceptable to them. The Committee
suggests that the Department may
put a condition that the University
should be located in that State
which provides land and other
infrastructure free of cost and other
States could have sub-centres.

tee ‘

Comments of the Committee

A proposal for establishment of

__Indian Institute of Dravidian Studies

at Kuppum is © still under
consideration in consultation with
the Government of Andhra
Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu. Department of
Education had conveyed to the
Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh,
Karanataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu
that Rs.6.00 crores would be offered
to set up the Institute provided that ©
State Governments also agreed to
contribute Rs. 6.00 crores. Andhra
Pradesh Government have identified
the land and sanctioned an amount
of Rs.1.75 crores. The Chief
Minister, Andhra Pradesh, has
informed that the State Government
would convene a _ meeting of
concerned Secretaries of Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and
Tamil Nadu. Government of Kerala
has decided to grant an amount of
Rs. 25 lakhs as a _ special
contribution. This amount would be
provided in the Budget for 1996-97.

The Committee has been given to understand that all the Southern States are not having

uniform approach to the proposal. The Department should initiate dialogue with all the
States so as to arrive at a consensus in regard to establishment of this university and all
other modalities be worked out.

Scheme of Community Polytechnics

eae

When the Department was asked
about the steps taken to strengthen
the scheme, it was stated that a
National Appraisal Committee had
been constituted to review the
implementation of the scheme and
to suggest measures for

National Appraisal Committee
(NAC) will be tentatively submitting
the report by March, 1996. Experts
representatives representing these
areas have been included as special
invitees, since it was felt that
Committee per se should noi



2

3

strengthening it. The Committee
was also informed that the
Appraisal Committee would look
into the various aspects of
strengthening the scheme including
extension to other areas as well as
for development of linkages with
schemes of other departments
having identical objectives. The
Committee desires that National
Appraisal Committee (NAC) may
complete its work and submit the
report without much delay. The
Committee is of the view that this is
a sensitive area where planning
requires a special kind of expertise
and grassroot experience which is
quite different from what is needed
in ITs. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Appraisal
Committee should include experts in
indigenous technology, —_ social
activists, especially women, teachers
and academicians with the desired
orientation. There should also be
similarly equipped mechanism for
monitoring the achievements and
difficulties. The Department should
prepare a programme of action for
the extension of the scheme to more
areas and for developing linkages
with scheme of other departments.

Comments of the Committee

become unwieldy. The NAC will be
asked to take into consideration
these reservations. Further,
extension of the programme will be
taken up on the recommendations
of NAC.

The Committee desires that the National Appraisal Committee should complete its

study immediately and submit its report as per schedule.

Scheme of Assistance to Voluntary Organisations

6.7

The Committee, in its Fifth report,
had also recommended evaluation of
the working of the voluntary
agencies. Explaining the action
taken, the Department informed the
Committee that it had been getting
the external evaluation of the
projects of voluntary associations
done in’ various States. The
Committee has also noted that the

The findings of the evaluation
studies of literacy projects in Uttar
Pradesh have been communicated to
the concerned voluntary agencies
and they have been requested to
take corrective measures with a view
to improving implementation of
their literacy projects. The agencies
entrusted with the evaluation of
Voluntary Agencies Projects in



23

2

3

Centre for Media Studies has
submitted its evaluation’ report on
the voluntary organisations in Uttar
Pradesh. The Committee observes
that suitable action may be taken on

» the findings of the Centre for Media

Studies and the evaluation being
undertaken in the other places may
be expedited.

Comments of the Committee

other States are being persuaded
to expedite completion of the
evaluation studies.

The Committee is constrained to note that the evaluation of Voluntary Agencies’
Projects in all the States has not yet been done. The Committee strongly recommends that it
may be got done expeditiously. a

LANGUAGES

Modern Indian Languages

TA

The Committee is anguished [0 note
that allocations for various schemes
under the Modern Indian Languages

. Division are not being fully utilised.

Tarique-e-Board could not utilise
the plan allocation fully during the
last three years. Sindhi Vikas Board
is languishing under ‘gross under-
utilisation, During last year out of
Rs. 60 lakhs allocated on plan side
only Rs. 5 lakhs were spent. The
Schemes for grants to voluntary
organisation for development of
regional languages and that for
appointment of teachers are also no
exception to this malady, The
Department does not appear to
make a rational allocation on the
basis of .assessment 01 the
requirement of each scheme, The
Committee suggests हक. the
Department should undertake a
review of each scheme.

The reasons for non-utilisation of
plan funds fully in respect of various
schemes are as follows:—

1, Scheme of Appointment of
Modern Indian Languages (MIL)
teachers (other than Hindi) in
Hindi speaking! States.

The Scheme of appointment of
Modern Indian Languages (MIL)
teachers (other than Hindi) in Hindi
speaking States of Bihar, Delhi,
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh was approved for
implementation in the financial year
1993-94. Only two Hindi speaking
States viz. Haryana and Himachal
Pradesh have so far furnished
concrete proposals. An amount of
Rs. 8.61 lakhs has so far been
released to Haryana during the year
1993-94, which has been carried
forward to the year 1995-96 as the
same have not been utilised in the
previous financial year. Likewise, an
amount of Rs, 3.36 lakhs has been
released to the Govt, of Himachal
Pradesh for the appointment of

ee लत लत


24

3

teachers, which has also not been

utilised as recruitment is yet to take

place.

2. Schemes of appointment of
Urdu teachers

The scheme of appointment of Urdu
teachers has not so far been
formulated as the Planning
Commission advised that the
comments of States/Union
Territories be obtained. Responses
from a majority of States are
awaited. Based on the responses to
be received from States, a view will
be taken before the formulation of
the scheme.

3. Financial assistance to voluntary
organisations for Development
of Regional Languages

The Central Institute of Indian

Languages is administering — the

scheme. So far, an expenditure of

Rs. 10 lakhs has been incurred

under the Scheme. The primary

reason for non-utilisation of funds
under the grant is due to non-
receipt of adequate proposals for
financial assistance from Voluntary

Agencies/Individuals.

4. Turique-e-Urdu Board

The Bureau for Promotion of Urdu,

a subordinate office under the

Department, has been converted

into an autonomous body, वा

deference to the recommendations
of Gujral/Jafri Committees. The

National Council for promotion of

Urdu Language has accordingly

been formed as a Society under the

Societies Registration Act on

20.6.94. The Council has, however,

not so far become functional as

posts are yet to be created. The

Bureau for Promotion of Urdu is

looking after the work of the

Council in the transitional period.

Once the Council becomes fully

functional and staff are in position,

expenditure will pick up and they



will be able to utilise the
allocation(s) made.

5. Sindhi Vikas Board

The. work relating to promotion of
Sindhi language, earlier handled by
a small cell constituted in the
Central Hindi Directorate, with an
Advisory Board viz. Sindhi Vikas
Board.has been renamed and set up
as an autonomous body viz. the
National Council for Promotion of
Sindhi Language (NCPSL) and
registered’ as a Society under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 on
26th May, 1994. The first meeting of
“the Council was held = on
17th November, 1995 under the
Chairmanship of former Minister of
Human Resource Development.
The Council is yet to become fully
functional as the posts are yet to be
created, A Special Officer has since
been . appointed to expedite the
हैः process.
Comments of the Committee free ae

The Committee takes a serious view of the fact that only two Hindi spéaking States
have given proposals under the scheme of appointment of teachers in Modern Indian
Languages in their States. While all.other States are asked 10 adopt Hindi, it is unfortunate
that Hindi-Speaking States are not being insisted upon to introduce any one of the Modern
Indian.Languages in the schoo] curriculum. Serious efforts should be made in this direction

As régards financial assistance to: voluntary organisations, it is unfortunate that the under-
utilisation of funds:,is due to non-receipt of the adequate number of proposals. ‘The
Committee is of the. view that adequate publicity be given to the schemes so as. to attract
good response from voluntary agencies



CHAPTER-II

Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government

Para No. Recommendations/Observations Reply
1 2) 3
Elementary Education
2.2 The Percentage of expenditure by The percentage expenditure on
the Centre on Elementary Elementary Education by _ the
Education has varied from 18.66 Centre which was insignificant in
percent in 1951-52 to 0.00 percent in seventies increased from 5.1% in
1971-72 and 20.76 percent in 1993- 1986-87 to 17.75% in 1987-88, when
94. This downward trend during the the funds for implementing National
sixties, seventies and early eighties Policy on Education, 1986 were
has severely affected Elementary allocated for the fist time. In 1995-
Education. The Committee feels 96 the share of Elementary
that priority to Elementary Education has recorded 24.11%, the
Education needs to be ensured. highest so far. The priority assigned
to Elementary Education is reflected
by the steep step up of public
expenditure on Elementary
education in Eighth Five Year Plan
(1992—97) by over 400% in
comparison with plan expenditure
during Seventh Plan (1985—90).
The share of plan expenditure on
Elementary Education has increased
from 10.77% in 1986-87 to 35.70%
in 1995-96.
Drop-Outs
2:5; Drop-out is one of the factors which Drop-outs are caused by a number

contributes to the derailment of the
Education Policy. The Committee
expresses its deep concern over the
statistics relating to drop-out rate,
which was 36.32% in Classes I—V
and 52.8% in Classes I—VIII in
1993-94. While Manipur had the
highest drop-out rate at primary
stage (68.26%); Sikkim had the
highest rate at the upper primary
stage (82.65%). Drop-out rate in
Classes I—VIII was more than 70%
in the States of Bihar, Manipur and
Sikkim. It was between 60 to 70%

of factors socio-economic
compulsions as well as perceptions
of schooling as dull and irrelevant
process. The 42nd round of National
Sample Survey (July 1986—June
1987) provides valuable information
on the reasons for drop-outs. About
one-fourth of all drop-outs in rural
as well as urban India gave “not
interest in education/further
studies” as the reasons for
discontinuation of education. 16.3%
of rural and 20.3% of urban drop-
outs gave ‘failure’ as the reason for

26


27

2

3

in 7 States, namely Andhra Pradesh,
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Karnataka, Orissa, Rajasthan and
Tripura.

Gender Disparities

2.8

The gender disparities are also
conspicuous in respect of enrolment
and retention. The girls’ enrolment
has grown at the primary stage from
5.4 million in 1950-51 to 16.4 million
in 1993-94 and at the upper primary
stage from 0.5 million to 15.7
million. The Committee is, how-
ever, constrained to note that girls
still account for only 42.9 per cent
of the enrolment at the primary
stage. The drop-out rates of girls at
the primary, as well as the upper
primary stage, are higher than those
of boys. The Committee feels that
the programmes implemented so far
have not yielded satisfactory results
and desires that effective steps be
taken in this regard. The Committee
feels that voluntary organisations
would be able to play a better role
and the Department should very
well explore this potential.

discontinuation. The other major
reason foy discontinuation of studies
is compulsion to participate in
household economic activity or
other economic reasons. However,
after the introduction of National
Policy on Education 1986 and
consequently higher allocation for

_ Elementary Education to States and

UTs for implementation of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes like Operation
Blackboard, Non-Formal Education,
Teacher Education etc., the drop-
out has shown significant decline. In
1986-87, drop-out at primary stage

(Classes I—V) was 48.60% and at |

upper primary stage — (Classes
I—VII) 64.90%. In 1993-94 it was
36.32% in Cla I—V and 52.8%
in Classes I—VUI.

The ongoing initiatives like the total
literacy campaign have generated
awareness especially among women
generated, as a consequence,
increased demand for girls’
education. Thé number of women
volunteers outnumber men as also
the women learners.

Under the Operation Blackboard it
has been stipulated that half of the
new teachers should be women.
This is expected to provide a fillip
to girls’ education. The National
Programme of Nutritional Support
to Primary Education is likely to
have an impact on the participation
of girls. There are other
interventions like Ashram Schools,
Girls’ hostels and educational
complexes which have a_ specific
focus on girls’ education.

In order to encourage voluntary
organisations, Non-formal education
centres—run by voluntary agencies
are being completely funded by the
Central Government.



8

3

Operation Blackboard

2.10

When the Department was asked to
explain the steps taken for
improving the monitoring
mechanism, the Committee was
informed that from 1995-96, a
system of concurrent evaluation,
with the help of external agencies,
would be _ introduced. The
Department further stated that
around 40 agencies in the country
were addressed to submit the

An ongoing women’s Education and
Employment —- programme like
Mahila Samakhya has demonstrated
effectively that in partnership with
voluntary organisations, rural
women can be mobilised for
education and can _ themselves
manage adult literacy, non-formal
education and early childhood care
facilities to support women’s and
girl’s education.

Reduction of the gender gap is
special focus in the project
interventions of several basic
education projects like the Bihar
Education Project, Lok Jumbish and
Shiksha Karmi in Rajasthan and the
U.P. Basic Education Project. The
most* recent and largest primary
gflucation project covering seven
tates is 7 the District. Primary
Education Prégramme which is
chiefly targeted at‘ districts with low

“female literacy rates where a specific

focus on girl’s - education and
women’s. development has _ been
built. : : ne

The non-formal ‘education
programme another Central
intervention to reach out the girls
who are unable to attend formal
schools. The ,Central assistance is
higher in the case of girl centres
(90% as against 60% in the case, of
co-ed. centres). pase

A few external agencies were
identified and a workshop to work
out the modalities and evaluation
design fer the concurrent evaluation
of Operation Blackboard, Non-
formal Education and ~ District
Institutes of Education and Training
(DIETs)* was organised in Central
Institute of Educational Technology
(CIET) णा 170 and 18th May 1995.
18 external agencies participated in



29

2

3

2.13

evaluation design. The Committee
feels that evaluation by external
agencies should be used as an
additional source of information on
the working of the Operation
Blackboard and that the monitoring,
presently being done through field
officers, needs to be _ further
strengthened.

The Committee is of the opinion
that the problem of poor enrolment
and high drop-out rates in schools
can be overcome by improving the
calibre of teachers and the quality of
their teaching. Universalisation of
primary education is a process which
calls for right planning, with right
priorities, with special inputs to
attract children. The — school
atmosphere should be made more
interesting and stimulating by
introducing new and _ innovative
methods, both for children and
teachers. Operation Blackboard. to

the workshop. On the basis of the
recommendation of the workshop,
following two groups were
constituted:

(i) A technical group headed by
Prof. A.B.L. Srivastava to work out
the sampling design.

(ii) A group of three agencies, viz.
National Institute of -Rural
Development (NIRD), Hyderabad;
Operations Research Group
(ORG), New Delhi and Department
of Public Administration, Lucknow
University; Lucknow to design tools
of evaluation for Operation
Blackboard, Non-formal Education
and District Institutes of Education
and Training (DIETs) respectively.
Those tools have since been
designed, tried out and modified to
the extent necessary. Further action
to work out the cost parameters is
being taken. Thereafter, agencies
for undertaking evaluation of
different schemes in different States
will be identified and entrusted with
the actual task 'of carrying out
concurrent evaluation of these
schemes. Meanwhile, the present
system of monitoring is also being
toned up.

The National Policy on Education,
1986 recognised the crucial role of
the teacher in formulation and
implementation of the educational
programmes, and therefore,
envisaged strengthening of teacher
education system in the country to
provide for continuing education of
teachers. Under the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme of Restructuring
and Reorganisation of Teacher
Education, SI Institutes of
Education and Training (DIETs)
and Colleges of Teacher Education/
Institutions of Advanced Study in



25 52

3

be truely successful, should address
to these issues also.

Education (CTEs/IASEs) are being
set up to provide training and
resouree support to elementary
education, secondary education and
adult education systems at the grass-
root level.

In addition 10 building an
institutional frame-work for
continuous and recurrent training of
teachers in DIETs/CTEs/IASEs. A
Special Orientation Programme for
Primary Teachers (SOPT) has been’
taken up to provide training - to

teachers in making optimum use of ६.
.. Operation
“materials. and

~ Blackboard (OB)
orienting them
towards minimum levels of learning

strategy which seeks to enable them

to adopt  activity-based, child
centred and competency-based
teaching learning. process. पा

collaboration with ISRO, a project
of training of teachers has been
taken up using satellite technology
in the States of Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh and Assam. IGNOU and
NCERT also propose to launch ‘a
joint collaborative project to provide
training (Diploma in — Primary
Education) to the large’ number of
untrained teachers in the North:
Eastern States and West, Bengal
through distance mode.

The National Council for. ‘Teacher
Education has been set up in 1995
to achieve planned and coordinated
development of teacher education
system throughout: the country. It
will ~ take measures for’ the
upgradation of .the “quality of the
teacher education through proper
maintenance of norms — and
standards.

An _ innovative programme of
teacher empowerment and joyful
learning initially started ~~ with
UNICEF assistance in Madhya
Pradesh as “Shikshak Samakhya”
has



31

Po

Non-Formal Education (NFE)

2.14

. The Committee regrets to observe

that the funds released” for the
scheme during 1992-93 and 1993-94
were not fully utilised. The
Committee, however, finds that
there is a 20% increase in allocation
for this year, as compared to
1994-95. The Committee desires that
the full utilisation of funds needs to
be ensured.

now been taken up in a number of
States. under different names like
“Guru Mitra Yojana” (Rajasthan),-
“Ananddayji‘Shikshan” (Maharashtra).
An innovative project of “Shikshak
Samakhya” has been taken -up in
5 districts of Madhya Pradesh which
projects the teacher as the key
person in the implementation of
educational strategy. In addition to
working for teacher empowerment
through’ improvement = of their
service conditions, settlement of all
administrative and. financial claims
and ensuring ‘promotional channels ~
as well as opening for professional
growth, measures.are also being
taken for improving the competence
of the teachers through peer
support, group discussions © in
Resource Centres etc. It also
provides for making the class-room
attractive and developing effective
and relevant teaching learning
materials through a_ participative
process.

The provision for NFE during
1992-93 and 1993-94 were made in
anticipation of the revision of the
scheme. However, the scheme could
not be revised in 1992-93 due to
which budget provision could not be
fully utilised. In 1993-94 also thé
revised scheme became effective
from 1.10.93. The expenditure in
the : first half of the year was,
therefore, incurred at pre-revised
rates. Moreover, the State
Government of Bihar:was not able
to claim the second instalment of
Central grant in 1993-94 due to non-
utilisation of: available — funds,



32

ny

3

2.15

The Committee, in its Fifth Report,
recommended review of the scheme
so as to increase the access of
studerits from the non-formal to the
formal ‘stream. The Department
informed the. Committee that a

5 National Workshop was organised in

NCERT to review the position of
implementation of the Non-Formal
Education (NFE) Programme. The
Committee is. of -the view that

. Organising workshops would not’ be

of any use unless these
translated into action. 1
Committee desires that an action
plan may be prepared on the basis
of the obsérvations made in the
workshop. ~

District Primary Education Programme

DAS

The District Primary Education
Programme (DPEP) is new
Centrally Sponsored Scheme which

resulting in savings of Rs. 1.93
crores in 1993-94. During 1994-95
the budget provision was fully
utilised. During 1995-96, there is a
budget -provision of Rs. 153.50
crores against which an expenditure
of Rs. 125.66 crores (82%) has
already been incurred upto
Sth February, 1996. The State

x Governments were requested to

prepare time bound action plans to
gear up
expenditure position was closely
monitored . through QPRs and
discussion with Education
ies/Directors. The | State
Governments ‘have prepared. time-
bound action plang to’ ensure _

- effective implementation of - the.

scheme and full utilisation ‘of the
funds during the year. The” budget
provision in 1995-96 is, therefore,
likely to be fully utilised.

In pursuance of the deliberations
held in the National Workshop,
almost all the . major — States
implementing NFE have drawn their
action plans. Implementation of
these action plans is being reviewed
periodically.

The World Bank has already agreed
to_ provide US $ 260 million for
implementation of DPEP in first

implementation -and ..



33

1 2 कं
the Government of India provides phase. The necessary credit
85% of the approved outlay of the agreement with International
District and State Plans to the State Development Agency (IDA) for
DPEP Societies. The allocation DPEP one has been signed. The
made for 1995-96 is Rs. 25 crores, expenditure. is reimbursable from
as compared to Rs. 40 crores in Ist April, 1994. A Financing
1994-95. Explaining the reasons for Agreement was entered into with
such a steep fall in the allocation, European Community. European
the Department informed that the Union will also provide programme
requirement of plan funds for DPEP assistance to the extent of ECU 150
in 1995-96 was estimated at Rs. million for implementation of DPEP
230.94 crores, out of which Rs. 25 in Madhya Pradesh. In view of the
crores, représenting domestic fact. that external funding are
<« sources, had been provided in the available a Supplementary provision
# Department’s Plan outlay and the of Rs. 205.94 crores are available .

rest of Rs, 205.94 crores was for implementation of DPEP during
expected to flow from external 1995-96 itself.
sources and as such it was to be
provided as additionality to the
Department’s Plan outlay. The
Committee, however, desires that,
in the event of non-availability of
external funds, alternative sources
of funding should be explored by
the Department.

2.20 The Committee has noted that Necessary budget provision of Rs.

DPEP takes a holistic view of
Elementary Education. It is a major
and multifaceted programme
seeking to overhaul the primary

education system. The Committee,

therefore, desires that it should be
provided with adequate funds.

Externally Aided Projects

2.21

Six externally aided projects are
presently being implemented in
selected districts of certain States.

230.94 crores has been made for the
District Primary Education
Programme for 1995-96
in the: Demands for Grants of this
Ministry. In addition to Rs. 25
crores representing domestic
sources, an amount of Rs. 205.94
crores have been obtained through
supplementary grants. It _ is,
therefore, felt that adequate budget
provision exists for the programme
in the Ministry's Demands for
Grants.

All the externally aided projects
provide for mid-term evaluation. In
addition, there is provision for



34

2:

3

The Committee feels that some
evaluation machinery should be set
up through which the results of
these projects could be
communicated to other States and
districts for their benefit.

Mahila Samakhya

2.24

Lok Jumbish
2.25

The Committee has also noted that
in the evaluation report on the
M. Venkatarangaiya Foundation,
Secunderabad, Andhra Pradesh; it
has been observed “Although
collectives were formed around
issues of common concern, efforts
need to be made to sustain the
Sanghas”. The Committee feels that
suitable action needs to be taken in
this regard.

The Committee agrees that, it is an
innovative project with the objective
of achieving education for all by
2000 A.D. through _ people’s
participation and mobilisation. The
first phase was completed in June
1994 and the second phase has been
started. The Committee is, however,
constrained to note that out of the
total allocation of Rs. 9.33 crores in
RE in 1993-94 only Rs. 6.26 crores
was utilised. The Committee desires
that full utilisation of the allocated
amount should be ensured.

concurrent evaluation on the major
areas of interventions. The findings
of these evaluations are shared with
participating States and districts,
NCERT has been requested to
document the innovative practices

and share the same with other
States.
Financial istance to

M. Venkatarangaiya Foundation has
been continued during 1994-95 and
the agency has initiated several
programmes to sustain Mahila
Sanghas like = management — of
dairying as income — generation
scheme, development of _ thrift
programme among rural women,
management of labour co-
operatives, strengthening all _ the
xisting co-operatives etc.

The

reason for low expenditure
during 1993-94 was due to the fact
that certain activities undertaken by
Lok Jumbish Project have a larger
gestation period for take off.
However, during 1994-95, the entire
allotted amount of Rs. 9.33 crores
has been released.

Panchayati Raj Institutions and Elementary Education

2.29

The Committee has also noted that
the 10th Finance Commission has
worked out certain allocation for

The recommendations of the
Committee is noted and the State
Governments are being requested to



35

2

3

3.1

See

Panchayati Raj Institutions which
would be given to them through
State Governments. The Committee
desires that 50% of that allocation
may be earmarked to Elementary
Education.

consider allocating the requisite
amount of funds to Elementary

~ Education.

SECONDARY EDUCATION
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan

The Committee, in its Fifth Report,
took a serious note of the non-
evaluation of the functioning of
Kendriya Vidyalayas. The
Department, informing the
Committee of the steps taken,
stated that they had set up a

- Committee under the Chairmanship

of the Deputy Minister (Education
& Culture) to undertake an in-depth
and exhaustive review of the
Kendriya Vidyalayas and __ their
management.

The Committee, in this regard,
recommends that an Action Plan
may be prepared for implementation
of the recommendations to be made
by the Committee.

Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti

3.8

As far as migration is concerned,

athe Committee was informed that

there was some reluctance among
the students, as well as their
parents, for migration to the schools
in some States having law and order
problems. Another problem had
arisen due to the domiciliary
requirement stipulated for admission
in professional institutions, mainly
in some Southern States. The
Committee was informed that a
Committee had been set up to
review the present scheme of
migration. The Committee desires

The recommendations of the
Review Committee were considered
by the Ministry of Human Resource
Development in a meeting held on
22nd May, 1995 under — the
Chairmanship of Minister of Human
Resource Development. Based on .
the decisions of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development, the
Board of Governors of Kendriya
Vidyalaya Sangathan in its meeting
held on 20th July. 1995 have
identified the recommendations/
decisions which need to be
implemented.

The Board of Governors have also
accepted the recommendations of
the Review Committee for
monitoring the progress regarding
implementation of the accepted
recommendations. The progress will
be intimated periodically to Board
of Governors and Ministry of
Human Resource Development.

Modification to the _ existing
migration scheme has _ been
approved by the Executive
Committee during its meeting held
on the 9th November, 1955. The
modified scheme will be
implemented from the next
academic session.



36

2

that the Review Committee should

complete its deliberations at the
earliest and give its findings.

The Committee is not convinced by
the reasons given for the savings

made in the funds for the years ©

1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94. The
Committee desires that this trend
should not repeat in future.

National: Open School

3.17

The Committee agrees that in order
to reach out to the remote corners
of the country, it “would ७९
necessary to set up State Open
Schools. The Department informed

upport of Rs. 40 lakhs has been
provided to two State © Open
Schools, and provision has. been
made to provide a token support of
Rs. 80 lakhs to four more’ State
Open Schools to be set up during
1995-96. The Committee, however,
feels that in the process of setting
up State Open Schools, the National
Open School should not lose its
identity.

t during 1994-95, financial.

The recommendation is noted for *
future compliance. :

The annual intake. of students by
National Open School in secondary
and senior secondary courses at
present is of the Order of “about
70,000. Even with the accelerated
pace of enrolment by National Open*.
School, it cannot at its own, meet’
the challenge of covering the target
groups of out-of-the school children
and adult illiterates. The networking
of the State, Open Schools 15:42:
therefore, necessary to reach out. to»
the target groups for contributing to
India’s goal of Education For All by
2000 A.D. The National Open

“School would, however, not only

keep its present level of enrolment
but incre:
play the lead role in setting up State
Open Schools and serve as resource
agency for the Open Schooling Sys-
tem in the country. National Open
School will facilita 8, de-
fining standardisation, accreditation
and maintenance “of quality; and to
maintain standards: of equivalence
with ‘the formal system, while
retaining its own distinct character.
National Open School | would
continue to offer its programmes in
Hindi, English. and also introduce
Urdu..medium, There should be no
misgivings: about National Open
School losing its identity in the
process of setting up of State Open
Schools. Rather, the National Open -
School would emerge as a national

s it further as well as / .«



37

3

Educational Technology

3.18

The Committee is of the view that
the growing number of scientific
advancements are not being utilised
sufficiently in the educational arena.
The educational programme made
and telecast/broadcast are not
reaching out to. schools and
children, particularly in the remote
and rural areas. All the States are
also not covered under the satellite
programmes. The Committee feels
that television is nat being
sufficiently utilised for educational
purposes. When the country is
having/going to have a plethora of
channels on TV, provision of a
separate channel for education
should not be a problem. This step
would go a long way in taking
technology to the children/schools
with more innovative programmes.
The Committee recommends that
the Department should take up the
matter with the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting.

institution of open schooling with a
greater and vital role to meet the
emerging national challenges for
significantly contributing to India’s
goal of Education For AH by 2000
A.D.

In consultations with Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting,
Department of Space (DoS) has
allocated one transponder on the
INSAT Space-segment for operating
a Training and Developmental
Communications Channel. Fhe
modalities for using this facility for
educational purposes is being
examined by DoS through a
Steering Committee set up for this
purpose by Department of Space.

A Working Group with Dr. Kiran
Karnik, the then Director of
Development and — Educational
Communication Unit of Department
of Space (DECU) was constituted in
1987 to draw up a perspective plan
for use of satellite services for
education. The Group submitted its
report in 1989 suggesting capital
outlay of Rs. 1200 crores and setting
up of a dedicated channel for
educational broadcasts. The report
of the Working Group was sent to,
the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting for comments.
Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting inter alia informed
that, (i) the scheme drawn up by the
Working Group is an extremely
ambitious one requiring substantial
outlays which are unlikely to be
made available; and (ii) a dedicated
education service of the kind
envisaged in the Report of the
Working Group can become
possible only when the second
channel? becomes available. Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting



38

3

3.19

The Committee is happy to note
that the production of school T.V.
Programmes has been taken over by
the Central Institute of Educational
Technology (CIET) and State
Institutes of Educational Technology
(SIET). SIETs are there only in six
States and the Committee feels that
they should be set up in each ani

every State. 3

Scheme of Assistance for Strengthening Culture

3.23

The Committee is of the view that
there has been a steady and serious
deterioration in the value system in
our society during the last few
decades. Several of the ethical
principles of yesteryears, such as
adherence to truth and non-

further informed that due to huge
finance, it would not be possible to
process and finance the scheme for
dedicated educational services
through the use of satellite.

Subsequently, however, in
November, 1995 a Working Group
on Rapid’ Expansion of Open
Learning/Distance Education 185
been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Education
Secretary. The Working Group in
its first meeting constituted a Sub-
Group to look into the various
aspects and formalise the
requirements for operationalisation
of the Educational: Channel. The
report of the Sub-Group is awaited.

Meanwhile with the launching of the
INSAT-2C satellite and the
availability of transponders on the
satellite there is every likelihood
that DoS through Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting will
make available one of these
transponders for the proposed
educational channel.

During the Eighth Five Year Plan
there is no budgetary provision for
setting up of more SIETs. However,
the recommendations made by the
Committee have been noted and
will be considered while formulating
proposal for Ninth Five Year Plan.

and Values in Education

The matter regarding constitution of
an Evaluation Committee to review
the scheme and also to assess the
benefits achieved during past 3 years
by evaluating the project activities
conducted by various agencies.
during that period under the existing



39

2

oe)

3.24

3.25

3.26

violence, temperance in speech and
conduct, tolerance and a spirit of
charity are losing their importance.

Value or moral education in schools
will certainly do much to tone up
the system but it has to be imparted
with a sense of mission by dedicated
people with a clear vision. In this
connection, the Committee desires
that the recommendations of the
Sriprakash Committee on moral
education should be considered
afresh and action taken thereon.

The Committee is surprised to find
that even though it is such a vital
subject, the Department has
allocated just rupees one crore. The
Committee desires _ that the
allocation needs to be suitably
increased.

Since the question of cultural
education is a sensitive one and
does not consist simply in imparting
information or a didactic approach.
the scheme has to be worked out
much more concretely and with a
great deal of imagination to make it
a success.. The Department should
take up the scheme with great
vigour.

scheme is under consideration of
this Department.

Scheme for Strengthening of Boarding/Hostel Facilities for Girl Students of Secondary/Higher

320

Secondary Schools

The Committee desires that an
evaluation of the functioning of the
voluntary organisations, _ being
assisted under this scheme, needs to
be undertaken.

Vocationalization of Secondary Education

3.33

The Committee feels that for
making the scheme more effective it
needs to be linked up with the

According to Para 11 of the scheme,
it will be evaluated after a period of
three years by an appropriate
agency to be engaged by the
Ministry of Human Resource
Development. Hence the review is
due in 1996-97. An evaluation of the
functioning of some of the voluntary
agencies will be taken up during the
financial year i.e. 1996-97.

Industrial organisations are being
associated in the design and conduct
of vocational courses to a large ex-



2

3

industriesfactories in. a suitable
manner. This is also necessary
because this linkage would solve, to
some extent, the employment prob-
lem of the students who come out of
these schools. Linkage between
school stage and university stage is
also required to be strengthened.

The Committee is also of the
opinion that while _ selecting
schemes, attention should be paid to
needs of the region and the
predominance of any _ specific
occupation of the area. The students
trained in a particular stream of
vocational education may be
provided with opportunities for
work in projects entrusted 0
Panchayati Raj Institutions.

The Committee is also of the view
that availability of syllabus and
other material in the regional
languages would help students
understand the subjects well in their
own mother-tongue. The
Committee, therefore, desires that
these materials should be provided
in the regional languages as early as
possible.

tegrated Education for the Disabled Children

This is one of the schemes suffering
from resource —_ crunch. The
Committee is dismayed that the plan

tent. Also a number of courses are
being run/developed in direct
collaboration with the users like the
Railway Commercial courses, Para-
medical courses, etc.

A Synergy Group was set up with
representatives from Government
Iinstitutions/industries/experts. This
Group focussed on various aspects
of the Programme including inter
alia ways’ and means in which
industry could be involved in a more
meaningful manner, linkages
between courses at various levels
etc.

The scheme provides for
introduction of need based
vocational courses, based on the
findings of District Vocational
Surveys. These surveys are to be
conducted to assess the manpower
requirements of the area, the range
of available occupations, trend of
emerging vocations etc. for which
100% assistance is provided under
the scheme.

The States/UTs have been
requested to take necessary steps in
this direction. The matter has also
been taken up with the Ministry of
Rural Areas and Employment.

100% assistance is provided to
States/UTs for conducting
workshops for development of text
books/instructional material/
curriculum of vocational courses.
The Central Institute of Vocational
Education has also developed a
variety of exempler  curriculum/
instructional material for a number
of courses which the States can
utilise by getting it translated in
their regional languages as per their
requirement.

Though the allocation for 1994-95
was Rs. 470.00 lakhs, the actual
expenditure during 1994-95 under



41

2

3

ao

outlay allocated for 1994-95 was Rs.
470.00 lakhs as against Rs. 550.00
lakhs requested for. The Committee
also noted that an additional
coverage of 5000 disabled children
over the previous year was expected
during 1994-95. Again, Rs. 470.00
lakhs has been approved for 1995-96
against Rs. 600.00 lakhs requested
for. Considering the fact that the
number of children to be covered is
40,000, the Committee feels that the
amount is wholly inadequate and
needs to be suitably increased.

The Committee is also of the view
that this scheme has not made much
headway and it needs to be further
expanded and popularised.

Rural University

4.4

When the Department was asked
about the progress of the
implementation of the scheme of
Rural Universities / Institutes, the
Committee was informed that the
Government has taken the decision
to implement the scheme and Rs. 3
crores has been provided in
the Budget for 1995-96. The
Committee welcomes the decision
and expresses the hope that this

this scheme was Rs. 517.00 lakhs.
Planning Commission has been
addressed for approval to incur an
additional expenditure of Rs. 2
crores under this scheme over and
above the current year’s budget
allocation of Rs. 4.70 crores.
Matching savings has been located
under the ‘Scheme of
Vocationalisation of Secondary
Education’ and ‘Promotion of Yoga
in Schools’.

For 1996-97, a budget allocation of
Rs. 7.60 crores was proposed, The
scheme-wise allocations are yet to
be finalised.

At the time of transfer of the
scheme to the Department of
Education from the Ministry of
Welfare in 1982-83, the scheme was
being implemented in only 6 to 7
States. Presently it is being
implemented in 24  States/UTs.
States/UTs not implementing the
Scheme were to be addressed in the
matter.

However, since the current year’s
allocations is not sufficient even to
meet the existing requirement of
States/UTs. implementing the
scheme at present, this can be done
only if a higher allocation is made
for this scheme. This could be
looked into during the 9th Plan.
Our priority now should be to meet
the existing liability of the States.

In pursuance of the commitment
made in the National Policy on
Education, NPE, 1986, to promote
Rural Higher Education on the lines
of Mahatma Gandhi’s Revolutionary
Ideas on Education, an apex body
for this purpose. by the name of
National Council of Rural Institutes
(NCRI), was inaugurated at
Hyderabad by the Prime Minister
on December 3rd, 1995. The



42

2

3

long pending programmes will
become operational without any
further delay.

Srants Commission

The Chairman, University Grants
Commission, when asked to
comment as to whether the
allocation was sufficient, informed
the Committee that the Grants
released were short of requirement.
It was also stated that as against the
projection of Rs. 403.50 crores for
the year 1995-96, the Ministry of
Finance approved only Rs. 341.82
crores under Non-Plan. In view of
the ever-increasing _ responsibilities

of the University Grants
Commission, particularly in. the
context of opening new central

universities, the Committee feels
that the amount allocated is not
sufficient and needs to be suitable
increased.

The Committee has noted that on
its recommendations made in its
Fifth Report, the University Grants
Commission had engaged the
services of Educational Consultants
India Limited to verify the civil
works undertaken by  non-grant
colleges during the Seventh Plan
Period. The Committee desires that
the study be completed
expeditiously and after receiving the
observation thereof, suitable action
should be taken against such
colleges as may have violated the
norms.

Council has started functioring.

University Grants Commission
(UGC) has been provided an
additional grant of Rs. 109.00 crores
at the RE stage in 1995-96. The
financial allocations of UGC under
Non-Plan in the current financial
year are as under:—_

(Rs. in crores)

1995-96

450.82

8.8. 1995-96. R.E.
341.82

The Educational Consultants India
Limited has since submitted _ its
report to the University Grants
Commission. The matter is under
examination. Necessary —_ action
would be taken in pursuance of the
recommendations after an
appropriate view has been on the
subject by the UGC.

TECHNICAL EDUCATION

Institutes of Technology (IITs)

The Plan allocation for the IITs has
been reduced to Rs. 26 crores for
1995-96 from Rs. 31.88 crores in
1994-95. The Non-Plan allocation
has also been reduced to Rs. 120.16
crores for 1995-96 from Rs. 134
crores in 1994-95. On being asked to

Rs. 26.00 crores was provided to
IITs as BE. 1995-96. The Non-Plan
allocation as BE 1995-96 was kept
as Rs. 120.16 crores. The revised
pattern of funding scheme has been
introduced in all HTs except IIT
Guwahati from the financial year



43

2

3

comment on reduction in allocation,
the Department informed the
Committee that the plan allocation
was reduced due to the financial
crunch. As regards the Non-Plan
allocation, the Committee was
informed that from the year 1993-94
a revised pattern of funding was
introduced. The Committee feels
that the institutes should not be
starved of funds as it would
ultimately affect the standards of the
institutes and recommends _ that
suitable increase may be made in
the allocation at the RE stage.

Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs)

5.2

5.3

The Committee has noted that there
is not much increase in Plan
allocation for 1995-96 which is Rs.
12 crores as compared to Rs. 11.87
crores for 1994-95. When the
Department was asked to explain
this, the Committee was informed
that from the financial year 1993-94
the revised pattern of funding
scheme was introduced in the IIMs.
Under this scheme, the Institutes
were given functional autonomy and
financial flexibility. At RE 1995-96
stage their matching — grant
requirement, Force Majeure, etc.
would be considered and
appropriate RE will be fixed.

The Department has also informed
that the proposals for establishing
two more IIMs—one at Calicut and
the other at Indore—were under
consideration. The Committee feels
that there is an urgent need to open
more such institutions in view of the
buoyancy in the economy and also
to counter the proliferation of
substandard private institutions. The
Committee recommends that an
early decision be taken to establish

1993-94. Under the scheme, the
grant ‘has been pegged at the level
of RE 1992-93 plus 10% thereof.
Rs. 120.16 crores is the RE 1992-93
plus 10% .thereof in respect of 5
IITs. Budgetary support under Plan
is being provided to IIT Guwahati.
It may be stated that at RE 1995-96
stage Rs. 144.37 crores has been
provided to HTs under Non-Plan to
take care of Matching Grant under
Force Majeure.

Revised pattern of funding has also
been introduced in IIMs except IIM,
Lucknow. At RE 1995-96 stage
Rs. 21.06 crores has been provided
as against BE of Rs. 10.54 crores to
take care of Matching Grant and
Force Majeure.

Recently, the Cabinet has approved
a proposal of the Department of
Education to establish two more
IIMs, one at Indore (Madhya
Pradesh) and the other at Calicut
(Kerala). Necessary action has
already been taken to operationalise
these institutes as early as possible.



2;

new IIMs. Location, selection and
other related works may be done
expeditiously.

Regional Engineering Colleges (RECs)

5.4

The Committee was informed that
during the last three years, emphasis
for development had been laid on
the expansion and diversification of
academic programmes and
modernisation of laboratories. When
the Department was asked about
the steps taken to bring RECs at
par with IITs, the Committee was
informed that a decision had been
taken to convert RECs into centres
of excellence on par with IITs. The
Committee feels that serious efforts
should be made in this direction.
The Committee recommends that
the allocation may be suitably
increased for achieving the target.

Scheme of Community Polytechnics

5.6

The Plan allocation has been
increased to Rs. 30 crores for
1995-96 from Rs. 10.65 crores in
1994-95. When the Department was
asked to explain, the Committee
was informed that the increase in
the plan outlay for 1995-96 was
mainly due to the revision of the
financial norms with modification in
the scope and extended coverage.
The Committee feels that full and
proper utilisation of the funds needs
to be ensured.

Under the “Centres for Excellence”
Programme which aims at bringing
RECs at par with the IITs, an
Expert Committee constituted by
the Department approved — the
proposals of 17 RECs regarding
upgradation of Computer facilities
(for Rs. 2012.50 lakhs), Library
(Rs. 2012.40 lakhs), Equipment
(Rs. 1559.50 lakhs), — Buildings
(Rs. 734.10 lakhs), — Teacher’s
Upgradation/Individual Faculty
Development (Rs. 337.50 lakhs).

Under the scheme of Community
Polytechnics, the Polytechnics have
already been asked to make full and
proper utilisation of grants released.

ADULT EDUCATION

National Literacy Mission

6.1

The National Literacy Mission
(NLM) was launched in 1988 and

As per the recommendation of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee



45

2

3

the Total Literacy Campaign in
1990. In the Committee’s opinion,
the National Literacy Mission needs
to be given a further impetus. Even
ie government is seized of the
Arun Ghosh Committee report on
National Literacy Mission, the
Committee feels it desirable to
undertake a mid-decade appraisal
through National Sample Survey, so
as to assess the impact of National
Literacy Mission on literacy rate.

Special Projects for Eradication of Illiteracy

6.2

6.3

The allocation made for the scheme
has been reduced to Rs. 120 crores
for 1995-96, as compared to Rs.
155.75 crores spent last year. The
Committee is not happy with the
pace of the coverage of the Total
Literacy Campaigns (TLC) in the
States which have low literacy rates.
The Committee has noted that in
Rajasthan Total Literacy Campaigns
have been extended to 18 out of 30
districts and in Uttar Pradesh 45 out
of 65, and there is not much
progress in regard to the coverage in
Bihar. The Committee is happy to
note that all the districts in Madhya
Pradesh have been covered. The
Committee, however, feels that
vigorous efforts are required to be
made to bring all the districts in the
country, and particularly low-
literacy States, .under the Total
Literacy Campaigns.

The Committee feels that the grants
allocated may not be sufficient to
increase the pace of the literacy
campaign and hence required to be
increased suitably. In those States
where the Post Literacy Campaigns
have been _ started, sufficient
allocation should be made for the
campaigns.

the National Sample Survey
Organisation (NSSO) has been
requested to design a sample study
throughout the country to assess the
impact of Literacy Mission on the
Literacy rate.

The National Literacy Mission
Authority has been focussing its
attention on the low literacy States
for the last two years. Out of 182
districts in the four Hindi-speaking
States where approximately half of
illiterates of the country reside, 125
districts have been covered under
Total Literacy Campaigns.

Against the objective of covering
345 districts by the end of the
Eighth Five Year Plan, 336 districts
have already been covered (either
fully or partially).

An Expert Group headed by Prof.
Arun Ghosh carried out ,an
evaluation of the literacy campaigns
and has recommended that the
projects should only be sanctioned
in districts which have carried out
adequate preparatory _ activities
before launch of the campaign.
Sanctioning projects before the
district is fully ready for the
campaign is likely to be counter-
productive.

No project has been hampered due
to non-availability of — sufficient
funds, Projects have shown capacity
to save money during  imple-
mentation. These savings can be
utilised for financing post literacy
campaigns. There is no likelyhood

‘of projects suffering due to lack of

sufficient funds.



2

he Committees also desires that
‘otal Literacy Campaign and Post
aif है) Campaign — should ~ be
mplemented through a_ multi-
»sronged strategy. The Post Literacy
Campaign could be linked up with
seaching of _ skills for __self-
zmployment such as the one at
Community Polytechnics and special
allocations be made for the same.
The Committee feels that the
programme should be linked to
income-oriented programmes and
greater stress should be laid on the
role of media in creating a demand
for literacy.

Assistance to Voluntary Organisations

The Committee is surprised to find
that allocation under this head for
this year has been reduced to Rs. 10
crores from Rs. 11.5 crores in RE
last year, inspite of concern
expressed by the Committee in its
fifth report over the reduction in
allocation. The Committee reiterates
its recommendation made earlier -for
further increase in the allocation.

3
Large number of people are
emerging out of Total Literacy
Campaigns. The existing  in-

frastructure of community poly-
technics is not at all equipped to
cope with such a large number of
persons. In the Post Literacy
Campaigns, efforts are being made
to provide information relating to
skill-development

In Post Literacy Campaigns,
information about income oriented
programmes is being given. The
National Literacy Mission is laying
more emphasis on the role of media
for creating demand for literacy.
Socially relevant messages are-being
broadcast on All India Radio,
Doordarshan, newspapers and other
periodicals. A multi-media campaign
approach, including use of local
cultural art forms is being utilised to
create a demand for literacy.

#Phe main approach towards literacy
is through volunteer based Total
Literacy Campaigns which are
implemented by the Zila Saksharata
Samitis by associating all leading
Voluntary Organisations in the
districts. With the expansion of
Total Literacy Campaigns (TLCs)
covering 336 districts in the country,

separate/independent projects to
Voluntary Agencies (VAs) are no
longer necessary Funding of

Voluntary Agencies for taking up
literacy projects is now confined to
non-Total Literacy Campaign
districts. During the year 1995-96,
Voluntary Agencies will mostly be
encouraged to take up resource
support and allied literacy work.
The allocation of Rs. 10.00 crores
for the Voluntary Agency Schemes
for the current financial year is
expected to be adequate to meet the



47

3

Directorate of Adult Education

6.8

6.9

Plan allocation for the Directorate
of Adult Education for 1995-96 has
been increased from. Rs. 4.93 crores
for 94-95 to Rs. 10.37 crores. The
bulk of the amount is allocated for
media promotion activities. In the
BE for 1994-95 an amount of Rs.
4.18 crores was allotted for this
purpose. The Committee has been
informed that this was expected to
go upto Rs. 9.42 crores due to spurt
in media efforts to build up
enyironment but as sufficient funds
were not available, this liability has
to be met from the budget provision
of 1995-96. The Committee also
notes that the increase ‘in the
allocation is due to the fact that the
agencies do not carry — the
advertisements free of ९००५,
Whereas the Doordarshan charges
1/4th the normal tariff for National
Network Programmes. it charges full
rates for the Metro Channel.

The Committee, in this regard, feels
that the matter needs to be
discussed between the Department
of Education and the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting and
desires that all advertisements of
National Literacy — Mission __be
broadcasvtelecast free of charge.

requirements under the scheme of
Assistance of Voluntary Agencies.

The Ministry of Human Resource
Development, Department of
Education had taken up the matter
regarding telecasting and
broadcasting the spots for
promotion of literacy over the
official electronic media firstly with.
the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting and then through the
Committee of Secretaries. The
Committee of Secretaries took a
decision that ‘Doordarshan would
charge one-fourth of the normal
tariff for National = Network
advertisements on Doordarshan and
All India, Radio. There was no
decision regarding charging of any
concessional rates on the Metro
Channel. Although the Department
of Education had earlier pressed for
free telecast of Natioanl Literacy
Mission spots, after the decision of
the Committee of Secretaries, the
matter could not be pursued any
further. However, in the light of the
recommendations of — Standing
Committee of Parliament for the
Ministry of Human _ Resource
Development, the issue has been
taken up directly with the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting so
that Ministry decides to telecast
spots for the National Literacy
Mission free of charge.



CHAPTER-III

mmendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to Pursue

Text of the para Comments

is)
w

ry Education
Education, as a qualitative attribute General.
of the population. is one of the most
important indicators of the socio
economic development of — the
country. It is a major component of
the human resource development
and is thus basic to any programme
of social and economic development.
There is a close relationship between
literacy and other indicators of the
quality of life. The Committee notes
that while the percentage of illiteracy
has declined in the country, the |
number of illiterates continues to
grow. The Committee feels that the
root cause for illiteracy गा our
country is the lack of universal
elementary education. which has not
been achieved, and also a very high
drop out rate at the primary stage.
The Committee is happy that, on the
recommendation made last year, a
substantial increase has been made
in the allocation for Elementary
Education this year. However. there
should not be any scope for y
complacency. The Directive :
Principle of State Policy providing
free and compulsory education until
the age of 14 years is yet to be
achieved. Looking at the scenario of
elementary education and the efforts
required to be made for improving
the situation, the Committee feels
that the allocation needs to be
further increased.



39

x

3

2.2

The Committee notes, from the
information  supplicd by the
Department. that while the overall
rate of progress in gross enrolment
ratio (GER) for the country as a
whole has been improving. the
regional imbalances are a cause for
concern. The Committee is grieved
to find that in 9 States i.e. Bihar,
Meghalaya. J&K. U.P... Goa,
Manipur, Orissa, Punjab and
Rajasthan and 3. UTs. ice.
Chandigarh, Delhi and Andaman &
Nicobar Islands. the ratio is
considerably lower. The — gross
enrolment ratio at the primary stage
in 1993-94 was less than 100 in many
States. Position at upper primary
stage is still worse. The national
average is 67.7. Except Kerala,
Mizoram. Himachal Pradesh. Tamil
Nadu, Lakshadweep and
Pondicherry, all other States and
UTs have gross enrolment ratio of
less than 100.

Presently 149 million children are
studying at elementary Stage
constituting 82% of the children of
the age group 6-14 years. Of these,
109 million children are enrolled in
5.73 lakh primary schools and 40
million children in 1.56 lakh upper
primary schools. 94.5% of rural
population living in 8.26 lakh
habitations has the facility of
Schooling within walking distance of
1 km. and 83.98% have facility at
upper primary schooling within a
walking distance of 3 km. 43%
students are girls at primary stage
and 39.5% are girls at upper
primary stage. Growth in enrolment
since 1990 has shown acceleration
that has now brought — gross
enrolment ratio to more than 100%
at primary stage, In 1994-95, 16
States and 3  UTs_ recorded
enrolment exceeding 100% for the
children in the age group 6-11 and
3 States and two UTs at upper
primary stage. 14 States and 3 UTs
recorded gross enrolment ratios
higher than the National Average of
104.5% at primary stage. At upper
primary stage, 14 States and 4 UTs
recorded gross enrolment ratio
higher than 61.7% which was the
National Average. Correspondingly,
significant decline is visible in the
number of never enrolled of
children and improvement _ in
retention rate over the last five
years. The enrolment in ‘classes I-
VIII increased from 121.2 million in
1981 to 149 million in 1994. The
retention rate, during this period,
for classes 1-५ increased from
52.07% to 63.68% and for classes I-
VIIL from 35% to 47.20%,



Ly

Blackboard

The Department has stated that in
order to operationalise the revised
policy of the Government regarding
school facilities, the scheme of
Operation Blackboard has been
expanded to provide third room/
third teacher to primary schools,
where enrolment exceeds, 100 and
to extend it to upper primary
schools from March 1994.

mal Education

The Committee also desires that an
assessment of the scheme should be
made as to whether the child's
quality of life is improving as a
result of the scheme; whether access
to the formal system, through
multipoint entry is ensured; and
whether vocational openings are
being facilitated. The Committee
also desires that closer connection
and coordination between — the
formal and the non-formal system
should be established.

ythening of Teacher Training Institutes

The Committee feels that the
allocation made for the expansion of
the scheme would not be sufficient
and needs to be further increased.

rnally Aided Projects

The Committee is also of the
opinion that so far as the externally
aided projects are concerned, the

As on date, third teacher posts have
been sanctioned for 21223 primary
schools exceeding enrolment 100
and 31806 upper primary schools

sanctioned teaching learning
equipment.

Concurrent evaluation of NFE
programme is proposed to be

undertaken which would, inter alia,
study the impact of the programme
on the quality of child’s life, access
to formal system etc. There is
provision for entry of students in
class VI and IX in formal schools
after completing primary and upper
primary level NFE courses. States
have been requested from time to
time to facilitate certification of
NFE courses and mainstreaming.
There are pre-vocational courses at
Classes IX-X available in formal
schools. The students completing
upper primary level NFE courses
are eligible to join these courses.
Efforts are already being made to
establish linkages between the
formal and non-formal systems.

1995-96 Budget allocation of
Rs. 118.00 crore is 31% more than
previous year’s allocation of Rs. 90
crores.

In case of all the externally aided
projects, except the Andhra Pradesh
Primary Education Project



St

2

agreements should provide flexibility
in utilising the funds and a scope for
decentralised planning. The
Committee desires that the structure
should be worked out through
coordination. responsive to local
needs. There should also be a
provision for maintaining the
infrastructure and continuing the
programme even after external aid
is stopped.

Mahila Samakhya

While appreciating the efforts being
made under the project. the
Committee is of the view that non-
fixing of targets would not give real
assessment of the performance of
the project. The Committee
recommends that the department
should consider fixing targets.

Rajasthan Shiksha Karmi Project

The allocation for the project has
been increased to Rs. 8 crores for
this year from Rs. 5 crores last year.
The Committee has been informed
that the proposal for second phase
of the project has been processed
and was awaiting approval of the
Cabinet. lt was further stated that
Swedish International Agency has
agreed to provide Rs. 24 crores for
the years 1994—97. The Committee
is unhappy to note that out of the
target of 2506 Prahar Pathshalas,
only 2115 have béen set up. The
Committee desires that the targets
fixed under the increased allocation
for 1995-96 should be achieved.

3

(APPEP), State level societies have
been set up for overall planning and
implementation of these projects/
programmes. These societies are
autonomous in character and have
been given sufficient flexibility in
utilisation” — of the funds.
Decentralised planning is the basic
concept on which these programmes
hinge. As far as sustainability of the
programmes is concerned, the State
Governments have undertaken to
take over the liabilities of the

programme after पार. project/
programme period expires.
Mahila Samakhya is a_process-

oriented programme and not target-
driven. Keeping the _ process-
oriented nature of Mahila Samakhya
in view, no specific targets regarding
coverage of the programme have
been set. However, all the Mahila
Samakhya Societies prepare a
detailed annual action _ plan
regarding activities to be undertaken
during the year. This process helps
in assessing the performance of the
programme on a yearly basis.

The targets set for Shiksha Karmi
Project have been fully achieved in
respect of day schools. However,
there has been slight shortfall in
setting up Prahar Pathshalas.

The Rajasthan Shiksha Karmi Board
has been requested to make all out
effort for the achievement of targets
fixed in the increased allocation for
the year 1995-96.



1 |

=

‘anchayati raj Institutions and Elementary Education

"28

The Committee feels that education
needs to be more and more
decentralised. The steps taken so far
are not sufficient. The system of
Village © Education . Committees
needs to be further strengthened
and sources and funds are required
to be directly channelled to them.

Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti

3.6

3.7

_ govered (excluding

As on 1.3.1995. 373 schools have*

been sanctioned and about 71
districts in the country कार छल to be
‘aumil Nadu and
West Bengal which have not yet
opted for the scheme).

The Department informed the |

Committee that it was planned (9
open 250 Vidyalayas in the country
during the first three years of 8th
Plan period to cover the remaining
districts. The Committee is unhappy
to note that this targe however.
could not be achievedédue to non-
receipt of suitable jroposals from
the concerned State Governments
and also beciuse of financial

constraints. Thé Committee is of the _

view that: putting onus on State
Governments would not solve the
problem.“The Comumittee-finds some
slackness on the part of the
Department and desires that the
Départment . should —_ vigorously
pursue the matter with the State
Governments. As regards _ the
financial constraints: the Committee
recommends that the allocations
may be increased suitably at RE
Stage. .

The financial resources and funds to
the Village Level Education
Committees (VECs) are to be
provided by the State Governments.
A request is being made to State
Governments/UT — Administrations
to make adequate allocation of
funds to the VECs.

Opening of Navodaya Vidyalayas is
limited by availability of adequate
resources and “of the suitable
proposals from the State
Governments, inter alia, providing
suitable land free of cost and
“temporary accommodation to run

the .vidyalayas till the Novodayast ३

Vidyalaya Samiti constructs its own
buildings. The State Governments
of Tamil Nadu and West Bengal
have not yet accepted the scl
Navodaya Vidyalayas: Besides, the
Government of Assam had accepted
the scheme only in 1992-93. Within
these limitations, it has been the
endeavour of the Samiti to achieve
the goal of opening a Navodaya
Vidyalaya in each district, at the
earl for which matter is being
regularly. pursued with the
concerned -authorities.

It is further submitted — that
Vidyalayas sanctioned during a year
are made functional in the following
Financial Year. Thus, provision for
Vidyalayas sanctioned during 1994-
95 has only been made in the
budget for the year 1995-96.
Provision of Vidyalayas sanctioned
during 1995-96 will be made in
1996-97.

।


53

1 2 =
3.11 The Committee has also been The completion of Vidyalaya
informed that of the 373 Vidyalayas buildings in’ hand is in full swing.
sanctioned so far, 202 Vidyalayas Works are being monitored closely
are now functioning in permanent by the officers of the Samiti and the ©
buildings and the others are running concerned construction agencies.
in temporary buildings provided The present status of construction of
by the State Governments. The buildings and the targets fixed, as
Department should initiate action under:
expeditiously for construction of
permanent buildings for the
remaining schools. The Committee
recommends that the construction
works, which are in progress, should
be completed carly.
Sl. No. Particulars As on Expected Expected Total
31.3.95 during during
1995-96 1996-97
ne Total No. of Schools
sanctioned 373 30 27 430
2. Construction works in
progress. 298 ao “4
33 Works completed:
Zero Phase 188 i 1 200
Phase-1 148 104 35 287
Phase-I 48 79 26 153
4. JNVs functioning at permanent
sites after taking
possesion. 193 +244 298 298

“This will depend upon opening and availability of land for new JNVs.

3.12 This Committee has also ndéted that The matter regarding opening of

3.14

the States of Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal have not yet accepted the
scheme. The Committee desires that
since it is a good scheme, the
Department should pursue — the
matter with the concerned States
with some flexibility and open mind.

The Committee is also disturbed to
note that there is consistent shortfall
in admission certain Navodayas

Navodaya Vidyalayas in the States
of West Bengal and Tamil Nadu has
again been taken up with the
concerned State Governments’ by
the Samiti through the Department
of Education.

Consequent upon efforts made by
the Samiti, the shortfall in admission
in JNVs located in North Eastern



3

those
astern
2 not
cut-off
The
some

: taken

suffering
unds. The

1 to note
of Rs. 306
ikhs could
1-94 out of
only about
utilised.

the plan
has been
rores from
94-95. The
the increase
it although,
lakhs above
dget would
it, this was
the charter
chool. It was

Region of the country havé been
arrested and results of selection test
for the academic session ° 1995-96
have shown marked improvement.
Out of 45 33५६, located in North-
Eastern Region, the results in only 5
Navodaya Vidyalayas are less than
50%. Efforts are being made to
improve the results even further.

A proposal submitted by NCERT
for relaxing the cut-off level for
admission in the States where a
shortfall of admission has been
experienced, was placed before the
Executive Committee of the Samiti
on the 9th of November, 1995. The
Committee approved that in order
to fully utilise the infrastructure
created at considerable cost and to
fill up all available seats the
eligibility criteria nvay be modified
to reduce the minimum cut-off
marks but a minimum cut-off level
should be retained to ensure
acceptable standard. Further action
is being taken accordingly.

During the year 1993-94, out of the
total budget allocation of Rs. 290
lakhs, Rs. 150 lakhs was earmarked
for construction of building at
NOIDA. However, the Finance
Committee of National Open School
in its meeting held on 11.1.1994
decided not to utilise the funds for
carrying out construction on this
land because during 1993-94, a
proposal was under consideration of
the National Open School to locate
its office at Pappan Kalan instead of
at NOIDA and take up the matter
with the Delhi Development
Authority for allotment of land at
Pappan Kalan. At that time,
National Open School was also
exploring the idea of acquiring 500



55

2

3

also. stated that the Finance
Committee of the National Open
School approved the budget of Rs.
933.82 lakhs on the basis of the
recommendations of the Expert
Committee. The Ministry of
Human Resource Development
proposed Rs. 700 lakhs of which
only Rs. 500 lakhs have been
approved. The Committee feels that
the National Open School appears
to make tall claims and ultimately is
not in a position to utilise the fund
fully. The Committee, — thus,
concludes that the Department is
making allocations without looking
at the past performance. The
Committee desires that the amount
allocated should be fully utilised.

sq. mts. of constructed space from
NBCC for setting up a corporate
office in Delhi. Under these
circumstances, funds meant for
construction for a _ building at
NOIDA were not utilised for this
purpose. Secondly, since the last
instalment of the grant was
sanctioned at the fag end of the
financial year, it could not be
utilised fully.

For 1994-95, against the allocation
of Rs. 306 lakhs, Rs. 139 lakhs were
earmarked for academic programme
including innovative programmes on
Open Basic Education and Open -
Vocational Education, production
and procurement of video tapes,
setting up of mini production unit
etc. on the basis of the
recommendations of the
Consultative Committee on.
Perspective Review. The Perspective
Review report could not be
approved by the appropriate bodies
of National Open School by the end
of the year 1994-95, resulting in
delay in the implementation of
above programmes and thus under
utilisation of grant during the year
1994-95.

For 1995-96, as per Government
policy of expanding Open School
education, provision to the extent of
Rs. 147.50 lakhs has been made for
academic programmes which include
basic education for neo-literates,
early drop-outs, participants of non-
formal education, vocational
education, making available the
curriculum and course material into
various Indian regional languages to
reach education to the people in the
remote areas, urban slums etc. An
additional’ budget of Rs. 40 lakhs
has been made for supporting State
Open Schools and Rs. 11 lakhs for
student support services.



56

2 is distressed to note
on Territories are not
he grants in time due
difficulties. This is a
+ problem. The
30010 try to find a
tis and simplify the

: is happy to note that
int has been increased
(0 10 Rs. 10,000.
lumber of awards has
only by 6 and needs to
eased.

Under the Educational Technology
Scheme grants are released to States/
Union Territories on receipt of
utilisation certificates and complete
proposals in the prescribed format. For
getting Utilisation Certificate, States/
Union Territories are regularly
reminded. Senior Officers of the
Department are also visiting the States/
Union Territories to help them in
sorting out any problem in the
Utilisation and purchase of hardware.

National Awards are the apex awards
available to school teachers in the
country besides a number of other
awards such as State Level Awards,
Regional & District Level Awards and
Awards given by Voluntary
Organisations. Raising the number of
such awards for the teachers may entail.
decentralising their distribution which
would dilute the prestige and status
attached to these awards.

The Total number of awardee .teachers
have never equalled the total number of
awards. Every year there have been
shortfalls in the number of awards
recommended in case of some States/
Union Territories. This experience thus
shows that States/Union Territories are
often not in a position to utilise their
allocation of awards fully. Keeping in
view above facts, it is felt that it may not
be appropriate to increase the total
number of National Awards to teachers
further.

nal Research and Training (NCERT)

iso falls under the
tutions who have not
of allocated funds.
1806 for 1994-95 was

whereas the actual
is Rs. 7.4 crores. The

NCERT has been advised to utilise the
full budgeted amount vide _ this
Ministry’s letter No. 2-595-Sch. 4,
dated 23.5.1995.



57

2

Committee feels that the
Department should ensure full
utilisation of the money allocated to
them.

Computer Education in Schools

3.30

The Committee noted that a
number of schools have not been
provided with computer facilities.
When the Department was asked to
explain the reasons, it was stated
that the State Government had to
provide pucca rooms with electricity
connections. The Committee is of
the opinion that the computer
education is one of the areas which
needs to be given a major thrust.
The Committee recommends that
the Centre should assist the State
Governments in providing — the
necessary infrastructure in this
regard.

Physical Education

3.40

The Committee is also of the view
that Yoga is a system, which
promotes an integrated development
of body and mind, and should be
made a compulsory subject in the
schools.

University and Higher Education

4.1

The Committee, in its Fifth Report,
recommended developing ways and
means to make higher education
self-reliant, as far as possible. The
Committee has noted that the
University Grants © Commission
appointed a high-power Committee,
under the Chairmanship of Justice
Punnayya, to recommend suitable
norms for determining maintenance
grants to Central Universities,
Deemed Universities and colleges,
as well as to suggest ways and
means for augmenting resources.

Under Computer Literacy and
Studies in Schools (CLASS)
Scheme, 100% grant is being given
to the States/UTs to implement the
scheme. The States are only
requested to provide pucca rooms
with electricity. This provision is
made with a view to ensure actual
involvement of the States/UTs in
implementation of the scheme. In
view of these, it may not be
appropriate to render Central
assistance for this purpose.

Yoga has been included 85

component of tht syllabus in health

and physical education prepared by

NCERT. The NCERT has also with .
the help of experts brought out a

syllabus in Yoga for classes I—XII.

However, it is for the educational

authorities of States to decide the

modalities of introducing Yoga.

The Pylee Committee constituted by
the University Grants Commission
to develop norms for working out
the unit cost has already met several
times and it has been decided that
the work relating to the unit cost for
selected Central’ Universities, State
Universities and deemed to be
Universities may be done by these
Universities themselves under the
coordination of Association of
Indian Universities. For this
purpose, Association of Indian
Universities has arranged a



58

3

The Committee desires that
Universities and Colleges should
find ways of generating funds
through financing of research
projects by industry and opening of
more vocational courses. The
Committee agrees with the view
expressed by the Department of
Education that higher education
cannot be totally _ self-reliant.
However, any effort made in the
direction of raising resources by
mobilising donations, etc. would not
only reduce the burden’ on
the resources of the
States but also ate a greater
sense of responsibility within the
educational system. But,
Government must continue to assist
institutions of higher education
adequately so that they fulfil their
primary purpose i.e. generation and
dissemination of knowledge. The
Committee, however, strongly feels
that private investors should be
firmly discouraged from running
educational institutions with a
purely profit motive. The
Committee suggests that University
Grants Commission should evolve
norms for regulating fee structure
and to prevent exploitation.

ity Grants Commission

The Committee finds that there is a
vast difference between the grants
allocated and grants utilised during
the year 1994-95. In the Plan, the
amount allocated was Rs. 169.5
crores whereas the grants released
totalled Rs. 216.00 crores.

workshop in May, 1995 to discuss
the parametres on which the unit
cost should be based.

The Punnayya Committee has
recommended sevetal measures for
generating additional resources by
the universities. The Committee
has, inter-alia, recommended that
the universities should _ solicit
endowments, contributions and
actively participate in consultancy
without affecting the academic
activities of the institutions. The
Report of the Punnayya Committee
alongwith the views of the
University Grants Commission
thereon, has been sent to all the
Universities/State Govts. for
implementation of the
recommendations relevant to them.
As regards vocational courses, the
University Grants Commission has
been provided an outlay of Rs.
26.00 crores during 1995-96 for
introducing vocational courses at the
undergraduate level. An equal
amount had been provided to the
Commission for the same purpose in
1994-95 as well.

The University Grants commission
has proposed certain amendments to
the University Grants Commission
Act which seek to empower the
Commission to regulate the fee
structure in higher educational
institutions falling = within _its
purview. The matter is under
examination.



59

2

3

In the case of non-plan, the
allocated amount was Rs.232.00
crores and the grant released was
345.59 crores. Explaining _ this
variation, the Committee was
informed that because of essential
requirements, which had not been
provided in the Budget Estimates,
including the requirements of new
Central Universities, the grants had
to be increased. As regards non-
plan, it was stated that even
Rs. 345.00 crores was not sufficient
to meet the actual requirements.
The Committee is of the view that
the resource crunch has assumed
alarming proportions and additional
grants are mostly allotted to new
Central Universities. as a result of
which State Universities _ and
Colleges are starved of funds.

Indian Council of Social Science Research

4.11

The Committee, in its Sth Report,
recommended increase in the
allocation. The Committee has
noted that in the revised estimates,
even though it was increased to
Rs.3.25 crores from the BE of
Rs.2.5 crores, finally the amount
released was only Rs.2.5 crores.
The Committee is obliged to
observe that the Department is not
making a rational allocation. The

The University Grants commission
provides development grants to the
State Universities, subject to the
availability of overall Plan outlays,
for recruitment of teachers,
purchase of books, journals and
scientific equipment, construction of
hostels, academic buildings, staff
quarters, etc. State Universities are
established by the State
Governments and it is primarily the
responsibility of the concerned State
Government to provide adequate
level of development and
maintenance grants to these
institutions. Colleges are also
established by the State
Governments, the universities or the
Private Managements and it is for
the concerned sponsoring agencies
to make necessary funds available
for the optimum development of the
concerned institutions. Central
Universities are set up by Act of the
Parliament and they are funded by
the Central Govt. In view of this,
the Govt. and the University Grants
Commission have to allocate the
required funds for meeting the
legitimate aspirations of these
institutions which are primarily set
up to play the role of pace-setting
and model institutions.

The BE for 1994-95 was Rs.2.5
crores which was increased to
Rs.3.25 crores within an
additionality of Rs.75.00 lakhs at
RE stage. The additionality . of
Rs.75.00 lakhs was duly approved
by Planning Commission and was
included in the Final Batch of
Supplementary Demand for Grants
proposed to the Ministry of Finance.
Because of the urgent and special



2

3

does not consider the
iplanation that the total
d not be released due to
inch, a$ plausible. The
is also” given to

that the actual
of the Council for 1995-
ted to be around Rs.6
Committee is of the
the Indian Council of
ze Research was set up
dose of promoting and
social sciences research
intry. The. Secretary,
id the Chairman, Indian
social Science Research
ring the evidence that
ing of the Council left
desired. They pleaded
‘unds to revamp and
the activities of the
acil of Social Science
d its regional centres.
nmittee, therefore,
a suitable increase in
0 achieve the desired

१८5 (RECs)

ttee also desires that
consider granting the
med University to such
have become centres of

requirement of the Indian Council
of Social Science Research, requisite
saving were also located from out of
the Departments Plan allocations
and provision was made at the
revised estimate state. It was given
to understand at different stages
that this proposal has been accepted
but finally on the 31st March, 1995
it was brought to the notice of
Department of Education that a few
items including the proposal for
Indian Council of Social Science
Research have been excluded in the
proposals for Supplementary
Demand for Grants presented to the
Parliament by Ministry of Finance.
The BE of the ICSSR for 1995-96 is
Rs.4.50 crores (Plan) and Rs.5.00
crores (Non-Plan). Ministry of
Finance have not agreed to increase
at RE stage. A proposal for the
enhancement of the Budget at Final
Grant stage has been submitted to
Ministry of Finance (IFD).

Authorisation has been issued to all
the RECs to incur the expenditure
in a phased manner. So far Rs. 3400
lakhs have been released to 17
RECs during the period 1993-94 to
1994-95. The Monitoring Committee
which is constituted under the
Chairmanship of Prof. T. R.
Anantharaman, Emiritus Scientist
has met on November, 22 and
December 1, 1995 to evaluate and
examine the project implementation
on 10 point Scale System based on
certain parameters. The minutes of
the meeting has been forwarded to



61

3

Modern Indian Languages

7.2

The Committee regrets that there is
no plan allocation for the scheme of
production of University level books
and recommends that — such
allocation may be restored in
consultation with State Book
Boards.

the Chairman of the Committee to
rate performance of the
implementation of each of the
Regional Engineering Colleges. The
recommendation of the Chairman is
awaited. As regards giving them
University Status to the Colleges,
the Ministry comes into picture only
when AICTE/UGCthe University
to which the College is affiliated/
State Government concerned give
their approval. In case of REC,
Nagpur, AICTE has sent its team
and its recommendations are
awaited.

The scheme of production of
University level books has an
allocation of Rs. 5.00 lakhs under
Plan for the year 1995-96 and
Rs. 10.00 lakhs under Non-Plan.
Grants have been released to the
concerned agencies including States/
Universities and allocations made
have been fully. utilised.



CHAPTER-IV

Recommendations/Observations replies to which have not been accepted by the Committee

Please see Chapter I



CHAPTER-V

Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of the Government have. not been
received

NIL

63



7 THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
ARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

XXXI
THIRTY-FIRST MEETING

met at 2.00 p.m. on Monday, the 11th March, 1996 in Committee Room
vor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

BERS
idra—Chairman

n

chaparde

जा

अंएण Rahman Nomani
umantha Rao

im

Sumar Samantaray
anadi

takhsh Singh Varma

tham Kanithi
shwaran
Pawar
Bhattacharya
andra Dome

C. Jarodia, Director
harma, Under Secretary
Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

tee considered and adopted the draft Thirty-seventh, Thirty-eighth, Thirty-
h Reports on the Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
attained in its Twenty-second, Nineteenth, Bwentieth and Seventeenth
sly with minor changes.

ttee then authorised the Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram and
to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Prof. Malini Bhattacharya and
dr. V. Rajeshwaran to lay them on the Table of Lok Sabha.

oo



65

4. The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on the 19th March, 1996
to consider and adopt the draft report on the Private Universities (Establishment and
Regulation) Bill, 1995.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 p.m.

rca TNS TET