PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

— on STANDING ade,

ON
te HumMANn RESOURCE
arco |) VELOPMENT

THIRTIETH REPORT
ON

FUNCTIONING OF
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
HEALTH SCHEME

समेत जयते

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED. PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

THIRTIETH REPORT
ON
FUNCTIONING OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME UNDER THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

June, 1995/Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)


eee

Ill. Report

G (a) Introduction «6 56 ४6६५ ४३४ ४४३ ४६३४४ en ia en ee. का
JIN ~ (b) Budgetary Provision 06 «४ ७ &« ४६ WS «s&s ४७६४ ४७४७ owe |
(ENT (c) Facilities and Services under CGHS. . . eae ie पु
(9) Previous Parliamentary Scrutiny of CGHS . . . . . "७०-००" बन"

| IV. Score or THE Report

V. Masor Proptem AREAS
(@) General Rinchouing's ot 4s sciaera fee ae Bass ss 2 hee
(b) Medicines

E HE SION ५ के ६ | ३ + sheet के hela inet के प्रजा क eee
'NDER T) (ii) Quality... . 0 ae eee

WELFARE (iii) Substitutions . ee
(iv) Formularies .......
(v) Date Expired Medicines. aes ४: # 7४ ४-६ 5-8 न
QD फिक्स ora २5 en लोक 9 OS RHE के AD हुक के

(Cc) Disposable Syringes) <5 ४ + agra ५४४ 6४६ FG Reese ४३४५ ८७४४७

(7) Functional Dispensaries . . . ee

(Co) Cicamliness ४ #+ ८.४ ६४७७ ४ ४५ ae ui.

(f) Punctuality and Behaviour

(g) Co-ordination . . . . . . . -

(h) Inspection . . .

(i) Shift System

GRO DO. ७७७२ ८४४ as

(0 New Dispensaries .. . .

(1) Emergency Services .

(m) Specialist Services .

(UE) ONY CUI + व ७ क 5 Sue) | छह के Yuet) | हब के जहर ५०१ ie ieee ae
VI. Separate CGHS Hosprrats/CGHS Winos in Centra
GOVERNMENT HOGEITALS's 6 cic 4 + ४७४. ०२.०२ ७ »०००७7+ के | हज क ४७८ aie
| & VIE. REMGBURSEMENT ८ «०» 5, 2 5 = 5 wis Ste te ayer g ० «5 ० «६ ९%४० ०.० *
1 Suescaierion: = igs अल अब ee a ae as

IX. Rattways AND ARMED Forces+MEDICAL FACILITIES
‘X; RECOGNISED Private HOSPITALS. . . - - - «०» ee » ५» eee tees

हु

XI. अककनरेष्टा ७0 Issues

(a) Staff Strength ...... Sra Soap # ४ G owe
(b) Staff Morale... <5... 2 ;

XII. Private Practice sy Doctors
| XIII. Exposure To Latest DEVELOPMENTS AND INNOVATIONS .- ~~. +--+ + +=

अर “(COMPCAINT BOX! cores) os «४२5२ >,त्जओे कं ७ = Ses aud 4 Se 5 ees

XV. Crer Wevrare Orricer/AreA WELFARE OFFiCER/BENEFICIARIES’
WELFARE COMMIITER, «2.6. <2 winced ead soe Bega esl ० ० sie ०७



XVI.
XVII.

XVUI.
XIX:

PENSIONERS. oq. 6 - - ० -+-० ५०००० ००५०५५०३०५०५०-०७४८००५५५००५०५५५०५०००५«५«५० ee
NEED एठार CONSIDBRING ALTERNATIVE SCHEMES

(a) Introduction'of a Comprehensive Health Insurance Scheme... . . - Sees
(0) Setting up of Meathihruss 2. 3s i ४४६० ४८४5 + ee «४४%

SuMMaRY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/SUGGESTIONS

ANNEXURES

I. City-wise distribution of dispensaries/beneficiaries ..............-
Il. Expenditure incurred during 1991-92 to 1994-95... . . . . . - «७-७७.
III. Key recommendations of the Estimates Committee. .

IV. List of persons who gave representations ............-.22000%
V. Dispensaries visited by the Committee... . . . - 2.2... ee eee eee

VI. Places for which requests for opening new dispensaries
Nave been made. 5 > चल in we ५ ह elope ie: Fate os ae के बी ७ हे
‘VIE. -Révision of Subscription clisiges= .°2 2. ie cts et les * गा
VIII. Minutes

PAGE
No.

19-20

20
20-21
21:24


Gi)

40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal.

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer


FOREWORD

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee, do hereby
present, on its behalf, this Thirtieth Report of the Committee on the functioning of Central
‘Government Health Scheme (CGHS), under the Department of Health, Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare.

2. The Committee visited several CGHS dispensaries located in Delhi, Bombay and
Madras to make an on-the-spot study of their functioning. The Committee met the CGHS
beneficiaries, Area Welfare Officers, Representatives of Resident Welfare Associations,
Pensioners’ Associations, etc. The Committee also heard some Chief Medical Officers and
the representatives of paramedical staff working in CGHS dispensaries.

3. With a view to making a comparison of the services/facilities being provided in the
Armed Forces and Railways, the Committee heard the views of the representative of the
Armed Forces Medical Service and the Director General, Railway Health Services. The
Committee also visited some private hospitals on the approved list of CGHS and held
discussions with the heads of these institutions. .

4. The Committee also met some experts and former health administrators for
ascertaining their opinion on improving the services provided by the CGHS.

5. A Press Communique inviting views/suggestions of the CGHS beneficiaries on the
subject was issued, and the Committee received several memorandwSuggestions in response
thereof.

6. The Committee took evidences of representatives of the Department of Health,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

7. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to all the institutions, associations, bodies
and individuals who appeared before the Committee or submitted memoranda on the
subject. The Committee also wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Ministry for
furnishing the requisite material and information required in connection with the examina-
tion of the subject and for giving evidences before the Committee.

8. The report was considered and adopted by the Committee at its meeting held on 16th’
June, 1995.

New Deni; P. UPENDRA

June 16, 1995. Chairman,
Committee on Human Resource Development

(iii)


REPORT

Introduction

1. The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) was started in 1954, with the
objective of providing comprehensive medical care to the Central Government employees
and their family. members so as to avoid the cumbersome system of medical reimbursement.

2. Besides Central Government employees, the scheme also provides services to
Members and former Members of Parliament; Judges of Supreme Court & Delhi High Court
(sitting and retired); freedom fighters; Central Government pensioners; employees of a few
autonomous bodies and semi-government organisations. Former Governors and former Vice-
Presidents of India are also covered under the scheme. The dependent family members of
Central Government servants, who are residing with them and though dependent on them
but do not come in the definition of the family, also take benefit under the scheme.

3. This scheme was initially started in Delhi. Subsequently, the services have been
extended to the following fifteen other cities so far.

Allahabad Ahmedabad Bangalore
Bombay Calcutta Hyderabad
Jaipur Jabalpur Lucknow
Madras Meerut Nagpur
Patna Pune Kanpur

4. In addition, employees of the Accountant General of India are being provided
CGHS coverage at Bhubaneshwar and Ranchi. Employees of Post & Telegraph Department,
in certain cities like Jabalpur, Pune, Jaipur, Lucknow and Ahmedabad, are not availing of
CGHS facilities as they have got their own dispensaries in these cities. P & T employees in
other stations, however, are covered under CGHS.

5. Presently, there are 233 Allopathic,31. Ayurvedic, 34 Homoeopathic, 8 Unani, 2
Siddha Dispensaries, 3 Yoga centres and 18 Poly-clinics covering 8.74 lakh card holders and
40 lakh beneficiaries all over India. There are also 69 laboratories and 17 dental units. The
table giving, city-wise distribution of dispensaries/beneficiaries/card holders is at Annexure-I.

Budgetary Provision:

6. The expenditure incurred on CGHS during 1994-95 was Rs. 5 crores on plan side and
Rs. 145 crores on non-plan side. A Table showing details of expenditure incurred during
1991-92 to 1994-95 is at Annexure-II.

Facilities and Services under CGHS:

7. The facilities provided under the scheme include out-patient care through a network
of Allopathic as well as Ayurvedic/Homoeopathic/Unani dispensaries and units, supply of
medicines, laboratory and X-Ray investigations, domiciliary visits, emergency treatment,
ante-natal care, confinement and post-natal care, advice on family welfare, specialist
consultations and hospitalisation facilities in government hospitals, as well as in private
hospitals recognised under CGHS. In order to increase the number of service institutions,
and to offer better service to the CGHS beneficiaries, all government hospitals run by the
Army, Navy, Air Force, Railways, E.S.I., and State Governments, as well as Municipal
hospitals, have also been recognised under CGHS for taking treatment through their nearest
dispensaries, irrespective of the fact as to whether they are residing within the areas covered
by the Scheme or not. ;

8. Since November 1984, the Central Government pensioners have been made eligible
for reimbursement of cost of hospitalisation/specialised treatment, including cost of artificial

1



2

appliances. A new scheme has since been introduced for Central Government pensioners
covered under CGHS. Under this Scheme, the pensioners can pay ten-times the CGHS
contribution as lumpsum, and become life members of the scheme. The domiciliary
testrictions to avail of the benefits of the scheme have been liberalised in favour of
pensioners. Further, pensioners can avail of CGHS facilities from their nearest dispensary,
irrespective of the fact whether they are residing within the jurisdiction of the city where the
CGHS is functioning or not.

Previous Parliamentary Scrutiny of CGHS:

9. The Committee took note of the fact that the Estimates Committee of the Seventh
Lok Sabha made a study of this subject and its report was presented to Parliament in 1982.
This Committee is, however, distressed over the fact that despite the detailed study and
recommendations made by the Estimates Committee, there seems to be no distinct
improvement in the working of CGHS. A select list of key recommendations of the
Estimates Committee on the subject is at Annexure-III.

SCOPE OF THE REPORT

10. The Committee, in view of the numerous complaints on CGHS, felt the need to
make a study of its functioning, especially from the point of view of convenience and
satisfaction of beneficiaries. The Committee, during the course of its consideration of this
subject, received a number of representations, a list of which is at Annexure-IV. The
Committee also visited some of the dispensaries in Delhi, Madras and Bombay to make an
on-the-spot study of the functioning of CGHS. A list of dispensaries visited by the
Committee is at Annexure-V. The Committee, in this report, has laid great thrust on
satisfaction of the patients viz. the CGHS beneficiaries. With this view, the Committee
hereunder has dealt with key problem areas, and made its recommendations and
observations on the broad areas of arrangement of work, improvement in quality of service,
drug dispensing procedures, pensioners’ problems, reimbursement, emergency care,
specialist consultations, etc., which are affecting the services provided to the beneficiaries.
Necessary suggestions/recommendations have also been made on all these aspects so as to
improve CGHS functioning. The Committee has also made tentative suggestions for
considering alternatives to the existing scheme e.g. health insurance in lieu of CGHS and a
non-departmental framework for the present CGHS scheme.

MAJOR PROBLEM AREAS
General Functioning:

11. The Committee, during the course of its consideration of this subject, received a
large number of representations from a cross section of the people, including pensioners.
Many beneficiaries, in their written representations, submitted to the Committee, expressed
their dissatisfaction over the general functioning of the Central Government Health Schenie
and its dispensaries. It was stated that much was left to be desired in the medical facilities
available at the CGHS dispensaries. Work culture in the dispensaries had degenerated and
that government servants were gradually losing faith in the CGHS dispensaries.

12. In view of a large number of complaints, as stated earlier, the Committee
undertook visits to some of the dispensaries situated in Delhi, Madras and Bombay, to make
an on-the-spot study of their functioning. The Committee, during these visits, was dismayed
to observe the state of affairs there and was extremely dissatisfied with the functioning of the
CGHS dispensaries. In fact, endorsing the feeling of the Committee in this regard, the
Secretary, Health, during the course of his oral evidence, himself admitted, “unfortunately it
is true that much is left to be desired so far as upkeep and maintenance ... We can admit
that it is a weakness on our part.” The Secretary also stated, “we have to make a very



3

sincere effort to see that all the problems are removed because I really cannot offer any
valid explanation .... It is painful.” The Director, CGHS, who accompanied the Committee
during its visits to the dispensaries, was also candid enough, during his oral evidence before
the Committee, that the-patient service and: other facilities provided in the dispensaries were
not upto the mark.

, 13. The Committee is convinced that inspite of its failure, so far, in delivering the
oods, CGHS can improve its functioning and win back the confidence of the beneficiaries,
itit can enkindle in the minds of both medical and paramedical staff, a sense of professional
approach and instil in them the ethos of discipline, dedication and devotion to their duties.
The Committee is also of the view that while this campaign for improvement must continue,
there is need for a specific attention to key areas of its working.

14. From the evidence before the Committee and from the nature of the problem itself,
the Committee has arrived at the conclusion that barring a few special aspects, the problem
lies in non-implementation of the already existing guidelines and arrangements due to the
structural defects in ‘their implementation. In a service sector, this calls for imaginative
leadership and creation of incentives for better performance, with severe punishment for
failure in adhering to the guidelines. Instead of supportive supervision over the routines of
the CGHS system, especially at the dispensary level, too many exaggerated claims are made,
based on misleading averages, leading to decline in credibility because the claims made do
not correspond to the direct experience of many beneficiaries. Citywise levels of supervisions
have to be made active with specific responsibilities for outcomes and grievances thoroughly
investigated. The Committee expresses its disappointment that no close and sustained
supervision seems to exist at various levels. All efforts seem to be concentrated on crisis
management or in attending to complaints and needs of beneficiaries who matter.

15. The Committee feels that responsibilities should be fixed for such a state of affairs
in the CGHS and suitable action should be taken in this regard. The Health Secretary has,
no doubt, candidly admitted failure but this by itself is not enough. Those responsible for
the present state of affairs should be held accountable and appropriate action taken against
them. The Health Secretary and the DGHS have promised to conduct a campaign for
improvement. The Committee would endorse such a campaign, and desires that it be
spearheaded by earmarked Senior officers drawn from two or three hierarchical levels,
including the Director General, Health Services.

16. The core of such a campaign should be sustained and painstaking attention to day-
to-day routines and implementation of policies. This can only be done by schedule of
inspections at each level. Such inspections should not be confined to a mere administrative
compliance of minimum performance but a close understanding of the levels of patient
dissatisfaction and the causes thereof and removal of impediments, if any. The powers and
responsibilities of in-charges of dispensaries require to be clarified and they should be held
squarely responsible for proper functioning of the units under their control. It seems that
when things go wrong, neither the doctor-in-charge nor the Area Welfare Officer is capable
of solving the problems. The Committee feels that the present arrangements diffuse
responsibility so much that none, from the Director down to the CMO-in-charge, can ever
possibly be held totally accountable for the holistic realisation of the objectives behind
CGHS. The Committee would recommend the urgent need to stop this decay of a system
and ensure a well considered campaign in the designing of which Secretary and DGHS must
give theirspersonal attention.

Medicines:

17. Supply: The Committee was informed that life-saving drugs were generally not


4

available in the CGHS dispensaries. It was also stated that the supply of medicines,
particularly the indented medicines, was a very time consuming process as supplies have to
be made from medical stores. The Committee is also constrained to note; from the
submissions made by the beneficiaries, that 50% medicines are generally not available in the
dispensaries. Some of the beneficiaries have suggested that authorised chemists should be
‘nearer to the dispensaries so as to avoid delay. Adding to this, a representative of CGHS
Employees’ Association, during the course of his oral evidence, stated that the lists of
medicines, one with the Medical Store Organisation(MSO) and the other with the CGHS,
generally would never tally. The medicines required in CGHS were not supplied and only
common medicines were supplied. He further’stated that the satisfaction ratio was 30% to
50% but had never exceeded 50%. All this. evidence only highlights the substantial gaps in
coordination and team spirit between the dispensaries, the Directorate and the Medical
Stores Depots, all of them working under the DGHS, eroding the credibility of the scheme.

18. The Ministry, responding to the above, has stated that CGHS has taken the
following measures to ensure timely supply of medicines:

“CGHS procures bulk supply of formulary items from the Medical Store
Organisation (MSO) under DGHS. The indents of these items, as per the annual
requirement of CGHS, are placed with the MSO well in advance by the Medical
Store Depot of CGHS. MSO makes the supply on a quarterly basis on CGHS
request. Local chemists have’ been appointed in and outside Delhi and the
medicines not available in the dispensaries are procured for the beneficiaries from
them against specialist prescriptions. In all emergent cases, CGHS beneficiaries are
issued authority slips by the CMOs in-charge and they obtain the medicines from
the authorised local chemists.”

19. When the Committee sought to know as to-whether decentralisation of purchase of
medicines could be done so as to improve the supply position of the medicines, the Ministry
had stated that it was not considered necessary as decentralisation would mean that the
advantage of bulk purchase from MSO would not be available and also that the procurement
of medicines was different from other procurements because of criticality of quality aspect.
The Ministry has further stated that tenders were invited only from registered firms. On a
suggestion made as to whether beneficiaries could be allowed to purchase the prescribed
medicines from any chemist, the Ministry submitted that the system of direct purchasé of
medicines from any chemist by the beneficiaries was not found practicable.

20. The Committee is, however, not satisfied with the replies given by the Ministry
because the key issue relates to failure in implementing policy and procedures in a co-
ordinated fashion and absence of accountability for failure or shortcomings. No efforts
appear to have been made to go into the obstacles in working out proper supply
arrangement. The Committee would emphasise that unless the Ministry goes into
disaggregated dispensary-wise problems, covering drug supply, quality and distribution
arrangements, the position cannot improve, since overall averages hide considerable
disparities in dispensaries in regard to regularity of supply, drugs issued per head, timely
availability, etc., between well. placed and. lower income beneficiaries. Evidence was
available of many malpractices, including pilferage, lack of proper control over storage and
lack of care in weeding out time-barred medicines. The Committee feels that the entire
arrangement between the central stores depot and.CGHS is not working properly, leading to
mutual recrimination but without any result. A close look is necessary to seé why such a
teridency exists. The Committee feels that a key gap lies in absence of close and sustained
supervision of d@®ailed day-to-day arrangements for indenting, procurement, storage,
investigation and’ distribution of drugs in MSD and with CGHS. Director, CGHS and



5

Director, MSD must be held responsible for performance of agreed tasks set out in a
verifiable format. For this purpose, Ministry may, if need be, seek outside help, to devise
suitable foolproof working system, with clear accountability, patient safety and quality
assurance. Nothing would, in the Committee's view, enhance the credibility of CGHS more.

21. The Committee would also emphasise that the Ministry should review the system to
streamline and revamp it so as to remove the delay in supply of medicines. The CMO of
eyery dispensary should ensure that all the medicines listed in the formulary are always
available in the dispensary. So far as the system of authorised local chemists is concerned,
the Committee feels that a beneficiary should be free to purchase medicines from any
chemist on the prescription given in the dispensary and later it could be reimbursed. The
Committee is aware that several steps were tried out in the past but never pursued to ensure
that delay is eliminated. It should not be beyond the administrative system to devise a well
thought-out system. The Government should consider this aspect and take an early decision.
Steps should also be taken to ensure payment of bills to the chemists within three months
from the date of supply of medicines.

22. Quality: The Committee received a number of complaints from the beneficiaries
regarding the quality of medicines supplied in the dispensaries. It was stated that standard
medicines were not purchased from listed companies and many of the companies supplying
the medicines were little known. One of the beneficiaries also informed the Committee that
medicines were procured through the lowest tenders as a result of which, medicines of
requisite standards were not procured. On this, the Ministry, in its reply, has clarified that
medicines were procured and supplied by the MSO with a certificate of 100% satisfaction
over standard quality. It was further stated that whenever a complaint was received by
CGHS about the quality of any formulary item, such medicines were sent for testing to the
Government laboratory at Ghaziabad. In such cases, issue of those medicines to patients was
suspended, it was added.

23. The Committee is, however, not satisfied with the Ministry's routine reply. The
Committee feels that ultimately it is the beneficiaries’ satisfaction which is of paramount
importance. It is also given to understand that it is one of the factors leading to aversion
towards CGHS among the beneficiaries. The CGHS does not appear to feel the pulse of the
beneficiaries in regard to the quality aspect. Prescribing medicines without examining as to
whether those medicines were effective or not or qualitatively good or bad, would not lead
the system anywhere. The Committee is surprised to hear from one of the beneficiaries that
some of the doctors advised them not to take the medicines supplied by CGHS dispensaries
as they were not effective. In view of a large number of complaints regarding the quality
aspect, the Committee observes that the quality testing machinery of CGHS is either non-
functional or is ineffective. None in the organisation seems concerned at recurrent
complaints as these are not properly investigated leading to logical conclusions regarding
accountability. The Committee's discussions with Drug Controller, MSD and CGHS leave it
gravely concerned at the quality standards of drugs supplied to dispensaries. The Committee
strongly feels that it needs to be streamlined and strengthened by more clearly, specifying
their respective roles and providing for foolproof evidence of performance at each level.
Government should take necessary steps immediately for quality control.

24. Substitutions: The Committee has been informed by the beneficiaries that medicines
prescribed were more often than not, substituted by less potent and cheaper medicines. The
Committee, during one of its visits to the dispensaries, found that the substitution of
medicines was done on a regular basis and in many a case the substituted medicines were
totally of different composition, besides being different in quality.


6

25. When the Ministry was asked to comment on this aspect, it was stated that single
ingredient medicines were procured in generic name by MSO and proprietary items were
procured as per formulary of CGHS. Ingredients contained in proprietary items did not
change with the brand name. However, items not available in the CGHS formularly were
procured from local chemists and issued to the patients as per prescriptions, the Ministry
added. This view was also confirmed by one of the CMOs who appeared before the
Committee.

26. The Committee is, however, not satisfied with the Ministry’s reply, for it does not
explain why medicines, as set out above, should not be always available, if a policy
regarding common formulary exists. It is well known that branded drugs are promoted
among physicians by the respective drug manufacturers and this may provide temptation for
prescribing medicines outside the formulary. Giving substitute medicine is a very delicate
issue. The Committee is given to understand that, sometimes, substitute medicines are given
by the pharmacist even without consulting the doctor. If substitute medicine’s composition is
different from that of the medicines originally prescribed, it could cause major complications
to patients. The Committee, therefore, insists that the Ministry must set up a system under
which every dispensary should have sufficient stock of all formulary medicines, and in case
the prescribed medicine is not available in the dispensary, the beneficiary should be allowed
to purchase it from a local chemist.

27. Formularies: The Committee is given to understand that the key to some of the
problems relating to medicines, lies in different formularies of medicines maintained by
CGHS and in different hospitals, where specialists prescribe either from the respective
formulary (or sometimes even outside on justified grounds). Many beneficiaries, who
appeared before the Coramittee, were of the view that different formularies being allowed
within the same scheme was leading to a lot of confusion and they suggested that there
should be only one list drawn and approved by DGHS, after due consultation with
concerned specialists, applicable to all the Central Government hospitals and the CGHS.
One of the CMOs, who appeared before the Committee, while supporting this point of view,
however, suggested that there could be two lists, one for dispensaries and the other for
specialists.

28. The Committee recognises that even though generic drugs are to be supplied
wherever possible, brand-name drugs are often prescribed by specialists. Where such brand-
name drugs are not available, substitute medicines are given at the dispensary. The patient
often fears that the substitute medicine would not be equally effective and insists on the
prescribed brand-name drug. This is one of the major problems at the dispensaries. The
Committee recommends that, without disturbing the well laid down principles of the
physicians’ right and freedom to prescribe, in the best interest of the patient, it should be
possible for DGHS to lay down a well thought out formulary, for different diseases,
ps 8 कद applicable at all establishments carrying generic and permitted brand-name
medicines. CGHS should be under an obligation to supply only drugs included in the current
formulary. Specialists should, in turn, be subject to the discipline of using the formulary as a
tule, giving reasons for justified deviations. The Committee hopes that there would be
enough enthusiasm on the part of doctors to make a success of the formulary scheme and,
thus reduce system costs for CGHS. This step would bring about better value for money
and, therefore, greater patient satisfaction.

29. Date-Expired Medicines: The Committee, during its visits to the dispensaries, noted
poor maintenance of medical stores. The Committee found outdated medicines in the stores.
Proper accounting of medicines was not done by the stores incharge and this aspect had
been confirmed by the CGHS Director himself during the oral evidence. The Committee is



7

surprised to observe that even CMOQs incharge do not maintain adequate supervision, let
alone the so called inspections done by CGHS authorities. As regards outdated medicines,
the Committee observes that the inventory is not maintained properly and the procedures
laid down for periodic weeding out of date expired medicines is not strictly followed. And,
as in other lapses, there seems to be no method to punish those accountable for failure to
operate a simple system such as periodic elimination of time expired medicines. Clearly,
CMOs incharge, who should ensure regular inventory of the medicines, and CGHS
authorities who should supervise them have both failed to ensure inventory of the stores and
weeding out date expired medicines. The Committee takes serious note of this deplorable
situation and wants that recalcitrant doctors should be given exemplary punishment.

30. Pilferage: The Committee was informed by the beneficiaries that a lot of pilferage of
medicines takes place in the dispensaries. Supporting this, one of the CMOs stated that
many of the good medicines, available in the dispensaries, were generally taken away by the
staff themselves. When the Committee sought to know as to what was a good medicine, it
was clarified that good medicines were of the make of standard companies which would cost
more than the other medicines. It was further stated that if the staff were denied the
medicines, they would feel irritated and would neglect the work, Usually, they would take
the medicines without any prescriptions from the dispensary, and in some cases, the
employees sell the medicines in the market, and make money. He further informed the
Committee that no action was taken against them by CGHS authorities. The Committee is
concerned about the lack of responsibility and total helplessness of doctors, CMOs and the
administration in preventing such pilferage and taking action against the culprits, especially
when they are Government employees themselves. The Committee strongly recommends
that exemplary punishment be given in such cases of pilferage. The system needs to be
corrected and streamlined from the top to the bottom so as to plug all the lacunae/oopholes
in this regard.

Disposable Syringes:

31. Many beneficiaries, in their written representations, as well as in their oral evidence,
complained that disposable syringes were not being used by CGHS dispensaries. When the
Ministry was asked to comment on the use of disposable syringes, it was stated that efforts
would be made to introduce them, subject to budget provisions. The Committee was
shocked to find that even sterilization of syringes, etc. which is a mandatory procedure, is
not properly done. For example, the Committee, during its visit to Kalibari Dispensary in
Delhi, found that, injections were being administered without sterilization and the
sterilization equipment could not be shown to the Committee. The Committee feels that
resource constraints should not be cited as an excuse for not using disposable syringes. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that disposable syringes should be introduced in
all dispensaries on an emergency basis. The Committee also desires that till disposable
syringes are not made available, sterilization of syringes needs to be strictly ensured under.
the regular supervision and monitoring of CMO and necessary articles/equipments should be
made available for sterilizing the syringes.

Functional Dispensaries:

32. Requests have also been received for conversion of more non-functional dispensaries
into functional dispensaries. One of the beneficiaries, who appeared’ before the Committee
suggested that all the dispensaries should be made functional so that people may not face
any difficulty in regard to timings. It was also suggested that every dispensary should have a
resident doctor who should be given a residence there itself and necessary paramedical staff,
including staff nurse, pharmacist and ward-boy, etc., should be provided. It would help
people approach them even at odd hours in case of emergencies. The CMOs, who met the


8

Committee, endorsed the proposal. They stated that it would ease the situation. The
Committee feels that these two are good suggestions and, if implemented, would go a long
way in improving patient care and providing better services.

33. In regard to improving the ‘work arrangements of CGHS dispensaries, the
Committee feels that a number of steps can be taken for enhancing functional efficiency.
Following the vigorous plea made by many beneficiaries, the Committee would recommend
that dispensaries should be made functional, viz. their services are available on Twenty-four
hour basis. This would be a departure from the usual system under which availability of
services is between 7.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. only, followed by truncated services thereafter,
which are not seen to be reliable by the beneficiaries. The requirements of making
dispensaries functional would, no doubt, involve augmenting the strength of doctors and
associated staff for availability on a rotation basis. If such augmentation to the permanent
strength of the CGHS would have financial and cadre implications; for CGHS, there is
always a possibility of contracting services of doctors for dispensary work along well
considered lines. The effectiveness of such twenty four hour functional arrangement should
not merely be tested against the number of patients treated, but rather from the sense of
assurance that medical facilities are at hand round the clock and whenever needed.

34. This could be done according to a phased programme, starting with dispensaries
located in low income beneficiary areas, examining how far the augmentation can be done
on a contractual basis and how to retain accountability for performance.

Cleanliness:

35. Many beneficiaries complained that cleanliness was totally lacking in dispensaries
and they were generally dirty and the standard of sanitation was very poor. The Committee
agrees with this view as the Members themselves had witnessed the situation prevailing in
the dispensaries during their visits. It was found during the visits that many of the
dispensaries were lacking in proper maintenance and upkeep and medicines were kept in
very dirty conditions. The store were filled with dirt, broken furniture etc. and did not
appear to have been cleaned for years. Toilets were in a very unhygienic condition. In an
Ayurvedic dispensary at Kalibari, New Delhi, medicine bottles were lying without any covers
and the Pharmacist incharge could not even show to the Committee the covers which were
reportedly removed prior to distribution of medicines. Similarly, in a homoeopathic
dispensary, pills kept in an open tray, were being handled with naked hand.

36. One of the CMOs, who appeared before the Committee, on being asked to
comment on the cleanliness aspect, argued that cleanliness depended totally on Safaiwalas
who could not be made to work and no action could be taken against them, as they were.a
law unto themselves.

37. When the representative of CGHS Employees’ Association was asked to comment
on this, he confirmed the existence of such conditions in the dispensaries and the excuse he
gave was that there was no incentive to Safai Karamcharis at all as they retire in the same
grade.

38. Even though the CGHS Director was himself a witness to the conditions in the
dispensaries, the Ministry, in its written reply, had stated that the cleanliness of dispensaries
was maintained by the CMOs incharge and, by and large, it was satisfactory.

39. The Committee wonders as to how the dispensaries are working under such
unhygienic conditions. The Committee expresses its deep anguish over such an important
aspect being deliberately overlooked and ignored. The fact that a Safaiwala outrightly
refuses to discharge his duties is a glaring example of slackness, laxity and indifference on



9

the part of the CGHS administration. The Committee is not convinced by the argument
that since Safai Karamcharis do not get any incentive, they would not work. The
Committee feels that the CMOs do not have any control over Safaikaramcharis and even
if they had, they may be inclined to take the line of least resistance. Unhygienic
conditions, prevailing in medical stores, is largely due to store keeper/pharmacist paying
scant attention to the upkeep. Condemned items must be disposed of quickly by
streamlining the existing procedure. Strict guidelines be issued for maintenance of
cleanliness in the dispensaries and privatisation of sanitation work considered.

Punctuality and Behaviour:

40. The Committee has been informed by the beneficiaries that dispensaries do not
normally open in time and punctuality is ignored. One of the beneficiaries who appeared
before the Committee, stated that due to lack of punctuality on the part of doctors and
para medical staff, the beneficiaries would have to wait for hours, for getting registered
and examined. Confirming this, the representative of CGHS Employees’ Association
stated that when the officers themselves come late they should not expect the other staff
members to come in time. When one of the CMOs was asked by the Committee to
comment on this aspect, he stated that generally all would not reach late. Some of the
staff members who stayed far away from the dispensary might be late. In fact, he himself
stayed far away from the dispensary and he was not able to attend the dispensary on
time. The Committee conveys its shock and anguish at this absence of work discipline
and easy compromises in discharge of duties. The Committee has been informed that all
the doctors and staff members were not provided accommodation nearby but that is not
possible in practical terms and even if it did, it had no relevance to work conditions and
discipline.

41. The Committee’s attention was also drawn to the discourteous behaviour of some
doctors and para-medical staff towards patients at the dispensaries. Many beneficiaries
informed the Committee that doctors, sometimes, start writing prescriptions even before
the patient has fully explained his problem. Overcrowding of patients/pressure of work
during peak hours did not give time to doctors to listen to the patients satisfactorily.

42. When the Ministry was asked to comment upon the punctuality aspect, it was
stated that the dispensaries, by and large, start functioning in time. However, in cases of
default, the CMOs incharge were suitably advised to ensure punctuality. It was further
stated that senior officers from the Zone, as well as from the Headquarters, would pay
periodical surprise visits to the dispensaries to ensure punctuality. In regard to the
behavioural aspect, the Ministry has stated that from time to time directions were issued
to the doctors and staff to be more polite and courteous to patients and necessary action
was taken on receipt of complaints. The Ministry affirmed that doctors and staff were
generally courteous. However, whenever workload was heavy, irritation on some amount
of ‘unavoidable delay resulted in arguments and loss of temper.

43. The Committee feels that punctuality should be strictly adhered to and polite
behaviour of the staff ensured. The Committee opines that this is an area which has gone
unnoticed by the government and no serious efforts have been made to sensitise the
CGHS staff, including the doctors, with the work culture they are expected to observe
and maintain. There must be a periodic review of workload and norms so that
physicians/doctors do not carry unmanageable burden. Wherever a norm is determined
after due consideration, there should be no excuse for discrepancy or inter personal
problems. Prompt and stringent disciplinary action may be initiated against doctors and
staff accused of frequent misbehaviour. Periodic inter-zonal, as well as intra-zonal,



10

transfer of staff may be one way of ensuring better behaviour and punctuality. The
Committee feels that a three year tenure is desirable.

Coordination:

44. The Committee is pained to note that there is lack of coordination among the staff
almost at all levels. The CMO does not get the desired cooperation from the doctors,
doctors do not get due assistance from the subordinate staff and the group ‘D’ employees do
not pay any heed to the superiors. This, the Committee feels, affects the general
functioning, as well as.the quality of service. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Government should take necessary remedial measures to streamline the functioning of the
dispensaries and restore congenial atmosphere of working by way of ensuring better
coordination among the staff.

Inspection:

45. The Committee is constrained to observe that the existing system of inspection of
CGHS dispensaries is very ineffective. The Secretary, Health, during his oral evidence
before the Committee, conceded that he could not visit a single dispensary ever since he
became the Health Secretary. Even the Director, CGHS, admitted that he rarely inspected
the dispensaries. The conditions noticed by the Committee, during its visits, give credence to
the view that inspections did not perhaps take place for years together. When the Ministry
was asked, it was stated that inspections were conducted by the Additional Directors of
Zones and Headquarters and-also the CMOs of the respective dispensaries. The Committee,
however, is not happy with the present supervisory mechanism and emphasises the need for
regular inspections. The Committee desires that the Additional Directors should make
monthly inspections and submit their reports. All those reports, the Committee desires,
should be reviewed at the higher level and necessary action taken.

Shift System:

46. The Committee received a number of representations that the existing single-shift
system was not convenient to the beneficiaries. It was stated that the beneficiaries, being
Government employees, had to leave for office before 9.00 a.m. and more often than not,
they get delayed in the dispensary. It was, therefore, suggested that ‘multi-shift’ or ‘double
shift’ would be better so that the beneficiaries could visit the dispensary for checkup etc.,
after office hours also. When the Committee sought the Ministry's view on this issue, it was
stated that the proposal to introduce double-shift system was already under the consideration
of the Government. The Committee is convinced that the present single shift system and the
timing are certainly not convenient to the Central Government employees.. The Committee
desires that evening shift may be introduced in all the dispensaries to enable the office goers
to avail of the services even after office hours. The Committee feels that while the needs and
difficulties of CGHS functionaries should be taken into account, the paramount
consideration must be satisfaction of beneficiaries.

Night Duty:

47. The Committee notes with concern that in the night shift of the dispensaries, only
one doctor is available and he has to perform all sorts of jobs himself. Some of the
beneficiaries stated that the night duty doctor would not examine properly and, therefore,
the system was virtually non-functioning. The Secretary, Health, gave a different version on
the necessity of night service. He stated that, at one stage, it was decided to do away with
this. In support of this, he informed that during night, the number of patients attending the
dispensary was one to eleven. The Committee, however, feels that a review be made of the
requirements of the night shift and suitable action taken.



ll

New Dispensaries:

48. The Committee had received a large number of representations for opening more
dispensaries, not only in Delhi, but at various other places in the country. The Committee
was informed that even-though many new colonies had come up, particularly in Trans
Yamuna areas, where there is a sizeable concentration of central Government: employees,
the CGHS has not taken any initiative to open new dispensaries, with the result the
beneficiaries had to travel long distances to reach the dispensary.

‘49. When the Secretary, Health, as asked to comment on this, he stated that even
though CGHS was not non-expanding scheme, it could be done only if provision existed for
new dispensaries. When the Ministry of Finance was approached for sanction of new
dispensaries, they had asked CGHS to reduce the staff strength in each dispensary, as per
the revised SIU norms. The Secretary informed the Committee that if the strength was
reduced, it would adversely affect the services.

50. The Committee suggests that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may take
up the matter with the Ministry of Finance once again and convince them of the necessity of
opening new dispensaries. The Ministry of Finance should also adopt a more cooperative
attitude in this matter. The Committee received many requests for opening new dispensaries.
A list of the places for which requests have been received is at Annexure-VI. The
Committee would like the Government to consider all the requests expeditiously.

Emergency Services:

51. Considering the location of CGHS facilities in urban areas, there is need to increase
the emergency services. The Committee has been informed that emergency services available
in the CGHS dispensaries were very inadequate. The Committee noted this fact during its
visits to the dispensaries. It was also stated that most of the dispensaries did not have
emergency kits. The Ministry conceded that emergency services available were only to treat
common and uncomplicated cases. It was also stated that a patient was first screened by the
doctor on duty and then referred to the hospital, if required. The Committee is not
convinced by the reply given by the Ministry. Emergency services should be adequately
strengthened in all the dispensaries, especially in respect of ambulance availability. The
government may consider providing one ambulance for four or five dispensaries/maternity
centres so that its services can be utilised in case of emergency. Whenever the proposed
Centralised Accident and Trauma Service is set up for Delhi, CGHS must make its facilities
also a part of the central pool.

52. The Committee was also informed by the beneficiaries that all the dispensaries were
not provided with facilities for basic pathological tests. Patients are often required to go to
another dispensary for tests, and in the process, ‘diagnosis and treatment take a long time.
When the Committee asked the Ministry to comment on this, it was stated that the basic
laboratory facilities were available on an average ratio of 1:3 dispensaries. It was further
stated that considering the workload and financial constraints, the present arrangement was
considered satisfactory. The Committee, however, feels that laboratory facilities in the
dispensaries need to be strengthened so that beneficiaries are not put to any serious
inconvenience.

Specialist Services:

53. Specialist Services are an important ingredient of CGHS. Many beneficiaries
complained to the Committee, both in writing and in oral evidence, that Specialist Services
were totally inadequate and were not meeting the requirements of the beneficiaries. When a
Specialist takes leave on the specified day, no substitute is provided. Another complaint is



ant sbealttas

12

that Specialists Services are not provided in dispensaries where the number of patients
requiring such treatment is quite large. It was suggested to the Committee that Specialists in
different fields should visit individual dispensaries regularly.

54. When the Committee sought clarifications from the Ministry on this aspect, it was
stated that visits of Specialists to each and every dispensary would require appointment of
additional Specialists and this would not be feasible due to resource constraint. The
Committee was further informed that Specialist Services were, however, provided through
poly-clinics.

55. The Committee is of the view that the present arrangement of Specialist Services is
not sufficient to meet the requirements of the beneficiaries. The Committee is convinced
that beneficiaries are put to a lot of avoidable inconvenience whenever a Specialist does not
turn up on the appointed day. While recognising the resource constraint, the Committee
feels that Government should consider strengthening the Specialist Services so as to ensure
better patient care and satisfaction. The Committee feels that those doctors who acquire
Specialist qualification in service should be utilised as Specialists rather than allowing their
additional knowledge and expertise to go waste.

Poly-Clinics:

56. The Committee has been informed that the system of poly-clinics has not been very
effective. Requests have also been received for opening more poly-clinics. The Committee
has also noted, from the Table given in Annexure-I, that the ratio of dispensaries and poly-
clinics is not satisfactory. For example, while Delhi has four poly-clinics for one hundred and
twenty dispensaries, Bombay has two for thirty four, Calcutta two for twenty one and
Madras two for seventeen dispensarics. In some cities, there is not even a single poly-clinic.

57, The representatives of the CGHS Employees’ Association informed the Committee
that none of the poly-clinics was functioning properly. Explaining the condition of poly-
clinics, he stated: “There may be one specialist but you cannot find all specialists.
Somewhere there is a Child Specialist and somewhere there is a Gynaecologist. Somewhere
there is X-ray and somewhere there is ECG. The situation is worse outside Delhi. If there is
a Radiologist, there is no X-ray machine. In Calcutta there 15 ३ Radiologist but there is no
X-ray machine. In Pune, there is an X-ray machine but there is no Radiologist....In
Allahabad, the X-ray machine was purchased in 1984. But, even after 10 years, it has been
still lying unpacked.”

58. When the Committee sought the Ministry's comments on opening of poly-clinics in
the ratio of 1:3 or 1:4, it was stated that multiplication of poly-clinics would require
additional specialists. These specialists would get frustrated after some time because they
would not get an opportunity to treat patients in the wards. It was further stated that
whereas necessary equipments would have to be provided in all such poly-clinics, these
might be under utilised. In view of this, the existing poly-clinics were being further
strengthened to deliver better service.

59. The Committee feels that the scheme of poly-clinics is not functioning effectively to
the satisfaction of the beneficiaries. Government should look into the complaints of lack of
adequate number of Specialists and other staff members and necessary steps should be taken
expeditiously in this regard and should there be any sense of frustration among specialists it
can be removed by a well designed rotation/transfer system. The Committee is convinced
that the number of poly-clinics presently operating is not sufficient to meet the requirements
of the beneficiaries. The Committee agrees that the existing poly-clinics need to be
strengthened. But, it should not be made an excuse for not opening new poly-clinics.


13

SEPARATE CGHS_ HOSPITALS/CGHS WINGS IN CENTRAL
GOVERNMENT HOSPITALS

60. Many of the beneficiaries, who met the Committee and also through written
representations, suggested that separate hospitals should be opened in major cities to cater
exclusively to the needs of CGHS beneficiaries. It was complained to the Committee that
CGHS beneficiaries did not get proper treatment and adequate attention in Government
hospitals. Even though there are separate CGHS wings in Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia and
Safdarjung hospitals there is no reservation of beds in them for CGHS beneficiaries.

61. On the suggestion of opening separate hospitals for CGHS beneficiaries, the
Secretary, Health, stated-that opening of new hospitals or providing hospital wings
exclusively for CGHS beneficiaries was not a feasible proposition and that he would instead
prefer recognition of more hospitals in corporate and private sectors for the CGHS
beneficiaries. Elaborating the idea, he further stated that charges could be fixed for different
kinds of treatment so that the beneficiaries should be free to have treatment in any hospital
and claim reimbursement. The Secretary also added that there could be a system of some
revolving fund with these recognised hospitals so that any beneficiary could go and get
treatment there and the charges could be adjusted later.

62. In regard to reservation of beds for CGHS beneficiaries in Central Government
hospitals, the Ministry stated that the Government Hospitals were already overcrowded and
such reservation of beds was not feasible.

63. The Committee sees merit in the contention of the Health Secretary and views it to
be a practical solution. Recognition of more private hospitals would indeed be a better and
quicker solution than setting up new hospitals. The idea of the Health Secretary to keep a
revolving funds with’ recognised hospitals is welcome and Government should act on this
proposal immediately. As regards the other details relating to the recognised private
hospitals, the Committee has dealt with them separately, while discussing the issue of
supplementing CGHS with recognised hospitals.

REIMBURSEMENT

64. The Committee has noted, from the complaints received from the beneficiaries, that
reimbursement of money spent on’ purchasing medicines, etc. takes unduly long time. It was
suggested that the procedure should be simplified so as to avoid delays. Some of the
beneficiaries suggested that full medical expenditure, including that incurred in referral
hospitals, should be reimbursed and that the earlier system of settling reimbursement
between the hospitals and CGHS was good and should be restored.

65. The Ministry, responding to the complaints on the delay in reimbursement, stated
that powers of reimbursement of cost of indented items had been delegated to the respective
Departments. On the suggesstion of restoring the earlier system, it was stated that it would
not be feasible due to financial constraints of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. But,
subsequently, the Ministry has informed the Committee that they had gone back to the old
system.

66. The Committee is given to understand that even though the reimbursement system
has been decentralised, the sanction for reimbursement is given by CGHS only and CGHS
takes a very long time in giving its sanction/approval which puts the beneficiaries to much
inconvenience. The Committee would like the Ministry and the GGHS to undertake a
review of the present system and fix time limits for such reimbursement and streamline the
mechanism.


14

SUBSCRIPTION

67. The Committee is given to understand that the CGHS subscription has recently been
increased by about five times. Many beneficiaries complained to the Committee that the
increase effected in the rate of subscription was on the high side. Justifying the increase in
the subscription, the Ministry stated that during the last four decades the pay and allowances
of-Government servants had undergone upward revision a number of times and the cost of
medicines had also increased manifold. However, ever since the CGHS was introduced, the
rate was revised only once. The revision was done on the recommendation of the Fourth Pay
Commission, the Ministry added. A table showing revised rates is at Annexure-VII.

68. As revealed from the Table, the current status and trends in levels of contribution
by beneficiaries at different income slabs indicate that, though apparently steep, the hike is
fully justified due to the increasing cost of medical services. Some relationship between pay-
scales and contribution rates has to be maintained. But, the case of pensioners must be
viewed more sympathetically, preferably by introducing a system of lumpsum one time
payment, entitling pensioners and their spouses to avail of CGHS facilities throughout their
lives.

69. On a suggestion received from the beneficiaries, the Committee sought to know
from the Ministry as to whether it proposes to make the subscription voluntary, instead of
compulsory as at present, in view of the steep hike in the subscription rate. The Ministry
submitted that no such proposal was under consideration of the Government as it was
mandatory for Central Government Employees to pay the prescribed fee.

70. The Committee also wanted to know from the Ministry as to why CGHS, being a
paid service, should not be brought under the purview of the Consumer Protection Act. The
Ministry has stated that the Central Government Health Scheme was not a paid service.
Only a token contribution was charged from the beneficiaries. The scheme was essentially a
welfare scheme and, therefore, it was not considered desirable to bring it under the
Consumer Protection Act.

RAILWAYS AND ARMED FORCES—MEDICAL FACILITIES

71. In this connection, the Committee has also considered the Railway Health Services
and the Armed Forces Health Services and heard the views of the Chiefs of both the
services so as to compare the medical facilities available of the employees to these two
organisations with the CGHS.

72, The network of Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) starts with the Medical
Services Units at the primary level. It has zonal and sub-zonal hospitals at the secondary
level and command level hospitals at the tertiary level which have all types of
superspecialities and the latest medical equipment. This network caters to the medical needs
of the armed forces personnel free of cost, from the lowest to the highest level. A
beneficiary may seek treatment by private doctors in case of emergency and later claim
reimbursement of the full amount spent on such treatment. Their arrangements with private
hospitals is better as they make advance payment for the treatment of their beneficiaries and
as such the patient receives better care and satisfactory service.

73. As regards ex-servicemen, except for such diseases as cancer, leprosy, T.B., mental
disorder, etc. all sorts of treatment are provided free of cost. For them, a scheme called
‘Army Group Insurance’ (AGI) is also there. Under this scheme, a retiring employee makes
a lumpsum contribution, ranging from Rs.3,000 to Rs.6,000, depending upon the rank from
which he retires. It entitles him to get treatment for cancer, by-pass surgery, kidney



15

transplant, etc. costing upto rupees one lakh. The Committee was given to understand that
despite doctor/nurse-patient ratio being lower in the AFMS, as compared to civil hospitals/
CGHS, the quality of services provided by the former is far better ‘than that of the latter.

74. Similarly, the network of Railway ‘Health Services (RHS) consists of health units at
the lowest level, sub-divisional and divisional hospitals at the secondary level and Zonal
hospitals at the tertiary level which provide speciality and superspeciality services. They also
have some centres of excellence located in different parts of the country which provide
‘specialised services for heart diseases, cancer, orthopaedics, cardio-micro vascular surgery,
gastro-enterology and plastic surgery etc.

75. Periodic examination of the health conditions of railway employees, the Committee
noted, is undertaken with a view to have an early detection of diseases and curing them at
the initial stages only. For pensioners, RHS has two schemes—Retired Employees
Contributory Health Scheme and the Retired Employees Liberalised Health Scheme. While
a beneficiary seeking in-door treatment has to pay 10% of the charges under the former, a
pensioner has to deposit the amount equal to the last pay drawn under the latter. He is
provided all the services available in the railway hospitals free of cost. In case of emergency,
a beneficiary may seek private treatment and get the amount reimbursed within a maximum
ceiling of Rs. 1500.

76. Further, there is a clearly laid down procedure of inspection under which a health
unit is inspected every six months. All the medicines prescribed by the doctors/specialists
are made available to the beneficiary in the unit/hospital itself. Medicines are given for
more days so that the patients need not go to the doctor frequently.

71. The beneficiary does not need to wait for days together for various investigations.
Generally, the investigation of the patient admitted in the morning is completed by the
evening itself.

78. In view of the above, the Committee is of the opinion that the general functioning
and the quality of services being provided by the AFMS and the RHS are far better and
satisfactory as compared to those of the CGHS. This is despite the fact that AFMS and RHS
are non-contributory. If both of them are able to provide better services without any
contribution from their beneficiaries, the Committee fails to understand as to why the same
could not be done by the CGHS which collects some amount as contribution. The
Committee feels that the ills afflicting the functioning of the CGHS are more because of
mismanagement of men and materials than on account of lack of resources.

79. The Committee, however, agrees with the Ministry that whatever be-the extent of
resources made available to CGHS, the system cannot be expanded without limit,
particularly in an era where private sector's role in medicine is getting dominant. The
Committee recognises that there are difficulties in large—scale expansion of the Scheme and
does not expect this to happen, barring a few marginal additions. It should, however, be
possible to expand CGHS to all major cities of India. It is noteworthy that no State
Government has adopted the model of CGHS for its own employees, preferring, instead, to
continue with a medical reimbursement system or grant of standard medical allowances in
lieu thereof.

RECOGNISED PRIVATE HOSPITALS

80. As far as CGHS needs are concerned, one area to be explored is how to use private
hospital services to supplement CGHS facilities, specially where beneficiaries cannot easily
have access to such facilities due to distance. Already, the Committee notes, private hospital
services are used to supplement CGHS in respect of facilities and procedures. In this


- duty on the import’ of hospital equipment and are: also provided land and institutional औे

16

connection, the evidence reveals that private hospitals have a grievance about payment at
low rates, or at discriminatory rates, not adequate to cover their costs. The Committee
would recommend that, while taking advantage of private hospital facilities, CGHS must
evaluate such facilities and lay down rates of payments on a uniform basis as part
of regulatory guidelines. CGHS may also consider procedures for approaching private
doctors and hospitals, specially to cover pensioners or those living beyond the city where
CGHS facilities are located. There could also be arrangements for a separate CGHS wing,
on an earmarked basis, reserving beds in the hospital general. wards for CGHS patients
despite the reasons given against such arrangement by the Ministry.

81. The Committee feels that the services of private hospitals and laboratories are not
being tapped effectively. The Committee received several complaints from the beneficiaries
that many efficient and good private hospitals have been kept out of the purview of the
CGHS, causing a lot of hardship to the beneficiaries. The Committee also received
complaints that recognised private hospitals often refuse to entertain CGHS beneficiaries
due to non-payment / delayed settlement of their bills by CGHS authorities. The Committee
also held discussions with the representatives of some of the private hospitals recognised by
CGHS. Dr. P.C. Reddy, Chairman, Apollo Hospitals, informed the Committee that there
was no rationale on the part of CGHS in prescribing the approved rates. Further, there were
city to city and hospital to hospital variations in costs. It was also stated that the hospitals
would not be able to render service at the existing approved rates, unless these were revised
from time to time. Similar complaint was made by Shri B.K. Thaparia, Chairman of
Bombay Hospitals.

82. When the Committee sought the comments of the Additional Director Generai of
Health Services, he submitted that the Government had received a number of requests for
revision of rates. He further stated that a Committee had been set up in 1994 to carry out
inspection of all the recognised hospitals and a revision would be done soon. There was also
a budget constraint, he added.

83. The Committee, after taking into consideration various aspects related to this
arrangement, observes that CGHS has not adopted a proper system of prescribing rates to
the mutual advantage of the CGHS beneficiaries and the private hospitals. Non-revision of
rates for several years and delayed payment of bills would only affect the beneficiaries. The
Committee desires that the formalities regarding revision of rates be completed early and the
concerned hospitals informed accordingly. The Department may also consider undertaking
the exercise of recognising more reputed private hospitals and laboratories. These efforts
would go a long way in not only supplerhenting the efforts of CGHS but also help achieve
the ultimate goal of patient care and satisfaction.

84. The Committee was informed that private hospitals are given exemption in customs |

finance, etc. on concessional rates. The Committee is surprised to rote that these private
hospitals are not reciprocating by providing any free or concessional treatment to the poor
CGHS beneficiaries. If at all any concession is being given by some hospitals, it is generally ‘
negligible. The Government also does not seem to be bothered about it. The Committee, 4
therefore, recommends that the Department should ensure that every private hospital, which |
has availed of such concessions from the Government, provide proportionate number of |
free/cancessional beds for the poor beneficiaries. The Government should also have a,
mechanism for ensuring its compliance. 4

85. It has been observed that the recognised private hospitals are interested only in accepting 5
cases requiring costly treatments/operations such as cardiac bypass and renal transplant etc.for which 4



17

they have got full capacity. The Committee, therefore, recommends that it should be stipulated that
both major, as well as minor, cases are entertained by recognised private hospitals.

STAFF-RELATED ISSUES
Staff Strength:

86. The Committee does not propose to make any detailed analysis of staff problems.
All such issues must be resolved keeping in mind the paramount interest of patient care.
However, from the evidence before the Committee, it seems clear that the Ministry should
take urgent action on some aspects affecting staff morale and efficiency. The Committee has
been informed that the full staff strength is never on duty in the dispensaries. Due to lack of
sufficient doctors, patients are required to wait for longer periods for check up. The
Committee is distressed to note that out of the total sanctioned strength of 1656 and 26 in
respect of Group “A” and “B” staff, only 1564 and 18 respectively are in position. The
position in regard to Group “C” staff is 2765 out of 3108. In case of Group ‘D’, out of 2983,
2845 are in position. Though there was an increase in the number of doctors, there was no
proportionate increase in the para-medical staff. One CMO informed the Committee that
due to lack of staff one of the two counters in the dispensary was run by a peon which
affected other work. When the Ministry was asked as to why a number of posts remained
vacant for a considerable time, it was stated that the récruitment of doctors was done by the
UPSC which was a time-consuming process. Even after selection, many of the doctors would
not join, or even if they joined, they would leave the job soon for better prospects
elsewhere.

87. The Committee also received complaints that whenever doctors were on leave, no
substitute was provided to the dispensary which affected the service to patients. When the
Ministry was asked to explain, it was stated that there was no provision for leave reserves in
CGHS and sometimes it might not be possible to provide a substitute.

88. The Committee feels that efficiency in the CGHS services can only be improved if
sufficient staff strength is there in position. The Committee notes with regret that a number
of posts are lying vacant. Government should take necessary steps to fill up the vacancies
immediately. The Committee also recommends that CGHS should keep a leave reserve in
tespect of doctors and para-medical staff and for this, additional posts may have to, be
created. Employing doctors on contract basis may also be considered. The Ministry of
Finance may be approached for sanction of additional posts as per the requirement.

Staff Morale:

89. The representative of the CGHS Employees’ Association informed the Committee
that there was a lot of frustration among categories ‘C’ and ‘D’ employees. Certain grades of
employees retired for the same post in which they had joined. A Safaiwala would retire as a
Safaiwala and he suggested that there should be some promotion/incentive for them. The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that Government may take positive steps in this regard.
The Committee feels that a quota be prescribed for promotion of Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’
employees depending upon the length of their service and the acquisition of the required
qualification. The Committee hopes that the Government and the Pay Commission would
take a positive view in this regard.


18

PRIVATE PRACTICE BY DOCTORS

90. The practice of doctors’ taking:more interest in private practice than doing justice to
their Government jobs, the Committee feels, is costing the CGHS dearly. The Committee is
given to understand that despite issuing guidelines against it, many doctors continue to

indulge in private practice. Maladies such as poor service, pilferage of medicines, late.

coming and early going etc., are inherent in this issue. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Government should take necessary and stringent measures to stop private
practice by Government doctors employed. in CGHS dispensaries and clinics.

EXPOSURE TO LATEST DEVELOPMENTS AND INNOVATIONS

91. The Committee has found that CGHS doctors generally are not upto date with the
latest developments taking place in the field of medical science. Nor they get exposure to the
complicated cases / ailments, which tend to limit their knowledge only to minor and routine
problems. The Committee, therefore, recommends that CGHS doctors must be given
adequate oppoitunity to keep themselves abreast and aware of the new advancements by
providing opportunities to participate in national and international seminars, workshops and
training programmes. Promotions of these doctors to higher posts may be linked with the
training/refresher courses.

COMPLAINT BOX

92. One of the points brought to the notice of the Committee by several beneficiaries
was that in most of the dispensaries Complaint Boxes were not kept, even though it was
mandatory on the part of CGHS to do so. Even if a complaint box was kept, it was kept at
such a place where it could not be easily seen by the patients. The Ministry should ensure
that complaint boxes are kept at prominent places and prompt action taken on each and
every complaint.

CHIEF WELFARE OFFICER/AREA .WELFARE OFFICER / BENEFICIARIES’
WELFARE COMMITTEE

93. The Committee also heard the views of the Chief Welfare Officer and one of the
Area Welfare Officers in order to find out their role in redressing the grievances of the
beneficiaries and to what extent they have been protecting the interests of the beneficiaries.
On being asked about the appointment procedure etc. of these officers, it was stated that the
post of Chief Welfare Officer was a regular post. Area Welfare Officers, however, were
appointed for various residential colonies for a period of two years on honorary basis.

94. It was further stated that the Area Welfare Officer and the Residential Welfare
Associations were the two fora where CGHS-related issues were raised. Generally, Area
Welfare Officer takes up the complaints with the CGHS Dispensary and in case, he was not
satisfied, he would refer it to the Chief Welfare Officer or CGHS. It was, however,
submitted that the post of Area Welfare Officer was purely honorary and no special benefits
were attached. When a probing enquiry was made to the Chief Welfare Officer as to

whether Area Welfare Officers were effective in dealing with the problems of CGHS"

beneficiaries, he evaded direct reply, except stating that in certain areas they took a lot of
interest.

95. The Committee, however, is not happy with the system.of Area Welfare Officer.
The Committee is constrained to observe that the beneficiaries are generally not in contact
with the Area Welfare Officers or rather they did not know about them. The Committee
agrees that since the Area Welfare Officers are not paid for their services and they have
various other activities, they would not take that much intérest as is required of the job. The



19

| Committee is, therefore, of the view that the Government should consider providing some
| minimum facilities, such as telephone, etc. to Area Welfare Officers. Some monetary
| incentives could also be provided. The suggestions of Area Welfare Officers should have
some authority and sanctity so that the beneficiaries’ grievances could be effectively
redressed. The Government should give. necessary instructions to all CMOs to act
immediately on the suggestions made by the Area Welfare Officers. Government may also
consider appointing Beneficiaries’ Welfare Committees for each dispensary, involving the
Chief Medical Officer, the Area Welfare Officers and representatives of Residential Welfare
Associations. Apart from providing incentive to the Area Welfare Officers, Government
should give them some sort of authority, so that they could discharge their responsibility
effectively.

96. The Committee feels that lack of proper/regular interaction between the CGHS
functionaries and its beneficiaries is the main cause of the dissatisfaction amongst the
beneficiaries and non-redressal of their grievances. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that a half-yearly open house meeting of the Additional Director, CGHS, of the concerned
Zone, CMOs and para-medical staff of a dispensary with its beneficiaries should be held so
that the grievances may be redressed quickly.

PENSIONERS

97. The Committee received a large number of complaints in regard to treatment of
pensioners in CGHS dispensaries. The main complaint was that senior citizens were made to
wait for their turn in the queue alongwith others. Complaints have also been made in regard
to hike in subscription rate, delayed reimbursement and non-availability of CGHS facilities
at places where a large number of CGHS pensioners are residing.

98. Many pensioners stated that they might be exempted from making any subscription
and be excluded from any future revision. It was further stated that wherever the CGHS
facilities were. not available, some sort of monthly allowance should be given to get
treatment for minor ailments. For major ailments, there should be an arrangement with the
State-run hospitals for their treatment.

99. The Committee sought the-comments of the Ministry on various issues relating to
pensioners. The Ministry has stated that instructions were already issued about giving
preference to retired people at the dispensaries. As regards provision of free medical
facilities to pensioners, it was stated that the matter was under the consideration of the Fifth
Pay Commission. On the issue of payment of lumpsum amount to pensioners for treatment,
the Ministry informed the Committee that the demand was justified and a proposal was sent
to the Finance Ministry but it was not agreed to. The Committee was also informed that the
issue was then referred to the Fifth Pay Commission. When the Committee sought to know
as to whether it would be possible to open separate counters for senior citizens, one of the
CMOs informed that due to lack of sufficient staff and space, it would not be possible. The
Committee feels that a sequentially negative view has been taken of genuine problems of
pensioners, where every suggested solution has been confronted by pointing out new
problems or postponement of decisions. Considering the world wide trend of respect and
special attention to problems of senior citizens, the Committee would request the
Government to take a just and fair decision on all these issues. ४

eR ee मत

“fe

100. The Committee received a suggestion that geriatric clinics be opened in all CGHS
dispensaries. In response to this, the Ministry stated that geriatrics was an upcoming facility
and specialists in this field were very few. It might be possible to open geriatric clinics only
in phases in course of time.



20

101. The World Health Organisation has been periodically drawing attention of the
health authorities to the problems of the aged. In regard to health related issues, WHO had
recommended that health and health allied services should be developed to the fullest extent
possible. It also recommended that institutional care should always be appropriate to the
needs of the elders and necessary health infrastructure and specialised staff to provide
thorough and complete geriatric care should also be made available. There has been a
variety of experiments abroad of redesigning of hospitalisation needs of old people, making
domiciliary and community care as a part of hospital .services.

102. In view of the above, the Committee recommends that appropriate instructions be
issued for according priority in treatment to senior citizens and the same be scrupulously
adhered to in each and every dispensary. The CMO himself should see to it that they are
not put to unnecessary hardships and strain. The Committee hopes that the Fifth Pay
Commission would give sympathetic consideration to the grievances of the pensioners as
regards payment of lumpsum amount to those not availing of the CGHS facilities and come
out with positive recommendations. The Government must also try to identify the areas
where there is comparatively larger concentration of retired Central Government employees
and provide them CGHS coverage. Government should also expedite the proposal for
allowing pensioners to seek treatment in local recognised hospitals and get reimbursement
thereafter.

103. The Committee strongly recommends that a complete study of the CGHS-related
issues and problems faced by pensioners may be undertaken and a plan of action for
removing their difficulties be drawn up.

NEED FOR CONSIDERING ALTERNATIVE SCHEMES

104, Although the intention of the Committee is to examine the functioning of the
CGHS by way of suggesting ways and methods for improving the functional efficiency and
increasing patients’ convenience and satisfaction, within the existing system, it would,
however, like to put forth the following alternatives for consideration:—

(a) Introduction of a Comprehensive Health Insurance Scheme:

There has been a general feeling that the Government should consider the Health
Insurance Scheme, initially to cover the senior citizens and later on extend the same to
serving employees as well. The senior citizens upto the age of 60 years, to begin with, could
be brought under the Scheme. This could be on the lines of the scheme alfeady introduced
by the Unit Trust of India for senior citizensi A similar proposal is also reported to be under
consideration of the Fifth Pay Commission. The proposed scheme will initially, supplement
the existing CGHS infrastructure and services. In this connection, expert opinion may be
obtained to see how far innovative measures, such as Medisave Scheme of Singapore, could
help provide suitable insurance cover to salaried employees. The Committee would,
therefore, urge the Ministry, to set up a working group to prepare the details of this scheme
in consultation with the Ministry of Finance.

(b) Setting up of Health Trusts:

The Committee also desires that the Ministry may explore the possibility of setting up
Trusts, in place of the existing CGHS system. This may help in decentralising the existing
monolithic structure of the CGHS. The Ministry could think of establishing three or four

Trusts, based at Bombay, Madras, Calcutta and Delhi, covering the beneficiaries in different
parts of the country.

These Trusts may include appropriate managementfinancial experts and be headed by



21

professional Executive Directors, responsible for their proper functioning within the
objectives laid down. The existing infrastructure, personnel and assets, etc. of the CGHS
may ultimately, be transferred to these Trusts.

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS

1. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should improve the work culture, upkeep
and maintenance of CGHS dispensaries so as to win back the confidence of the
beneficiaries. This could be possible only if CGHS could instil a sense of professional
approach and inculcate the ethos of discipline, dedication and devotion in the minds of
medical and para-medical staff. (Para-13)

2. Existing guidelines and arrangements to improve the working of the CGHS
dispensaries need to be implemented meticulously and responsibility/accountability for the
degeneration of work culture should be fixed and stern action taken against the erring
officials. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare should launch a compaign for improving
the work culture with a definite timebound programme. (Para-14)

3. The campaign should be spearheaded by earmarked senior officers drawn from two
or three hierarchical levels including the Director General, Health Services. There is a need
for introducing periodical inspections at every level. (Para-15)

4. The powers and responsibilities of the Medical Officers in-charge of dispensaries
should be clearly defined and they should be held responsible for the proper functioning of
the units under their control. (Para-16)

5. The Ministry should look into the problems of drug supply, quality of medicines,
their distribution arrangements, pilferage, lack of proper control over storage and lack of
care in weeding out life expired medicines. The Ministry should examine and explore the
possibility of allowing a beneficiary to purchase medicines from any chemist on the
prescription given in the dispensaries which could be reimbursed subsequently. (Para-20)

6. The Ministry should devise a suitable foolproof working system, with clear
accountability, patient safety and quality assurance with regard to procurement, supply and
distribution of medicines. The system of supply of medicines needs to be streamlined and
revamped to curtail delays and the medicines listed in the formulary should always be made
available in the CGHS dispensaries. (Para-20)

7. Non-supply of standard medicines is leading to aversion towards CGHS among the
beneficiaries. It appears that the quality testing machinery of CGHS is either non-
functioning or totally ineffective.: The Ministry should take immediate steps.to enforce
quality controls on medicines supplied to the CGHS dispensaries. (Para-23)

8. Medicines prescribed are, more often than not, substituted by less potent and cheaper
medicines. There is a vast difference in the composition and quality of the substituted
médicines. The Ministry should, therefore, work out a system wherein all dispensaries have
sufficient stock of all formulary medicines and where the prescribed medicine is not available
in the dispensary, the beneficiary should be allowed to purchase it from the local chemist.
(Para-26)

9. Different formularies of medicines within the same scheme is resulting into a lot of
confusion amongst the beneficiaries. The problem could be overcome by drawing one list of
medicines duly approved by DGHS, after due consultation with the concerned specialist,
which would be applicable to all Central Government hospitals and the CGHS. (Para-27)

10. The DGHS should lay down a well thought out formulary, for different diseases,


22

uniformly applicable to all establishments carrying generic and permitted brand name
medicines without disturbing the physician's right and freedom: to prescribe in the best
interest of the patient. (Para-28)

11. The functioning of the medical stores leaves much to be desired. There is no proper
inventory of the medicines. Periodic weeding out of date-expired medicines is not strictly
followed. There is no inspection of these stores. CMOs in-charge should ensure regular
inventory of the medicines and weed out the date expired medicines at periodic intervals.
Exemplary punishment must be given to the officials found responsible for these lapses.
(Para-29) पु

12. A lot of pilferage of medicines is reported to be taking place in the dispensaries. A
strict watch is required to be kept over the pilferage of medicines and exemplary punishment
should be given to those found responsible. (Para-30)

13. Disposable syringes should be introduced in all dispensaries on an emergency basis.
Till the disposable syringes are made available in the dispensaries, sterlisation of syringes
needs to be strictly ensured under the regular supervision and monitoring of CMO.
Necessary material/articles/equipments required for sterilisation of syringes must be made
available in the dispensaries. (Para-31)

14. Non-functional dispensaries should be converted into functional dispensaries. Every
dispensary should have a Resident Doctor and necessary para-medical staff, such as staff
nurse, pharmacist, ward boy, etc. (Para-33)

15. There is an urgent need for the upkeep, maintenance and cleanliness of CGHS
dispensaries. At present, these dispensaries are in a very unhygienic condition and the
Medical Officers, storekeepers/pharmacists, etc. pay scant attention towards this important
aspect. The Ministry should issue strict instructions for the proper upkeep and maintenance
of cleanliness in the dispensaries. The Ministry should also consider privatisation of
sanitation works in dispensaries. (Para-39)

16. It has been observed that useless and unserviceable items are lying for years
together occupying the scarce space in the dispensaries. These items should be condemned
periodically, and disposed of expeditiously by streamlining the procedure. (Para-39)

17, Punctuality and discipline must be strictly observed by the staff and the doctors.
They should be sensitised with the work culture they are expected to observe and maintain.
They should be polite and courteous in thier behaviour with the patients. Disciplinary action
should be taken against doctors and staff accused of misbehaviour. (Para-42)

18. Periodic inter-zonal as well as intra-zonal transfer of staff may be effected. There
could be a tenure of three years for rotational transfers. (Para-42)

19. There is a need for greater coordination between doctors para-medical staff and the
other administrative staff working in the dispensaries. This will help to improve the work
culture and provide better services. (Para-44)

20. There should be monthly inspection of dispensaries by the Additional Directors and
the inspection reports should be reviewed at the higher level to take necessary remedial
measures. (Para-45)

21. The Ministry should immediately introduce evening shift in all the dispensaries to
enable the office goers to, avail of the services after office hours. While the needs and
difficulties of the staff working in these dispensaries should be taken into account, the
paramount consideration must be the ultimate satisfaction of ‘the patients/beneficiaries.
(Para-46)



23

22. The system of night shift of dispensaries for emergency treatments, etc. needs to be
reviewed keeping in view the medical needs of the beneficiaries. (Para-47)

23. The Ministry should take initiative to open new dispensaries, particularly in the new
colonies, keeping in view. the difficulties faced by the beneficiaries. The Ministry may take
up the matter with the Ministry of Finance and convince them of the necessity of opening
new dispensaries. The Ministry of Finance should adopt a more cooperative attitude in this
regard. (Para-50)

24. Emergency services should be adequately strengthened in all the dispensaries,
especially with regard to the availability of ambulance. Simultaneously the laboratory
facilities also need to be strengthened so that the beneficiaries are not put to any serious
inconvenience. (Paras-51 & 52)

25. The present arrangement of specialist services is not sufficient to meet the
requirement of the beneficiaries. The Government should consider strengthening the
specialist services so as to ensure better patient care and satisfaction. (Para-55)

26. The scheme of poly-clinics is not functioning effectively to the satisfaction of
beneficiaries. The existing infrastructure of poly-clinics needs to be strengthened. The poly-
clinics should have adequate number of specialists and other staff. The Government should
work out a well designed policy of rotation/transfer of the specialists. (Para-59)

27. The Government should recognise more hospitals in corporate and private sectors
for the CGHS beneficiaries. The charges could be fixed for different kinds of treatment so
that beneficiaries are free to take treatment in any hospital and claim reimbursement. There
could be a system of some revolving fund with these recognised hospitals so that any
beneficiary could get the treatment there and the charges could be adjusted later. (Para-63)

28. In order to supplement the CGHS facilities with private hospital services, the CGHS
should evaluate such facilities, recognise more hospitals and lay down reasonable rates of
payments, on a uniform basis. There could also be arrangements for a separate CGHS wing,
on an earmarked basis, reserving beds in the hospital general wards for CGHS patients.
(Para-81)

29. Some private hospitals are given exemption in customs duty for the import of
hospital equipments and are also provided land, institutional finance, etc. on concessional
rates. The Government should ensure that these hospitals in turn reciprocate by providing
free/concessional treatment and beds to the poor beneficiaries. (Para-84).

30. The reimbursement of money spent on purchasing medicines takes unduly long time.
The procedure for reimbursement should be simplified so as to avoid delays. The Ministry
and the CGHS should review the existing system and fix time limits for reimbursing the cost
by streamlining the procedure. (Para-66.)

31. The Ministry should take immediate steps to improve staff morale and efficiency.
The staff strength available in the dispensaries is less than the sanctioned strength. The
shortage of staff has to be made good keeping in view the necessity of the patients/
beneficiaries. Though there was an increase in the number of doctors, there is no
proportionate increase in the para-medical staff. All vacant posts should be filled up. CGHS
should keep a pool of leave reserve doctors and para-medical staff and for this, additional
posts may have to be created. There should be periodic review of work load and norms so
that physicians are not burdened with overcrowding of patients. Possibility of employing
doctors on contract basis may also be considered. The Ministry of Finance may be
approached for sanction of additional posts as per the justified strength. (Para-88)


24

32. A quota may be prescribed for promotion of Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ employees
depending upon the length of service and acquisition of required qualification. (Para-89).

33. Private practice by Government Doctors employed in CGHS dispensaries and clinics
should be stopped and stringent action taken agajnst those violating the rules. (Para-90)

34, CGHS Doctors must be given adequate opportunity to keep themselves abreast of
the new advancements by providing opportunities to participate in national and international
seminars, workshops and training programmes. The promotional avenues of the Doctors
may be linked with the training programmes/refresher courses attended by them. (Para-91)

35. The Ministry should ensure that complaint boxes are available and conspicuously
displayed at prominent places in the dispensaries. Prompt action should be taken on each
and every complaint. (Para-92)

36. The Government may consider providing some facilities such as telephones, etc. to
the Area Welfare: Officers, besides some monetary incentives. The Area Welfare Officers’
suggestions should be given due weightage keeping in view the beneficiaries grievance.
(Para-95)

37. Government may also consider appointing CGHS Beneficiaries Welfare Committees
for each dispensary, involving the Chief Medical Officer, the Area Welfare Officer and
representatives of the Resident Welfare Associations. (Para-95)

38. The Ministry should give due consideration to the problems of senior citizens and
try to take a sympathetic view of the problems faced by them. Necessary instructions be
issued for according priority in treatment to senior citizens. The Government should try to
identify areas where there is comparatively large concentration of retired Central
Government employees and provide them CGHS coverage. The possibility of allowing
pensioners to seek treatment in local recognised hospitals and get reimbursement thereafter
may also be explored. A complete study of the CGHS related issue and the problems faced
by pensioners may be undertaken and a plan of action drawn up. (Paras-102 & 103)

39. The Government may examine/explore alternatives for replacing CGHS with
Health Insurance Cover, initially starting with senior citizens and later on extending it to
serving employees as well. Expert opinion may be obtained to see how far innovative
measures, such as ‘Medisave’ scheme of Singapore, can help introduce suitable insurance
cover to salaried employees.~A working group to prepare the details of this scheme could be
set up. [Para-104 (a)]

40. The Government may also examine whether the on-going CGHS could be
converted from purely departmental activity into a more manageable quasi-Governmental
set-up managed by trust or trusts. A modified CGHS system, operated on a decentralized
basis outside Government control, would be able to make CGHS more responsive to patient
needs in its work arrangements. The CGHS could, thus, be converted from a departmental

undertaking into three or four trusts covering beneficiaries in different parts of the country.
[Para-104 (b)]



City-wise Distribution of Dispensaries/Beneficiaries

Annexure-I

Name of Date of |Allo.|Ayur. ee lc ig) 'Yoga|Total] Poly | CGHS |Den- i of No of
City Starting Families | Benefici-

‘ aries

| Ahmedabad Apl. 1979 छा | - | 7 1144
Allahabad [ Mar. 1969 | 1969 Bea | -_| | 9| 28842 | 163411
Bangalore Feb. 1976 BS | - | | ४ | 47966 |. 200292
Bombay Nov. 1963 | 4 | | — | 34 96473 | 376001
Caleutta@ Aug. 1972 eae ee] | 21 | 96581*| 410569
[Deni | July 1954 किक ee 120 305666 | 1388680
Hyderabad Feb. 1976 Bey eae |» | 68299 | 299791
Jabalpur | Oct. 1991 | | -— | - | fs 9701 38074
|

Jaipur July 1978 Es | — | 7 21193 | 96653 |
[Kanpur | . July 1972 | 2] -] | 12 38006 | 197690
Lucknow Mar. 1979 ey “| | 9| 20827 107382
[Mads Mar. 1975 | 14 | 4 1 Eas = 7 55339 | 231171
Meerut July 1971 | 6 | la | — | | 3| 14231 91293
im Nagpur Oct. 1973} io] २| 1 | — | | 131| 11 — | 1] 31004] 142054
Patna@ Nov. 1976 ॥ 50] | 1| Ea | — | |-| 7{ 1 | Bea Eg 20220* | 100453 |
[Pune | july 198| 7| 1| 2 | | - | | | — | | 10 | | ey Ea EY | 32581 | 119722

Bhubaneswar Aug. 1988 | 1s] —| — | — |—[-| 1] -] | - | | 9 | | - | | _- |
Total eee 1203 13 | 34 | 88, Ee | ७ | 17 | 894973 | 3996432

* Including two Sub-Dispensaries. (Figures as on 31-3-1993)
** Including one Sub-Dispensary (Figures as on 31-3-1992)

$ Exclusively for A.G.'s Employees only

@ Figures as on 31-3-1993



Expenditure incurred during 1991-92 to 1994-95

Annexure-II

(Rs. in lakhs)

Budget Plan Non-Plan Revised Plan Non-Plan
Estimates

1991-1992 400.00 7,332.00 1991-1992 2,00.00 72,32.00

1992-1993 300.00 7,558.00 1992-1993 4,84.00 83,54.00

1993-1994 575.00 8,990.00 1993-1994 5,00.00 1,13.00

1994-1995, 400.00 10,000.00 1994-1995 5,00.00 1,45.00

1995-1996 700.00 15,500.00

26


1.18
to
122

2.40

2.84

2.91

2.102

Annexure-III

Key Recommendations of Estimates Committee

The Ministry has made no assessment or evaluation of the CGHS Scheme with
reference to its objectives. There is no independent feedback system through
which it can know the experiences of the beneficiaries. In this context Health
Secretary admitted that “there are possibly no clear indicators by which one
could base any clear-cut claim” (that the objectives of the Scheme had been
fulfilled by and large).

After an in-depth study of the working of the CGHS in the light of the
memoranda received from CGHS beneficiaries and the material placed before
them by the Ministry and also after paying on-the-spot study visits to various
CGHS dispensaries in and outside Delhi, the Committee have come to the
conclusion that the working of CGHS leaves much to be desired; it has failed to
provide facilities for medical care and treatment to the satisfaction of the
beneficiaries and so has not by and large achieved its objectives.

The Committee would urge the Ministry to rationalise the workload of doctors
in dispensaries not only in Delhi but also elsewhere keeping in view the average
attendance in each dispensary so as to ensure that, as far as possible, no doctor
remains under-utlised or over-burdened. The Committee would expect this
rationalisation to be done without delay.

The Committee regret to note that even though formal orders were issued in
March 1981 to all the supervisory officers of the CGHS that a system of detailed
scheduled inspection of every dispensary atleast twice a year should be
introduced, the system has not been put into practice so far due to non-
availability of transport. The Committee do not accept non-availability of
transport as a valid reason for not doing detailed inspections of every dispensary
atleast twice a year. The Committee would like that this sytem of scheduled
inspection should be implemented without any further delay and the non-
availability of transport should not be allowed to stand in the way of the officers
performing this important duty regularly. If Government transport is not
available they should be allowed to hire private transport (Taxi) but the

, inspection should not be allowed to suffer.

The Ministry has now issued instructions that hereafter the minutes of the
meetings held in the dispensaries with the Area Welfare Officer or the residents’
associations should be duly recorded and the decisions arrived at the meetings
followed up and reviewed in the following meetings. This is what should have
been done all along. The Committee expect the Ministry to monitor
implementation of these instructions.

The Committee note that in Delhi the Ministry has taken up the question of
allotment of accommodation, plots and flats with the Delhi Development
Authority for housing CGHS dispensaries in the newly developing colonies. The
Committee hope that the Ministry would continue to pursue the matter with the
DDA with a view to get suitable land allotted and suitable buildings constructed
for housing CGHS dispensaries in the new areas.

27


3.59

3.46

3.118

3.131

3/132

3.144

3.145

3.146

28

The Committee are of the view that a single 12-hour shift in CGHS dispensaries
would be ideal both for the patients and the medical and para-medical staff.
They also feel that its introduction should be staggered to keep the expenditure
under control: This should first be introduced in all.

From the memoranda received and the evidence heard by the Committee, it
appears that perhaps the weakest and the most criticised area of CGHS is. the
present system of dispensing medicines. Medicines are not readily available;
indented medicines take a few days, sometimes upto 7 days, to arrive; patients
have to go without medicines for varying periods. Quality of medicines does not
inspire confidence. Patients have to stand in long queues for collecting medicines
and they have to pay repeated visits to the dispensary for the purpose.
Pharmacists behaviour and effciency are far from satisfactory. The Committee
feel that if only the medicines distribution system is streamlined and
modernised, much of the cause of the dissatisfaction of CGHS would vanish.
The Committee take note of the circumstances in which medicines with brand
names prescribed by specialists are not issued by the dispensary doctors and in
their place generic products are supplied in pursuance of Government decision
on the Hathi Committee Report. The Committee do not see any objection in
supplying medicines by generic names in lieu of brand names provided the
substitutes have been found to be of proven quality and same therapeutic ‘value
after scientific tests. It will be wrong in the Committee’s opinion to prescribe
any untested substitutes in lieu of brand name. The Committee would like the
Ministry to review the generic name medicines in the CGHS formularies from
this angle and intimate to the Committee whether all of these generic name
medicines have been found to be of required standard and therapéutic value,
and also ensure that no new name may be added to formulary before subjecting
it to quality test.

The Committee also feel that in sensitive and chronic cases in which treatment
with brand names medicines has been able to control or stabilise the problems,
and where a switch-over to generic name substitute is likely to create a
psychological effect or introduce and element of risk or slow down recovery, it
will be advisable not to insist on issue of substitute medicines in lieu of brand
names regardless of cost implications. Doctors should have no fetish either for
generic names or for brand names

The Committee suggest that workload for specialists consultation in each branch
should be systematically assessed vis-a-vis the existing capacity of the specialists
available and shortage in any particular branch made good. Needless to say,
adequate number of specialists should be available to cope with the demand not
only in Delhi but also in other cities. The Committee would like’ to be apprised
of the outcome of assessment -city-wise.

Decentralisation of specialists services is a step in the right direction. The
Committee agree that it is not necessary to provide specialists in each
dispensary. But it should be the objective of the Ministry to provide’ specialists
for a group of dispensaries at least in areas which are far off from"Dr. Ram
Manohar Lohia Hospital and Safdarjung Hospital. The Committee would like
the’ Ministry to review the present location of nodal dispensaries and their
linkage with other dispensaries and inform the Committee of the steps necessary
to augment and rationalise the present facilities.

t


4.69

4.70

4.110

5.46

5.47

5.48

5.49

S257

5.76

29

Though the Ministry has laid down an elaborate system of quality tests on
medicines purchase by CGHS, this is not properly observed in actual practice.
All supplies of medicines from unregistered or new firms are required to be
subjected to chemical tests but it is a matter of deep regret that this is not being
done.

The Committee do not consider it proper to purchase medicines from firms
whose standing and standards have not been tested and accepted. Helping Small
Scale Industries is a noble aim but not at the cost of CGHS beneficiaries’ health.
The Committee would like the Ministry to drive this point.

Different stories are in circulation about time-barred medicines in the CGHS
dispensaries but for obvious reasons, the Corhmittee are not in a position to go
into the matter in depth. The Committee call upon the Ministry to look into this
problem more critically, and make case studies at field level to ensure that
precautions taken by CGHS against the use of time-barred drugs are adequate
to guard against their misuse either on the patients or otherwise.

The experiences of CGHS beneficiaries in hospitals recognised for their
treatment in Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta and other cities do not appear to be very
happy. The hospitals are stated to be over-crowded, services poor and
admissions even in emergency cases not always prompt; and do special
consideration is shown to CGHS beneficiaries. The Ministry do not have any
system of monitoring demand and availability of admissions in these hospitals,
the Committee are unable to accept the Ministry’s claim that none has been
denied admission in these hospitals.

The Committee strongly feel that there is an immediate need to recognise more
hospitals like Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narain Hospital, Gobind Ballabh Pant
Hospital, for the purpose of treatment of CGHS beneficiaries. Besides
Government hospitals certain private hospitals of repute should also be
recognised for the purpose.

There is dissatisfaction with ambulance services in Delhi and outside. These
services are, however, not under the control of CGHS authorities. The need for
having an efficient ambulance service in a city cannot be disputed. For this
purpose, adequate number of ambulance vans should be available; their location
should be known to the people; and they should be available on telephone. The
Committee expect that the Ministry will use its good offices to arrange-for an
efficient ambulance service in Delhi and other cities where CGHS is in
operation for the benefit of CGHS beneficiaries.

The importance of polyclinic an intermediate health station between the
dispensary and the referral hospital—has been highlighted and the need for
setting up more polyclinics emphasized by CGHS beneficiaries as well as
medical expert. Government had also realised its importance and it has already
set up 4 polyclinics in Delhi. 12 more are proposed to be set up.


6.9
&
6.10

6.98

6.122

30

The Committee regret to observe that the figures of total strength of doctors
and para-medical staff furnished by the Ministry are quite confusing. The
Ministry has supplied three different sets of figures which do not tally with one
another.

Taking the best figures, the Committee find that over 100 posts of doctors and
nearly 225 posts of para-medical staff are lying vacant. At certain places
vacancies in the case of doctors have been there for over five years and in the

‘case of para-medical staff for over 10 years. The reasons given by the Ministry

for these shortages, such as long time taken in making recruitment of doctors
through UPSC and non-availability of para-medical staff, do not carry conviction
with the Committee. It only shows that the Ministry has'no proper system of
perspective planning and initiating action for recruitment of Medical Officers
well in advance. Such a large number of vacancies are bound to affect adversely
the working of CGHS dispensaries on the one hand and aggravate
unemployment position in the country on the other. The Committee cannot but
hold the Ministry responsible for the failure in providing full contingents of
doctors and para-medical staff in the CGHS dispensaries. The Committee would
like the Ministry to remove weaknesses in personnel planning and management
to avoid such serious short-comings as highlighted above. They would also like
the Ministry to fill up.

The Committee find that as ‘against 222 doctors, who have been provided
Government accommodation, 487 are without it. In para-medical staff category,
as against 258 such staff who have Government accommodation, 951 have not
got Government accommodation so far. The degree of satisfaction is 32% for
Doctors and 21% for para-medical staff. It is, in the Committee’s opinion, very
essential to provide residential accommodation at least to all key personnel close
to the dispensary to which they are attached, in the interest of a more efficient
service to patients at odd hours. The Committee would like the Ministry to
identify the doctors and para-medical staff who are holding key positions in each
dispensary and arrange, in conslutation with the Ministry of Works and
Housing, to provide them suitable accommodation within easy distance from the
respective dispensaries.

CGHS beneficiaries dissatisfaction with the behaviour of doctors and para-
medical staff at the dispensary level has been brought to the Committee's notice
in writing and in person. The Committee do not want to convey an impression
that CGHS beneficiaries consider all or most of the doctors or para-medical staff
rude. But even if a small minority behaves improperly, the image of the entire

class gets tarnished. It is against this danger that the Committee wish to warn’

the community of doctors and para-medical staff.

|
|
\


० 9० :७ 9 ७ + ४० 0७ 5

. Shri
. Shri

Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri

» Shri
न Shri
. Shri
: DE

» Shri
» Shri
. Shri
. Shri
. Shri
. Shri
Beli
. Shri

. Shri
» Shri
Shri

. Shri

» Shri

. Shri

ल्‍ Shri

. Shri

. Shri
ल्‍ Shri
Shri
. Shri
~ Shri
. Shri
. Shri
. Shri
. Shri
. Smt.
. Shri
~ Shri
. Shri
. Shri
. Shri
. Shri
. Shri
. Shri
. Shri
|. Shri

List of persons who gave representations

N.K. Gupta
Krishna Gopal
R.B. Srivastava
Upender Lal
P.N. Puri
Bishamber Nath
Runapareddi H. Rao
G.M. Verma
Ashwani Kumar
A.P. Gupta
N.K. Gupta ,
Takat Tam
T.V.P. Rao
Harisankar
V.R.S. Goel
N.M. Mathew
Sethi

K.C. Hewal
K.C. Goel
Puran Chand
P.N. Kumra
L.R. Sharma
Charanjit Lal
Jai Dev Singh Rana
V.K. Aggarwal
A.V. Gopala Krishna
G.N. Likhiyani
A.S. Buxi
Balbir Vadera
Mustadi Lal
Narayan Nawani
N.K. Narad
D.R. Suri

J.R. Sharma
Deshbandhu
Lakshmi

‘Deepak Narain

J.R. Channa
H.P. Bahri
Kailash Chandra
S.R. Sangar
§.K. Bhatia

S. Nath
J.L.Chanana
J.S. Bhalla
M.M. Saxena

31

Annexure—IV


32

47. Shri B.K. Govil

48. Shri I.P. Bhargava

49. Shri M.L. Bhatia

50. Shri D. Goswami

51. Shri S.N. Gupta

52. Shri S.M.S. Baghavan

53. Shri A.S. Chadha

54. Shri R.N. Malik

55. Shri Madan Lal Bhardwaj

56. Shri D.S. Joki

57. Shri Bahadur Singh

58. Shri M.R. Kapoor

59. Shri M.R. Kataria

60. Dr. Nathu Lal

61. Shri A.C. Mehra

62. Shri Parkash Chand

63. Shri Sudarshan Lal Bell

64, Shri M.N. Mathur

65. Dr. G. Gopal Rao

66. Shri Y.P. Mahajan

67. Shri P.S. Malhotra

68. Shri Azhar Husain

69. Shri Rajnath Singh

70. Shri T.V.K. Warrier

71. Shri P.G. Mulchandani

72. Shri Ashok Thawani

73. Shri R.D. Garg

74, Shri A.C. Jain & Shri $.K. Vyas

75. Dr. Suraj Bhan

76. Shri P. Vijay Kumar, Shastri Bhavan,
C.G.E., Co-ordination Committee

77, Shri D.P. Sihna, Powers Engineers Association, CEA

78. Shri T.N. Mittal

79. Dr. Avtar Singh & Shri R.K. Singh

80. Shri M.V.M. Nambiar

81. Shri S.D. Malhotra

82. Shri R.P. Ahir, Area Welfare Officer

83. Shri H.P. Saha, C.G.E. Coordination Committee, Calcutta

84. Shri M.S. Kasna

85. Shri R.G.-Bhatnagar

86. Shri T.R. Prakash, C. EERWA

87. Shri Pandey, C.G.E.R.W.A.

88. Shri R.C. Richaria, A.W.D.

89. Shri S.C. Sharma

90. Shri S.P. Tripathi, C.G.E.R.W.A.

91. Shri S.S. Aggarwal, A.W.O.

92. Shri H.K. Mandal, C.G.E.W.A.

93. Shri K.L. Dua

94. Shri R.T. Rajani


115

५ १ ४
118.

119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.
126.
127.
128.
129.

130.-

131.
132,
133.
134.
135.

33

. Shri R.P. Gupta, A.W.O.

. Shri P.S. Nagpal

. Shri V.P. Gupta, Retired Superintending Engineer, C.P.W.D.

. Dr. M.D. Khanna, Advocate, Supreme Court of India

. Shri B.V.K. Warrier

. Shri S.K. Sharma

. Shri K.K. Dhawan &. Shri H.L. Kapur

. Shri K.N. Goswami

. Shri Darshan Singh

. Shri P.K. Sharma, Deputy Controller of Accounts (Retired) Delhi Administration
. Shri O.P. Paul

. Shri D.C. Jain

. Shri B.R. Sabharwal

. Shri S.M.S. Raghavan (Income Tax Officer)

. Shri K.G. Saxena

. Shri B.L. Banerjee, Secretary, Council of Central Government Pensioners, South

Calcutta
Shri P.S. Bhargava, Sr. Audit Officer, Jaipur

. Shri Jagdish C. Bhatia

. Shri M.R. Singh

. Shri V.K. Gupta, Chief Engineer

. Shri S.N. Lall, Secretary, Pensioners Samaj

. Shri L.S. Jindal, Secretary, I.M.D. Gazetted Officer Association

Shri Kailash Chand, Area Welfare Officer

Shri Suresh Chand Jain, Senior System Security Officer, Joint Cipher Bureau,
Ministry of Defence, Sena Bhavan

Shri.S.K. Jain, Senior Civilian Staff Officer

Shri K.K. Mishra, Director, Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan

Shri D.R. Bains, Registrar, School of Planning and Architecture
Shri A. Umapathy

Shri D.C. Mawati, Area Welfare Officer, Pushp Vihar

Shri G.S. Sampath

Shri Yogeshwar Lal, Secretary

Shri Barun Kumar Sengupta

Shri R. Ramanathan

Shri S.P. Mathur

Shri K.C. Bhardwaj

Shri M.C. Chawla

Shri S.N. Bhatia

Shri B.P. Goel

Shri B.K. Handa

Shri. 1.5. Goyal

Shri Srinivasan


Dispensaries visited by the Committee

Madras:

i) K.K. Nagar
ii) T. Nagar
Delhi: ‘

i) South Avenue
ii) Curzon Road
ili) Kali Bari

iv) Sarojini Nagar
२) Sarojini Nagar Market
vi) Gole Market
Bombay:

i) Mahim

ii) Worli

Annexure-V

a


लू

9० 53 9 ४७ +# ४ (७ ४-

Annexure-VI

Places for which requests for opening new dispensaries have been made

. Madanpur Khadar, Delhi.

. Mysore (Karnataka).

. Trans Yamuna Areas.

. Lajpat Nagar, Ghaziabad (U.P.)
. Vasant Vihar

. Vasant Kunj

. Sarita Vihar

. Shalimar Bagh


Annexure-VII

Revision of Subscription Charges with effect from 1.4.1994

Pay of the beneficiary * — Rates of subscription f
(Figures in-Rupees) per month i
(Figures in Rs.) |
Upto 1200 5 |
1201: to .1500 10 |
1501 1० 1800 15
1801 10 2500 20 |
2501 to 3200 25 i
3201 to 4000 30 4
4001 to 5000 40 {
Above 5000 50

36



Annexure-VIII

MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY .STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

XI
“ELEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 24th August, 1994 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli -

4. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
5. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

6. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

8. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

10. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan

11. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

12. Dr. Vasant Pawar

13. Shri K.T. Vandayar

14. Shri Inder Jit

15. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

17. Shri Anna Joshi

18. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

19. Shri Ramchandra Dome

20. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

21. Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. * * *

3. . * *

4. The Committee then discussed about its future programme and decided to take up the
following topics for consideration:—
(i) Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Bill, 1992;

*Minutes of I to X meetings of the Committee relate to matters not included in this report.
***Relate to other matters.

37


38

(ii) Functioning of Central Government Hospitals and Central Government Health
Scheme;

(iii) Functioning of Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti and the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan;
and

(iv) Steps for improvement of India’s performance in the International sports events —
functioning of the Sports Authority of India and various sports federations receiving
Government grants.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.

met asthe pte ct


XII
TWELFTH MEETING

The Committee met 2 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 7th September, 1994 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

1

Shri P. Upendra——Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

79 9 रे ००

Dr. M. Aram

Shri O.P. Kohli

Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
Shri Md. Salim

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

8.

9,
10.
Ts
2
13.
14,
15;
16.
17.
18.
19:
20.
21.
432.
23.

Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
Dr. Vasant Pawar

Prof. P.J. Kurien

Shri Z.M. Kahandole

Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
Shri Aslam Sher Khan

Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

Dr. K.D. Jeswani

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

Shri, Anna Joshi

Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

Shri Brahma Nand Mandal

SECRETARIAT

ee RENE

an

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

* * *
The Committee then took up for consideration the following subjects:

(i) Functioning of the Central Government Hospitals and the Central Government Health
Scheme; and

(ii) Steps for improvement of India’s performance in the International sports events —
functioning of the Sports Authority of India and various sports federations receiving
Government grants.

3.1 Thereafter, the Committee identified various issues on the above mentioned subjects
id decided that the same may be sent to the concerned Ministries for their comments. The

***Relate to other matters.

39


40

Committee also finalised the names of individuals / organisations who are to be invited for
tendering oral evidence before the Committee in connection with the above mentioned
subjects.

4. The Committee decided to visit some of the Central Government Hospitals and Central
Government Health Scheme dispensaries situated in Delhi and other parts of the country to
have first /hand information about their functioning which would help the Committee
examine their functioning effectively. These visits could be undertaken by forming small
groups of members of the Committee. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise
the dates, places to be visited and other details of the visits.

4.1 The Committee also authorised the Chairman to approach Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha, to seek his permission to visit the hospitals outside Delhi

5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m. to meet again at.11.00 a.m. on Thursday,
the 8th September, 1994 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

ee os


XVI
“SIXTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 6th October, 1994 in CC pauls
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House, Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
‘RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram
. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
Shri Md. Salim
. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
. Prof. 1.0, Sanadi
. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
|| . Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
i 10. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
| LOK SABHA

weer aAnAYW

| 11, Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
12. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
| 13. Dr. Vasant Pawar
| 14, Prof. P.J. Kurien
| 15. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
} 16. Shri Z.M. Kahandole
| 17. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
18. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
| 20. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
21. Shri Anna Joshi
| 22. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
23. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
24. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
| 25. Shri Suraj Mandal
* *
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

*Minutes of XIII to XV meetings relate to matters not included in this report.
***Relate to other matters.

41


42
2. . * .
3. . . .
4. . . *

5. The Committee then discussed the proposed visit to All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, Safdarjung Hospital and a C.G.H.S dispensary on the 8th October, 1994.Some
Members expressed their inability to join the visit and after some discussion the Committee
postponed the visit to a later date.

6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Friday, the
7th October, 1994.

***Relate to other matters.

scampi ibis

aes


: xIx
“NINETEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 9.15 a.m. on Wednesday the 26th October, 1994 in~Committee
Room ‘A’ and again at 3.00 p.m. after lunch-break in Committee Room ‘D’ Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4. Shri Md. Salim

5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

6. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

7. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
8. Dr. Vasant Pawar

9. Prof. P.J. Kurien

10. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

11. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
12. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

13. Shri Inder Jit

14. Shri Rambadan

15. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

16. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

17. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

18. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
19. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

20. Shri Anna Joshi

21. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

22. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

23. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
24. Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer.

2. The Committee prior to proceeding to visit the C.G.H.S. dispensaries and the All
India Institute of Medical Sciences for inspection held some discussions. The Committee,
then visited two C.G.H.S. dispensaries—one in South Avenue and the other at Curzon
Road (Constitution House). In the dispensaries visited by the Committee, the Committee

*Minutes of XVII and XVIII meetings relate to matters not included in this report.
***Relate to other matters.

43


44

members enquired from the patients about the facilities provided to them and sought their
views on further improvement.

2.1 In the South Avenue dispensary, the Committee Members came across some out-
dated medicines which were brought to the notice of the officers of the Department of
Health, accompanying the Committee. They were also instructed to enquire into this matter
and fix responsibility in that regard. The Committee also found that cleanliness, in general,
was much below standard, particularly in the dispensary in South Avenue. It also noted that
a number of bulbs of the light points were missing. There was no emergency kit in the
dispensary in South Avenue. Further, while the dispensary in South Avenue was using non-
disposable syringes, the dispensary at Curzon Road had disposable ones. The Department of
health officials, accompanying the Committee members, when asked to explain as to why the
dispensary in South Avenue was using non-disposable syringes, could not give any
satisfactory reply.

3. During the visit to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), the Committee
Members enquired about the facilities provided to the patients and ascertained their views
thereon. The Committee visited the O.P.D., the Casualty, Dr. R.P. Centre for Ophthalmic
Sciences, the Neurosciences and the Cardiothoracic Centre. The Committee found almost all
the Departments and Wards extremely crowded. The waiting period for out-patients was
unusually long.

3.1 The Committee held discussions with the Director, Heads of the various Centres and
other Senior Officers, of the AIIMS. The Senior Doctors present, besides Dr. $.K. Kachker,
Director of the Institute, were Dr. Bannerjee, Dr. Dada, Dr. L.M. Nath, Dr. Wazir and
Dr. Basu, Medical Superintendent, and other Senior Officers. The discussions ranged from
shifting of the out-patients and casualty Wing outside the Institute’s premises, provision of
more funds for expansion and strengthening of infrastructural facilities, coordination
between the four Centres of the AIIMS, career planning for Doctors and employees,
treatment of the poor and restoration of status of the Institute as the country’s top referral
body, as it was originally conceived. The director, AIIMS, informed the Committee that
during 1993-94, 1.7 million patients came to the hospital for treatment while it was equipped
to treat satisfactorily not more than six lakh patients. He added that, over the years, while
the expenses had increased tremendously, there had not been corresponding increase in the
funds made available to the Institute. While in 1977, the Institute was spending twenty per
cent of total expenditure on the treatment of patients, this was now about five per cent only.
The Committee was also apprised of the constraints under which the Institute was
functioning such as inadequate water supply, lack of other infrastructural facilities and
inadequate funds required for immediate replacement of equipments, such as Cat-Scan etc.
The first Cat-Scan was installed in the Institute some-time in 1975 and therefore it required
replacement. The Institute’s proposal for increase in fee from existing rate of Rupee one to
Rupees ten for issue of O.P.D. Card had been pending with the Ministry for nearly two
years.

3.2 The Committee was informed that the Institute was governed by the University Act,
but the same was not being implemented. This has led to erosion of autonomy of the
AIIMS.

4. During the meeting held, after lunch break in Committee Room ‘D’ P.H.A., the
Chairman, in the first instance, brought to the notice of Secretary, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare (Department of Health), about the absence of the representative of the
Department of Health during the Committee’s visit to C.G.H.S. dispensaries and AIIMS in
morning. The Secretary informed the Committee that the Director-in-charge was to attend


45

on the Committee. However, he had to go on tour on an urgent official work. Therefore,
Additional Director General of Health Services, was deputed for the purpose.

5. ‘ ‘ ‘
5.1 . : हे
6. : ‘ ‘
7. मु +
8. + ‘ ‘

9. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday,
the, 8th November, 1994.

***Relate to other matters.


XXII
“TWENTY-SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 3rd January, 1995 in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA’ SABHA
2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Shri 0. P. Kohli
4. Shri Md. Salim
5. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen
6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA
7. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
8. Dr. Vasant Pawar
9. Prof. P. J. Kurien
10, Shri 2. M. Kahandole
11. Shri Inder Jit i
12. Shri Rambadan ;
13. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
14, Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
15. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
16. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia
17, Shri Anna Joshi
18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
19. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
20. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri N. K. Singh, Deputy Director
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. * * *

3 * * *

4. The Chairman informed the Committee that the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha,
had accorded permission to undertake visits to Pondicherry/Madras and Chandigarh in
connection with the consideration of the functioning of C.G.H.S, and Central Government —
Hospitals. Two Study Groups would be constituted for this purpose. Study Group I will be

*Minutes of XX and XXI meetings relate to matters not included in this report.
***Relate to other matters.

46


41

visiting MadrasPondicherry from 15th to 18th January, 1995, and the Study Group II will be
visiting Chandigarh in the last.week of January, 1995. He invited options from the members
for being considered on any one of the two Study Groups.

5. * * .
Ss * * * :
32 * हु की
5.3 * + +
5.4 se 5 =
55 bs > bg
5.6 ba sf 4
5.7 + * .
6. . . ’

7. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday
the 4th January, 1995.

- ***Relate to other matters.


XXIII
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 p.m. and again at 3.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 4th January,
1995 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliamerit House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri O. P. Kohli
3. Shri Md. Salim
4. Prof. I. 0. Sanadi
5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
8. Dr. ५. Rajeshwaran
9, Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
10. Dr. Vasant Pawar
11, Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
12. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
13, Shri Aslam Sher Khan
14, Shri Inder Jit
15. Shri Rambadan
16. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
17. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
18. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia
[19 Shri Anna Joshi
120, Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
21. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
22. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
23. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
WITNESSES

1. Shri K.D. Gandhi, Convenor,
Central Govt. Health Scheme,
Beneficiaries Welfare Committee.

2. Shri Jugal Kishore,
Area Welfare Officer.

3. Shri Sudarshan Lal Behl, President,
Central Government Employees Residents
Welfare Association, Pushp Vihar

48


49

4. Dr. B.B. Bisoi, General Secretary,
Joint Action Council of Service
Doctors Organisations, R.K. Puram.
New Delhi.

5. Shri Ramkrishan, General Secretary,
All India CGHS Employees Association,
Sriniwas Puri, New Delhi.

6. Shri P.N. Kumara, President,
Bharat Pensioners Samaj, Jangpura,
New Delhi.
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri N. K. Singh, Deputy Director
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee, after some discussions, proceeded to visit the C.G.H.S. dispensary
located at Kali Bari Marg and the Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital.

2.1 In the dispensary the Members enquired from the patients about the facilities provided
to them and sought their views for further improvements. The Committee also observed that
out of four doctors only two were on duty and two were on leave for whom no replacement
had been provided. Disposable syringes were not being used. In the Ayurvedic &
Homoeopathic dispensaries, housed in the same building, the medicines meant for distribution
to patients were found lying uncovered thereby being exposed to dust and humidity. The Store
rooms were also untidy and no dustbins were around. Several rooms were found locked and
the accommodation, though spacious, was not being properly utilised.

3. During its visit to Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, the Members visited different
Wards/Departments in separate groups and enquired about the facilities provided to the
patients and ascertained their views thereon.

3.1 The Committee found almost all the Departments/Wards, particularly the O.P.D. over-
crowded. The waiting period for Out-patients was unusually long.

3.2 The Committee held discussions with the Medical Superintendent, Dr. S.P. Aggarwal,
Heads of the various Departments and other senior officers of the Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia
Hospital. The discussion ranged from the shortage of space, further expansion of the hospital
strengthening of infrastructural facilities, virtual non-existence of residential accommodation
for doctors & staff, inadequate number of staff particularly of class IV and V, expansion of the
Gynaecology & Obstectrics ward of the hospital, provision of residential accommodation for
doctors and employees in the Hospital premises or in the vicinity, improvement in sanitary
condition and lighting arrangements, to various other problems of the hospital. The Medical
Superintendent informed the Committee that there was no shortage of medicines in the
hospital and in case of any emergency one thousand rupees was always there at the disposal of
the doctor in charge of the Emergency/Casualty Ward.

4. The Committee, thereafter, heard the oral evidence of the witnesses mentioned above in
connection with the consideration of functioning of C.G.H.S. jand Central Government
Hospitals.

4.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 p.m. to meet again at 10.30 a.m. on Thursday the
50 January, 1995.


XXIII

TWENTY-THIRD MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 p.m. and again at 3.00'a.m. on Wednesday, the 4th January,
1995 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri 0. P. Kohli

. Shri Md. Salim

. Prof. I. G. Sanadi

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

9 ७ #+ ४ ७

Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA
7.
8.
9:
10.
11.
12;
13.
14.
15.
16.
. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia

. Shri Anna Joshi

Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
Dr. Vasant Pawar

Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
Shri Aslam Sher Khan

Shri Inder Jit

Shri Rambadan

Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
23.
WITNESSES

1. Shri K.D. Gandhi, Convenor,

Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

Central Govt. Health Scheme,
Beneficiaries Welfare Committee.

2. Shri Jugal Kishore,
Area Welfare Officer.

3. Shri Sudarshan Lal Behl, President,
Central Government Employees Residents
Welfare Association, Pushp Vihar

48

a
f


XXIV
TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the Sth January, 1995 in Committee

Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House “Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri O.P. Kohli

3. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
4, Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

5. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

6. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
7. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
8. Dr. Vasant Pawar
9. Shri Z.M. Kahandole
10. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
11. Shri Aslam Sher Khan
12. Shri Inder Jit
13, Shri Rambadan
14, Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
15. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
17. Shri Anna Joshi
18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
19. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
20. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
21. Shri. Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
WITNESSES
1, Dr. S.K. Kacker,
Director, A.I.I.M.S.
2. Dr. B. Chakraverty,
Medical Superintendent,
Safdarjung Hospital.
3. Dr. S.P. Agarwal,
Medical Superintendent,
Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital.
4. Dr. ९. Anand, Principal & Medical
Superintendent,
Lady Hardinge Medical College &
Smt. Sucheta Kripalani Hospital.
5. Dr. P. Das Gupta,
Drug Controller of India.

6. Dr. Ramalinga Swamy, Former
Director, A.I.I.M.S.

50

if
{
‘
if
"i
ft


51

7. Dr. Brigadier R.S. Verma,
Medical Superintendent,-
Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre.

8. Dr. Yash Puri,
Hospital Consultant.

9. Major General H.S. Oberoi,
VSM, Senior Consultant (Medicine) A.F.M.S.

10. Dr. Nathu Lal, C.M.O.,
S.N. Market.

11. Dr. G.C. Nayak, C.M.O., Shahdara.
12. Dr. H.L. Rastogi, C.M.O., Tilak Nagar.

13. Shri M.S. Dayal, Secretary,
Deptt. of Health,
M/o Health & Family Welfare.

14. Dr. A.K. Mukherji,
Director General Health Services.

15. Dr. N.C. Dutta,
Director, C.G.H.S.

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
2. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the witnesses mentioned above.
2.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.

3. The Committee, thereafter, discussed its future programme and decide to meet again
on 30th and 31st January, 1995.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 p.m.



XXV

TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. and again at 2.30 p.m. on Monday, the 30th January,
1995 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi:

PRESENT

1.

Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

eran + vn

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.0, Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

; Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

9.
10.
11.
12.
13)
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

‘Prof. P.J.. Kurien

Shri Z.M. Kahandole

Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
Shri Aslam Sher Khan

Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

Shri Anna Joshi

Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
Shri Suraj Mandal .

WITNESSES

1.
2.

Dr. B.N. Sinha, Director General, Railway Health Services.
Shri S.C. Nagpal, Director and Chief Welfare Officer, Ministry of Personnél, Public

Grievances and Pensions.

Welfare.

Welfare.

. Shri M.S. Dayal, Secretary, Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family

. Shri A.K. Mukherjee, Director General Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family

52



53

5. Shri S.N. Haldhar, Director, C.G.H.S., Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

6. Shri N.C. Dutta, Additional Director, C.G.H.S. Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare.

SECRETARIAT

1. Smt. V.S. Rama Devi, Secretary-General

2. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

3. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

4. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

5. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee, after some discussions, proceeded to visit C.G.H.S. dispensaries
No. 13 and No. 35, located in Sarojini Nagar, New Delhi, and also the Safdarjung Hospital.

2.1 In the CGHS dispensary No. 13, the Committee found the cleanliness in and
around the building of the dispensary unsatisfactory. It was explained to the Committee that"
one post of Safaiwala had been lying vacant for a long time. The Committee also found that
the stock register in this dispensary was not up-to-date and the stock of medicines
distributed, the balance, was not shown properly. Some old records were found stacked in
almirahs for the last 20 years which were of no use at all. The number of patients when the
Commitee visited was surprisingly very low.

2.2 In the dispensary No. 35, located near Sarojini, Nagar Market, lot of broken and
condemned furniture were found locked in two separate rooms. The Committee was
informed that these were to be written off by the appropriate authority. The emergency kit
was not available in this dispensary. The cleanliness also was ‘not satisfactory.

3. The Committee, thereafter, visited the Safdarjung Hospital where the Members were
received by its Medical Superintendent alongwith his senior colleagues. Members of the
Committee visited various wards/wings of the Hospital in different groups accompanied by
the heads of the respective Departments/Wings.

3.1 Members of the Committee, while visiting different Wards/Departments, enquired
about the facilities and services being provided to the patients and ascertained their views
regarding the problems encountered by them. Departments/Wards were found over
crowded, waiting period for patients being unusually long.,

3.2 Department of Orthopaedics, particularly its O.P.D. was crammed with. patients
and there was no space and facilities for waiting patients, some of them sitting/lying on the
ground, both in and outside the building. Proper ventilation. facility and cleanliness also was,
not there.

3.3 Similarly, the O.P.Ds of the Gynaecology and Obstetrics were also very much
crowded and the number of beds in the wards was found to be very low. Condition of the
nursery was also not satisfactory. Dearth of nursing staff, the Committee was informed, was
one of the main problems hampering the working of the department.

3.4 In Burns and Plastics, the wards were found with no proper ventilation and lot of
dust on windows, etc., particularly in the wards located on ground floor. No outdoor
patients were seen while the Committee visited the wards.

3.5 Buildings of certain departments, such as Orthopaedics, Gynaecology and Obstetrics
and Cardiology, were in a dilapidated condition. Some operation theatres also were in a bad
shape and needed substantial renovation. The maintenance of the nurses’ hostels was also
not satisfactory.


54

3.6 There was, virtually, no facility for the visitors and the people attending on the
patients, were found squatting in the open space between various wings/blocks of the
hospital.

3.7 The Committee came to know that recognition to the Blood Bank: existing in the
hospital had been withdrawn due to lack of staff and facilities required for its upkeep.

3.8 Members of the Committee, after visiting various Wards and Departments,
assembled in the -officé of the Medical Superintendent for discussions with all sections
working in the Hospital i

3.9 During the; discussions, the Medical Superintendent informed the Committee that
lack of sufficient number of medical and para-medical staff, adequate powers to the Medical
Superintendent, residential accorimodation/hostels for the doctors and nurses and
coordination between AIIMS and Safdarjung Hospital were some of the major hinderances
in providing adequate’ and efficient service to the. people. 1, ५

4. The Committee was apprised of the urgent need to have some: super-speciality
services, more posts ‘at different’ levels} récognising, Burns and: Plastics: Department. as“
separate institute, recognising the hospital “as‘a“teaching hospital,” construction of a new
Gyane OT, separate CGHS wing, a library building, an auditorium, Nursing Home and the
Department of Rehabilitation and Physiotherapy at the earliest

4,1 The Committee, held discussions with the Association of resident doctors, Nurses’
Union and the Safdarjung Hospital Workers’ Union on the problems faced by them.

4.2 The Committee then heard the oral evidence of the above. mentioned witnesses in
connection with the consideration of functioning of Central Government Health Scheme and
Central Government Hospitals.

4.3 A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 p.m. to meet again at 10.30 a.m. on
Tuesday, the 31st January, 1995.

SRR ST TOS ha a TS SESE



4 XXVI

TWENTY-SIXTH MEETING

j The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. and again at 3.00 p.M. on Tuesday, the 3ist January,
1995 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
|] PRESENT
a 1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman
हि RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. M. Aram
i 3. Miss Saroj Khaparde
हे 4. Shri 0.9. Kohli
: 5. Shri Md. Salim
6. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
7. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi
8. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen
9. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

10. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA
iy 11. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
~ 12. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran
13. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
14. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
कै 15. Shri Aslam Sher Khan
i 16. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
17. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
19. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
20. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
21. Shri Suraj Mandal

WITNESSES

1. Shri Alok Mukhopadhyay,
Executive Director, Voluntary Health
Association of India.

2. Shri R. Srinivasan,
Former Secretary, Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare.

3. Dr. Harcharan Singh,
Former Health Advisor,
Planning Commission.

55



56

4. Dr. D. Banerjee,

Professor (Emeritus),

Centre for Social Medicine and Community Health,
- Jawaharlal Nehru University. 9)
5. Dr. ‘Almas Ali,

Meinber—Secretary,

Voluntary Health Association of India.

6. \ * aie *
Te * हे * * *
8, . . ht

9. * * a CS . =

10. . - * * *

SECRETARIAT :

1. Shri Satish. Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer ४

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the representatives of the Voluntary Health
Association and some members of the Independent Commission on Health in India
(mentioned as witness 1-5) and ascertained their views and suggestions regarding the
functioning of the Central Government Health Scheme and Central Government Hospitals.

3. * * *

4. A Verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

5. + * * *

6 * * *

7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.

***Relate to other matters.



XXVII
TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. and in continuation from 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the
16th February, 1995 in Committee Room ‘D?, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Miss Saroj Khaparde

3. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
LOK SABHA

. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
Shri Aslam Sher Khan

Shri Inder Jit

Shri Rambadan

Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

10.. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
11, Shri Anna Joshi

12. Shri Ramchandra Dome

13. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development visited Smt. Sucheta Kripalani Hospital, Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital
and inspected the C.G.H.S. Dispensary, Gole Market No. 1.

3: In the dispensary, the stock register was not found up-to-date, the entries of
medicines distributed and the balance were not being done regularly. The Committee was
informed that the doctors in the dispensary did not have separate consultation rooms. It was
further informed that the dispensary which attends to around 350 patients everyday only one
nursing staff had been provided. No complaint box was found in the dispensary and no
complaint ‘was made in the register since 1993.

4. In the Sucheta Kripalani Hospital, the Committee was received by Dr. (Mrs.) C.
Anand, Principal and Medical Superintendent alongwith her colleagues. Members of the
Committee visited different wards/departments of Smt. Sucheta Kripalani Hospital and
Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital in separate groups.

ye erans

5. In Smt= Sucheta Kripalani Hospital, almost all the departments/wards, particularly
Orthopaedics, Gynae and Obstetrics, general surgery and Physiotherapy were found to be

37


roy

58

overcrowded. In most-of the wards, particularly in the maternity ward, many patients were
found to be sharing the beds. The department of Physiotherapy was so short of space that it
was ;not possible to even walk inside. Equipment installed for exercise, etc. are mostly
archaic. Similarly, equipment in dental also were: found to be very old. The operation
theatres in the hospital were found to be in dilapidated condition and their cleanliness also
was not upto the mark. The Committee was astonished to note that the casualty wing of the
hospital was being run by Junior Residents as it did not have regular staff. Two ambulances
which were at the disposal of the hospital were out of order. Sewage system in the hospital
was very old which gets often chocked resulting in storage of filthy water at different places.
Water supply was also in a pathetic condition. Broken water taps were found at different
places.

6. Similarly, in Kalawati Saran Children Hospital, every ward specially the nursery was
crammed with babies—more than two sharing a bed. The wards were highly stuffy with no
ventilation at all, not to speak of air-conditioning. Mothers were squatting on the floor as
there was no facility for them.

7. The Committee after going around the hospital, held discussion with the Medical
Superintendent and various heads of departments/wards in which a graphic account of the
functioning of the hospital and the works done was given by the Medical Superintendent.
Lack of enough space, building being very old requiring massive repair, strengthening of
departments like physiotherapy, dental, eye, ENT, improving facilities in Paediatric surgery
accident emergency, ICU, labs., nursery and OTs and the problems of accommodation,
shortage of staff, vacancy in the faculty were some of the main issues that figured during the
discussion.

8. The Committee also had discussion with the representative of the faculty association,
resident doctors’ association, nurses association and employees’ Union regarding their
grievances in particular and the problems of the hospital in general.

9. The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m.



x
*TENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Friday, the 16th June, 1995, in Committee Room
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi

MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

Shri O.P. Kohli

. Maulana Habibur Rahaman Nomani
. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma
LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

10. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

11. Dr. Vasant Pawar

12. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

13. Shri Inder Jit

14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

15. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
56... Kanaujia :

9० 3 9७ ७ +# ०

'प्रद्याएनांग Report on the
odification the Committee-
the forthcoming -session.. «