NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
NINETY-NINTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTIONTAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 73RD  REPORT
ON DREADED DISEASES
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27TH FEBRUARY, 2001)
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON  27TH FEBRUARY, 2001)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2001/CHAITRA, 1922 (SAKA)
 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                    
2.         PREFACE                                                                                                         
3.                  REPORT                                                                                                               
CHAPTER  I   Recommendations/Observations that have been
                        Accepted by the Government--------------------------
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
                        Does not desire to pursue in view of the
                        Government’s replies --------------------------------
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
                        Replies of the Government have not been accepted
                        By the Committee-----------------------------------
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
                        Government has not given any reply-------------------
 
4.                   OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE    
5.                   MINUTES

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
 
COMMITTTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
1.       Shri S.B. Chavan                            Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
2.       Shri Mourice Kujur
3.       Shri Akhilesh Das
4.       Shri Eduardo Faleiro
5.       Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”
6.       Shri Dina Nath Mishra
7.       Prof. R.B.S. Varma
8.       Shri Bratin Sengupta
9.       Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”
10.   Shri Raj Mohinder Singh
11.   Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
12.   Shri Mrinal Sen
13.   Dr. C. Narayana  Reddy
14.   Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
15.   Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar
 
LOK SABHA
16.   Shrimati Jaskaur Meena
17.   Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
18.   Shri Ramakant Angle
19.   Shri Kirti Jha Azad
20.   Shri Baliram Kashyap
21.   Shri Ramanand Singh
22.   Shri Dileep Sanghani
23.   Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
24.   Shri G. S. Baswaraj
25.   Shri V. M. Sudheeran
26.   Shrimati Shyama Singh
27.   Shri Sunil Dutt
28.   Shri Ramesh Chennithala
29.   Shri Kantilal Bhuriya
30.   Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
31.   Shri Samik Lahiri
32.   Dr. D.V.G. Shankar Rao
33.   Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
34.   Shrimati Renu Kumari
35.   Shri Shivaji Mane
36.   Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
37.   Dr. Baliram
38.   Dr. A.D.K. Jayaseelan
39.   Dr. V. Saroja
40.   Shri Trilochan Kanungo
41.   Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
42.   Shri Vanlal Zawma
43.   Smt. Kumudini Patnaik
 

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretariat
       Shri Gurnam Singh, Committee Officer
 
PREFACE
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Ninety –ninth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
73
rd Report on Dreaded Diseases.
2.         The Seventy-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th December, 1998.  Replies of the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Health, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare were considered by the Committee.  Clarifications were also sought by the Committee from
the representatives of the Department.  .
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 22nd January, 2001.
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                   S.B. CHAVAN
January 22, 2001                                                                                               Chairman
Magha 2, 1922 (Saka)                                                             Department-related Parliamentary
                                                                                                            Standing Committee on
                                                                                                 Human Resource Development
 REPORT
 
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its
Seventy-third Report on Dreaded Diseases which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok  Sabha on 8 th
December, 1998.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the
Report.  They have been categorized as follows:-
(i)                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 3.1, 3.6, 3.7,  3.8, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12,
3.14, 5.4. (Chapter I)
(ii)                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies: 3.5,  5.5, 5.6 (Chapter II)
(iii)               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee: 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.9, 3.13, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 (Chapter III)
(iv)              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  of the Government have not been received – nil
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
Recommendation
3.1        The Committee is constrained to note that funds granted to the States are not utilized fully.   The matter of low
utilization of funds has been of grave concern at all  levels.  The main problem is that State AIDS Prevention Organisations
(SAPO) face a number of difficulties in receiving and utilizing funds due to the current financial system at the State level.   The
major hindrance is that they do not have the direct power to spend the money and yet are accountable for it under the project. 
This is  a peculiar system and needs to be changed immediately.   The country is facing such a gigantic task of dealing with the
problem of AIDS and frivolous matters such as delayed release of funds etc.   should not hinder the implementation of the
project.   The Committee strongly recommends that the Centre in coordination with the States should take all required steps to
see that funds flow smoothly to the grass root level for successful implementation of the programme.   The Committee was
given to understand that the funds were released by State Finance Department at the last moment or sometimes at the end of the
current financial year.   The Committee feels that this kind of situation should not prevail any more.   The funds should be
released in advance, at least six months before, and on receiving the expenditure certificate, the next instalment may be released
immediately.
Reply of Government
3.1        In the initial years of the National AIDS Control Programme there was some problem in release of funds by the State
Governments to programme managers.  However, from the year 1996-97 an improvement was observed in utilization of the
funds as shown in Annexure-1.   From the year 1998-99 State AIDS Control Societies have been constituted by the States/UTs
as per directives of the Central Government.  Funds are directly released to State AIDS Control Societies without channelising
through the Finance Department of State  Government.   By this mechanism, the delay, which was caused in release of funds
from State Finance Department to programme management, has been eliminated.
Recommendation
3.6               The Committee was given to understand that the  IEC material for strengthening awareness programme was reviewed 
and revised material has been finalized.   The Committee desires that a local scrutiny should be kept on the IEC materials being
used and whenever any review is made the State Government concerned should also be consulted.   There is also a necessity of
training the people who handle the IEC material and also those involved in making the audio and video programmes.  
Specialized skills are required for this and Government should consider strengthening the training programmes for every group
including NGOs.
Reply of Government
3.6               Generic material such as posters, pamphlets, booklets, films has been designed at the central level and disseminated to
the States, UTs, NGOs and the media thus ensuring broad coverage and quality and the correctness of the messages.   All the
IEC material is pre-tested before use.
NACO has finalized a nation wide training plan for different functionaries in the health department till the sub center
level and NGOs.   A major component of this training is IEC with emphasis on developing communication skills on HIV/AIDS.
Recommendation
3.7               The Committee is given to understand that care, support and medicines for people living with HIV/AIDS  is very
inadequate.  This is particularly in view of the social stigma attached with this infection and the affected persons being treated as
social outcast by the community as a whole.   Infected persons are also required   to be counseled to ensure that they take all
precautions to avoid any further infection to others.   For this, the Committee feels, highly skilled and efficient counseling and
education are required.  The Committee has the evidence to note that very few counseling centers are existing in the country.  
This counseling should have been started much earlier and the Committee is pained to note that much effort has not been done
in this direction.   Therefore, much more emphasis should be laid on this aspect and also on educating the general populace
about their behavioural pattern with the infected people.   Similarly, as already recommended earlier, medicines to the infected
people should be regularly ensured and government should provide sufficient budget for this purpose and assistance from
foreign agencies may be obtained, if need be.
Reply of Government
3.7               NACO is setting up counseling services across the country on a top priority basis to provide information about
HIV/AIDS and related issues, and to provide psychological support to those already infected.
Counseling  services are being provided in the following ways:-
National Counselling Training Programme

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
Setting up a comprehensive counseling support programme, including training of a wide variety of health care workers
and social and community workers through standard training module and materials  is an important aspect of this programme.  
The trainers comprise of both government and non-government officials who can integrate counseling on HIV/AIDS with their
ongoing programmes.   Training is conducted at two levels: intermediate and grassroots.   The main objective of the training
programme is to create a cadre of counsellors at the grassroots level.
Six regional centers,  which are imparting training, with their state-wise distribution are given below:-
 NAME STATE
1. Christian Medical College Vellore
(Southern Region)
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka, Pondichery, Lakshwadeep
2. Vivekananda Education Society
(North Eastern Region)
Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Tripura & Arunachal Pradesh
3. Child in Need Institute, Calcutta
(Eastern Region)
West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Andman &
Nicobar Islands, Sikkim
4. Tata Institute of Social Sciences,
Bombay
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Goa, Madhya Pradesh,
Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu
 NAME STATE
5. Maulana Azad Medical College,
Delhi (Northern Region)
Delhi, Himachal  Pradesh, Haryana and
Chandigarh
6. National AIDS Research Institute,
Pune (Central Region) and J & K
Jammu and Kashmir, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh
Outcome:
-                                              CMC Vellore, the Apex Centre has trained 15 master trainers.
-                                              A total of 490 trainers have been trained at the intermediate level.
-                                              A total of 4000 trainers have been trained at the grassroots level.
Telephonic Counselling Services
NACO has set up a National AIDS Help line on a toll free number 1097.   Callers can avail of counseling services round
the clock on this number.   The telephone is linked to a computerized voice response system which gives information on various
issues related to HIV/AIDS such as the general information on HIV/AIDS, symptoms of HIV infection/AIDS, testing of HIV
and care and support services for those infected and affected by HIV/AIDS.   Interested callers can also avail of personal
counselling.
            These services are very  useful since they maintain the confidentiality of the caller.
Such services have already been successfully implemented in Delhi, Calcutta, Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Guwahati,
Chennai and Patna.
Counselling Services in Government Hospitals
A model HIV councelling center has been set up at the Department of Skin and STD, Safdajung Hospital.  The project is
a joint collaboration of NACO, STD Department of Safdarjung Hospital and six Delhi based NGOs.   The counselling center,
the first of its kind to be set up in a government hospital, has the following objective:
Counselling Services in Voluntary Testing Centres
Voluntary testing Centres have been set up in all Government hospitals.   It would be mandatory to have pre and post
test counseling in these centers.   The counseling services would be provided by a trained NGO.         
Further Comments    

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
When asked by the Committee , whether the Department is taking any step to open such model counseling centers in
different parts of the country,     the Department replied that it is proposed to set up voluntary testing and counseling centers in
all the district hospitals in the country on the basis of the model counseling center at Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi.  These
voluntary testing and counseling centers would be run by qualified and trained NGOs and would be funded by the concerned
State/UT/Corporation AIDS Control Societies.   Protocols and guidelines are also being  formulated for such centers.
Recommendation
3.8               The Committee is of the firm view that much emphasis under the AIDS control programme has not been so far laid on
the high risk behaviour groups like sex workers and frequently travelling males and drug users.   These are main groups which
are highly vulnerable to HIV/AIDS infection.   Awareness and counseling are much more required on these people than on the
other group of the society.   They should be made to understand the danger of the STD/HIV/AIDS and the risk factor involved
in not using condoms and taking other precautions.  Special awareness programme should be taken up particularly for sex
workers and frequently travelling males.
Reply of Government
3.8               NACO is implementing targeted intervention programmes to prevent the spread of infection in the high risk
marginalized population.   A multi pronged approach has been devised to contain further transmission of HIV within this group
or to other strata of society through them, as also to give health care and support services to those already infected.   A
combination of IEC strategies, including counselling, and relevant service provision, such as STD care and condoms, can be
used to create an enabling environment for people to scrutinize their behaviour and effect a change to protect themselves.
NACO is working with donor agencies in cooperation with the State Governments to conduct pilot programmes with
identified groups using an integrated approach.  Examples of successful targeted intervention programmes include Sonagachi
intervention project in Calcutta, Kamathipura Intervention project in Bombay and Continuum of care project in Manipur.   In the
second phase of the AIDS control project these targetted intervention programmes would be scaled up to cover vulnerable
populations in all states.
Recommendation
3.10      The Committee has learnt that various international agencies are implementing various programmes in different parts of
the country for tackling the problem of HIV/AIDS.   In this connection the Committee is constrained to note that NACO is not
involved in the implementation of all the projects in all parts of the country.  For example even though many pilot programmes
are being implemented in Tamil Nadu, NACO is involved with the implementation of only USAID Project.   The Committee
recommends that  NACO should be involved in the implementation of all pilot projects in all parts of the country so that it has
complete information about the implementation of all the projects.
Reply of Government
3.10      A steering committee has been formed in all the states where bilateral agencies are implementing intervention projects.  
These steering committees have a representative from NACO as well as the Project Director of the State AIDS Societies as
members.   The steering committee meets regularly and all decisions are taken in consultation with the representatives of the
Central and State Governments.
Recommendation
3.11      The  Committee is constrained to note that many states were performing very slow and the World Bank Mission in its
mid term review in 1995 recommended discontinuance of credit to such states.   The Committee was given to understand that
the reasons for slow performance were non-adherence to action plan, non-availability of infrastructure, political and social
problems.  It also appears that many states do not perceive the AIDS Control Programme as their own concern.   The
Empowered Committees of the States have also not been effective and have little control over initiating activities.   The
Committee perceives that there is still lack of awareness and enthusiasm in the states.   If the State Governments do not rise to
the occasion and pool in all the sources and energies available with them, it would be difficult to tackle the problems of
AIDS/HIV either by the Central Government or any international agency.   It is the State Governments which are nearer to the
people and which implement the programme.   They should therefore, be more concerned about the problem.   The Central
Government should, therefore, seriously consider this aspect.
 
Reply of Government
3.11            In order to develop ownership of the programme in States/UTs, State AIDS Societies have been constituted under the
Chairpersonship of Health Secretary.   The Society also includes representatives of NGOs as well as other related departments

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
for effective coordination and implementation of the programme.   There is complete decentralization of the programme activity
to State level.   The role of the Central Government is only to provide technical expertise and policy guidelines.   The society
model will also ensure expeditious flow of funds from Central Government to programme implementation in the states.
Recommendation
3.12            The Committee was informed that efforts were being made to introduce AIDS education in the Schools.   It is true that
young people in India are equally vulnerable to HIV infection and they are also required to be educated in proper atmosphere.  
Inclusion of AIDS education as a part of the curriculum is of course one of the best alternatives to increase awareness about it.  
The Committee desires that it should be finalized as early as possible and it should be introduced from the academic year 1998-
99 onwards.
Reply of Government
3.12      Special programmes are being broadcast for the youth and rural/migrant populations on All India Radio FM and Vividh
Bharti respectively.   These programmes are in the entertainment mode with the objective of creating awareness and counseling
those who have specific queries or problems.   The programme on Vividh Bharti is broadcast in 11 regional languages.
A School AIDS Education Prograamme has been initiated to provide life skills education to high school students with a
component on HIV/AIDS.   The plan advocates a co-curricular approach in implementing School AIDS education.   It is
proposed to cover all the schools in a planned manner over the next five years.   The main components of the plan are advocacy
for opinion leaders, sensitization workshop for school principals, training of model teachers and peer education and school level
activities.
NACO  has also approached NCERT who have agreed to include information on HIV/AIDS in the curriculum.
Recommendation
3.14      The main concern facing the world community now is non-development of any vaccine for HIV/AIDS so far.   Many
countries are still in the process of research on this.   However, the Committee is constrained to note that no research on
development of vaccine for this has been initiated in India so far.   The Committee desires that our country also should
contribute its own mite, for it may so happen that the research conducted in India may ultimately lead to success.
Reply of Government
3.14      The Department of Biotechnology, Department of Science and Technology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Delhi, National AIDS Research Institute, Pune and National Institute of Immunology, Delhi are involved in research in HIV
vaccine.   The Govt. of India encourages research in this field.
Recommendation
5.4         The Committee views with concern that mass awareness about Hepatitis B has not yet been taken up by the
Department.   People need to be educated about Hepatitis B virus the way it is being done in the case of HIV.   The IEC
activities in this regard need to be stepped up, and the Department should make use of all modes of IEC to spread the message
about Hepatitis B.   Special efforts need to be taken by the Department especially in the rural areas where people are still
unaware of it.  Steps should also be taken to print Pamphlets in the vernacular languages to address the issue among the rural
people.   NGOs can be successfully involved in this awareness campaign.
Reply of Government
5.4        Central Health Education Bureau, a subordinate office of the Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare has undertaken a mass campaign to enlighten the public about the protection from viral Hepatitis (Jaundice)
by distribution of one lakh handbills to (1) State Health Education Bureau; (2)Directors of Health Services; (3) Department of
Prevention and Social Medicine (Medical Colleges); (4) Assistant Directors of Health Services; (5) National Medical Libraries;
(6) District Medical Offices; (7) Councils and Institute of India (Health); (8) Subscribers of Swasth Hind and Arogya Sandesh;
and (9) distributed to general public in the Family Welfare Pavilion during India International  Trade Fair 99. A press
advertisement on the subject was also given in the leading newspapers from 17th July to 3rd August, 1997 all over India.
Information, Education and Communication is an important component of the National AIDS Control Programme. 
Various communication media like electronic, print inter-personal communication and folk media etc. are being
intensively used for dissemination of information on HIV/AIDS.
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES
Recommendation
3.5               The Committee is aware that there is no cure for AIDS.  Prevention is the only aspect which has to be strengthened. 
For prevention a large scale public awareness is required.  The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the  awareness
programme has not picked up in India.  Even though the problem of AIDS is enveloping the whole country, the Committee has
come to note that the literature prepared and the programmes initiated are neither related to the local needs of the people nor the
local dialects.  Half of India’s population is illiterate.  One aspect on which one can feel happy is that the AIDS syndrome has
not yet touched, in a bigger way, the horizons of the rural areas.  This is, therefore the area which is to be protected with very
well chalked out programmes.  The programmes to be launched should take into view the local people’s conditions, their
cultural behaviour and the language.  Unless the message transmitted is not properly received the whole effort will go waste. 
The Committee strongly recommends the Department to give a serious consideration on this.  The Committee is of the view that
in the awareness programme, participation of NGOs, students, local bodies etc. should be given preference to the maximum
extent because these are the groups which can effectively transmit the message through the language understandable to the local
community.
Reply of Government
3.5        During the last five years, the National AIDS Control Programme has successfully created awareness among the public
about HIV/AIDS through mass media campaigns, community mobilization and HIV/AIDS education in schools and colleges. 
All media of communication, including interpersonal communication are being used to disseminate AIDS prevention messages
in rural and urban areas.  The State Governments conduct awareness programmes through mass media campaigns as well as
traditional art forms in order to ensure that awareness programmes are in the local medium and bear the regional sensitivities in
mind.
The National AIDS Control Organisation also provides budgetary support to the media units under the aegis of Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, viz. Doordarshan, All India Radio.  Song and Drama Division, Directorate of Field Publicity,
Press Information Bureau and Films Division.
-
                      The Directorate of Field Publicity has a network of 260 Field Units spread over all States and Union Territories.  All
these units are involved in organising AIDS awareness activities including film shows and programmes of seminars, elocution
contests, question-answer sessions, and debates, quiz compositions, rallies and workshops.
-                      The Song and Drama Division organizes dance-drama shows and folk media performances in rural areas through its
regional centres.
-                      The Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) produced more than a dozen video spots and jingles. 
These along with the spots produced through a professional agency are being telecast on a regular basis on Doordarshan.
-
                      Generic material such as posters, pamphlets, booklets, films has been designed at the central level and disseminated to
the States, UTs, NGOs and the media thus ensuring broad coverage and  quality and the correctness of the messages.  This
material has been brought out in eleven regional languages in order to relate to the local needs of the people or the local dialects.
 
-                      NACO is collaborating with the Department of Women and Child Development to integrate HIV/AIDS awareness with
the ICDS programme in order to generate awareness at the grassroots level.  To overcome the barriers of illiteracy, the
awareness material will have a high visual content.
Recommendation
5.5        The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that a large number of blood banks are existing in this country
without basic facilities for testing.  The Committee while appreciating the recent steps taken for issuing licenses to the blood
banks has been informed that they also use unstandardised kits and there is no uniform kit available for testing.  The Committee,
therefore, feels that the screening method for Hepatitis B must be properly standardised.  The Committee is aware that law
already exists where under-screening is mandatory for blood banks.  What is sadly lacking is non-implementation of this
mandatory requirement.  The Committee feels that it is the duty of the Government to find ways and means for getting this
provision implemented effectively all over the country.
Reply of Government
5.5  It is mandatory for all blood banks in the country to screen each and every unit of blood for HIV, Hepatitis 'B', Malaria and
Syphllis.  It is being monitored regularly through States and Union Territories.

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
Recommendation
5.6        The Committee also notes that the medical and paramedical staff, who are working in rural areas are not trained to
perform the test.  The Department should focus its attention in giving specialised training to the medical and para medical
working staff in rural areas and the Registered Medical Practitioners.
Reply of Government
5.6 The ability to perform the test in the rural areas will depend on availability of trained manpower, physical infrastructure such
as suitably equipped laboratory and funds for procurement of diagnostic kits.  National Institute of Communicable Diseases
(NICD), as a part of the National Surveillance Programme for Communicable Diseases, is training Lab. Technicians at district
level.  The test (latex) Agglutination for identification of Hepatitis 'B' Surface Antigen is included in the training programme. 
This training is also being imparted to Lab. Technicians of 230 districts under the WHO country project for Biennium 1998-99. 
NICD has also prepared the training module on viral hepatitis to promote awareness about the types of viral hepatitis and its
prevention and control measures.  This module is being used for the training programmes of Medical Officers at State, District
and Primary Health Centre levels under the National Surveillance Programme for Communicable Diseases.
National AIDS Control Organisation has developed a comprehensive training programme for all health care workers from
primary to tertiary levels of care.  It is being implemented throughout the country in order to achieve cent-percent coverage of
training in HIV/AIDS prevention and control programme.  Training modules have been developed for each category of health
workers.
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation
3.2              The Committee is pained to note that a number of States have not filled in the sanctioned posts.   The reason given that
this has been done in view of the fact that the National AIDS Control Programme is a time bound project, is not convincing to
the Committee.   The Committee feels that this aspect could have been tackled by the Centre in a better manner by convincing
the states about the importance of the programme and the necessity of creation of the posts and a via-media for the continuance
of the posts created could have been found out.   It is surprising for the Committee that the Department has not done anything in
this regard till now.   This aspect needs to be considered immediately and all the States should be asked to create the number of
posts as are required.
Reply of Government
3.2        In the first phase of the National AIDS Control Programme, 17 posts were sanctioned in large states and 11 posts in
small states/UTs for programme management at state level but due to various reasons, these posts could not be filled by the
State Governments.   Government of India had reminded states/UTs in this regard from time to time.
For the effective implementation of second phase of National AIDS Control Programme, Government of India has
sanctioned 47 posts for major States, 39 for medium States and 27 for small States/UTs which also includes posts to be filled on
contractual basis.  The States are in the process of filling up these posts.   All the States/UTs have given an undertaking to fill up
the sanctioned posts.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee was informed that out of 1143 posts sanctioned under NACP Phase II, which started in
November, 1999, 542 posts have already been filled up till June, 2000.  The Committee is, however, disturbed to note that
information with regard to vacancy position in respect of States/UTs like Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and D
& N Haveli is not available with the Central Government.  What is more alarming is that in the case of many major and
medium states, number of posts filled up so far is very less.  The Committee has been given to understand that the main
reasons for vacant posts are non-availability of suitable candidates in some states as well as the time taken in filling up
the posts either through deputation or on contract.  There has also been some reluctance on the part of the States to fill
up these posts on the ground that the employees would become the permanent liability of the State Govt.  after the
closure of the project.
            The Committee feels that given the menace of AIDS, which will only increase in future, the approach of Central
Govt. would not do any good to the morale of the persons who are instrumental in the implementation of the programme
at grass root level.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier observation that this aspect could have been tackled
by the Govt. in a better manner by convincing the States about the importance of the Programme and the urgent

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
necessity of creation of posts.  The Committee once again emphasises that keeping in view the financial  status of State
Govts. a via-media for continuance of the posts beyond the Project Period has to be found out by the Govt. without any
further delay. 
 
 
Recommendation
3.3               The Committee was given to understand that IMA and NACO are making a combined effort to train general medical
practitioners for clinical management of AIDS  and HIV infected persons.   The training given is too less to cover a chunk of
general physicians in the country, particularly in the states where AIDS and HIV are rampant.   A large-scale training to the
physicians and nurses is required so that they may be able to effectively tackle the patients.   The Committee is also given to
understand that many physicians and nurses do not turn up or attend to the HIV and AIDS patients mainly because of the lack of
general awareness and the skills to treat and tackle them.   Therefore, the Department should chalk out a massive scheme to
cover, at least once, for some period for training most of the general physicians in the major cities of the country.   Nurse
training is also not very satisfactory.   They need to be given specialized skill training.
Reply of Government
3.3        Government of India has chalked out a comprehensive training programme to cover medical and para-medical workers
including nurses to train them in prevention and control of HIV and AIDS.   A programme for training of General Medical
Practitioners was also developed for which a sum of Rs. 37 lakhs was sanctioned  to central office of Indian Medical
Association.  So  far, they have trained 7500 physicians in different parts of the country.   The association is being requested to
take up more training programmes.   Besides  Indian Medical Association, Christian Medical Association of India (CMAI) and
Voluntary Health Association of India (VHAI) had also taken up training programmes for general medical practitioners on HIV
and AIDS prevention and control.   The curriculum of training courses includes the management of HIV infected people and
AIDS cases and their counselling.   In order to update the knowledge of Medical Practitioners on management of Sexually
Transmitted Diseases, 1.5 lakh booklets on Syndromic Management on Sexually Transmitted Diseases have been mailed to all
the members of Indian Medical Association.
            During second phase of National AIDS Control Programme, three tier saturation Training Programme has been
initiated.  At tertiary health care line, which includes medical colleges/regional institutions, persons have been trained.  To each
institution a team of 10 faculty members from deptt. of medicine, surgery, Obstertic & Gynecology, Pediatric, microbiology,
public health, blood banking, social science/Psychiatry and Sexually transmitted diseases have been trained.  This team will
train the other medical and paramedical functionaries at institutional level, as well as training of district level core team of
trainers which in turn train medical, paramedical and other auxiliary staff functioning at district & Primary Health Centre level.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee has been informed that during the IInd Phse of NACP, 4412 doctors(specialists/medical officers),
5874 nurses and 5948 para-medicals have been trained at various levels by States/UTs and other organisations like Steel
Authority of India Limited (SAIL), Railways, ESI Corporation etc.  The Committee also finds that in majority of the
States, medical personnel have been trained as `Core Trainers’.  However, as per the figures furnished to the Committee,
States/UTs like Andhra Pradesh, Lakshadeep, Maharashtra, Pondicherry, Tripura and West Bengal have not taken any
initiative in this regard.  What is more disturbing is that in States/UTs like Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, J & K, Karnataka,
Kerala, M.P., Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, U.P., D & N Haveli, Damman and Diu, work of training of Medical
Peronnel seems to have ended with the grooming of Core Trainers.  Not only this, a very negligible number of
medical/paramedical personnel have been trained in HIV/AIDS so far and that too is concentrated in very few states of
the Country.  The Committee is constrined to observe that training which is the most vital component of AIDS Control
Programme seems to be still in the initial stages.  It is all the more essential and urgent in view of inherent reservations
in the minds of a large number of doctors and nurses to handle HIV/AIDS patients.  While appreciating the role of
Indian Medical Association (IMA), Christian Medical Association of India (CMAI) and Voluntary Health Association of
India (VHAI), the Committee strongly feels that private organisations alone cannot handle this massive programme. 
Co-ordinated effort with an active role to be played by both Central and State Govts. would be the ideal position. 
Monitoring of the training programme at regular intervals is bound to achieve the desired results.
Recommendation
3.4               The Committee understands that blood banks are the area which needs to be strengthened and modernized for securing
safe blood supply.  Blood banks are the place from where infected blood is donated and transfused.   The Committee is,

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
however, constrained to note that many blood banks in the public sector are yet to be taken up for modernisation to achieve the
goal of securing safe blood supply.   All the blood banks, at least in the public sector, should be immediately covered to ensure
supply of safe blood.   The Committee also feels the necessity of a regular monitoring of the public sector blood banks on any
possible violation of norms.  Similarly, the Committee is equally concerned about the blood banks in the private sector.   There
is hardly any monitoring over the activities of the private blood banks.   Efforts are also required to modernize Government
blood banks and provide necessary facilities for testing  AIDS/HIV etc.   Similarly, Government should also see to it that the
recently amended Drugs and Cosmetics Rule which provides that no blood bank shall collect blood from professional donors, is
strictly adhered to by al the blood banks.
Reply OF Government
3.4        Government of India has provided for modernization of 727 blood banks in public sector and 88 blood banks in
voluntary sector.   It is mandatory for all the blood banks to obtain license from Drug Controller General of India before making
it operational.  Currently there are 1352 licensed blood banks in the country.   There is complete ban on professional blood
donation since 1.1.98.   It is mandatory for each licensed blood bank to test blood units for HIV, Hepatitis B, Syphilis and
Malaria.   For the monitoring of the proper functioning of blood banks in States there is the Department of Food and Drugs,
which conducts regular inspections of these blood banks, and the renewal of annual license is recommended by them on the
basis of their inspection reports.   State AIDS Control Societies are also conducting regular visits of the blood banks in their
respective states to maintain the quality of these blood banks.
Further Comments
On a specific query about the number of blood banks, whose licenses have not been renewed during the last five years
and the nature of irregularities found during the inspection, the Committee was informed that in the last five years, 176 license
applications for blood banks were rejected and five renewal applications were not approved.  The main
deficiencies/irregularities were : I) inadequate storage facility ii) deficiency in testing procedure and facility iii) suspected
dependence on professional paid blood donors iv) lack of qualified technical personnel, etc.
Comments of the Committee
While noting that blood-related infection has come down from 8 percent to 4 percent, the Committee is of the
view that the role played by blood banks both in public and private sector is very vital in the containment of HIV/AIDS. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that expeditious steps should be taken by the Department to modernize all the
licensed blood banks both in public and private sector.  The Committee, while appreciating the appointment of a Joint
Controller of Blood Safety on a full time basis in every AIDS Control Society in the Country, is of the view that an
effective monitoring mechanism needs to be built up without any delay.  This is all the more essential in the case of
private blood banks which are alleged to be entertaining professional donors in large numbers.  Both regular and
random checks should be carried out to be followed by remedial measures.  The Committee notes that voluntary blood
donation is increasing  gradually.  The Committee, however, feels that with the active involvement of voluntary agencies,
public awareness can be increased in this regard.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
take effective steps in this matter.
Recommendation
3.9        NGOs have to very vital role in AIDS Control Program.  They are the groups which can work in close proximity to the
people particularly the high risk behavioural groups.  The  Committee, however, is constrained to notethat the Central
Government which sanctions funds to the NGOs does not have even the list of NGOs working under the programme in various
states.  The Committee feels that Centre should take initiative in bringing the NGOs forward under the implementation of the
programme.
Reply of Government
3.9        NACO has developed a directory of NGOs working on HIV/AIDS prevention and control, which is continuously being
updated.  Information is being collected through the State AIDS Programme Officers, bilateral andUN agencies for this purpose.
NACO is adopting various measures to include the participation of NGOs, in designing and implementing HIV/AIDS related
programmes and policies and programmes.  Under the NACO programme, guidelines have been formulated for NGO funding
and to encourage partnerships between the State AIDS Cell and NGOs.  Separate guidelines have been formulated to help the
NGOs intervene at the community level.
NACO also organized a National Workshop with NGOs on HIV/AIDS.  The workshop which was held on 15-16
th
January, 98 was attended by representatives of 150 NGOs, bilateral and UN agencies.  The main objective of this National level
workshop was to involve the NGOs inthe policy framework of the second phase of the programme by re-examining the

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
procedures, policies and roles for collaboration between NGOs, the bilateral agencies and the Government.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes that a directory of NGOs working on HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control has been
developed by NACO which is being continuously updated.  While appreciating the various measures taken by NACO for
participation of NGOs, the Committee has a word of caution.  It has been observed that NGOs are by and large
concentrated in Metropolitan cities so as to get wider publicity for their activities.  The Committee feels that NGOs
should also come forward to work in rural areas as the menace of AIDS has started affecting rural masses also.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be made by the Govt. so as to encourage NGOs to work both in
urban and rural areas.  While encouraging the participation of NGOs in AIDS Prevention and Control Programme, an
effective monitoring mechanism for supervising their activities also needs to be evolved so that only those NGOs
performing well remain in the field.
Recommendation
3.13      The fact that there being no cure for AIDS is agitating the mind of scientific community the world over.   Whatever
medicines that are available are only to give temporary relief.  Even those medicines are not available to a large number of
infected population because of the high cost.  The Committee is pained to learn from the representative of the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare that there is no company which is importing the drugs.  Even if the Government does not want to introduce
the drugs for treatment, efforts should at least be made to ensure the availability of the drugs in the market.   The Committee
recommends that the Government should consider this and see that medicines which are available in other parts of the world are
brought/made available in India at a cheaper cost.   The Committee was also given to understand  that the Indian systems of
medicines such as Ayurveda and Homoeopathy claim to have got medicines for curing AIDS.  Government should seriously
examine and have research done on the efficacy of all those medicines as early as possible.   This is all the more necessary
because if indigenous medicines are found to be efficacious these could be made available at a cheaper cost.
Reply of Government
3.13            Under the National AIDS Control programme, funds are provided to states and UTs for the management of
opportunistic infections in HIV/AIDS patients.   As far as the Anti-Retro-viral drugs are concerned,  they are not provided under
the programme.   However, drugs like Azidothymidine, Lamivudine, Indinavir, Saquinavir and Ritonavir etc. are available in the
market.
Government of India has provided funds to Central Council of Research on Homeopathy for conducting trials of homeopathy
drugs in HIV/AIDS patients to assess their efficacy.   The research is in progress and the final report is still awaited.  Funds have
also been provided by the Tamil Nadu State AIDS Control Society to Institute of Thoracic Medicine,  Tambram to study the
efficacy of Sidha drugs in management of HIV/AIDS cases.  The Final report is still awaited.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that drugs like Azidothymidine, Lamivudine, Indinavir, Saquinavir and Ritonaviv etc. for
treatment of AIDS/HIV are available in the market. However, the Committee apprehends that these drugs due to their
prohibitive cost must be out of the reach of majority of patients.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that serious
efforts need to be made by the Govt. so as to ensure the availability of these drugs in India at a cheaper cost.  If need be,
Patent Laws should be looked into for finding a solution to this problem.
 The Committee notes that funds have been provided for conducting research to study the efficacy of
homoeopathy and Sidha drugs in management of HIV/AIDS cases.  The Committee hopes that this research work would
lead to some positive results for HIV/AIDS Patients.
Recommendation
5.1        The Committee is constrained to note that the country has 40 million carriers of HBV and the Government has not
woken up yet to meet the challenge.  Even though some steps have been taken by the Department, they are far from adequate. 
The Committee is of the view that prevention is better than cure.  During the course of its interaction with experts, it was
emphasised again and again that mass vaccination was the only foolproof method for eradication of this ever spreading disease. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that it should be taken up by the Government, on a large scale and steps should be taken
by the Government to include it in the universal immunisation programme.  Taking into account the fact that WHO has
recommended that countries with a carrier prevalence of 2 percent and above should consider inclusion of HBV in routine
immunisation programme for infants and as India has a prevalence of 4 percent, the Committee feels that vaccination
programme should be started without further delay.

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
Recommendation
5.2 This measure becomes all the more necessary keeping in view the fact that infants and young children who generally have
mild infection, can become life-long carriers without showing any symptoms all along.  And after 20-25 years about 25 percent
of chronic carriers can develop hepatitis cirrhosis (liver failure) and liver cancer.  The Committee feels that successful
implementation of pulse polio programme can be taken up as a role model for starting vaccination programme for Hepatitis B. 
The Committee is constrained to note that the proposal to include vaccination against Hepatitis B can only be implemented if
adequate resources become available during the 9 th plan.  The Committee feels that this is a sorry state of affairs.  Government
has to provide sufficient funds during 9th plan period, if future generations are to be saved. 
Reply of Government
5.1. Since health is a State subject, it is the responsibility of the State Government to take measures for the prevention of all
diseases.  However,  Hepatitis B was considered in the Department of Family Welfare for inclusion in the Immunization
Programme while formulating Plan of Action for the 9th Plan.  The initial estimate which was worked out is as follows:-
a.             Estimated no. of newborn - 2.5 crore
b.             No. of doses to be administered - 3 doses.
c.             No. of doses required including wastage - 10.00 crore
d.             Approx. cost per dose at international rate - Rs.50/-
e.             Total fund requirement - Rs. 500 crores/year.
 
However, the Planning Commission had indicated that additional allocation of funds will not be possible.  Therefore, the same
could not be included in the final plan of action of the 9
th Plan.
The Department of Family Welfare is still actively involved in the consultation process with experts, Indian Council of
Medical Research, International Organizations for modalities of introduction of the vaccine, and also looking for the funding
sources from World Bank etc.
Further Comments
            In reply to a question as to what efforts have so far been made by the Department to generate additional funds,   the
Department replied that introduction of Hepatitis B in the Universal Immunization Programme  (UIP) has not been possible due
to the enormous financial implication of such a step.   The Planning Commission has stated that funds will have to be found
within the existing plan resources of the Department of Health for the 9 th Plan.   While steps are being explored for formulating
a pilot project, including Hepatitis B under the Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) is a step which will require large
scale resource mobilization.   This does not appear to be feasible during the 9th plan period.
Comments of the Committee
 The Committee is of the view that Hepatitis B is even more dangerous that AIDS in terms of its             infectious
nature and spread amongst 40 million people.   Mass vaccination is the only fool proof method for preventing this ever
spreading disease.   The Committee, therefore,  reiterates its recommendation that the Department should not only
pursue this matter with the Planning Commission but it should also look for funds from other sources.
Recommendation
5.3        The Committee feels that apart from vaccination there are some other areas where there is a chance of spreading HBV
which cannot be ignored like rampant use of unsterilised syringes in hospitals.   This unethical practice was more rampant in
rural areas.   Mere issuing guidelines to state authorities for the use of a separate sterile syringe and needle for each injection
would not suffice.   The Committee feels that stringent measures are required to check this dangerous practice.   Steps should
also be taken to educate the general masses about fatal consequences of such use of unsterlised syringes.
Reply of Government
5.3        National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) has initiated a comprehensive training programme for all categories of
the Health Care Workers on universal precautions to prevent the spread of HIV, Hepatitis 'B' and other blood borne infections in
all Government hospitals/Health Centers.  Besides, the information on this aspect is also being disseminated to the community
through media.

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
Further Comments
TheCommittee specifically wanted to knowthe measures taken by the Govt. to ensure the use of separate sterile syringe
and needle for each injection.  The Department replied that the following two measures have been takenso far:-
-                      instructions issued  by DGHS toall Central Govt. hospitals as well as State Govts. for use of separate sterile
syringe and needle for each injection .
-                      Training of doctors , nurses and para-medical personnel of hospitals etc regarding the use of separate syringes
and needles for each injection under the AIDS programme.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is of the view that these instructions lack the necessary  teeth to stop the unethical practice of use of 
unsterilised syringes in hospitals. Moreover, the Committee also feels that merely by issuing instructions to the hospitals
or by training doctors and para-medicals, this unethical practice perhaps would not be contained.  Hence, it reiterates its
earlier observation that stringent measures are required to check this dangerous practice.    The Committee feels that
exemplary punishment to defaulters would set an example for others.  Steps should also be taken to educate the general
masses about fatal consequences of use of unsterlised syringes and needles.  The Committee is also of the view that an
effective monitoring mechanism of random checks to be carried out right from PHCs to big hospitals in the cities can
yield the desired results.
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
NIL
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
Comments of the Committee
The Committee was informed that out of 1143 posts sanctioned under NACP Phase II, which started in
November, 1999, 542 posts have already been filled up till June, 2000.  The Committee is, however, disturbed to note that
information with regard to vacancy position in respect of States/UTs like Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and D
& N Haveli is not available with the Central Government.  What is more alarming is that in the case of many major and
medium states, number of posts filled up so far is very less.  The Committee has been given to understand that the main
reasons for vacant posts are non-availability of suitable candidates in some states as well as the time taken in filling up
the posts either through deputation or on contract.  There has also been some reluctance on the part of the States to fill
up these posts on the ground that the employees would become the permanent liability of the State Govt.  after the
closure of the project.
            The Committee feels that given the menace of AIDS, which will only increase in future, the approach of Central
Govt. would not do any good to the morale of the persons who are instrumental in the implementation of the programme
at grass root level.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier observation that this aspect could have been tackled
by the Govt. in a better manner by convincing the States about the importance of the Programme and the urgent
necessity of creation of posts.  The Committee once again emphasises that keeping in view the financial  status of State
Govts. a via-media for continuance of the posts beyond the Project Period has to be found out by the Govt. without any
further delay.  (Para 3.2)
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee has been informed that during the IInd Phse of NACP, 4412 doctors(specialists/medical officers),
5874 nurses and 5948 para-medicals have been trained at various levels by States/UTs and other organisations like Steel
Authority of India Limited (SAIL), Railways, ESI Corporation etc.  The Committee also finds that in majority of the
States, medical personnel have been trained as `Core Trainers’.  However, as per the figures furnished to the Committee,
States/UTs like Andhra Pradesh, Lakshadeep, Maharashtra, Pondicherry, Tripura and West Bengal have not taken any
initiative in this regard.  What is more disturbing is that in States/UTs like Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, J & K, Karnataka,
Kerala, M.P., Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, U.P., D & N Haveli, Damman and Diu, work of training of Medical
Peronnel seems to have ended with the grooming of Core Trainers.  Not only this, a very negligible number of
medical/paramedical personnel have been trained in HIV/AIDS so far and that too is concentrated in very few states of
the Country.  The Committee is constrined to observe that training which is the most vital component of AIDS Control
Programme seems to be still in the initial stages.  It is all the more essential and urgent in view of inherent reservations

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
in the minds of a large number of doctors and nurses to handle HIV/AIDS patients.  While appreciating the role of
Indian Medical Association (IMA), Christian Medical Association of India (CMAI) and Voluntary Health Association of
India (VHAI), the Committee strongly feels that private organisations alone cannot handle this massive programme. 
Co-ordinated effort with an active role to be played by both Central and State Govts. would be the ideal position. 
Monitoring of the training programme at regular intervals is bound to achieve the desired results. (Para 3.3)
Comments of the Committee
While noting that blood-related infection has come down from 8 percent to 4 percent, the Committee is of the
view that the role played by blood banks both in public and private sector is very vital in the containment of HIV/AIDS. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that expeditious steps should be taken by the Department to modernize all the
licensed blood banks both in public and private sector.  The Committee, while appreciating the appointment of a Joint
Controller of Blood Safety on a full time basis in every AIDS Control Society in the Country, is of the view that an
effective monitoring mechanism needs to be built up without any delay.  This is all the more essential in the case of
private blood banks which are alleged to be entertaining professional donors in large numbers.  Both regular and
random checks should be carried out to be followed by remedial measures.  The Committee notes that voluntary blood
donation is increasing  gradually.  The Committee, however, feels that with the active involvement of voluntary agencies,
public awareness can be increased in this regard.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
take effective steps in this matter.       (Para 3.4)
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes that a directory of NGOs working on HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control has been
developed by NACO which is being continuously updated.  While appreciating the various measures taken by NACO for
participation of NGOs, the Committee has a word of caution.  It has been observed that NGOs are by and large
concentrated in Metropolitan cities so as to get wider publicity for their activities.  The Committee feels that NGOs
should also come forward to work in rural areas as the menace of AIDS has started affecting rural masses also.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be made by the Govt. so as to encourage NGOs to work both in
urban and rural areas.  While encouraging the participation of NGOs in AIDS Prevention and Control Programme, an
effective monitoring mechanism for supervising their activities also needs to be evolved so that only those NGOs
performing well remain in the field.    (Para 3.9)
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that drugs like Azidothymidine, Lamivudine, Indinavir, Saquinavir and Ritonaviv etc. for
treatment of AIDS/HIV are available in the market. However, the Committee apprehends that these drugs due to their
prohibitive cost must be out of the reach of majority of patients.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that serious
efforts need to be made by the Govt. so as to ensure the availability of these drugs in India at a cheaper cost.  If need be,
Patent Laws should be looked into for finding a solution to this problem.
 The Committee notes that funds have been provided for conducting research to study the efficacy of
homoeopathy and Sidha drugs in management of HIV/AIDS cases.  The Committee hopes that this research work would
lead to some positive results for HIV/AIDS Patients. (Para 3.13)
Comments of the Committee
 The Committee is of the view that Hepatitis B is even more dangerous that AIDS in terms of its            
infectious nature and spread amongst 40 million people.   Mass vaccination is the only fool proof method for preventing
this ever spreading disease.   The Committee, therefore,  reiterates its recommendation that the Department should not
only pursue this matter with the Planning Commission but it should also look for funds from other sources.  (Para 5.1)
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is of the view that these instructions lack the necessary  teeth to stop the unethical practice of use
of  unsterilised syringes in hospitals. Moreover, the Committee also feels that merely by issuing instructions to the
hospitals or by training doctors and para-medicals, this unethical practice perhaps would not be contained.  Hence, it
reiterates its earlier observation that stringent measures are required to check this dangerous practice.    The Committee
feels that exemplary punishment to defaulters would set an example for others.  Steps should also be taken to educate the
general masses about fatal consequences of use of unsterlised syringes and needles.  The Committee is also of the view
that an effective monitoring mechanism of random checks to be carried out right from PHCs to big hospitals in the cities
can yield the desired results. (Para 5.3)

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE
 
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 10.00 A.M on Friday the 22 nd  September, 2000 in Committee Room `A` , Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.        Shri S.B. Chavan                       ¾¾                 Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Mourice Kujur
3.         Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”
4.         Shri Dina Nath Mishra
5.          Prof. R. B. S. Varma
6.         Shri Bratin Sengupta
7.         Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”
8.         Dr. C. Narayana  Reddy
 
LOK SABHA
 
9.         Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
10.        Shri Satyabrata Mookherjee
11.        Shri Baliram Kashyap
12.        Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
13.        Shri G.S. Baswaraj
14.        Shrimati Shyama Singh
15.         Dr. D.V.G. Shankar Rao
16.        Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
17.        Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
            WITNESSES
I.          Representatives of the Department of Health
1.       Shri J.A. Chowdhury, Secretary
2.       Dr. S.P. Agarwal, DGHS
3.       Shri JUR Prasada Rao, Addl. Secretary
 
  SECRETARIAT
                        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shrimati. Vandana Garg, Director
Shri C. B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Gurnam Singh, Committee Officer
 
 
 
2.                  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed  the Members of the Committee and officials of the Department of Health.  The 
Committee then took up for  discussion  the  Action Taken by the Government on the 54 th  Report of the Committee on the
Functioning of National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore.  Members raised certain
queries on the number of teaching posts lying vacant, particularly in the reserved categories and shortage of funds.

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
Thereafter,  the Committee discussed  the Action Taken by the Government on the 73 rd Report of the Committee on
Dreaded Diseases.  The Secretary and other officials of the Department answered the queries put by the Members.
3.         Thereafter,  the Committee discussed  the Action Taken by the Government on the 72 nd Report of the Committee on
Adult Education. Members expressed their reservations on the actual implementation of the Adult education schemes.   Certain
queries were raised by the Members Officials of the Department of Education clarified the queries.  
4.         The Chairman informed that the Committee could taken up Higher Education and UGC in its subsequent meetings,
besides other business.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting  was kept. 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at  12.30 P.M.
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.30 A. M. on Monday, the 22 nd  January, 2001 in Committee Room `D`,  Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  The following were present:
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1. Shri S.B. Chavan                                   ¾¾                 Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Eduardo Faleiro
3. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
4. Shri Bratin Sengupta
5. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
6. Dr. C. Narayana  Reddy
 
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
8. Shri Ramakant Angle
9. Shri Baliram Kashyap
10. Shri Dileep Sanghani
11. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
12. Shri G. S. Baswaraj
13. Shri V. M. Sudheeran
14. Shrimati Shyama Singh
15. Shri Sunil Dutt
16. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
17. Shri Samik Lahiri
18. Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
19. Shrimati Renu Kumari
20. Shri Shivaji Mane
21. Dr. A.D.K. Jayaseelan
22. Shri Vanlal Zawma
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri .Satish Kumar  Additional Secretary
Shrimati. Vandana Garg, Director
Shri C. B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Gurnam Singh, Committee Officer

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/99threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:15]
 
2.       The Committee considered the Draft Action Taken Reports on 54 th Report on National Institute of Mental Health and
Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore and 73 rd  Report on Dreaded Diseases. The Committee, after some discussion,
suggested some  modifications in the Draft Reports and authorised the Chairman of the Committee to effect them.
2.                3.           The Committee then decided that both the Reports   may be presented/laid in both the Houses on 27th February,
2001.   The Committee,  in this connection, authorised Shri Eduardo Faleiro  and Prof. R.B.S.Verma   to present the
Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Ramakant Angle and Smt. Shyama Singh  to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
4.        The Committee also directed the Secretariat to get  copies of Draft National Health Policy from the  Deparment of
Health for circulation to the Members of the Committee.
5.        The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at  12.45  
P.M.