PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF SPEECH AND HEARING,
MYSORE

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25.2.97)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25.2.97)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 1997/Phalguna, 1918 (Saka)

2616/RS/F—1-A


५9408 |
ee a eee

०२५



1. ComposrrIoNn OF THE COMMITTEE

2. PREFACE

3. Report

L

jt

Il.

BV

Vv.

VI.

शा.

शा.

Ix.

yh :

Introduction

Aims & Objectives
Staff Position
Equipment

Training Activities
Public Education
Clinical Services
Linkages with Industries
Pay Scales of the Staff

. Budget

4. ANNEXURE
5. Minutes

AL

CONTENTS

2७685
()-Gi)
(iii)

9—14


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(1996-97)

. Shri $.8. Chavan—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo

. Dr. 8.8. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar

. Shri Raj Nath Singh

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav -

. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr. Mohan Babu

45. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shri Jai Prakash

. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Shrimati Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

. Dr. ९. Silvera

. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
. Shri Dutta Meghe

५ Shri LG. Sanadi

. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Pawan Diwan

. Shri Krishna

. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

» Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

. Shri Mukhtar Anees

@

2616/RS/F—2-A



(ii)

. Dr. M. Jagannath

. Dr. Bali Ram

. Shri Ranen Barman
. Shri Surender Singh
. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2616 / RS/F—2-B



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do
hereby present this Fifty-fifth Report of the Committee on the All India Institute of Speech and
Hearing, Mysore under the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

2. A Study Group of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development visited the All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore on 16th
November, 1996 to make an on the spot Study and also to get first hand information about the
functioning of the All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore. A list of Members who visited
the All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore is enclosed as Annexure-I.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the 16th January, 1997.

New De.ut; S.B. CHAVAN,
16 January, 1997 Chairman,
Seunerr Nine Rey Gapinicn Department-related Parliamentary
26, Pausa, 1918 (Saka) Standing Committee

on Human Resource Development.

(iii)

rr TE 2, eaten


A

A

REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION

1.1. The All India Institute of Speech and Hearing was established in 1965 to meet the
long felt need to serve the Speech and Hearing Handicapped in India. The Foundation stone
of the AIISH building was laid by the then President of India, Dr. Sarvapalli
Radhakrishnan, on 25th July, 1966. The late Maharaja of Mysore, His Highness Sri
Jayachamarajendra Wodeyar, donated land for setting up the Institute. The present location
of AIISH is on the Manasagangothri campus, covering an area of 32 acres.

1.2. AIISH was made a registered Society in October 1966 and is governed by an
Executive Council. Since then AIISH has made rapid strides. New units, sections,
departments, have been added from time to time.

Il. AIMS and OBJECTIVES
2. The main aims and objectives of the Institute are as under:—

(a) To provide and assist in providing general, professional and technical education and
training in Speech and Hearing for graduate, post-graduate and doctorate courses;

(०) To provide and assist in providing general, professioua! and technical education and
training to various categories of personnel e.g., medical, paramedical, non-medical,
etc; >

(c) To provide and assist in providing facilities and encouragement to research in speech
and hearing, their disorders and the concerned diseases of ear, nose and throat;

(d) To provide and assist in providing clinical and surgical services for those with speech
and hearing handicaps and ear, nose and throat diseases;

(e) To assist in the development of speech and hearing clinics in hospitals and other
centres;

(f) To educate the public about persons with communicative disorders; and

(g) To stimulate interest in speech and hearing through publicity and mass
communication and to co-operate with other agencies and institutions or
ee professional associations.

Il. STAFF POSITION

3.1. When the Committee sought to know as to whether any vacancies are there in the
institute; if so, whether there is any adverse impact on the activities of the institute due to
this shortfall, the Director of the Institute apprised the Committee that they try their level
best to fill up **2 sanctioned posts whenever any posts fall vacant. The Director, however,
stated that they do not get qualified staff inspite of repeated advertisements. The main
reason for this is that the pay scales are not attractive, it was added. The Committee was
further informed that unless the pay scales of the staff are revised the efforts being made by
the institute to fill up the vacant posts would not yield any results. The Committee agrees
that in an institution of this kind where excellent work is done particularly for the
handicapped people, it is necessary to have well qualified staff. All necessary steps may,
therefore, be taken to enable the institute to attract more qualified staff.

IV. EQUIPMENT

4.1 The Committee was informed during its visit to the Institute that for clinical,
research and training purposes, they haye to purchase necessary equipments available
indigenously, and also to import, from out of the budgetary grants available to the Institute.

1

2616/RS/F—3-A



2

| The Committee has learnt that even though laser facility is one of the latest technologies
available in the medical field, this is not available in the institute. The Director informed
that it is under consideration. The Committee has also been given to understand that the
institute is in need of some more sophisticated equipments for which additional grants are
required. The Committee, strongly feels that the Department may examine the matter.

|

। 4.2 The Director also informed the Committee that they have to import many
equipments. Many of the instruments that are required are not manufactured indigenously,
The industrialists are not coming forward to manufacture the instruments because of weak
market position. The Committee feels that intensive efforts have to. be made to
develop—indigenous instruments so that more and better services can be provided. The
manufacturers will also have the opportunity to export their products. The Department may
consider providing necessary incentives for this purpose. The Department may also examine,
in consultation with the Ministries of Industry and Commerce, the possibility of allowing
exports by the manufacturers. ४

4.3 The Director has also informed the Committee that they propose to develop as
many indigenous materials and equipments as possible and for this purpose the Institute is
interacting with various departments and ministries to fabricate and develop instruments that
they require. The Committee desires that the Department of Health may extend the
necessary support to the Institute for this purpose.

V. TRAINING ACTIVITIES

5.1. The Committee learnt that a two year post graduate (M.Sc. in Speech and
Hearing) training programme was started in 1966. In the following year, an undergraduate
(B.Sc. in Speech and Hearing) course of three years was also started.

|

5.2 The main objectives of AIISH revolve around generation of man power in the areas
of Speech Pathology and Audiology. The successful trainees in the respective programmes
are awarded the degrees of B.Sc. (Speech and Hearing), M.Sc. (Speech and Hearing),
Ph.D. (Speech and hearing) by the University of Mysore. The students are drawn on a zonal
basis to ensure the availability of services throughout the country. The Committee has learnt

, that no tution fee is charged. In the past the students were getting stipend, but now. this
‘system has been discontinued. The Committee was also informed that students now get
merit scholarships only. The Committee, however, feels that the original system of stipend is
better to attract bettér talent and possibility of restoring and enhancing it may be examined

' VI. PUBLIC EDUCATION

6.1. The Committee was informed that efforts are made in the Institute to keep: the
public informed regarding prevention of communication disorders and the facilities available
for rehabilitation. Public education is also done to stimulate interest in speech and hearing,
publicity and mass communication and to co-operate with other agencies and institutions or
professional associations.

6.2. The main avenues utilized by AIISH to disseminate information range from
publication in/distribution of/conducting:

—newspapers;

—articles;

—public education pamphlets;

—radio talks;

—exhibitions;

—slides in cinema halls;

—radio and TV fillers;

2616/RS/F—3-B


—stickers, badges, posters;

—greeting cards;

—extension services in rural areas; and
—conducting open house.

6.3. A phone-in-programme was broadcast from the Mysore Station of the All India
Radio. Questions were invited from the public and on the spot answers were relayed, it was
added. fs

“6.4. The Committee, however, feels that the public education programme is mainly
limited to Karnataka. However, communication disorders are prevalent everywhere in the
country. Therefore, the excellent work done in the institute should spread and reach out to
every nook and comer of the country. The awareness programmes is required to be spread
to all walks of life and spheres of activities. Public education programme could be taken up
zone-wise in the same manner in which admission of students is done.

6.5. The Committee has also learnt that in collaboration with the Family Planning
Association of India, the staff and students of AIISH carry out field visits around a radius of
25 kms. of Mysore to bring about awareness and early identification of speech and hearing
{paola The Committee is of the view that such activities are required to be extended to
| other areas/states. More funds and staff as required, may be provided to the Institute for
the purpose.
शा. CLINICAL SERVICES

7.1. The Committee has learnt that the Speech and Hearing Impaired from both within
and outside the country have been availing clinical services provided in AIISH premises.
Evaluation of patients is done on the problems such as voice, speech, language and hearing
impairment etc. Medical specialists from K.R. Hospital, Mysore also make visits. The
Committee has also noted that out patient services for medical and surgical treatment, are
\rendered once a week and operations are conducted for organic lesions related to speech
‘jand hearing disorders twice a week at the K.R. Hospital, Mysore by the ENT doctors of
|AIISH. The Committee feels that the Institute should also develop sufficient infrastructure
\for conducting operations so that the staff of the Institute can have better exposure and the
services of the Institute can be better utilised.

MIM. LINKAGES WITH INDUSTRIES

! 8.1. Noise pollution is a major health hazard, particularly in the industrial units. The
iCommittee is happy to learn that on account of the efforts of the Institute in creating
j awareness regarding health hazard of noise pollution, the industrial units i.e. M/S Vikrant
: Tyres and Rare Material Projects (Bhabha Atomic Research Centre) are utilising the
| facilities of the Institute, for introducing hearing conservation programme. The Committee
i feels that this is required to be introduced in all the industrial units. The Institute may take
' up this matter with the major industrial units and ‘increase awareness among the
managements about the necessity of the programme. This would, besides spreading the
network of the Institute, make the environment at work -place more comfortable.

\
|
IX. PAY SCALES OF THE STAFF

9.1. The Committee has noted that even though All India Institute of Speech and
Hearing (AIISH) is the only institution working in the area of speech and hearing but in
terms of salary and other benefits, the Institute is not at par with other National Institutions
like All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, Jawaharlal Institute of Post-
Graduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Pondicherry and National Institute of
Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore. The Director of the Institute



4

informed the Committee that the pay scales of the teaching staff in the institute are very low
as compared to the UGC pay scales as well as that of other autonomous institutes.

9.2. The Director further informed that even though the staff has demanded UGC pay
scales but the main difficulty is that since it is not a deemed university, UGC pay scales
cannot be given. She has, also stated that the matter was considered by the Finance
Committee and it recommended flexible complementary and Central Health Services (CHS)
scales for medical staff and flexible complimentary scales for non-medical staff. This was to
be approved by the Executive Council, the Director stated. The Director has, however,
requested that this institute should be treated at par with other institutes.

9.3. When the Committee sought to know as to whether the issue of pay scales of the
Institute was referred to the Fifth Pay Commission, the Department informed the
Committee that the Institute has already submitted a comprehensive memorandum to the
Fifth Pay Commission. The Committee is of the view that even though the Institute has been
doing excellant work, the Department of Health does not appear to have paid any attention
on the issue of pay scales in the Institute. The Committee desires that the issue may be
settled once for all so that well qualified staff may join the Institute. This would enable the
Institute to concentrate more on its work with devotion.

9.4. The Director also informed the Committee that promotional avenues are not good
as compared to institutes like NIMHANS where promotions are given after every 5-8 years
service. She pleaded for better promotional avenues in AIISH also. The Department may
look into the matter and take necessary action.

X. BUDGET

10.1. The Director informed the Committee that the Institute gets grants from the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare under Plan and Non Plan. Occasionally, they get
grants from other sources also for some specific purposes. Government of Karnataka also
gives grants occasionally. Otherwise the Institute depends mostly on grants that are received
from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, it was added. The Institute got Rs. 75
lakhs under the 7th Plan for all the five years. Under the 8th Plan, it got Rs. 275 lakhs. The
Director further added that they hope to get more funds in the 9th Plan. She, however,
stated that special funds are required to purchase the equipment, because almost all of them
have to be imported and most of them are very expensive. Sometimes, an instrument costs
Rs. 7 to Rs. 12 lakhs the Director added.World Health Organisation has also assisted the
Institute. But the Director is apprehensive that since it is not a committed package, in future
it may not come. The Director, therefore, pleaded that they would like to have more grants
for purchase of equipment and buildings. Patients’ load has also gone up. The patients have
to be tested within a reasonable time. When they come there for treatment, they have to
stay for 2-3 days to get the comprehensive evaluation and for each test they may have to
wait. Therefore, the Director added, the institute propose to increase the number of test
rooms and also to increase the staff strength. The Committee recommends that the
Department of Health may consider the requirements of the Institute and make necessary
allocations. The Committee also reiterates the recommendation made earlier that necessary
staff strength may be sanctioned as per requirement.

10.2. The Committee was surprised to find that different methods were being followed

in the case of committed expenditure of the previous plan. According to the understanding

. of the Committee, committed expenditure will not get reflected in any shape or form in the
| subsequent plan. What is termed as a non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan becomes
1 relevant only to the expenditure of new non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan period.
३ This applies in the case ef both autonomous as well as deemed university institutions. In



5

order to get further clarification in the matter the Secretary and the Financial Adviser of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare were specially called to clarify as to whether this
view of the Committee is correct or not. The Secretary could not come because of illness.
The Financial Adviser appeared before the Chairman and he confirmed that the non-plan
committed expenditure of the previous plan should not get reflected into the non-plan
expenditure of the subsequent plan. He also confirmed that they are not making any
distinction between the Government institution and other autonomous and deemed
university instituticns which naturally means that the confusion which is prevailing in some
of institutions in treating committed expenditure as part of the new non-plan expenditure
should be clarified by the department concerned to all the institutions in the country so that
there should be uniformity in matters of procedure of not including the committed non-plan
expenditure in the subsequent plan’s non-plan expenditure.

10.3. The Committee also noticed that in some of the institutions where vacancies were
available, they were utilising the funds’ meant for vacancies, for the purpose of non-plan
expenditure, which according to the Committee is not a desirable feature. Plan money can
not be diverted for non-plan side or even the non-plan expenditure should not have any
element of the scheme provided under the plan. All the vacancies prevailing in different
institutions will have to be filled in against the non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan
as the burden of the expenditure will not be there.



ANNEXURE

NAME OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE WHO VISITED ALL INDIA INSTITUTE

a

४+8 9४० 9० :१ 9 (७ # 9७ [७४५

OF SPEECH AND HEARING, MYSORE ON 16TH NOVEMBER, 1996

. Shri S.B. Chavan
. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

Shri Dau. Dayal Joshi

. Shri Sartaj Singh

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Shri 1.0, Sanadi
. Dr. M. Jagannath
. Dr. Bali Ram



MINUTES



14

4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *

7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 Noon.

***Relate to other matters.

241 £10 -1090.

Dane

Me

a

*e

Paces