PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY-THIRD REPORT

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations / Observations contained in
the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource Development)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2.6.1995)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2.6.1995)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

June, 1995/Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)

R3AFW



CoMPosiTION OF THE COMMITTEE

INTRODUCTION.
Cuapter I
Cuarter II 26: 255 कक लक पटक nies Soa: a Ae Gee IE

Cuarter III Recommendations / Observations which the Committce do not desire to
pursue in view of the Government's replies.

Cuarrer IV Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which replics of the’ ©
~ Government have not been accepted by the Committee... ....... 4

CuarTer V Recommendations / Observations in respect of which final replics of the 5
25

Government are still awaited



3 a "3 ff 2
SSTTUAMOD stir ao 2ए718७416072
5] ae Mi:
4.1 75 ५ १5७ Sp MOMBUGOSTHI

eo Oe

2

WaT

TE

dO NaioithbnaminoyoSt
¥ Td oueruig

5216]

* ge

बा)

05७]

ee sgh

HS 1158



1.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

Shri P. Upendra — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram
. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
. Miss Saroj Khaparde

Shri O.P. Kohli

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Shri ५. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

. Dr. ५. Rajeshwaran

. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

. Dr. Vasant Pawar

. Prof. P.J. Kurien

. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
. Shri K.T. Vandayar

. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

. Shri Inder Jit

. Shri Anna Joshi

. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

. Shri Rambadan

. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

. Shri Ramchandra Dome

. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

@


44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram वार 0 90 50!
SECRETARIAT - +>  (ट्श्श)

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh, Deputy Director

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer



INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on
its behalf, present this Twenty Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its 5th Report on “Demands for Grants” (1994-95) of
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education).

2. The Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 18th April, 1994 and laid
on the ‘Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 1994. Replies of Government of all the
recommendations contained in the report, received from the Department of Education were
considered by the Committee and this report was adopted at its sitting held on 30th May,
1995.

New Dewi; P. UPENDRA
30th May, 1995 Chairman,

z Committee on Human Resource Development
9th Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)

(iii)


CHAPTER-I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Fifth Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development (Department of Education) for the year 1994-95 which was
presented to Rajya Sabha on 18.4.94 and the Lok Sabha on 22.4.94.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: para
22, 25, 28, 29, 31, 33, 34, 35, 45, 46, 50, 51, 54, 55, 56, 57, 61, 62, 63, 67, 70, 71, 74, 75, 77,
78, 80, 82, 83, 86, 88, 91, 93, 96, 103, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112.

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies para 24, 37, 39, 42, 44, 47, 49, 59, 65, 66, 69, 81, 84, 85, 90,
94, 95, 97, 99, 101, 105.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 27, 30, 32, 52, 58, 60, 98.

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: Nil.

3. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of its
recommendations.
Operation Black Board
Recommendation (Para No. 27)

The Committee is of the opinion that infrastructure for the required standard for
elementary schools has not been created and maintained. The Committee feels that when
purchase of equipment is made for schools, the quality aspect of the equipment must be
ensured.

Ministry’s Reply

The State Governments have been asked to ensure timely supply of material and also
evolve a mechanism for maintaining quality.
Comments of the Committee

The Union Government cannot completely abdicate its responsibility in this matter. The
Committee desires that steps should be taken to ensure quality aspect of the infrastructure
supplied.
Recommendation (Para No. 30)

In regard to Dropouts, the recommendation of the Committee was as follows:

The Committee is not satisfied with the efforts made on the basis of last year’s Committee
report for reducing dropouts from elementary schools, especially of children belonging to
Scheduled Tribes and Schedules Castes categories. 9

Ministry Reply

“Reduction of dropout rates and universal retention are integral components of the
national policy framework. |

The complex, multi-causal problem of dropout has to be attacked with multi-pronged
strategy on a sustained basis for tangible results. This is precisely the thrust of ongoing efforts.

-


nN

Various State Governments and UT administrations have incentives like free textbooks,
mid-day meal scheme and attendance scholarship to meet part of the opportunity cost of
schooling and thereby retain children, especially from the disadvantaged groups in the school
system.

The Ministry of Welfare also administers various schemes for the educational
development of Scheduled Castes and Tribes. Pre-matric scholarships for the children of
those engaged in unclean occupation, Girls’ hostels for SCs and STs, Boys’ hostels for SCs
and STs and Ashram schools for tribal children and establishment of educational complexes
in low literacy pockets in प्राय areas are important interventions for reducing the dropout
rate among Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe. children.

In addition, in order to improve the school environment, schemes like Operation
Blackboard and restructuring of teacher education through DIETs focus on making teaching-
learning more activity-oriented and child-centred and ultimately a joyful experience.

Minimum levels of learning approach also would add to the qualitative upgradation of
the learning process.

Even under the NFE programme, a system of equivalence has been envisaged enabling
the schools dropouts to rejoin the formal system.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels that dropout is a very serious problem. The Committee observes,
with disappointment, that the efforts made to contain this have not yielded the desired
results. Additional initiatives such as mid-day meals are required to be taken in this regard.
As part of the multi-pronged strategy, efforts should be made for integration of various
schemes with those under implementation by the Department of Women and Child
Development and the Ministry of Rural Development. There should be regular monitoring
of the steps being taken in this matter.

Enrolment of Girls in School
Recommendation (Para No. 32)

The Committee feels that enrolment of girls in schools was not upto the expectations.
More efforts are required in this direction.

Ministry Reply

“Education of Girls, particularly in rural areas, is given due priority. In order to attract
girls to schools, various incentives like free mid-day meals, free textbooks, free uniforms and
attendance scholarships are provided.

Under the Operation Blackboard, 52%, of the additional teachers recruited are women.
This is expected to encourage girls’ enrolment.

Under the NFE programme, Central Government funds 90% of the project cost of
exclusive girls’ centres.

The revised scheme has also built-in higher incentive structure for promoting girls’
education. A cash incentive of Rs. 125 per girl child, who quSlifies to enter upper primary
level, is given to the instructor as compared to Rs. 100 per male child.

Wherever total literacy campaigns have been successfully conducted, there has been an
increase in the demand for formal education and the consequent parental awareness and
pressure are expected to contribute incourse of time to higher enrolment of girls.”


Comments of the Committee

The Committee is unhappy to note that girls still account for only 42.9 per cent of the
enrolment at the primary stage. The dropout rates of girls at the primary, as well as the
upper primary stage, are higher than those of boys. The Committee desires that the pace of
efforts is required to be stepped up and a multipronged strategy needs to be adopted
integrating various schemes. Voluntary organisations would be able to play a better role and
this potential needs to be explored and deserving organisations should be adequately
supported. Involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions in this regard should also be ensured.

Kendriya Vidyalayas
Recommendaiton (Para No. 52)

The Committee recommends that more Kendriya Vidyalayas should be opened to cater
to the needs of wards of transferable Central Government employees.
Ministry’s Reply

The Government has approved opening of upto 20 Kendriya Vidyalayas annually in civil
and defence sectors for the five years’ period 1993—98 and as many proposals has found
suitable under the project sector, where all recurring and non-recurring expenses are borne
by the sponsoring projects. So far, 818 Kendriya Vidyalayas including 23 sanctioned during
the current year have been opened.
Comments of the Commitee

The Committee feels that the present number of schools is very inadequate to meet the
requirement. There is still a big gap between the demand and the number of schools
available.\ The Committee reiterates its recommendation that more number of schools be
opened at\the earliest.

Navodaya Vidyalayas
Recommendation (Para No. 55)

The Committee feels that there is lack of commitment in this Scheme as the allocated
funds have not been fully utilised in the past.
Ministry’s reply

“During 1991-92, due to non-receipt of feasible proposals from the concerned State/UT
Govts. the targets laid down for the year could not be achieved. There is often delay on the
part of the State Govt. in the allotment of land etc. due to which the funds earmarked for
permanent construction of Vidyalaya complex are not utilised within the stipulated time and
can be utilised only after the allotment of land to the JNVs. The Samiti has now taken steps
to expedite feasible proposals from the State Government and utilise the funds allotted to
it”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is happy to note from the material supplied later that the allocation
made for the year 1994-95 has been fully spent. The Committee trusts that this trend would
be maintained in the future.

Recommendation. (Para No. 58)

The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the fact that Assam, Bihar and Uttar
Pradesh a

ar behind in regard to the number of Vidyalayas, in proportion to the number
s they have.



Ministry’s reply

Assam has accepted the NV scheme in the year 1993 only and the Samiti has started the
process of establishing new JNVs. In the case of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh the Samiti is
making efforts to establish new JNVs in the uncovered districts, keeping in view the
minimum requirements for establishment of new JNVs. The three States are being requested
to submit the proposals on priority basis in order to cover the uncovered districts within the
8th Plan period. It is submitted that the Samiti is dependent on State Govts. in this regard.
Unless the State Govts. make suitable proposals in sufficient number, the Samiti can not
open enough schools.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee, however, does not fully agree with the contention of the Ministry that
it is dependent on State Govts. the Deptt. does not appear to be making serious efforts in
pursuading the State Govts. to take prompt action in the matter.

Recommendation (Para No. 60)

The Committee recommends that Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme may be expanded.
States, which have not accepted this Scheme, may be persuaded to agree to the opening of
these schools.

Ministry’s reply

“The State Governments of West Bengal and Tamil Nadu are being requested, from
time to time, to agree to opening of Navodaya Vidyalayas in their States.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not happy with the routine reply of the Government. The Committee
made the recommendation with a view that the Deptt. would make all-out efforts to
persuade the State Governments. However, there appear to be no serious efforts on the part
of the Deptt. to remove the misgivings of these two States and persuade them to fall in line
with the other States. The Committee desires that the Govt. should pursue the matter
vigorously, using all avenues available.

Indira Gandhi National Open University
Recommendation (Para No. 74)

The Committee recommends expansion of the scope of IGNOU to other courses also. It
is observed that funds provided by the Ministry are not utilised effectively and this aspect
should be looked into.

Ministry’s reply

“According to information given by IGNOU, 43 programmes consisting of several
courses, were launched upto 1993-94. The University proposes to launch 10 new programmes
during 94-95. The University will be advised to ensure that the funds given to the University
are utilised effectively.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is glad to note. that the allocations made for 1994-95 have been fully
spent. The‘Cémmittee believes that this trend would be maintained and that the expansion
of the scope of the University to other courses would keep enlarging.



Sanskrit and other Classical Languages
Recommendation (Para No. 98)

The Committee is not satisfied with the pace of establishing Rashtriya Sanskrit and
other Classical Languages Grants Commission. It also suggests speedy action for establishing
the Urdu University.

Ministry's reply
“The proposal to set up a subcommission under the UGC banner, instead of a full-

fledged commission, is presently under examination through a UGC Committee. Prompt
action will be ensured as soon as the report becomes available.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is constrained to note that its observation has not been examined in right

‘st. It has not been indicated as to what happened to the proposal of a separate
sion. The Deptt. should examine this proposal seriously before deciding on a Sub-
ion under the banner of UGC. The Deptt. should also make efforts to establish a
Urdu University, as recommended by the Committee



CHAPTER-IL

RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Para No. Recommendation Reply
1 2 3
ELEMENTARY EDUCATION

2. Article of 45 of the Constitution of India provides The recommendation is accepted. The. revised
free and compulsory education for all children below National Policy of Educaiton (NPE), 1992 also
the age of fourteen years. It was expected that by the recommends that the target of Universalisation
year 1995, India would achieve Universal Elementary should be achieved before the end of this century.
Education. However, there is still 153 million हे है
children, as on March, 1991, in the age group of Needless to say that the effort to achieve Universal
GEIS ७9 re pat Vo be: Cavett! unnler the’ Scheme: Elementary Education would be a joint effort of the
They constitute 18 per cent of the total population of Central and State Governments. While the role of
the country. The Committee hopes that by the end of the Central Govt., is to provide policy support and
this century this backlog will be covered and total 18 & ४ 20 tech tice errors cutcal
universal elementary education will be achieved. areas, the actual implemention leading to full

A enrolment, full retention and good standards will
have to remain mostly states’ responsibility.

2. The Committee feels that the Department may take Decentralisation is at guiding consideration of the
steps to decentralise Elementary Education and take National Policy on Education, 1986. The’ 73rd and
help of Pa Raj institutions for proper 74th Constitutional Amendments — relating’ to
monitoring and implementation of the Scheme. Panchayati Raj and Nagar Palika institutions entrust

the Panchayati Raj institutions with the responsibility
for primary and secondary education, A Central
Advisory Board of Education (CABE) Committee on
Decentralised Management of Education prepared
detailed guidelines for decentralisation of education
in the context of these Constitutional Amendments.
Recommendations of the CABE Committee were
endorsed by the Chief Ministers in their conference
held on 15th February, 1994. They also decided to
appropriately implement the recommendations while
enacting the State legislations to follow the
Constitutional amendments and while framing
subordinate legislations in a time bound manner. The
Ministry has already written to all State Governments
to take expeditious action in the matter. The Ministry
will monitor the progress in achieving decentralisation
and devolution of responsibility on Panchayati Raj
Institutions and will continue to pursue with the
states with this objective.
OPERATION BLACK BOARD

28. The Committee also feels that monitoring mechnism A continuous monitoring-cum-evaluation system has
for regulation and implementation of the scheme been worked out. It would provide a regular
should be improved and evaluation done. feedback on the implementation of the programme.

29. The Committee feels that question of increase in the While forwarding Report of the National Advisory

weight of primary school bags, particularly in city

schools, should be seriously considered and
appropriate measures be taken to lessen the weight.
Mechanism for ensuring minimum standards in

schools, in regard to teachers as well as
infrastructure, should be created and strengthened.

Committee on reduction of academic burden on
school students, Prof. Yash Pal, the Chairman of the
Committee advised that wide ranging debates on the
Report was necessary. In the SOth meeting of the
CABE held on 2.3.94, the Education Ministers of a
number of States/UTs expressed ‘their broad
agreement with the recomniendations of Yash Pal
Committee read with suggestions of MHRD Group,



2

Bm

है!

The Committee feels that the scheme should first
achieve the targets laid dows earlier, that is they
should first cover all the single teacher schools before
going in for three-teacher schools.

and the CABE advised effective dialogue and follow
up with the State/U.T. Governments in the matter.
Detailed views emerging out of the state-level
workshops have now been received from the States of
A.P., Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Maharashtra,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal and UT of Delhi. Consensus of the views of
state-level workshops on each recommendation of
Yash Pal Committee has been identified. An action
plan has been formulated for implementation in the
school system directly under the control of the
Central Government as well as in the State school
system. Since majority of the school .system is under
the control of the States/UTs, implementation of the
Yash Pal Committee’s recommendations, most of
which are of long-term nature rests with the State/
UT Govts. MHRD will continue its efforts to
pursuade them to implement the recommendations in
a time bound manner.

2. Minimum levels of learning have been laid down at
primary stage. Similarly, they are also being laid’
down for subjects taught at upper primary stage. This
will ensure competency based teaching and higher
attainment levels, SCERTs, DIETs research
institutions and voluntary organisations are being
involved in implementation.

1, 96% of the single teacher schools have already
been sanctioned second teachers. 99.9% of the
primary schools have been sanctioned teaching
learning equipment. The remaining schools will also
be covered as soon as we receive proposals from the
State Governments/UTs.

2. The expansion of OB scheme is being taken up
only in those schools where two teachers are in
position and physical facilities, as envisaged under
Operation Blackboard, are available. Those schools
which have appointed two teachers and have more
than 100 students on their rolls are entitled to a third
teacher.

NON-FORMAL EDUCATION

ess of students from
is not up to
heme may

The Committee feels that
Non-formal education to for
the mark and, therefore, a review of this
be undertaken.

The Scheme of Non-formal education which was
revised in June, 1993 lays much emphasis on
certification of NFE courses to facilitate lateral entry
of the students of Non-formal stream to formal
stream. The revised scheme envisages __ that
(a) Arrangements will be made for assessing
children’s attainment in NFE stream with reference
to an equivalent stage in the formal system and
specific instructions issued to facilitate lateral entry
into the formal system for students of non-formal
education stream.

(b) Non-formal education centres would insist on
children completing education at least upto V class
level and arrangements of non-formal education upto
class VIII would be provided, wherever necessary.
Efforts would also be made to link non-formal



3

35.

courses with Open Schools.

(c) Scholarships to the needy children, particularly
working children, may be provided to enable them to
continue education in the formal system.

(d) The NFE programme would also be linked with
the schemes of public libraries, Jana Shikshan
Nilayams for providing facilities to conduct
educational pursuits.

(e) Vocational and Technical courses of a wide
variety would be provided for children and youth
who come out of non-formal stream. In order to
motivate NFE Instructors for enabling NFE students
to qualify for entry 10 upper-primary/higher levels, a
provision has been made in the revised scheme for
payment of cash incentive upto Rs. 12004p.a. The
position regarding system of certification of NFE
courses in the states is being reviewed with a view to
developing a proper system of certification to
improve the access of students from Non-formal
stream to formal stream.

MAHILA SAMAKHYA

The Committee feels that increase in expenditure on
National Resource Group and consultancy/meetings
etc., under Mahila Samakhya from Rs. 4.60 lakhs in
92-93 to Rs. 80 lakhs in 1993-94, was quite high. The
Committee feels that this should be looked into.

The Committee feels that a mechanism may be
evolved to regulate and monitor the working of
voluntary organisations who are implementing the
Mahila Samakhya Scheme.

A Budget provision of Rs. 45 lakh was made during
1992-93 and Rs. 80 lakhs during 1993-94 under Sub-
head C.1(2)(8)-Expenditure on National Resource
Group & Consultancies/meetings etc. Against this
budget provision an actual expenditure of
Rs. 5,21,585 was incurred during 92-93 and
Rs. 1,99,469/ during 1993-94.

The work of the Voluntary organisations
implementing the Mahila Samakhya is periodically
evaluated by engaging experts. Decision on
continuance or modification of support is based on
evaluation reports.

FURTHER REPLY

The Ministry has conducted evaluation of seven
voluntary agencies by outside experts to assess the
performance of the voluntary agencies implementing
Mahila Samakhya programme. A _ brief note
explaining the observations made by the experts in
the evaluation report is enclosed. (Annexure-I).

The programme has been in operation since 1989.
The programme has since been establishing its basic
infrastructure in 4 States and hence, there is now a
scaling down of basic establishment costs. The Mahila
Samakhya programme is also a process-driven
programme and not a finance-driven one, as a result
of which expenditures are not high for project
activities. Secondly, the programme has been able to
benefit from convergence with many other Govt. or
non-govt. initiatives at the grass-root level, which has
helped to save costs in Mahila Samakhya budgets.
Budget Estimates have, therefore, been prepared by
taking into account the expenditure incurred in the
last 2 years as well as the demands received from the
State Societies for funds during 1994-95.



46.

Mahila Samakhya is a process oriented programme
and not a target driven scheme. Its strategy lies in
that it creates an environment for women to seek
knowledge and information in order to made
informed choices, and -above all bring about
circumstances where women can learn at their own
pace and rhythm. Keeping the process oriented
nature of Mahila Samakhya in view, no specific
targets regarding coverage of the programme have
been set. The programme is presently being imple-
mented in 15 districts of Gujarat, Karnataka, Uttar
Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh covering 2075 villages.
The Mahila Samakhya approach has been extended
to 7 districts of Bihar under the aegis of the Bihar
ject. Madhya Pradesh has recently
shown interest in implementing the programme, and
is in the process of setting up project structures and
networks with voluntary organisations
ng in women’s development, in the State.

COMPUTER EDUCATION

The Committee also sugges that adequate
infrastructural support forthe — upkeep and
mamtenance of computers should be provided: and
the scheme should also be monitored effectively.

SCHOLARSHIPS

The Committee is unhappy over the curtailment of
Budget allocation under the head *
Instead the number of scholarships should hi
increased to help the economically backward and
meritorious students so that more and more students
could complete secondary education and go for
higher studies

hol

Under the scheme of Computer Literacy and Studies
in schools (CLASS) the Plan allocation, of Rs. 146
crores has been made in the 8th Plan. During the
plan period 1320 schools are to be covered in
addition to 2598 schools already covered till the 7th
Plan. During the current financial year 1994-95, 300
schools are proposed for inclusion under the scheme
which provides for a onetime grant of Rs. 1 lakh for
hardware and Rs. 1.3 lakhs (recurring) for, software
develoopment, training, computer and supply. of
stationery etc., for each school.

Provision of Rs. 27.00 crores has been made for the
scheme during the current financial year.

The revised scheme of CLASS operationalised in
1993-94 aims at providing better teacher, hardware,
software, maiatenance (of computer) arrangements.
As suggested by the Committee the Department
would try to monitor the implementation effectively.

Due to the transfer of the JN Scholarships scheme to

the Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund. along with a
corpus fund grant of Rs. 7 crores, no budget
is required in 94-95 for this scheme except
for old scholars. Also due to transfer of upgradation
of merit of SC/ST scheme, to the Ministry of
Welfare, the budget allocation for this scheme is not
required to be operated by Department of Education.
Similarly, the provision required from 1994-95
onwards for the scholarship scheme in Residential
Public Schools is only for earlier awardees whose
number is decaresing due to their passing out.

KENDRIYA VIDYALAYAS

The Committee has taken a serious note of the fact
that the overall management and functioning of the
Kendriya Vidyalaya has not been evaluated in revent
times.

A Review Committee set up to study the functioning
of KVS submitted its Report in June, 1988 and after
considering ‘the recommendations of the Review
Committee, an Empowered Committee under the



10

w

3

St.

55.

The Committee finds that enrolment of students in
KVs has increased from 1993, but there is alarming
decrease in the number-of students appearing for the
secondary school examination, from 48 thousands to
41.7 thousands during the “same period. The
Committee would like the Deptt. to go into this
matter and find out the reasons therefor.

taken serious view of the fact
that Navodaya Vidyalayas have been opened without
sufficient infrastructure. It recommends that essential
infrastructure like hostels, library, playgrounds ete.
may be created as early as possible.

The Committee feels that there is lack of
commitment in this Scheme as the allocated funds
have not been fully utilised in the past.

Chairmanship of Secretary, HRD formulated its
views in March, 1989. The views inter alia consisted
of recommendations on strengthening of the
management and functioning of the KVS at various
levels. In 93-94 the KVS Board has appointed a small
Committee under one of its members Sh. Bir
Devinder Singh to examine how much
implementation has taken place and what further
needs to be implemented. Also, a Committee has
been appointed 2 months back under the
chairmanship of Deputy Minister to review the
functioning of KVS. Thus the Ministry is attending to
the recommendation of the Standing Committee.

This has been noted. Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan
has been asked to look into the matter and apprise
Government.

This has been done in earlier years due to the
bonafide urge to provide one Navodaya Vidyalaya in
each district at the earliest.

All the States/UT Govts. are being requested to
provide minimum facilities i.e. 30 acres of land free
of cost and suitable temporary accommodation which
accommodate atleast 240 students and staff for a
period of two to three years or till Samiti constructs
its own building in the districts where Navodaya
Vidyalayas are yet to be established. Creation of
essential infrasture is limited by availability of suffient
land for permanent building and accommodation and
the budgetary allocation to the NVS through the
annual plan as reflected in the budget of the Govt.
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samity has now decided not to
conduct the admission test unless land for
construction of building has been handed over to it.

During 1991-92, due to non-receipt of feasible
proposals from the concerned State/UT Govts. the
targets laid down for the year could not be achieved.
There is often delay on the part of the State Govt. in
the allotment of land etc. due to which the funds
earmarked for permanent construction of Vidyalaya
complex are not “utilised within the stipualted time
and can be utilsied only after the allotment of land to
the JNVs. The Samiti has now taken steps to
expedite feasible proposals from the State Govts. and
utilise the funds allotted to it.

(Rs. in crores)

Year

Budget
Allocation

Expenditure Savings

1991-92
1992-93

92.09
132.00

89.77 2.32
129.38 2.62

(Committee's Comments on the reply may be seen in Chapter I)


11

शा

ol

“speedy establishment of Vidy

The Coni
that good

hers are not attracted to Navodaya
Vi 11 recommends that the Deptt. of
E ॥ हा; tke necessary steps. to maintain
quality of education in these schools.

The Committe iy not satisfied with the pace of
opening of Navodya Vid ७ recommends for
1४४७ in the districts
so far,

which have not been covere

The Scheme of migration of 30 per cent students,
from each Vi to another Vidyalaya, located
different linguistics region, at present’. is facing
problems. The committe recommends that adequate
efforts may be made to implement this scheme.

With a view to encourage better quality teachers to
join Navodaya Vidyalayas the following incentives are
at present being provided to teachers and principals.

1. Rent free, partially furnished housing facility as
available on site.

2. Facility of admission to theic wards in the
Navodaya Vidyalayas where they are posted as per
Samiti’s Rules.

3. Children Education allowance @ Rs. 150/- per
month per child subject to minimum of two school
going children as per Samiti’s Rules.

4. Free Boarding with students as per rules.

5. Possibility of appointment of spouse as a teacher
as per the rules of the Samiti.

6. The Recruitment Rules of the Samiti are being
revised to help in inducting committed and motivated
teachers.

At present, 350 Navodaya Vidyalayas have been
sanctioned against’ 444 districts (excluding West
Bengal and Tamil Nadu who have not opted to join
the scheme). While obtaining approval’ of the
Cabinet during the every plan period, as per the
policy of the government for all the ongoing schemes,
approval is also obtained for opening a specific
number of Navodaya Vidyalayas evey year. The
Cabinet has approved the opening of one Navodya
Vidyalaya on an average in each of the district. With
physical target of 50 per year during first three years
of the 8th plan period. it is subm hat opening of
new Navodaya Vidyalayas is 6, by ee
factors like firstly availability of sufficient numtber of
offers from the state governments of land for
nent building and —for_—_ temporary
mmodation and secondly by the budgetary
nm available to the NVS through the Annual
lected in the budget of the Government.

itations the NVS has the target to
provide a Navodaya Vidyalaya to every district at the
earliest.

There has been some reluctance among students and
Parents in some cases when one of the schools has
been in a disturbed area due to terrorist problem or
law and order problem. For some years, most schools
in Punjab and in parts of Haryana were affected.
Presently schools in Srinagar valley in J&K.and some
schools in North-East are similarly affected.
Recently, another problem has been presented in
some States that at the end of class XII many
students want to appear in pre-engineering or pre-
medical examination but the concerned state
government requires the students to have studied for
four preceding years in the state. The migrated
students are put to disadvantage due to this



1 2 3

requirement. Due to these reasons, the Navodaya
Vidyalaya Samiti has held the scheme or migration in
abeyance for schools located in disturbed areas. It is
examining in consultation with the CBSE whether to
restrict the migration to two years and allow the
migrated students to appear for Board examinations
from their parent schools. The attempt of the NVS is
to finalise the modified scheme of migration at the
earliest for being implemented.

Assistance to Agencies for Strengthening Cultural and Art Value in Educational Institutions
IMPLEMENTING INNOVATIVE PROGRAMME

02 Budget allocations to these agencies have been The recommendations made by the committee have

increwed from Rs, 95. lakhs in 1993-94 (Revised been noted for implementation, India’s common

Estimate) to Rs. 100 kakhs in 1994-95. egalitarianism, democracy and

re prominently among the core

03 ‘The Committee feels that mote attention should be components identified in the National Policy on

paid to promote our composite and secular culture Education to cut across different subject areas. These

through innovative pro; values form’ the bedrock of the reformulated Scheme

of Assistance for Strengthening Culture and Values in

Education. This reformulated Scheme, introduced in

घट 1993-94 has been extended to Non-formal Sector and

4 new component of training of inservice art, craft,

music" and dance teachers has been added in the

Scheme. Under the formulated scheme, voluntary

ies located in various States, Kendriya

aus and Navodaya Vidyalayas have been +

to conduct innovative programmes like

aining for value sensitization of school teachers

mer camps of students for creative activities.

competitions in painting, debating, declamation and

poetry, metabolisation of values of composite culture

and secularism in school students through their

particepation in dramas and interaction of the
students with classical and folk performing arts.

UNIVERSITY AND HIGHER EDUCATION

07 The Committee feels that the Deptt. should develop The Govt's policy on financing of education is spelt
ans to make higher education self- out in the National Policy on Education, which

Fas possible. postulates that “Resources, to the extent possible,
will be raised by. mobilising donations, asking the

beneficiary communities to maintain school buildings

and supplies of some consumables, raising fees at the

higher levels of education and effecting some savings

by the efficient use of facilities. Institutions involved

with the research and development of technical and

scientific manpower should also mobilize some funds

by levying a cess or charge on the user agencies,

including Govt. Deptts. and entrepreneurs. All these

measures will be taken not only to reduce the burden

‘on State resources but also for creating a greater

sense of responsibility within the educational system.

The UGC appointed a high power Committee under

the Chairmanship of (Retired) Justice Punnaiya in

1992 to recommend suitable norms for determining

maintenance grant to Central Universities, Deemed

Universities and colleges. The aim was to promote



13

3

70.

7.

74.

75.

*.

more efficient use of grant, discourage avoidable
expenditure and promote resource generation. It has
given its report in November, 1993. Presently a small
Committee of UGC is working out the specific norms
bases on the principles recommended by the
Committee. r

In technical education the IITs and IIMs have already
increased their fees and Government has shifted them
on the block grant system in 1993-94 with the same
objective.

The Ministry would like to point out however that
higher education is not totally self relying anywhere
in the world and this can’t be achieved in India also.
If fees are increased to the extent of covering the
whole cost of education, they will go beyond the
reach of most Indian families. The effort of the
Ministry therefore is to push the Institutions for
greater efficiency in utilisation of money and to
maximise resource generation through ex-students,
consultancies etc. The question of student fees itself
has many implications which recommend a cautious
approach on this issue.

UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION

The Committee also feels that whichever colleges and
universities are recognised by the UGC, they should
follow all the guidelines for infrastructural fi ies,
recruitment of lecturers, subject materials, methods
of teaching etc. It recommends to the UGC to take
up regular performance evaluation of recognised
colleges.

a
The Committee suggests that regional centres of
UGC may be established early to meet the
requirement of far off places.

The State Universities and colleges established by
various agencies are declared eligible by the UGC to
receive Plan and non-plan grants only after they
fulfill all the prescribed conditions for the purpose.
After allocating plan grants to eligible colleges for
items like books, equipment, building, teacher
fellowship etc., the actual release of grants is made
after detailed examination of the proposal of the
college and verification of progress report of
expenditure and utilization certificate for grants
released earlier, The UGC has engaged the services
of Educational Consultants India Limited to verify
the civil work undertaken by the non-govt. colleges
during the seventh plan period to verify their
authenticity in utilisation and utilisation certificate for
grants released earlier.

The UGC has recently set up five regional offices
which are:-

(a) Ghaziabad/Noida (North)

(०) Bhopal (Central)

(०) Hyderabad (Southern)

(d) Pune (Western) and

(०) Guwahati (Eastern).

INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY (IGNOU)

The Committee recommends expansion of the scope
of IGNOU to other courses also. It is observed that
funds provided by the Ministry are not utilised
effectively and this aspect should be looked into.

The Committee recommends that the achievements
of IGNOU should be evaluated by an appropriate
agency.

According to information given by IGNOU, 43
programmes consisting of several cout tote
launched upto 1993-94. The University pi to
launch 10 new programmes during 1994-95 The
University will be advised to ensure that, the funds
given by the Uriiversity are utilised effectively.
(Committee's commends on this reply may be seen in
chapter-1)

The suggestion of the Committee has been noted
IGNOU is offering 44 programmes and they propose
to launch 10 more programmes during 1994 and 3 in
1995.



14

3

77.

78.

80.

The poosition of savings during 1992-93 and 1993-94
were as under:—

(Rs. in Lakhs)

Plan Non-Plan

1992-93 50.00 —
1993-94 400.00# 25.40°

@Allocation for MCA project. This was not released
due to some administrative reasons.

*Deducted due to non-implementation of 10% cut in
posts.

INDIAN COUNCIL OF SOCIAL SCIENCE RESEARCH

The Committee is not happy over the decrease in
5 to ICSSR and recommends that the budgetary
ion be restored to the level of previous year's

The Committee feels that ICSSR should concentrate
on research activities in applied social sciences so that
research findings could be utilised for improvement
‘of our socia

yster

The recommendation of the Standing Committee has
been noted but it may be clarified that there is no
decrease in the grants since 8.8. (Plan) is Rs. 2.5
crores and 8.8. (Non-plan) Rs. 4.88 crores during
1994-95.

The recommendation has been referred to the
Council for necessary action.

RURAL UNIVERSITIES

The Committee feels that not much has been done to
establish rural universities and the concept remains
only on paper. It recommends that concrete and
urgent steps should be taken to set up rural
universities.

Steps are being taken to implement the scheme
during 1994-95. ‘

INDIAN INSTITUTE OF ADVANCED STUDY

The Indian Institute of Advance Study (IIAS, which
started functioning from 1965, aims at free and
creative enquiry into the fundamental themes and
problems of life and thought. The 1994-95 Budget has
provided Rs. 1.63 crores for the scheme.

The Committee recommends that proper evaluation
of the functioning of HAS be undertaken and asks 10
analyse the research areas in which the Institute is
engaged and to appoint an appropriate agency to
ate the quality of research done.

The budget estimate of the Institute for 1994-95 is
Rs. 1.73 lakhs (Plan=35.00 lakhs and Non-
plan=138.00 lakhs).

The Institute was reorganised in 1984. The Society of
the Institute at its meeting held on 4.1.91 resolved
that the working of the Institute should be reviewed
every five years by a Committee constituted by the
Governing Body. A Review Committee under the
Chairmanship of Prof. Yash Pal was constituted in
March, 1991, The Committee submitted its report in
February, 1992. The Ministry will monitior the action
taken on the recommendations made by the
committee.

FURTHER REPLY

In compliance of the recommendation of the
Committee on HRD, for proper evaluation of the
Institute, a Performance Audit Committee, under the
Chairmanship of Prof. U.R. Ananthamurthy,
Prresident, Sahitaya Akademi has been set up. The
Committee has held two sittings and its report is
likely to be submitted to the Institute shortly.
Government will identify specific action points
emerging from its recommendations and will take
suitable steps to monitor its implementation.

The Governing Body of the Institute consisting of



15

a

eminent intellectuals and academics of the country,
considered Yashpal Committee Report and felt that
while it provided useful insights into certain aspects
of the Institute, the findings being too general were
not aminable.

The Institute is housed in the erstwhile Viceregal
Lodge (now Rashtrapati Nivas) at Shimla. The
building has developed cracks and is generally in
need of special repairs. A programme for such
repairs has been drawn up in consultation with the
Intech and the CPWD. An amount of Rs. 3 crores is
likely to be spent for the purpose during 1995-96.
Further, Rs. 15 lakhs would be earmarked for special
project on Gandhian Studies. The remaining amount
will be defrayed on carrying out and sustaining the
existing activities of the Institute.

CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES

The Committee is happy to note that two Central

these universities The Committee suggests that work
on these universities may be expedited.

Adult Education

The Vice-Chancellors have been appointed in both
the Universities. Land has been selected and Vice-
Chancellors are taking action in consultation with the
UGC for finalisation of academic courses to
operationalise the Universities. Both the universities
have become operational.

SPECIAL PROJECTS FOR ERADICATION OF ILLITERACY

The Committee recommends that States with low
literacy rate should be given more attention and the
pace of TLC campaign may be increased through
additional grants to achieve total literacy as early as
possible.

The focus of the NLM has now shifted to States with
low literacy rates including the Northern
Hindi—speaking States. Seven States with large
illiterate population comprising nearly 70 percent of
the total illiterate persons, viz., Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
Rajasthan Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and
West Bengal have been grouped together for special
attention. 117 districts have been partially or fully
covered under TLC in states with literacy rates below
National average. The pace of TLC campaign has
increased over the last three years. In 1991-92, 35
TLCs were approved against the target of 26. in
1992-93, 58 TLCs were approved against the target of
60, while in 1993-94, 108 TLCs have been approved
against the target of 60 districts. Human Resource
Minister has taken a meeting with the Chief Ministers
of four Hindi Speaking States of Bihar, Madhya
Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. All the Chief
Ministers have pledged their support for achieving
the goals of EFA, including literacy. Education
Secretary addressed letters to the Chief Secretaries of
these States to personaly monitor literacy programme
at their level and ensure that they are viewed as
priority programme by the state and district officials.
The NLM in collaboration with Lal Bahadur Shastri
National Academy of Administration is organising
workshop to sensitize the senior officers of these
states about the need and strategy of implementing
TLC. Special Cells have been created in the NLMA
headed by Director level offilcials to monitor
progress of literacy programmes individually in the



16

3

91.

93.

four Hindi speaking States. Workshops for artists,
writers and media personalities have been organised
im these States to secure their participation in the
programme. It is hoped that these efforts would
result in better appreciation of the problems of the
literacy by the government and people of these States
and help in social mobilisation in support of the
programme. This, in turn, would result in
formulation of more projects by the Zila Saksharata
Samiti leading to enhanced coverage in these States.
NLM will ensure that as soon as well formulated
project proposals having the support of State
Governments are received the same are expeditiously
processed for approval. During the current year it is
proposed to extend coverage to 60 new districts for
TLC of Rs. 300 crores is projected for next year for
TLC.

SCHEME OF ASSISTANCE TO VOLUNTARY AGENCIES IN ADULT EDUCATION

The Committee suggests that performance evaluation
of the voluntary agencies may be done through an
appropriate agency.

HINDI

The Committee is not satisfied with the reduction of
funds from Rs. 5.7 crores in Revised Estimate for
1993-94 to Rs. 2.5 crores in Budget Estimate for
1994-95 for Scheme of Appointment for Hindi
Teachers in Non-Hindi speaking State/UTs.

Keeping in view the recommendations of the
Standing Committee, it has been decided that
henceforth all the TLC projects implemented by
Voluntary Agencies (VAs) will be subjected to
external evaluation through reputed social research
institutions or the State Resource Centres. Currently,
107 VAs are implementing 109 TLC projects. These
projects are at various stages of implementation.
External evaluation, in the first instance, is being
conducted of those projects of VAs which are at
advanced stage of implementation, External
evaluation of literacy projects of 12 VAs in UP was
entrusted to a research organisation, namely, Centre
for Media Studies, New Delhi. The research
organisation has completed the study and is expected
to submit the final evaluation report by the month of
September, 1994, External evaluation agencies have
also been identified for evaluating the projects of
VAs in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan and
Deihi. Proposals confirming willingness to take up
evaluation studies have been received from the
identified external evaluation agencies in these states.
These agencies have indicated that they will take
between 4 to 6 months to complete the evaluation
study and submit their reports.

The BE 1993-94 for the appointment of Hindi
teachers in their training was Rs. 250 lakhs. This was
raised to Rs. 570 lakhs in the RE 1993-94 to meet a
‘Special situation which required extra money to meet
the arrears which had accumulated in Orissa. In the
BE 1994-95 the amount has been kept at the normal
level as BE of 1993-94 because the special one time
increase of the previous year was not to be repeated
in the current year.

At the revised estimate stage for 1994-95 demand for
such additional allocation will be made as may be
necessary,



. Se

7

103.

SANSKRIT AND OTHER CLASSICAL LANGUAGES

The Committee recommends that more number of
scholarships be provided for Sanskrit and the rates
increased.

The present rates of scholarships to various categories
of students and of the schemes of the Language
Bureau of the Department are as under:

(i) Ved Pathshalas Rs. 150 p.m.

(ii) Voluntary Sanskrit Organisations Rs. 100 p.m.
(iii) Preservation of Oral Traditions Rs. 175 p.m.
The number of Scholarships is reviewed every year
by the Grants-in-aid Committee. Action will be
initiated as per the advice of the Standing
Committee, keeping in view the budgetary
Provisions.

INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

The Committee wants to know whether anything has
been done to restrict the outflow of our engineers,
especially from IITs, to foreign countries, resulting in
the flight of trained and yaluable human resource.

The Government of India has taken the following
steps to check the brain-drain from the country as
well as to attract back those who have settled abroad.

Core group of scientists are created for carrying out
research in new and frontier area of science, scientist
pool for temporary placement, supernumerary post
for scientist, facilities to import equipment for
research facilities to secure expeditious clearance of
their proposals by Ministry of Industry, delegation of
administrative and financial power to‘ scientific
institutions, new sciencetechnology development
Departments to provide opportunities to scientists
and technologists to work, outlay for science and
Technology has been increased in the successive five
year plan.

It may however be mentioned that situation of global
inter-dependence interaction of institutions in one
country with institutions in another country has
become inevitable, and in most of the cases desirable.
The Indian Technical Personnel going abroad do
return after higher education. Such a trend is seen in
other countries as well.

The Ministry would like to point out that as the
employment opportunities and terms of employment
improve, such outgo would reduce naturally. With
the resurgence in economic sector in the country,
which would rejuvenate the R&D sector also, this
trend can be expected to begin now.

Further reply

With regard to brain drain, the observations of the
Committee of HRD are noted. IIT, Delhi is currently
undertaking a DST sponsored study related to
employment profile and brain-drain among IT
Graduates. Studies are also underway in LIT,
Kharagpur and IIT, Kanpur and their results will be
known after some time. The plan allocation for 1995-
96 has been fixed at Rs. 26 crores from Rs. 31.88
crores for 1994-95, keeping in view the financial
crunch. Non-Plan allocation has been fixed at Rs.
120.16 crores for 1995-96 from Rs. 134 crores of the
RE for 1994-95. From the financial year 1993-94, a



18

n

3

107.°

110.

Revised Pattern of Funding Scheme has. been
introduced in the ITs. Under this scheme, the
Institutes have been given functional autonomy and
financial flexibility. At RE 1995-96 stage, their
matching grant requirements force majeure etc. will
be considered and appropriate RE will be fixed. The
standard of IITs will be maintained with the support
provided by the Government.

REGIONAL ENGINEERING COLLEGES

The Committee feels that review of the functioning,
teaching and learning environment of these colleges
to be under taken.

Necessary steps are being taken to review the
functioning, teaching and learning environment of the
Regional Engineering Colleges.

INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT

The Committee is concerned over the decrease of
funds to these institutions. It recommends to the
Deptt. to open more such institutions’ to counter
proliferation of substandard private institutes of
management. It also recommends strengthening of
the existing IIMs.

The total allocation to IIMs at RE stage during 1993-
94 has increased. However, keeping in view the plan
allocation, provided by the Planning Commission, the
8.8. 1994-95 under plan has decreased.

‘The Government is trying to allocate enough funds to
these Institutions so that they can implement the VIII
plan development proposals approved by the
Government. Simultaneously Government is
persuading these Institutions to more vigorously
involve themselves in resource generation.

COMMUNITY POLYTECHNICS

The scheme of the community Polytechnics was
instituted at 36 selected diploma level institutions
during the year 1978-79 in the central sector. Under
the scheme, identified polytechnics are selected to act
as focal points to promote socio-economic upliftment
and qualitative improvement in the life style of the
ilarly for the under privileged
aged, through scientific and

and the
technological inputs

The Committee welcome the higher funding this year
to Community Polytechnics, The Committee wants to
know what action has been taken on the
recommendations of Kalbagh Committee and
whether regional centres are being opened as
suggested by Kalbagh Committee.

The Committee feels that rural people especially
weaker sections may benefit from this scheme to a
great extent. It, therefore, suggests extension of this
scheme to other areas and linking of these
Community Polyclinic schemes of various other
Department like the Women and Child Development
etc. (Schemes like. ~TRYSEM, DWACRA,
MEGSAT)

Since the institution of the scheme in 1978-79, there
has been growth and expansion of the scheme, both
quantitatively and qualitatively. 304 Polytechnics have
50 far been identified,upto March 1994, to function as
community polytechnics.

The recommendations of the Kalbagh Committee
have been broadly accepted and taking into
consideration these recommendations, grant norms
have been revised. Draft guidelines have also been
formulated. In pursuance of the _ said
recommendations, necessary action is being taken to
set up National Coordinating Council, Regional
Technical Advisory Committee and Regional
Information Centres. A minimum amount of Rs.
30.00 crores is required under the scheme during
1994-95 for implementing the scheme with revised
norms as against Rs. 10.65 crores provided in 1994-
95. EFC has cleared the scheme for 8th Plan period
with revised financial norms.

Special programmes have been identified for the
benefit of minorities and disadvantaged. It is
proposed to extend the coverage of the scheme to all
approved diploma level institutions. Action is being
initiated to workout programmes and modalities for
linking the scheme with the schemes of other Deptts.
which are aimed at substainable rural development,



1g

be

TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT MISSIONS

The Committee is of the view that the pace of setting
up Technology Development Mission is slow and it
may be stepped up so that technical education may
be improved in various institutions.

RESOURCE MOBILISATION

The Committee advises the Department to take
effective action to make technical education self
reliant. The concerned institution should get
adequate support from industries and establishments:
where engineers and experts would be working in
future. The Committee also suggests imposition of an
educational cess to augment resources for education.

and of weaker sections, such as TRYSEM, |
DWACRA, MEGSAT. The community polytechnics
may act as focal points for all such schemes and

a a

The scheme of Technology Development Missions is

"planned to be implemented in 5 IITs and IISc.

Bangalore. Institute-wise different Missions were
identified and expenditure involved is being worked
out. On these estimates EFC Memo other
procedural clearances will be obtained from the

~ competent authority. Ad-hoc grant of Rs. 2 crores

has been given in the year 1993-94 for these Missions
to’ the Institutes. The funds are mainly for
procurement of special equipments, creation of
advanced infrastructural facilities for research, as well
as mechanism to monitor transfer of developed
technology to industries, The Ministry is trying to
expedite finalisation of Technology Mission proposal
by IITs and Government decision on it thereafter.

A committee was constituted by AICTE under the
chairmanship of Dr. D. Swaminaihan, Member
Planning Commission and it has submitted its report
which is being examined in the MinistryAICTE.

Some of the important recommendations are:

(i) setting up of an education development bank of
India (EDBI) for financing “soft loan for
establishment of institutions’
(ii) Setting up of National Loan Scholarship under
EDBI for'jproviding soft loans to needy students.
Reply to’para 67 may also be seen in this regard.



=

CHAPTER-III

RECOMMENDATIONSOBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVT.’S REPLIES

Para No. Recommendation Reply

1 2 3

ELEMENTARY EDUCATION

me While the Comaiittee takes note of this increase in Please See Annexure
allocation for Elementary Education, it
view of the rising prices, the increase in real terms, is
not substan

@

TEACHER EDUCATION

3. The Committee feels that more emphasis should be Please See Annexure
laid on Teachers’ Education by further increase in
allocation and also take steps to evaluate, from time
to time, the existing methodology of training
programme.

SECONDARY EDUCATION
39. The Committee feels that secondary education in Please See Annexure

general is facing resource crunch therefore, suggests
that sufficient funds may be allocated for its various

schemes.
VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
42. The Committee feels that adequate funds be provided Please See Annexure
to implement the scheme and to achieve the fixed
targets.

COMPUTER EDUCATION

4 The Committee feels that the Budget allocation of Please See Annexure
Rs, 25 crores for 1994-95 is not sufficient as it is even
Jess than that of last year's Revised Estimate (i.e. Rs.
26 crores). Therefore, more funds should be provided
for computer education.

SCHOLARSHIP

47. The Committee feels that there should be more Please See
provision for loan scholarships for the benefit of
needy students.

Annexure

KENDRIYA VIDYALAYAS

49. The Committee is not satisfied with the provision in Please See Annexure
the budget and suggests substantial increase therefor.

NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS

58. The Committee also feels that more funds should be Please See Annexure
provided for Navodsiya Vidyalayas especially under
non-plan expenditure.

ENVIRONMENTAL ORIENTATION TO SCHOOL EDUCATION
65. The Committee feels that when there is need for Piease See Annexure
greater emphasis on environmental awareness, the
Deptt. should provide more money for this purpose.
UNIVERSITY AND HIGHER EDUCATION
66. Considering the price rise, the Committee feels that Please See Annexure
increase in allocation for higher education is not

satisfactory and, therefore, recommends that
adequate amt. may be provided.

20

oer ab नारा“ शएओ


SSS सहकणणा

21

81.

UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION

The Committee expresses its concern over the
reduction in UGC grants to State-Colleges and State
Universities in real terms and recommends that
sufficient finances be provided to UGC, to meet its
obligations.

Please See Annexure

INDIAN COUNCIL OF PHILOSOPHICAL RESEARCH

The Committee finds that the allocation under this
head has been static over the years. The Committee
realises the difficulty in quantifying the results of the
type of activities undertaken by such organisations,
but it regrets that research activities of ICPR have
not been properly evaluated at regular intervals.

Please See Annexure

CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES

The Committee feels that adequate grants may be
given to Central Universities to upgrade the quality
of education.

The Visva-Bharati, an educational _ institution
established by Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore, was
incorporated as a Central University by Visva-Bharati
Act, 1957. The Committee feels that Visva-Bharati
may be given special attention in view of its
importance as a national institution of learning and to
provide sufficient funds for its maintenance.

Please See Annexure

Please See Annexure

SCHEME OF ASSISTANCE TO VOLUNTARY AGENCIES IN ADULT EDUCATION

There is a decrease in the assistance to these
voluntary agencies from Rs. 15 crores in the Budget
Estimate of 1993-94 to Rs. 13 crores in the Revised
Estimate of 1993-94 and Rs. 10 crores in the 1994-95
Budget. This decrease of 50% is contrary to the
declared policy and the Committee expresses serious
concern over this.

The principal strategy of NLM now comprises of
launching of mass campaigns for total literacy which
are area-specific, time bound, volunteer-based and
result oriented. The NLM seeks to secure extensive
involvement of VAs in the implementation of TLCs.
In over 250 Districts spread all over the country,
Zilla Saksharata Samitis (District Literacy Societies)
are implementing TLCs with active support and
assistance of a large number of voluntary
organisations including’ social activist groups. The
ZSSs themselves are unique innovations in as much
as these Samitis are registered voluntary organisations
which have been established with the cooperative
efforts of Government functionaries headed by
District Collector and representatives of leading VAs
and eminent persons from public life in the District.
With the expansion of TLCs separate and
independent literacy projects to VAs are no longer
necessary since VAs’ participation is inbuilt in TLC
approach. In areas which are yet to be covered by
TLCs, VAs will, however, continue to be provided
with financial assistance under the Scheme for taking
up of independent projects for eradication of
illiteracy. With the intensification and expansion of
TLCs under the special project scheme, the
requirement of funds under the Scheme of Assistance
to Voluntary Agencies in Adult Education is getting
correspondingly reduced. Thus, assistance to VAs
during 1994-95 would be extended mostly for taking
up-programmes and activities, in support of ongoing
literacy campaigns by organising environment
building activities, providing resource support
through SRCs, training of literacy functionaries,
development .and production to teaching learning
materials, undertaking innovative and experimental
Projects for the; functionality component of literacy
Programmes, etc. Financial assistance to VAs for
taking up TLC projects in smaller areas would now
be confined to only non-TLC districts.



22
1 2 2
HINDI
The Committee is not satisfied with the meagre Please See Annexure

allocation of Rs. 2 lakhs provided in Budget Estimate
of 1994-95 for promotion of Hindi through cassettes.
It wonders how the Deptt. is producing cassettes with
this small amount and where these are utilised.

95. The Committee feels that adequate funds be provided Please See Annexure
to establish the International University of Hindi.

SANSKRIT AND OTHER CLASSICAL LANGUAGES

97. The Committee feels that more efforts should be Financial assistance is being provided to more than
made for the promotion of languages, such as Arabic 160 voluntary organisations working for the
and Persian. promotion of Arabic and Persian Language.

MODERN INDIAN LANGUAGES
99. The Committee feels that adequate attention is not Please See Annexure

being paid for development of modern Indian
languages. The scheme for promotion and production
of books in regional languages at the University level
is a good scheme and adequate funds be provided for
the same.

TECHNICAL EDUCATION

101. For Technical Education, the Deptt. has provided Please See Annexure
Rs. 401 crores in 1993-94. for the year 1994-95, Rs.
437.9 crores have been provided in the Budget
Estimates. The Committee feels that the allocation is
inadequate and should be increased suitably.

REGIONAL ENGINEERING COLLEGES

105. The Committee feels that more Regional Engineering Please See Annexure
Colleges should be opened in highly populated and
backward areas. Besides, the Committee feels that
curtailment of funds for the year 1994-95 would effect
the functioning of these colleges and funds should
therefore, be provided at the level of last year.



CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Para No.

Recommendation

Reply

2

3

2.

32.

OPERATION BLACK BOARD

The Committee is of the opinion that infrastructure
for the required standard for elementary schools has
not been created and maintained. The Committee
feels that when purchase of equipment is made for
schools the quality aspect of the equipment must be
ensured.

The Committee is not satisfied with the efforts made
on the basis of last years Committee report for
reducing drop-outs. from elementary schools
especially of children belonging to Scheduled Tribes
and Scheduled Castes categories.

The Committee feels that enrolment of girls in
schools is not up to the expectations. More efforts
are required in this direction,

The State Govts. have asked to ensure to supply of
material also evolve a mechanism for maintaining
quality (Committee’s comments may be seen in
Chapter-I)

Reduction of dropout and universal relention are
integral component the national policy for work.
2. The complex multi-causal problem dropout has to
be attached with multipronged strategy on a sustained
basis tangible results. This precisely the thrust
ongoing efforts.

3. Various governments and administrations
incentives like textbooks, mid-day scheme and attend
scholarships to meet of the opportunity cost schoolihg
and thereby retain children especially from the
disadvantaged groups in the school system.

4. The Ministry of Welfare also administers various
schemes for the educational development of
Scheduled Castes and Tribes. Prematric scholarships
for the children of those engaged in unclean
occupation, Girls’ hostels for SCs and STs, Boys’
hostels for SCs and STs and Ashram schools for
tribal children and establishment of educational
complexes in low literacy pockets in tribal areas are
important interventions for reducing the dropout rate
among Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe
children.

5. In addition, in order to improve the school
environment, schemes like operation blackboard and
restructuring of teacher education through DIETs
focus on making teaching-learning more activity
oriented and child-centred and ultimately a joyful
experience.

6. Minimum levels of learning approach also would
add to the qualitative upgradation of the learning
Process.

7. Even under the NFE programme, a system of
‘equivalence has been envisagea enabling the school
dropouts to rejoin the formal system. (Committee's
comments on this reply may be seen in Chapter I).

Education of girls, particularly in rural areas is given
due priority. In order to attract girls to schools,
various incentives like free mid-day meals, free text-
books, free uniforms and attendance scholarships are
provided.

2. Under the Operation Blackboard, 52% of the
additional teachers recruited are women. This is
expected to encourage girl's enrolment.

3. Under the NFE programme, Central Government



52.

24

3

funds 90% of the project cost of exclusive girls’
centres.

4. The revised scheme has also built in higher
incentive structure for promoting girls’ education. A
cash incentive of Rs. 125 per girl child who qualifies
to enter upper primary level is given to the instructor
as compared to Rs. 100 per male child.

5. Wherever total literacy campaigns have been
successfully conducted, there has been an increase in
the demand for formal education and the consequent
parental awareness and pressure are expected to
contribute in the couise of time to higher enrolment
of girls. (Committee's comments on this reply may be
seen in Chapter-I).

KENDRIYA VIDYALAYAS

The Committee recommends that more KVs should
be opened to cater to the needs of wards of
transferable Central Govt. employees.

The Government has approved opening of upto 20
KVs annually in Civil & Defence Sectors for the 5
years period 1993-98 and as many proposals as found
suitable under the project sector, where all recurring
and non-recurring expenses, are borne by the
sposoring projects. So far, 818 Kendriya Vidyalayas,
including 23 sanctioned during the current year, have
been opened. (Committee's comments may be seen
in Chapter-l).

NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS

The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the
fact that Assam, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh are far
behind in regard to the number of Vidyalayas, in
Proportion to the number of districts they have.

The Committee recommends that Navodaya
Vidyalaya Scheme may be expanded. States, which
have not accepted this Scheme, may be persuaded to
agree to the opening of these schools.

Assam has accepted the NV scheme in the year 1993
only and the Samiti has started the process of
establishing new JNVs. In the case of Bihar and
Uttar Pradesh the Samiti is making efforts to
establish new JNVs in the uncovered districts,
keeping in view the minimum requirements for
establishment of new JNVs The three states are being
requested to submit the proposals on priority basis in
order to cover the uncovered districts within the 8th
Plan period. It is submitted that the Samiti is
dependent on State Govts. in this regard. Unless the
State Govts. make suitable proposals in sufficient
number, the Samiti can not open enough schools.
(Committee's comments on this reply may be seen in
Chapter-I).

The State Government of West Bengal and Tamil
Nadu are being requested from time to time to agree
to the opening of Navodaya Vidyalayas in their
States. (Committee's comments on this reply may be
seen in Chapter-I)

SANSKRIT AND OTHER CLASSICAL LANGUAGES

The Committee is not satisfied with the pace of
establishing Rashtriya Sanskrit and other Classical
Languages Grant Commission. It also suggests speedy
action for establishing the Urdu University.

The proposal to set up a sub-commission under the
UGC banner instead of a fulfledged commission is
presently under examination through a UGC
Committee. Prompt action will be ensured as soon as
the report becomes available. (Committee's
comments on this reply may be seen in Chapter-I)



- aMUKaMMA

HH no sotimmoD gnibssi2 yeinomai

botslsi-isomnsagsd

। lo टे९+शशा 36 2tasiD 10] ebaemeC no hogs Ani ati ni 10: [9४३९1
10 ध010830118 fi ३8891 313199887#19 93 911991110391 zed (TA of basme) soiteoubS
109 (:६ 5799) 80082093 terlossT (A 889) soitsoubS एऋऋश्वाअंत 10 1940 ब्आ ni
ub rotuqmoD ,(५५ ४54) ॥00॥॥5098 Asnoite0V ,(९६ uw) noitssuba
i syebovon (eb BRAW(DIV eynbaod ,(:४ 24) aqindewslorise
i®WATTED4 10 1:00०० asiba!
£4) mnomqoleved sgeugnet
fap 22058 3७ ER CRITIC ज्याउछऊ का बल ्मछक़ठछ उता Z Tie

><9111४1195

a

34 sel ont noiiw
४0०8 off} .MoGsA noi
oii yd boimetin esw fe

8५४10 80९1 more =
3 OA to ziewd Se
dT .0isc2uba 1? smooeil
LA rol noituoubS” od? nl
ob roleinild ७1711 od? £001 ,z9dmso00
adit to mui 381 yd १160 to ०९0 1७ 1987७
& # blo arsiziniM litD 1७ sonstinoD
SQ1

zi noiisobbs ai insenieoval é
४08 be a od
906089093 no droge
[1 non bae asiq
i berolqxe gaisd
nT omoonl mort emoituiitzal
Vibbs al .coitseubS 101 esowoest
2103 3d oF 00७ svad teni\vicubivibni- sieving

2 ७1 as

11909 oi to tnscetimen
ist 2aw Inemtinryno:
1 diZi no timmue ९-३:

79113:

120 001083७9<
eb 251 ०0 borne:
tint YOU eounsy

ba of noitsnob yritqmexs bak 239 |
179 01 eyew siolgxe of f b 021४ ov 3: अब) .
as ४३४0006 (8०0० oft yd noiizoubs

i 29101
i Bu 10) z901WORS7

no yoo isnot oi ni sbam zsiaiuiueq yoiloq ofl +

‘axsteiniM [2 bas time AAG gaiwh sbem zis i
9892 oft stetoneg enall auoiuv gaiwb noitsool!
3 off! yd bodose: 9d bivow #॥०18>053 iol AO sea lo noiseolls
Bibbs Asse 01 znolts gnidsa: zi 01189 to
[89198 ३89 910०० znoissolls Ie 208 Indi oe
४ 89790 18001 oft to instxe sit
bs yuninomels oF yjinoing tvoryid oct insmnagsCl
ul sottimmoD gnibast2 ५४1 yd sbem enol
ut yd bebnommos ३1:9४ sti ७1 noitzzolls

vy fanoisen
sayels iV srabovey

बाएं
uowor



ANNEXURE-I

Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development in its Fifth Report on Demands for Grants for 1994-95 of Department of
Education (Demand No. 47) has recommended enhancement/increase in allocation of funds
in respect of Elementary Education (Para 24), Teacher Education (para 37), Secondary
Education (Para 39), Vocational Education (para 42), Computer Education (para 44),
Scholarships (para 47), Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (para 49), Novodaya Vidyalayas (para
59), Environmental Awareness (para 65), University & Higher Education (paras 66 & 69),
Indian Council of Philosophical Research (para 81), Central Universities (paras 84 & 85),
Language Development (Paras 94, 95 & 99) and Technical Education (paras 101 & 105).
The Committee has in essence recommended increased allocation of resources for the
education sector itself since sectoral recommendations cover the entire range of educational
activities.

2. From 1968 onwards, when the First National Plan on Education was formulated on
the basis of Kothari Commission Report, the goal has been to set apart 6% of the National
Income for Education. This goal was reiterated by the National Policy on Education, 1986.
In the “Education for All” (EFA) of Nine High Population Countries held in Delhi on 16th
December, 1993, the Prime Minister declared the Commitment of the country to reach the
target of 6% of GNP by the turn of the century. This commitment was reiterated in the
Conference of Chief Ministers held as a follow-up of the EFA-9 Summit on 15th February,
1994,

3, Investment in education is in a large measure through public funds made available by
the Central and State Governments. Besides Education Department, other Departments also
spend on Education. This expenditure amounted to Rs. 4406 crores in 1992-93. Apart from
plan and non plan allocations additional avenues for raising resources for education are
being explored in the form of Educational Cess and exempting donation to Educational
Institutions from Income Tax. Chief Ministers have also decided to explore ways to enhance
resources for Education. In addition investment in education by the local bodies and by
private individuals/trust have also to be considered.

4. The policy postulates made in the National Policy on Education, subsequent
commitments made during EFA Summit and Chief Ministers’ Conference and trend of
enhanced allocation during various Plans generate the confidence that the target of
allocation of 6% GNP for Education would be reached by the end of Ninth Five Year Plan.
The Department of Education is making efforts to seek additional plan allocation every year
so that sectoral allocations could inerease. Actual inter-se increases in allocation would
depend upon the extent of the total increase within the priority framework of the
Department i.e. the highest priority to elementary education and literacy. In keeping with
the recommendations made by the Standing Committee last year, the Department ensured
the following step up in allocation to the schemes commended by the Committee.

Name of Scheme. BE 1993-94 BE 1994-95
Non-formal Education 108,76.00 131,32.00
National Awards to Teachers 27.00 42.00
Navodaya Vidyalayas 131,71.00 152,63.00
National Open School 290.00 306.00
Higher Education 140,50.00 161,50.00
IGNOU 1400.00 2700.00
Adult Education 117,97.00 214,00.00



27
Name of Scheme BE 1993-94 BE 1994-95
Modern Indian Languages 430.00 478.00
Vocational Education 8500.00 8846.00
Community Polytechnics 600.00 1065.00
Integrated Education for 450.00 470.00

Disabled Children

5. For 1995-96 also, the Department would endeavour to increase allocation for schemes
recommended by the Standing Committee for higher allocation, out of the increase in Plan
allocation, Planning Commission might agree to make for 1995-96 in response to this
Department’s request.


ANNEXURE-II

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

VII
*SEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 30th May, 1995 in Committee Room
No. 67, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1, Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
5. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
LOK SABHA

7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

8. Dr. Vasant Pawar

9. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

12. Shri Anna Joshi

13. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
14. Shri Ramachandra Dome

15. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
16. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Twenty-Third and Twenty-Sixth Reports on the
Action Taken by the government on the recommendations made by the Committee in its
Fifth and Sixth Reports on the Demands for Grants 1994-95 of the Departments of
Education and Youth Affairs. After making some modifications, the Committee adopted the
same.

3. The Committee, then adjourned at 4.00 p.m. to meet again on 3181 May, 1995.

*Minutes of Ist to VIth mecting relates to matters not included in this report.

28



Errata to the Twenty-Third Report of the Committee on

Action taken by Government on the observations/recomendations

On page 1 line 39 for ‘Ministry Reply‘ zead_ ‘Ministry's Reply’.

On page 9 under serial no, 45 line 10 for ‘develoopment'’ read
*development’,

On page 9 under serial No. 46 Line 12 fo@ ‘decaresing’ read
‘decreasing’.

On page 10 under serial no. 54 line 11 for ‘suffient’ read_
‘sufficient’.