PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY FOURTH REPORT

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02.06.95)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 02.06.95)

Baha

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

June 1995/Jyaistha 1917 (Saka)


Cuarrer-Il

Chapter-Hl

Citarter-IV

Citapter-V

Minutes

Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the
Government... 8—10

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not ie
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies. “M17

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the (एणाष्रा।९९............... 18—21
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of
the Government afc still ॥छशां।20............... .. ...--००००००००००००००००००००००००



hee

कि ु

sa
आशंका

५७४३४)!

of

ब्वीजेंनफ



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (1995-96)

1. Shri P. Upendra——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri O.P. Kohli

6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

8. Shri Md. Salim

9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr.V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

21. Prof. P.J. Kurien

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

24, Shri Z.M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. DR. G.L. Kanaujia 3
38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

(i)



41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish. Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer



INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on his behalf,
do hereby present this 24th Report on Action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
of the Department of Health, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for the year 1994-95.

The Ninth Report was presented to the Rajya Sabha/laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha —
on 22nd April, 1994. Replies of Government on all the गा the Co contained in the
report, received from the Deptt. of Health, were considered by the Committee and this
report was adopted at its sitting held on Ist June. 1995. — :

P. UPENDRA,
% Chairman,
New Deut; Standing Committee on ;
June 151, 1995 Human Resource Development.

11 Jyaistha, 1917 (Saka)



के
gaibrie 99109319016958 si) to 1६७1 of) |
i ३5०00 1359 galvad inomqvlayod
st 00197 #0 aS रत 7३:७१ ९034: ob

‘ott Yo 3004५) शांत ३0 ni 16107 शा०1४ए॥आधराएं०
ise AG ४200० 0,110 1197784901 aft 10

ae " ११७ cus [9४910 7४४ 1104; dat, oT
no “७०३ Hes Oe 10 ae Folwpilgost ४९९४३ Naga 915६5 ne
riog 919४ tial, c

y Saea-ak) mou bsvisve7 nos
OCT saul 81 no

jletod itl no 101५
ad? no Inommyed
vlonael ebisnsd pe ats

Sif ai beniwinog en
हती brit 99916 9H

का

गा 4
i हि a : 7. pea@iwa

: 9४3:
ng SsuD कण
१७७९%०७० ५४४७० ५०७४७४५;

a

ghitlie 21 ॥ beigabs ९४४ Togo ”



CHAPTER-I
REPORT

1. The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Ninth Report on Demands for Grants of the Department
of Health for the year 1994-95.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised as follows:—

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government.
(Para Nos. 20, 33, 37—39, 42-43, 55, 65. 67 & 74)

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in

view of the Government's repli
(Para Nos. 10—13, 21—23, 47—50, 53, 57—59, 61, 69, 73-74, 76 & 82)

(iii) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of the Government has not
been accepted by the Committee.
(Para Nos. 14-15, 17-18, 26-27, 29, 30-31, 34-35 & 79)
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited. (NIL)
3. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of its
recommendations.
National Malaria Eradication Programme (NMEP)
Recommendation (Para No. 14)

The Committee suggests a national level review of the programme to, assess the current
strategies and their impact on the disease status.

Reply of the Government

“The aggravated malariogenic situation in certain areas is mainly due to natural calamities
like excessive rain and water logging, coupled with operational inadequacy, permitted
increase in malaria mortality in certain areas. The States have already been requested to
take corrective measure and intensify malaria control activities in malaria endemic areas.
The blood smears collected from fewer cases and yexamained from 1987 to 1993 are as
follows:— *

(Figures in Millions)

Year Blood Slide Examined Annual Blood Examination Rate (%)
1987 72,53 9.63
1988 75.70 9.87 »
1989 72.07 9.37
1990 74.42 9.49
1991 75.16 9.30
1992 ‘ 79.01 9.59
1993 76.05 9.14

(Prov.)



As per approved norms, at least 10% of the population at the risk of malaria is to be
screened annually and during the years, as noted above. achievement has been over 92%.
During 1994, it is proposed to review the NMEP through an Independent Appraisal Team.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given by the Department which appears to be
evasive and non-committal. The Committee, in fact, while suggesting a national level review of
the NMEP, had the resurgence of malaria in certain parts of the country in its mind.

It, therefore, felt the desirability of reviewing the strategy adopted so far and amending it
accordingly, with a view to making it more effective and efficient. The Committee feels that
this task needs urgent attention.

Recommendation (Para No. 15)

Under the NMEP, DDT, BHC and Malathion are sprayed to control malaria mosquitoes.
Only 50 per cent of the targets in spraying, i.e. 864 lakhs population has been covered,
instead of 1757 lakhs in population targeted. The Committee is not satisfied with this
performance. It suggests that other methods to control malaria should be explored.

Reply of the Government

“The low percentage of insecticidal spray is mainly on account of some States like Orissa,
Karnataka, Bihar, Tamil Nadu. Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland,
Manipur and Andaman & Nicobar Islands performing less than 50% of the technically
targeted population area. Spray coverage of some of the States like Punjab, Haryana, Goa,
Meghalaya, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and Mizoram has been more than 75%. The low
performing States have been requested to improve spray coverage in order to provide
insecticidal protection to the population needing it. In addition to this, the States have been
requested to adopt other control methods like bio-environmental measures (use of
larvivorous fish, source reduction, sanitation, etc.), prophylactic methods (impregnated
bednets etc.) and community motivation and involvement in prevention of mosquito
breeding.”

Further Reply of the Government

“Many States have not been achieving their targets for spray because of various
constraints like refusal to spray by the community, delay in release of funds by the States
leading to delay in procurement of insecticides, lack of funds to meet operational cost and
large number of vacancies of malaria staff.

Dte. of NMEP has been advising States on technical targets for spray, schedule of spray
from time to time. During the meetings Health autho have been requested to take
adequate steps to improve the spray operation and intensified health education.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee, on a perusal of the replies submitted by the Department, is constrained to
say that the Department has not made serious efforts in achieving the targets in this regard.
The lack of adequate response and cooperation from the States, cited as a reason for the low
level of insecticidal spray in certain States, does not sound convincing to the Committee. The

eR aati 5



6)

sound convincing to the Committee. The Committee feels that the Department should make
all-out efforts to impress upon the States, particularly those having sufficient tribal
population, to implement the NMEP more effectively and vigorously.

Control Programme
Recommendation (Para Nos. 17 & 18)

The Committee feels that the goal of the 8th Plan, to reduce morbidity and mortality
due to Kala-Azar, with the ultimate goal of eradication, is not in sight.

The Committee also recommends that affected tribal areas may be provided additional
grants to deal with this chronic situation.

Reply of the Government

“As a result of control measures taken, there has been a declining trend in both
morbidity and mortality due to Kala-Azar during 1993 and 1994, as is evident from
details given below:—

Year Cases Deaths Increase/Decrease

Case Deaths

1989 भा 477 (+) 43.50% (+) 19.00%
1990 54650 589 (+) 43.50% (+) 19.00%
1991 उ764 8M (+) 5.14% (+) 29.40%
1992 75523 1417 (+) 23.70% (+) 41.14%
1993 44155 706 (+) 41.50% (+) 50.20%
1994 799 108 (-) 47.53% (+) 56.30%
(upto April)

1995 15093 247

(upto April)

The Kala-Azar Control programme has been able to bring about a perceptible decline
in the incidence of the disease, both in terms of morbidity and mortality, during 1993-94.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee does not agree with the Department’s claim about the perceptible decline
in the incidence of the disease. It has, in fact, increased over the years from 1989 till
1993. After showing a decline in the year 1994, it again shot up in the year 1995. The
Committee feels concerned about the poor performance of the Kala-Azar Control
Programme which needs more attention and support from the Department and the affected
States.

Drug De-Addiction programme
Recommendation (Para Nos. 26 & 27)

‘Assistance has been provided through Government of India funds and or UNDCP for
building/vehicle/equipmenttraining of personnel for establishing 31 Centres in the States
of Manipur, Nagaland, Assam, Mizoram, East Bengal, U.P., Rajasthan, Punjab, Tamil


4

Nadu, Karnataka and Kerala. The Committee recommends opening of these centres in other
States also.

The Committee is not satisfied with the performance of Lady Hardinge Medical College,
New Delhi in this respect. The Committee recommends that the Department should provide
more facilities for drug de-addiction centres, as still a large number of youths are addicted to
drugs.

Replies of the Government

“The entire Programme is being reviewed in the EFC meeting to be convened shortly
including the strengthening of centres like Lady Hardinge Medical College.”

Comments of the Committee

The Committee finds that its recommendations regarding opening of Drug De-Addiction
centres in more States, and for providing more facilities for the existing centres have not been
properly responded to. The Committee emphasises that the action taken replies to the
recommendations of the Committee should be specific and to the point which has not been
done in this case. The Committee expects a proper compliance/explanation in this regard.

National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 29)

The Committee does not approve the'reduction in allocations. It suggests that Department
should implement the programme of monitoring: lodized salt production and distribution.
The Committee also suggests that more attention should be paid to States where the

problem is more serious. The Committee also suggests to make a study of the effect of extra
consumption of iodine.

Reply of the Government

The Budget allocation under this programme in 1992-93 was Rs. 50.00 lakhs. This was
raised to Rs. 544.00 lakhs at the R.E. stage to accommodate certain outstanding claims of
subsidy payable to iodized salt manufacturers. Thus, the budget allocation of Rs. 1 crore in
1993-94 should not be seen as a reduction, but more as a step-up from the original level of
Rs. 50.00 lakhs in 1992-93. In 1994-95, the budget estimates have been kept at the level of
Rs. 1.00 crores. However, UNICEF is providing funds to the extent of Rs. 431.00 lakhs in
1994 and Rs. 270.00 lakhs in 1995 for the 1.D.D. Control programme is unlikely to suffer
from scarcity of funds.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels that the Department has not given a convincing reply in regard to
other suggestions like production and distribution of iodised salt in the country.

National Cancer Control Programme
Recommendation (Para Nos. 30 & 31)

The Department informed the Committee that during the year 1993-94 and 1992-93, funds
under Cancer Control Programme were surrendered on account of lower utilisation.

The Committee suggests that it should be inquired as to why the allocated amount was not
utilised. The Committee is also not satisfied with reduction in Budgetary allocation and
suggests enhancement.

Reply of the Government

“During 1992-93, the external aid amounting to Rs. 6 crores did not materialise. As
regards, 1993-94, an amount of Rs. 2.50 crores could not be released to the All India


5

Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, for the development of the Institute’s Rotary
Cancer Hospital due to non-procurement of linear accelerator by the Institute under the
project. Also, an amount of Rs. 5.50 crores was proposed to be provided to Chittaranjan
National Cancer Institute, Calcutta, but about Rs. one crore less was provided due to
phasing of procurement of equipment. These were two main items where proposed funds
could not be released.”
Comments of the Committee

The Committee notes that the action taken reply of the Department does not give adequate
explanation for not fully utilising the funds provided under the Cancer Control Programme.
The Committee also notes that the Department has not said anything in response to the
Committee’s suggestion regarding the need to look into the reasons for under-utilisation of
funds in this regard.

The Committee, therefore, suggests that the Department should make an enquiry into this
and try to divert utilised money to other schemes starved of funds including grants to
voluntary organisations involved in this scheme.

Prevention of Food Adulteration and Control of Drugs
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee wonders how the State will be able to maintain the quality of food and

drugs when grants are reduced. Therefore, the Committee suggests enhancement of funds
for the same.
Reply of the Government

“A provision of Rs. 100 lakhs was made under sub-head D.2(2)(7)—Augmentation of
Drug Testing Facilities during the year, 1993-94 (BE) 1993-94 and (RE) 1993-94 out of
which Rs. 98.00 lakhs was for States and Rs. 2.00 lakhs was for UTs with Legislature under
sub-head E.2(1)(8)—Augmentation of Drug Testing Facilities in UTs. During the year 1994-
95 (Budget Estimates) out of total provision of Rs. 100 lakhs, Rs. 95 lakhs has been made
for Centrally Sponsored Scheme for States and Rs. 5 lakhs has been made for UTs with
Legislature. Thus, there is no decrease in the Budget Estimates during the year 1994-95 for
the Augmentation of Drug Testing Facilities in the States/UTs. Besides, State Govts./UTs.
Administration have been asked to send their requirements for consideration at RE 1994-95
stage.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee, while agreeing with the Department that there was no decrease in the BE
during the year 1994-95, notes that, in fact, there was no increase either in the allocation for
this purpose when RE is taken into account. It has remained at the same level. The allocation
for UTs only was increased from Rs. 2 lakhs to Rs. 5 lakhs during 1994-95 leading thereby to
a corresponding decrease in the share for the States. In view of an urgent need for expanding
and strengthening of the Drug Testing Facilities in our country, the Committee suggests an
enhancement of funds for the same.

National Mental Health Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 34)

“It was proposed to allocate Rs. 18.00 lakhs for 1994-95 under this programme. Only a
sum of Rs. 10.00 lakhs has been approved. Apparently, this is on account of lack of
response from the institutions and consequent poor utilisation of available funds. The
reasons for this lack of response and poor utilisation of funds should be investigated”.



Reply of the Government

“The observations have been noted for guidance and further necessary action. However,
one of the contributory factors which has been identified is the non-furnishing of audited
accounts of funds released in the past to the concerned institutions. This is being taken up
for immediate rectification.”

Recommendation (Para No. 35)

The Committee feels-that disorders in mental health is one of the major problems that
we are facing today. Institutions, private as well as Government, which are working in this
field, are in a very bad shape. Therefore, it recommends that a review of this scheme,
wherever it is operating, should be made and a minimum standard of treatment be ensured
in these institutions.

Reply of the Government
“The Government agrees with the observations made by the Committee.”
Comments of the Committee

The Committee finds the replies given by the Department incomplete and unsatisfactory.
In para 34, the Committee had given a specific suggestion for looking into the reasons for the
lack of response from institutions and poor utilisation of funds provided for the Mental Health
Programme. In para 35, the Committee ‘had recommended to undertake a review of the
Programme and also to ensure minimum standard of treatment in the institutions providing
mental health care. It may be noted that in response to the specific suggestion/
recommendation made by the Committee, the Department has given a cryptic reply. The
Committee expects the Department to initiate specific actions in keeping with the
recommendations of the Committee in this regard.

Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
Recommendation (Para No. 65)

The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons adduced by the Department for
decrease in allocation for CGHS. It feels that Central Government Employees are not
served very well by CGHS. There are complaints from CGHS beneficiaries in regard to non-
availability of required medicines, delay in supply. insistance on pre-payment by private
recognised hospitals, etc. The Committee wants that the Department should look into this
matter and take remedial measures. The Committee also suggests increase in allocation of
funds for CGHS and the Department should see ,that quality of services improves.

Reply of the Government

“The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have already taken up the case with the
Ministry of Finance for providing additional funds for drugs to CGHS. However, since the
cost of drugs shows a continuous upward trend, the provisions becomes inadequate every
year. The concern of the Committee has been noted by the Department and efforts to
improve the quality and supply of drugs is being attended to.”

Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that efforts to improve the quality and supply of drug are being
initiated by the Department. But the Department has not mentioned anything about the

Committee’s concern on other issues like improving/increasing the quality of services,
insistance on pre-payment by private recognised hospitals, etc.


The Committee is of the view that the services being provided by the CGHS
dispensaries are not only unsatisfactory but also inadequate. The Committee feels that the
quality of medicines/services and the procedure adopted for reimbursement, etc. need to be
looked into and improved immediately.

Serologist and Chemical Examiner
Recommendation (Para No. 79)

The Committee feels that the reason given for abolition of technical posts is not
plausible. As per the report of the Department, number of medico-legal cases in forensic
serology coming from the States has not gone down, showing that the demand for such
services continues to be there. Also, this is not the only work done by the Department. The
Department is the only indigenous producer of VDRL antigen and different antisera of
internationally recognised standard; they are earning revenue and saving foreign exchange.
Before the decision is implemented, the Committee feels that assessment the work done by
the Department must be undertaken to see whether a massive curtailment of posts would
not hamper this work.

Reply of the Government

A detailed activity analysis of the Directorate General of Health Services and its
subordinate offices was carried out. On the basis of the analysis, it was decided that while
additional posts may be created in some of the offices, some posts may be abolished in
others, which included the Office of the Serologist and Chemical Examiner. The decision to
abolish 30 posts in the said office was based on the fact that most of the States have
established their own Forensic Science Institutes and Laboratories. As the abolition of the
post will take place not through retrenchment, but by not filling up the same in and when
they fall vacant or upon their placement in Surplus-Cell, the existing incumbents should have
no cause for anxiety as they would not be retrenched. At the same time, the abolition of
posts will not in any way affect the production. research and development work of this
office.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee notes that the reply of the Department is mere repetition of what has
been stated earlier in this regard and doeswnot meet the Committee’s objection.



CHAPTER II

RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Para Recommmendation/Observations Reply
No.
20. National programme for Control of Blindness

The Committee recommends that all out efforts
should be made to save the people from blindness.
Private agencies should also be involved for this
purpose.

During the years 1991-92 and 1992-93, the
performance of cataract operations ranged between
1.5 to 1.6 million, However, with additional inputs,
proper monitoring and
setting up of District Blindness Control Societies in
the districts, the cataract performance during 1993-94
went up to over 1.9 million,

To further enhance the performance, World Bank
assisted Cataract Blindness Control Project has been
initiated in 7 major states namely, U.P., A.P., M.P.,
Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Orissa and Tamil Nadu,
which account for nearly 2/3rd of blind population in
India. Besides, other special eye care projects have
been started in J&K & Karnataka, For effective
involvement and participation of Voluntary/NGO
Sector, grant-in-aid per operated case of cataract has
been enhanced from Rs. 80/ to Rs. 1754 where
NGO uses Govt. vehicles & — ophthalmic
infrastructure, from Rs.1204 to Rs. 250 where
NGO does not use Govt. facilities vehicle or
personnel and Rs.3 for tribal and remote areas
w.e.f. 1.4.94, Also under the World Bank project for
Control of Blindness in 7 States, schemes are being
worked up to give non-recurring assistance to NGOs/
Pvt. Sector in extremely rural and remote areas and
tribal areas where there are no Govt. eye care
services existing.

It is expected that with additional inputs, revised
strategies, decentralised management & involvement
of voluntary and private sector, it would be possible
to



9

Para
No.

Recommendations/Observations

‘ Reply

33

37-39

Prevention of Food Adulteration and Control of Drugs

The Committee wonders how the state will be able to
maintain the quality of food and drugs when grants
are reduced. Therefore, Committee — suggests
enhancement of funds for the same.

Hemoeopathy and Indian System of Medicine

Homoeopathy

The Committee notes that ISM & Homoeopathy as a
whole were not able to spend the money allocated to
them last year. The Committee feels that before
providing more money they should ensure that
money will be spent fully and properly.

The Department proposed to equate facilities of
Homoeopathy with other Indian system of medicine.
The Committee feels that the Department is not
taking it seriously. Homoeopathy has been provided
less funds in comparison to the other systems of
medicines and no steps have been taken to ensure
full utilisation of funds allocated and release of funds
‘on time.

The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation
given by the Department and suggests more
allocation in Homoeopathy. The Committee suggests
restoration of the grants at the Level of previous
year:

reduce backlog of cataract & prevalence of blindness
effectively.

A provision of Rs. 100 Lakhs was made under sub-
head D.2(2)(7)-Augmentation of Drug Testing
Facilities during the year, 1993-94 (BE) 1993-94 and
(RE) 1993-94 out of which Rs. 98.00 Lakhs was for
States and Rs. 2.00 Lakhs was for UTs with
Legislature under sub-head E.2(1) (8)-Augmentation
of Drug Testing Facilities in UTs. During the year
1994-95 (Budget Estimates) out of total provision of
Rs. 100 Lakhs, Rs. 95 Lakhs has been made for
Centrally Sponsored Scheme for States and Rs. 5
Lakhs has been made for UTs with Legislature.
Thus, there is no decrease in the Budget Estimates
during the year 1994-95 for the Augmentation of
Drug Testing Facilities in the States/UTs. Besides,
State Govts./UTs Administration have been asked to
send their requirements for consideration at RE
1994-95 stage

(For Committee’s Comments pl. see Chapter 1)

Depending on the actual requirement of additional
funds during 1994-95, more funds shall be asked for
in RE 1994-95,



10

Para
No.

Recommendations/Observations

Reply

42-43

55

6

74

Indian System of Medicine

On the question of setting up of Directorate of
Indian System of Medicines and Homoeopathy. the
Department of Health informed the Committee that
it has prepared a proposal for setting up a separate
Directorate of Indian Systems of Med and
Homoeopathy for strengthening these _ systems.
including non-drug therapies like Yoga and
Naturopathy.

The Committee suggests that this Directorate should
be set up expeditiously.

Development & Cultivation of Medicinal Plants

The Committee notes that the Department has taken
steps for production of medicinal plants. This will
save some of the important medicinal plants from
extinction, and it will also ensure the avail
these plants in the market. However, the Committee
feels that these efforts should be continued.

Hospitals and Dispensaries
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)

The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons
adduced by the Department for decrease in allocation
for CGHS. It feels that Central Government
Employees are not served very well by CGHS. There
are complaints from C.G.H.S. beneficiaries in
regards to non’ availability of required medicines.
delay in supply, insistence for pre-payment by privae
recognised hospitals etc. The Committee wants
the Department should look into this matter and take
remedial measures. The Committee also suggests
increase in funds of CGHS and the Department
should see that quality of services increase.

Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi

The Committee is concerned at the bad state of CIP
(Central Institute of Psychiatry), Ranchi. The
Committee feels that a review of functioning of this
institute be made early.

External Assistance

The Committee notes that a large amount of external
aid remains unutilised, and as the aid increases
unutilised portion is also increasing. Therefore. it
Suggests that reasons for non-utilisation of funds
should be rectified. It also suggests that before going
for external assistance the Department should ensure
full utilisation of the funds.

The Scheme involving expenditure on development of
ISM&H including creation of separate Deptt. of
ISM&H_ has been cleared by the EFC, and is
ing approval of C.C.E.A.

Suggestion of the Committee has been noted for
compliance.

The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have
already taken up the case with the Ministry of
Finance for providing additional funds for drugs to
CGHS. However, since the cost of drugs shows a
continuous upward trend, the provision becomes
inadequate every year. The concern of the
Committee has been noted by the Department and
efforts to improve the quality and supply of drugs is
being attended to.

(For Committee's comment pl. see Chapter 1)

The suggestion has been noted for guidance and
further action.

The Committee's recommendation has, been noted for

compliance. .



RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE

Para

10-13

CHAPTER-III

COMMITTEE

DESIRE TO PURSUE

Recommendations/Observations.

Centrally Sponsored Programmes

National Malaria Eradication Programme

The Committee feels that in real terms, funds for the
scheme are decreasing. and it may be provided with
additional funds for better implementation.

The Committee suggests innovation of new ways to
deal with the problem and to achieve complete
eradication of malaria from the country. 3

The Committee observes that though the tribal
population is only 8 per cent, 31 per cent of all the
malaria cases and 60 per cent of the more dangerous
P. Faalciparum infectious, are in the tribal areas, and
in spite of all these, only 10 per cent of the National
Malaria Eradication Programme's fund is spent in
tribal areas. The Committee fee!s that not enough
attention has been given to the tribal areas. It has
also observed that incidence of malaria in slums and
backward ‘areas as compared to other areas. The
Committee, in its previous report (4th) has suggested
and is again reiterating that this distortion in malaria
cases and funds spent in tribal areas may be —
corrected.

Reply

Para No. 10—In the 8th Five Year Plan an amount of
Rs. 425- crores was originally allocated for the
programme (including Kala Azar and Filaria) but
under the Social Safety Net, an additionality of
Rs. 70,22 crores was made available during 1992-93
& 1993-94.

Para 11, 12 & 13

In the recent years, the malaria situation has been
more or less static. During the 8th Five Year Plan
period, the new approaches envisaged are (i)
Materiogenic stratification to pin point the problem
areas and identify the priority areas for specific
control methods. (ii) Intensification of malaria
control activities in areas with predominance of tribal
population by providing additional inputs. For this,
100% central assistance to North Eastern States
is in final stage of approval by the Govt. of

‘India. For control of malaria in the tribal areas

of 7 States viz, Andhra’ Pradesh, Bihar,
Gujarat. Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa and
Rajasthan. World Bank assistance is sought



12

Para
No.

Recommendations/Observations

Reply

21—23

In the action taken report, the Department has
informed the Committee that due to weak health
infrastructure in hill and difficult terrain tribal area,
they have proposed 100 per cent central assistance to
North Eastern States. It is for final approval. before
the Planning Commission. For intenification of anti-
malaria activities in the tribal areas of seven States of
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan, the preliminary
conceptual proposal for World Bank assistance was
submitted in July, 1991 and as per the indications
from WHO/World Bank, the required information
from the field is being obtained, for making out the
final document, as per the requirement of the World
Bank. The Committee is not satisfied with the
progress made in this direction and_ therefore,
suggests that this process be expedited.

National AIDS Control Programme and STD Controt

There has been no change in the Budget allocation
for National STD Control Programme, which remains
static at Rs. 50 lakhs. The Committee recommends
that this should be enhanced,

In the year 1993-94, the Department spent Rs. 72.3
crores on NACP (and other related programmes) out
of which Rs. 64.1 crores came from external
agencies. The Committee suggests that aid should be
utilised effectively. This problem has become acute
and incidence of HIV positive is not only increasing
in Metropolitan Cities but it has started cropping up
in small tours and rural areas also. The Committee
feels that the Department should allocate more
funds.

and a proposal is under formulation. After the
project proposal was scrutinised by World Bank and
WHO, the Govt. of India constituted a Task Force in
July, 1992 to go into the details of malaria situation
and related points and finalise a project document for
obtaining World Bank assistance. The Task Force in
their final report has suggested more field studies in
these States. For undertaking these studies, financial
assistance from Japanese grant is being sought. The
project document is likely to be finalised in about a
year’s time after analysing the information so

gathered from these States.
(iii) Adoption of —bio-environmental methods
wherever feasible, like improvement of _ water

disposal, sanitation, introduction of Larvivorous fish,
promoting prophylactic methods like impregnated
bednets, neem oil etc. (iv) Field trials with bio-
pesticides and synthetic Pyre-throids for more
effective use in the programme. (v) Added emphasis
for malaria control in developmental projects, sites
and urban. sit

Para No, 21

During the year 1994-95, apart from a provision of
Rs. 50 lakhs under the national budget for STD
Control Programme kept separately in the Demand
for Grants for Deptt. of Health, a provision of
Rs. akhs has also been kept fot STD Control as
a separate component under the World Bank funded
National AIDS Control Programme. Thus a total
provision of Rs. 402 lakhs is available for STD
Control Programme during the current financial year.

Para No. 22



Para
No.

Recommendations/Observati

Reply

The Committee suggests that infrastructure for AIDS
Control like blood banks, blood test laboratories,
special wards etc. should be strengthened and
monitored. It also proposes for popularising and
increasing awareness for use of condoms and for this
NGO's should also be involved. The Committee also
suggests that STD should not be neglected, due to
emphasis on AIDS. as a large number of people are
suffering from the disease and in fact this may lead to
AIDS.

In the year 1993-94, a provision of Rs. 73 crores was
kept under the National AIDS Control Programme
including Blood Safety and STD Control Programme.
This was inclusive of Rs. 67.10 crores kept under the
component by World Bank and USAID.

external

ing the current financial year i.e., 1994-95,
Rs. 82.55 crores has been allocated. This includes
Rs. 71.27 crores under external aid component. The
net increase in the current year's budget is about
13% over the last year's budget. Out of this, Rs.
47.85 crores has been kept for the activities under the
AIDS Prevention and Control Programme to be
carried out by States/UT Govts. in their big cities as
well as small towns to reduce and effectively arrest
the spread of HIV infection.

Para No. 23

Creation of awareness through IEC, STD Control,
Blood Safety, Rational use of Blood, Clinical
agement of HIV/AIDS cases etc. from an
integral part of the strategies adopted under the
National AIDS Control Programme. Special emphasis
is also being given to control hospital infections in the
country. It is the policy of the Govt. to provide
human and non-discriminatory treatment to the
AIDS patients in the hospitals. There is no need to

isolate AIDS patient or to have separate wards for
them. Active participation of NGOs is being sought
to encourage extensive participation of general public
in AIDS awareness movement. For this purpose.
there is a provision of Rs. 4.00 crores in the budget
under the National AIDS Control Programme with
the overall provision of Rs. 402 lakhs, STD
Control clinics are being strengthened. A_ large
number of training _courses/workshops/seminars/



14

Para
No.

Recommendations/Obscrvations

Reply

47—S0

53

57-59

Ayurveda

The Committee expresses its displeasure over the
decrease in allocation of funds and suggest that
increased funds should be provided to the institutions
of Ayurveda.

The Committee has also taken a serious note of the
fact that there is not sufficient infrastructure to check
and regulate the quality of Ayurvedic Medicine.

The Committee suggests that stanllards for Ayurveda
medicine should be fixed and monitored. The
department, ii oral evidence, said that standard of
Ayurvedic medicines can be checked only at the level
of manufacturing and after that it is very difficult.
The Committee suggests to the Deptt. to take
appropriate measures for this.

The Committee also notes that the Department had
Proposed to establish a National Institute of
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani Medicine, Homoeopathy
and Naturopathy on the lines of All India Institute of
Medical Science. But till now all these institutes are
in very bad condition and they are nowhere nearer to
the standards of AIIMS in any sense.

The Committee feels that scientific research in Indian
System of Medicine is not done properly. It shows
the scant attention paid by the Department to these
systems of medicine.

Unani Medicine

The Committee, while satisfied with the alloc
made for the development of U: Medi
however, suggests that the Department should ensure
that the funds are utilised properly and achievements
are evaluated regularly.

Excise Duty

The Committee feels that in the contemporary
scenario of globalistion of the science of Ayurveda.
the proposed levy of 10 per cent Excise Duty
adversely affect the export of Ayurveda Siddha and
Unani Medicines, which is still at a primitive stage of
growth.

campaigns: are being arranged to arrest STD in the
country. Govt. plans to provide simplified
syndromatic treatment to STD patient even in the
District hospitals and PHCs.

Allocation of funds to all Ayurveda Institutes

depends upon their annual plan proposals and funds

utilisation depends on the projects undertaken. These

will be taken due care in 1994-95 based on their

actual requirements. PLIM. Ghaziabad, has not yet”
finalised its building plans.

Therefore. funds allocations shall be made only after

the plan and estimates are finalised.

In the Scheme for strengthening of ISM and H,
including the setting up of a separate Deptt. of ISM
and H, it is proposed to revitalise the research in
ISM and H in collaboration with ICMR, NIMHANS,
etc. so that research in these system are modernised
and set on scientific lines.

During Testing Labs. to test ISM and H drugs are
proposed to be increased to improve the drug
standardisation ISM and H_ educational institutions
will also be strengthened including establishment of
National Institute in each system of medicine.

There is a standing mechanism to periodically
monitor the working of the CCRUM. Steps have
been taken to ensure timely action on the issue and
proper utilisation of the allotted funds.

10% Excise Duty on medicines was imposed by the
Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Expenditure. The
observations of the Committee have been sent for
their consideration.



61

take necessary steps to remove this Excise Duty.

Yoga

The Committee is satisfied that allocation for Yoga

popularisation of Yoga in schools and colleges as well
as residential areas.

Media should also be used effectively. Proper
monitoring of the utilisation of funds should also be
done.

The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has
considered the suggestion of including Yoga in
Schools’ curriculum in the meeting held on 29.4.94
under the Chairmanship of Secy. (Health) and the
suggestion was welcomed in the meeting. It was
observed that the Scheme was taken up and started
by the Min. of HRD. The existing Physical Training
Instructors or any teacher in the Schools could be —
given three months training for this purpose.
However, it is hoped that with the creation of the
Deptt. of ISM and H, this aspect would also be taken
care of.

oN All India Institute of Medical Sciences

be Der 20 ea eo OD Efforts are made to provide sufficient funds to

allocation for AIIMS in real terms. The Committee
suggests that it should be provided with sufficient
funds to carry out its increasing responsibilities. क is
one of the premier institutions in the field of medical
education, research and treatment. The Committee
feels that it should maintain its supremacy and
speciality as a referal hospital, with upto date
equipments and highly qualified doctors. The
Committee also recommends that functioning and
achievements of AIIMS may be reviewed periodically
by an experts Committee.

AIIMS every year and there has been an increase in
allocation both Plan and Non-Plan over the last three
years as would be seen from ‘the figures given
below: —

Rs. in Crores)
Plan Non-Plan — Total

Actual 91-92 14.76 39.00... 53.76
Actual 92-93 28.19 45.43 73.62
Actual 93-94 33.03 50.40. 83.43

The Plan funds are utilised for replacement of costly
old equipments and -procurement of equipment of
new technology. The Ministry has already approved a
plan for upgrading the AIIMS IRCH at a cost of
Rs. 20 crores which is under implementation. In
other deptts. also. similar upgradation is being
planned, depending on the availability of resources.



16

Para
No.

Recommendations/Observations

Reply

73-74

76

Para-medical Personnel

The Committee notes that the Department has
accepted that there is’ a serious shortage of para
medical personnel. The Committee is concerned to

note that the number of nurses is less than the
number of doctors in many cases. The Committee
hopes that this shortage is a short-term phenomenon
and very soon it will be overcome. It recommends
opening of more institutions for training of para-
medical personnel. creation of additional posts and
streamlining of the recruitment process to achieve
these goals. It also recommends increase in the
allocation for para-medical training institutions.

Indian Council of Medical Research

The Committee suggests that proper system of
evaluation of research activities should be developed
to assess the working of the Council.

The suggestion of the Committee to reiew the
achievement of AIIMS periodically has been noted
for compliance.

In order to train additional nursing staff, it is
proposed to open ten additional nursing schools
during 1994-95 and 1995-1996. For this, a sum of Rs.
450 lakhs have been allocated during the current plan
period. The process of rationalisation of recruitment
rules with a view to bring in greater uniformity has
also been initiated. A sum of Rs. 10 crores has been
allocated for schemes which include training of
nurses, strengthening of existing training institutions
and construction of residential, premises for nurses.

Both intramural and extramural research funded by
ICMR are subjected to rigorous review process.

Intramural Research

Each Permanent InstituteRegional Medical Research
Centre -of the ICMR has a Scientific Advisory
Committee comprising outstanding experts in various
disciplines. Critical review and monitoring of research
programmes are undertaken annually by the
Committees. In addition, close interactions between
sts of the institute and experts are promoted
during the course of the year through discussions.
These programmes are again reviewed by the
Scientific Advisory Board & finally by the Governing
Body of the Council.

Extramural Research

Each extramural research programme of the ICMR is
subjected to poor review. Thus, each of the Centres
for Advanced Research is reviewedmonitored by a
Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC), the Task
Force projects are reviewed and monitored by their
own Expert Groups. The ad-hoc research schemes
are reviewed/monitored by Project. Committees
(PAC). The research Fellowship proposals are
scrutinised by Expert Groups. The over-all review of
the entire extramural research under a particular
Technical Division is done by the Scientific



Recommendations/Observations

North Eustern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of
Health and Medical Sciences, Shillong
The Committee is not satisfied with the progress of
NEIGRI. as it is behind schedule. Therefore. the
Committee suggests that, a time schedule should be
fixed for the completion of the work and the
Department should make every effort to complete it
‘on time.

Advisory Group of the Division or area, Thus, the
ICMR Hyrs. has constituted 6 SAG's (one each of

~ Development: Research (including family planning:
won, Maternal & Child Health): Traditional

Medicine Reyearch: 4620-५० 82४३५ ६ ह
Information — 6 Communication (inch
publications) y 1
Finally, the Scientific Advisory Board of the Council
annually reviews the overall activity (both intramural
& extramural) of the Council, Last

In order to expedite the work, it has been decided to
‘Set up an interim facility at temporary site in Shillong
with MI bedded hospital having. super speciality. in
Cardiology and Gastroenterology during 1994-95. The
Govt, has decided 10. award the civil, works to
Hospital Services Consultancy Corporations (HSCC)
subject to the signing of necessary agreement’
between HSCC and the Institute. The proposal to set
up a referal hospital का Maw Diang Diang at the
Permanent site during the 8th Plan Period is under
active consideration.



CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE”

National Malaria Eradication Programme (NMEP)
Recommendation (Para No. 14)

The Committee suggests a national level review of the Programme to assess the current
strategies and their impact on the disease status.
Reply of the Government

“The aggravated malariogenic situation in certain areas is mainly due to natural
calamities like excessive rain and water logging coupled with operational inadequacy,
permitted increase in malaria mortality in certian areas. The States have already been
requested to take corrective measure and intensify malaria control activities in malaria
endemic areas. The blood smears collected from fewer cases and examined from 1987 to
1993 are as follows:—

(Figures in Millions)

Year Blood Slide Annual Blood

Examined Examination

Rate (%)

1987 7253 9.63
1988 75.0 9.87
1989 72.07 9.37
1990 74.42 9.49
1991 75.16 9.30
1992 79.01 9.59
1993 76.05 9.14
(prov.)

As per approved norms, at least 10% of the population at the risk of malaria .is to be
screened annually and during the years. as noted above achievement has been over 92%.
During 1994, it is proposed to review the NMEP through an Independent Appraisal Team.”

Recommendation (Para No. 15)

Under the NMEP, DDT, BHC and Malathion are sprayed to control malaria
mosquitoes. Only 50 per cent of the targets in spraying. i.e. 864 lakhs population has been
covered, instead of 1757 lakhs in population targeted. The Committee is not satisfied with
this performance. It suggests that other methods to control malaria should be explored.
Reply of the Government

“The low percentage of insecticidal spray is mainly on account of some States like
Orissa, Karnataka, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh,
Nagaland, Manipur and Andaman & Nicobar Islands performing less than 50% of the
technically targeted population area. Spray coverage of some of the States like Punjab,

* For comments of the Committee see Chapter-I.



19

Haryana, Goa, Meghalaya, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and Mizoram has been more than 75%.
The low performing States have been requested to improve spray coverage in order to provide
insecticidal protection to the population needing it. In addition to this, the States have been
requested to adopt other control methods. like bio-environmental measures (use of larvivorous
fish, source reduction, sanitation, etc.) prophylactic methods (impregnated bednets etc.) and
community motivation and involvement in prevention of mosquito breeding.”

Further Reply of the Government

“Many States have not been achieving their targets for spray because of various
constraints like refusal to spray by the community delay in release of funds by the States
leading to delay in procurement of insecticides, lack of funds to meet operational cost and
large number of vacancies of malaria staff.

Dte. of NMEP has been advising States on technical targets for spray, schedule of spray
from time to time. During the meetings Health Authorities have been requested to take
adequate steps to improve the spray operation and intensified health, education.”
Kala-Azar Control Programme
Recommendation (Para Nos. 17 & 18)

The Committee feels that the goal of the 8th Plan, to reduce morbidity and mortality due
to Kala-Azar, with the ultimate goal of eradication, is not in sight.

The Committee also recommends that affected tribal areas may be provided additional
grants to deal with this chronic situation.

Reply of the Government

“As a result of control measures taken. there has been a declining trend in both morbidity
and mortality due to Kala Azar during 1993 and 1994, as is evident from details given
below:—

Year Cases Deaths Increase/ Decrew 5
Case Deaths
1989 30903 बा (+)19.00%
1990 54650 589 (+)19.00%
1991 57614 ह34 (+)29.40%
1992 75523 1417 (+)41.14%
1993 44155 706 कं (+)50.20%
1994 7919 108 (-H7.53%.. (-)56.30%
(upto April)
1995 15093 348
(upto April)

The Kala Azar Control Programme has been uble to bring about a perceptible decline in
the incidence of the disease, both in terms of morbidity and mortality, during 1993-94.
Drug De-Addiction Programme
Recommendation (Para Nos. 26 & 27)

Assistance has been provided through Government of India funds and or UNDCP for
buildingWehicleequipmenttraining of personnel for establishing 31 Centres in the States of
Manipur, Nagaland, Assam, Mizoram, West Bengal. U.P., Rajasthan, Punjab, Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka and Kerala. The Committee recommends opening of these centres in other States
also.


20

The Committee is not satisfied with the performance of Lady Hardinge Medical
College, New Delhi in this respect. The Committee recommends that the Department should
provide more facilities for drug de-addiction centres, as still a large number of youths are
addicted to drugs.

Replies of the Government

The entire Programme is being reviewed in the EFC meeting to be convened shortly
including the, strengthening of centres like Lady Hardinge Medical College.

National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 29)

The Committee does not approve the reduction in allocations. It suggest that
Department should implement the programme of monitoring, iodized salt production and
distribution. The Committee also suggest that more attention should be paid to States where
the problem is more serious. The Committee also suggests to make a study of the effect of
extra consumption of iodine.

Reply of the Government

The Budget allocation under this programme in 1992-93 was Rs. 50.00 lakhs. This was.
raised to Rs. 544.00 lakhs at the 1२.६. stage to accommodate certain outstanding claims of
subsidy payable to iodized salt manufacturers. Thus. the budget allocation of Rs. 1 crore in
1993-94 should not be seen as a reduction, but more as a step-up from the original level of
Rs. 50.00 lakhs in 1992-93. In 1994-95, the budget estimates have been kept at the level of
Rs. 1.00 crores. However, UNICEF is providing funds to the extent of Rs. 431.00 lakhs in
1994 and Rs. 270.00 lakhs in 1995. for the 1.D.D. Control programme is unlikely to suffer
from scarcity of funds.

National Cancer Control Programme
Recommendation (Para Nos. 30 & 31)

The Department informed the Committee that during the year 1993-94 and 1992-93,
funds under Cancer Control Programme were surrendered on account of lower utilisation.

The Committee suggests that it should be inquired as to why the allocated amount was
not utilised. The Committee is also not satisfied with reduction in Budgetary allocation and
suggests enhancement.

Reply of the Government

“During 1992-93, the external aid amounting to Rs. 6 crores did not materialise. As
regards, 1993-94, an amount of Rs. 2.50 crores could not be released to the All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, for the development of the Institute’s Rotary
Cancer Hospital due to non-procurement of linear accelerator by the Institute under the
project. Also, an amount of Rs. 5.50 crores was proposed to be provided to Chittaranjan
National Cancer Institute, Calcutta, but about Rs. one crore less was provided due to
phasing of procurement of equipment. These were two main items where proposed funds
could not be released.”

National Mental Health Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 34)

“It was proposed to allocate Rs. 18.00 lakhs for 1994-95 under this programme. Only a
sum of Rs. 10.00 lakhs has been approved. Apparently, this is on account of lack of
response from the Institutions and consequent poor utilisation of available funds. The
reasons for this lack of response and poor utilisation of funds should be investigated.”



Reply of the Government

“The observations have been noted for guidance and further necessary action. However,
one of the contributory factors which has been identified is the non-furnishing of audited
accounts of funds released in the past to the concerned institutions. This is being taken up
for immediate rectification.”

Recommendation (Para No. 35)

The Committee feels that disorders in mental health is one of the major problems that
we ure facing today. Institutions. private as well as Government. which are working in this
field, are in a very bad shape. Therefore. it recommends that-a review of this scheme,
wherever it is operating. should be made and a minimum standard of treatment be ensured
in these institutions.

Reply of the Government

“The Government agrees with the observations made by the Committee.”

Serologist and Chemical Examiner

Recommendation (Para No. 79)

The Committee feels that the reason given for abolition of technical posts is not
plausible. As per the report of the Department. number of medico-legal cases in forensic
serology coming from the States has not gone down, showing that the demand for such
services continues to be there. Also, this is not the only work done by the Department. The
department is the only indigenous producer of VDRL antigen and different antisera of
internationally recognised standard; they are earning revenue and saving foreign exchange.
Before the decision is implemented, the Committee feels that assessment work done by the
department must be undertaken to see whether a massive curtailment of posts would not
hamper this work.

Reply of the Government

A detailed activity analysis of the Directorate General of Health Services and its
subordinate offices was carried out. On the basis of the analysis, it was decided that while
additional posts may be created in some of the offices, some posts may be abolished in
others, which included the Office of the Serologist and Chemical Examiner. The decision to
abolish 30 posts in the said office was based on the fact that most of the States have
established their own Forensic Science Institutes and Laboratories. As the abolition of the
posts will take place not through retrenchment, but by not filling up the same in and when
they fall vacant or upon their placement in surplus-Cell. the existing incumbents should have
no cause for anxiety as they would not be retrenched. At the same time, the abolition of
posts will not in any way affect the production. research and development work of this
office.



CHAPTER-V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, FINAL REPLIES OF WHICH ARE STILL
AWAITED



MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT
IX
“NINTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the Ist June, 1995 in Committee
Room No. 67, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

. Shri 0. P. Kohli

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
Shri Md. Salim

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. 1. 6. Sanadi

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
10. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

11. Shri Inder Jit

12. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

13. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia

14. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
15. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
16. Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri P.P-K. Ramacharyulu. Committee Officer

9०:०9 9 # ० ७

2. The Committee considered the Draft Twenty-fourth and Twenty-eighth Reports on
the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations made by the Committee
in its Ninth and Eighth Reports on the Demands for Grants, 1994-95 of the Departments
of Health and Family Welfare. After some modifications the Committee adopted the
same. 2

3. The Committee then decided to present the adopted Action Taken Reports to
both the houses of Parliament on 2nd June, 1995.

4. The Committee then authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri Pravat

“Minutes of Ist to VIIIth Meeting relate to matters not included in this Report

23


on

Kumar Samantaray and Shri O.P. Kohli to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Prof.
Malini Bhattacharya and in her absence Shri Inder Jit to lay it on the Table of Lok Sabha.

5. The Committee, then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.