203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED-THIRD REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN
THE HUNDRED NINETY-FOURTH REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2007-2008 (DEMAND NO. 103)
OF THE
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 5TH DECEMBER, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 5TH DECEMBER, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2007/ AGRAHAYANA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
1.                    COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.                    PREFACE
3.                    REPORT
CHAPTER I                   Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government
 
CHAPTER II                 Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not    desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply
 
CHAPTER III                Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
 
CHAPTER IV                Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited
 
4.             OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE
5.                    MINUTES
6.                    *ANNEXURES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
*Will be appended at the printing stage.
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2007-08)

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
           
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
 
1.
      Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
2.      Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.      Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4.      Shri Vijaykumar Rupani
5.      Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6.      Shri Uday Pratap Singh
7.      Shrimati Brinda Karat
8.      Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran
9.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
10.  Shrimati Supriya Sule
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.  Shri Ashok Argal
12.  Shri Basudeb Barman
13.  Shri Harishchandra Chavan
14.  Shri Harisinh Chavda
15.  Shri Abu Hasan Khan Chaudhary
16.  Shri Rahul Gandhi
17.  Shri Francis K. George
18.  Shrimati Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
19.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
20.  Shri Ramswaroop Koli
21.  Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
22.  Shrimati Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
23.  Shrimati Archana Nayak
24.  Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
25.  Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
26.  Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
27.  Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
28.  Shri Chengara Surendran
29.  Dr. Meinya Thokchom
30.  Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
31.  Shri K. Virupakshappa
 
 
(i)
 
 
 
            SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Director
Shri Amit Kumar, Committee Officer
 
(ii)
 
PREFACE
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred-third

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Hundred Ninety-fourth Report on
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 103) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development for the year 2007-08.  The Action
Taken Report contains only those paragraphs which entailed recommendations/observations and it leaves the narration.
 
2.
                              The Hundred Ninety-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 27 th April, 2007. Replies of
the Government to the recommendations/observations contained in the Report, were considered by the Committee at its
meeting held on the 29th November, 2007.
 
3.                              The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the 29th November, 2007.
 
 
NEW DELHI; 29th November, 2007,
Agrahayana 08, 1929 (Saka)
 
JANARDAN DWIVEDI
   
    Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary
 Standing Committee on  Human Resource Development
 
 
(iii)
 
REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its
Hundred Ninety-fourth Report on (Demand No.103) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development for the year 2007-
2008.
 
2.         Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report, have
been categorized as follows:
 
(i)                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
5.4, 5.8, 6.1, 6.8, 11.3, 17.3, 18.7 and 18.11 
(Chapter I) Total – 8
(ii)                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 3.4, 3.13, 3.17, 3.21, 3.24, 5.6, 5.7, 5.9, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, 8.4, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 9.7, 10.3, 12.3, 12.4, 13.4, 14.6,
16.2, 16.4, 16.5, 17.5, 18.2, 18.4, 18.5, 18.8, 18.9, 19.2, 19.3, 21.4 and 21.5 
 
             (Chapter II)  Total – 37
(iii)
               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.12, 3.6, 3.10, 3.12, 3.14, 3.16, 3.18, 3.19, 3.23, 3.24, 3.25, 3.27, 3.29, 3.31, 3.32, 4.4,
5.5, 11.2, 11.4, 11.5, 11.6, 13.5, 14.3, 14.4, 14.5, 15.4, 15.5, 15.6 and 20.2
 
 (Chapter-III)  Total - 35
(iv)              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
(Chapter – IV) Total - Nil
CHAPTER-I
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
V      RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL CRECHE SCHEME FOR THE CHILDREN
        OF WORKING MOTHERS    
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 5.4           The Committee was informed that all these three organizations have experience of implementing crèche
programme across the country for almost three decades and have a nation-wide presence and network for running crèches. 
These organizations are well equipped with field units and staff.  Hence no constraints are being faced for implementation of
the scheme through these organizations. The Committee recommends that to meet the growth in number of creches other
organization/NGOs may also be involved in the implementation of these projects.
 
Action Taken
 
To meet the growing need of creches, the Ministry has prepared an EFC paper to open more creches across the country
during the 11th Five Year Plan. While expanding the scheme, due consideration will be given to the recommendations made by
the Committee by involving other reputed organizations/NGOs also for implementation of the crèche programme.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 5.8           The Committee notes that there are a large number of working mothers in unorganized sector who are in great
need of creches to look after their children when they go to work.  The safety of the children is utterly neglected and they are
prone to score of anti social elements.  Unfortunately, the crèche scheme is not functioning in those areas which need the
most.  The Committee was informed that for opening creches, applications are pending but the Ministry has no funds available
to open the creches.  The Committee therefore recommends that more allocation should be made under this head to meet the
growing demand for creches.  The Scheme may be revamped and expanded and the Planning Commission should be
approached for more allocation emphasizing the need for creches in view of safety of children of working mothers.
 
Action Taken
 
Efforts are being made to revamp and expand the scheme so as to ensure the safety of  the children of the working
mothers. An EFC Memo has been moved for this purpose.
 
 
VI.       SCHEMES TRANSFERRED FROM THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 6.1             A number of schemes have been transferred from the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to the Ministry
in 2006.  An assessment about their performance during 2006-07 is given below-
 
HOMES FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILDREN FOR PROMOTION OF IN-COUNTRY ADOPTION
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 6.8           The Committee wonders why the All India Evaluation is taking such a long time and still not complete. To get
into the fact of the matter the Committee desires to know the details of the procedure of the evaluation, implementing agencies
and time schedule for the evaluation. The Committee may be apprised about the outcome of the evaluation.
 
Action Taken
 
            The National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development recently completed its study on “Evaluation of
the Scheme of Assistance to Homes for Children (Shishu Greh) to Promote In-country Adoption”. The study has been
completed within a period of six months and submitted its report  to the Ministry. The study has come out with a positive note

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
about the working of the scheme, it has highlighted on the need of supervision/monitoring of these agencies by the State
Governments and CARA in promoting adoptions in the country.
It has been recommended that for effective and smooth functioning of these organisations, timely release of grants is very
essential, grants to on-going projects may be released directly by CARA, new cases will be brought before the Project
Sectioning Committee for approval.
 
            The report has been prepared after analyzing the selected indicators/ parameters and minimum standards provided by
the Ministry which were considered crucial for evaluation of the scheme. A multi-stage stratified random sampling technique
was applied to select state-wise total number of organisations at the first stage. At the second stage, purposive sapling method
was applied for selection of the organisations. Brief of the outcome of the evaluation study is placed at Annexure-IX.
 
A copy of the report was sent to the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance to consider lifting the ban
imposed on expansion of this scheme. In reply, the Department of Expenditure has communicated that since the Ministry of
Women and Child Development is formulating a new scheme –‘Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS)’ by incorporating
the elements of the schemes i, e, An Integrated Programme for Street Children, Scheme for Assistance to Homes (Shishu
Greh), CARA and Child line, etc, there is no justification for the expansion of scope of the existing scheme which are under
consideration.
.X.       CENTRAL ADOPTION RESOURCE AGENCY (CARA)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 11.3         Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls is another new scheme proposed to be launched
after merger of two schemes, Kishori Shakti Yojana and Nutrition Programme for Adolescent Girls. The Committee observes
that NPAG was implemented on a pilot basis in 2002-03 and 2003-04 by the Planning Commission It continued on a pilot
project basis in 51 identified backward districts in 2006-07 also. Kishori Shakti Yojana has been there under ICDS for a few
years. It was only in 2006-07 that the scheme has been expanded from 2000 ICDS projects to 6118 ICDS projects. Committee
is not aware whether there is going to be a significant modification by bringing these two schemes under a new scheme.  The
Committee would, however, like to emphasise that there is a need for having a comprehensive review of all the Schemes
relating to nutrition for women and children being run not only by the Ministry of Women and Child Development but by
other Ministries like Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Rural Development etc.  The Committee strongly feels that there
should be an umbrella scheme for provision of nutrition to women and children under which different small schemes run by
other Ministries can be brought together.
 
Action Taken
 
 Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls  is proposed to be launched on merger of Kishori Shakti
Yojana and Nutrition Programme for Adolescent Girls. A proposal for expansion of NPAG to all districts and its merger with
KSY has been included in the XI Plan proposals of the Ministry.  This is necessary to improve the nutritional status of
adolescent girls and also to empower them socially and economically.
 
 The current efforts for addressing the issues of adolescent girls need to be stepped up substantially in an integrated manner. It
is necessary to expand  NPAG [which at present is being implemented in 51 identified districts only] and merge it with   KSY, 
enrich content and expand coverage of merged scheme to all the districts in the country in the XI Plan.  An integrated approach
taking care of life skills, nutrition, health of adolescents may pave way for a healthy society/ better quality human resources. It
would also lead to reduction in IMR/ MMR.
 
The two schemes are planned to be merged since they exist with more or less similar interventions, for the same group of
target beneficiaries. There are no significant modifications as such, envisaged in the new scheme.            However, the
provision for KSY which was prescribed, in the year 1991, as Rs.1.1 lakh per block per annum, is proposed to be revised upto
Rs.5 lakh per block per annum.  This will enrich the content, strengthen the training component and improve the quality of
services by making the interventions more meaningful.
 
 The  ICDS Scheme is not exclusively a Nutrition Scheme, but aims at holistic development of children below 6 years of age
and pregnant women and lactating mothers, through a package of 6 services viz. supplementary nutrition, growth monitoring,
nutrition and health education, immunization,  referral and pre-school education.  Three of the services i.e.  immunization,
referral services and health check up are provided in convergence with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
 
 
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
XVII.      CENTRAL SOCIAL WELFARE BOARD (CSWB)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 17.3         The Committee desires that the contents of the reports may be forwarded to the Committee and the process
should start in other states also.
 
Action Taken
 
            The contents of the report of Task Force constituted for Maharashtra are at a compilation stage.  They will be
forwarded to the Committee.  After studying contents of the report the process of starting constitution of Task Force in other
States will be followed up.
 
XVIII              RASHTRIYA MAHILA KOSH (RMK)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 18.7     The Committee is not inclined to agree with the view taken by the Governing Board of RMK.  The Committee
reiterates its earlier recommendation.  The Committee would like to be  apprised about different rates of interest charged on an
average under various loan schemes being implemented under RMK.
 
Action Taken
 
 The concern of the parliamentary committee for reduction of interest rates being charged from the  beneficiaries will again be
put up to the Governing Board in its next meeting.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 18.11       The Committee therefore recommends that RMK need to be revamped and recast to eliminate the above short-
comings.  Adequate publicity may be given among the poor women on various aspects of RMK.  Instead of continuing in a
few States RMK should be actively popularized in all the States. The RMK needs to be broad based; it should give loans to the
individuals also.
 
Acton Taken
 
Noted for compliance.
CHAPTER-II
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
 
II.        BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 2.5           In the light of feedback received about the performance  level during the Tenth Plan period, the Committee
would like to emphasise that every conceivable  measure needs to be taken by the Ministry so that shortfall and deviations
from the prescribed financial norms do not occur during the Eleventh  Plan Period.
 
Action Taken
 
The observation of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 2.6           The Committee expresses its serious reservation on the trend of Utilisation of allocated funds during 2006-07.
About 38 per cent of fund utilization during the last quarter of the financial year with 15 per cent to be spent during the last
month, i.e. March  goes against the prescribed norms of only 33 per cent utilization during the last quarter. The Committee

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
would, therefore, like to emphasise that every conceivable attempt should be made for strict compliance of financial norms.
 
Action Taken
 
Up to December 2006, under the Plan schemes 64.85% funds were utilized and in the last quarter of the financial year 2006-07
the percentage of fund utilization was 32.34%. In the month of March 2007, the expenditure was 15.77%, thus exceeding only
by 0.77% over the limit imposed by the Ministry of Finance.  For expenditure in excess of 15% during March 2007, prior
approval of Ministry of Finance was taken.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 2.7     The Committee has been voicing its concern about the declining trend in both allocation and utilization of funds for
women welfare schemes. For 2006-07, also, in spite of enhanced allocation of Rs. 130.70 crore, expenditure reported upto 16
th
March, 2007 is only Rs. 91.40 crores. Not only this, the Committee notes that it was only in the last quarter that utilization
picked up as expenditure reported upto 31
st December, 2006 was only Rs. 58.75 crore.
 
Action taken
 
The Ministry has noted the Committee’s observations regarding low expenditure in the year 2006-07 especially upto
31st December, 2006.  As explained earlier, the schemes are being revamped during the XIth Plan and  it is expected that more
proposals would then  come forth.
 
III.
             INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (ICDS)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
 Para 3.4          Besides that, States like Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and West Bengal have exceeded the allocated funds, thereby
indicating that funds from the previous year were also available with them.  Both the situations indicate that some inherent
problem-areas continue to persist under the Scheme.  Either the Central funds are not reaching the implementing agencies in
time or States simply do not have the capacity to utilize the enhanced allocation.  The Committee understands that there
already exists a comprehensive four-level monitoring mechanism for ICDS.  The Committee can only emphasise that there is a
need for strengthening the monitoring mechanism so as to regulate the flow of funds and judicious utilization thereof
 
Action Taken
 
The funds released under ICDS Scheme are for committed liabilities towards salaries of ICDS functionaries,  honoraria
of Anganwadi Workers & Helpers and rents etc. Till the year 2006-07 funds were  released to States/UTs generally in two
instalments.  However, in some cases, additional instalments were released in the later part of the year due to reasons like late
receipt of Statements of Expenditure etc. As a result some unspent balances were there with the States/UTs as on 31.12.2006.
 
In pursuance to the directions of Ministry of Finance, from the current financial year i.e. 2007-08, the release of funds
to the States/UTs would be made in four instalments.  To monitor the expenditure more effectively, the release of instalments
has further been linked to receipt of Statement of Expenditure/Monthly Progress Report of the preceding quarter.  This would
lead to reduction in unspent balances at the end of each quarter.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.13  The Committee is aware that the ICDS was envisioned as a community participative programme and the
components of the scheme do not provide for the creation of infrastructural facilities.  However, in view of the present dismal
status of AWC buildings and also chronic problem of fund constraints being faced by majority of States, it is now time that
providing infrastructural facilities like construction of pucca building and other related aspects form part of the scheme so that
over a period of time all the AWCs must have pucca building to function.  If the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan can provide 30% of
its allocation for infrastructure development, the Committee does not find any reason why a particular percentage of the fund
could not be allocated for infrastructure creation under the ICDS.
 
Action Taken 
 
Taking cognizance of the fact that there is no provision for construction of AWCs under the  ICDS Scheme, except in

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
the World Bank Assisted Projects and in NE States as special dispensation, as also the findings of Rapid Facility Survey
conducted by NCAER, the lack of infrastructure has been identified as a cause for concern by the Ministry also.
 
To address this issue, the Government under the proposed revamped ICDS Scheme is contemplating infrastructural
development, on the pattern of SSA/NRHM. It is proposed to earmark 30% of the funds allocated for the ICDS scheme for
infrastructure development, including construction of AWC buildings, baby friendly toilets, provision of safe drinking water
etc.  
Since the number of AWCs without adequate infrastructure is very large, it has also been decided to explore the
possibilities of tapping the funds available under existing Schemes/Programmes of other Ministries also such as the National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF), MPLAD, Scheduled Caste Sub Plan
(SCSP), Tribal Area Sub Plan (TASP), etc.  These Ministries have already been requested to consider modifying their existing
guidelines to earmark certain percentage of allocation for construction of Anganwadi Centres.
 
Simultaneously, provision of safe drinking water and toilet facility in an Anganwadi Centre is also being attempted
through convergence with Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme, Total Sanitation Campaign being administered by the
Department of Drinking Water Supply under the Ministry of Rural Development.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.17         Supreme Court, vide its order dated 7.10.2004, had inter-alia, directed all the States/UTs that the contractors
shall not be used for supply of nutrition in Anganwadi Centres and funds shall be spent by making use of SHGs and Mahila
Mandals for buying of grains and preparation of meals.  The Committee was informed that 21 States/UTs have so far furnished
information on system of procurement, storage, distribution of supplementary nutrition, involvement of Corporates/ SHGs and
duties/responsibilities thereof under ICDS Programme in their States/UTs.  The Committee may like to know whether any
assessment of the impact of the changeover is being studied. The Committee also recommends that the remaining states should
be directed to furnish their feedback at the earliest.
 
Action taken
 
As the Government has issued guidelines in the matter only recently, it would be too early to assess the impact of the
changeover as the shift in the process of procurement of food grains etc. is still in a transition stage.  However, impact
assessment would be carried out after some time.
 
The States/UTs, from whom information is awaited, have been reminded to furnish their feedback at the earliest.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
 Para 3.21        The Committee observes that majority of States/ UTs are also paying additional honorarium to AWWs and
Helpers ranging from Rs. 200/- to Rs. 3200/- for AWWs and from Rs. 100/- to Rs. 1600/- for Helpers.  However, States like
Orissa, Chattisgarh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, N-E States (except Tripura), Rajasthan and U.P. are yet to take an initiative. 
While appreciating the pro-active role of small States like Tripura, Jharkhand, Uttaranchal inspite of fund constraints, the
Committee strongly feels that other States should also come forward.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the 
Department may pursue with all the concerned States.
 
Action Taken       
 
As per information received, out of 31 States/UTs, 24 are paying additional honorarium to AWWs & AWHs from their
own resources. Remaining States will also be advised to give similar incentive to these functionaries.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.24        On a specific query about the status of reservation of 25% of vacant posts of Supervisors for Anganwadi
Workers, the Committee was informed that 18 states have issued instructions on reservation ranging from 25% to 100%  posts
for AWWs in the recruitment of Supervisors. No information was available from 16 states and the matter was sub-judice in
one state. The Committee also notes that as a new policy initiative, instructions have been issued by Govt. for reservation  of
25% of vacancies of AWWs for Helpers on the 6
th October, 2006.  While welcoming this new initiative, the Committee
would like the Ministry to pursue with all the State Govts. to keep the prescribed percentage of posts reserved for AWWs and
Helpers. Such an incentive for key functionaries of AWCs would go a long way in strengthening the ICDS Scheme.
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Action Taken
     
Instructions have already been issued to States/UTs for reservation of 25% of vacancies of Supervisors for AWWs and
similar percentage in vacancies of AWWs for AWHs. These instructions have also been reiterated from time to time.
Information from 21 States have been received that they have reserved the posts of Supervisors to be fill up from amongst the
AWCs.  In one State, the matter is still sub-judice.
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.        RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL CRECHE SCHEME FOR THE CHILDREN OF WORKING MOTHERS
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 5.6           The other area of concern identified by the Committee is the pendency of settlement of accounts. The
Committee notes that Andhra Pradesh State Board having the maximum number of crèches (3902) has settled accounts upto
1995-96 only. For States like Assam, Manipur, Rajasthan, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and A&N Islands, accounts have been
settled upto 2003-04 only.  Very few States have settled accounts upto 2005-06.  Evidently, funds are released without
settlement of previous accounts thereby violating the financial rules.  Details about crèches being run by the two other
implementing agencies are not known to the Committee.  The Committee apprehends a similar status with regard to 8659
crèches  being run by them.  The Committee would like to point out that with the enhanced financial norms and levying of user
charges, financial management should be as per the prescribed norms. The Committee wonders about the factors behind non-
settlement of accounts by an experienced body like CSWB having a country-wide network of State Boards for running the
crèches.
 
Action Taken
 
The  accounts of all State Boards have been settled up to the year 2005-06 except for Andhra Pradesh State Board for
which the accounts could be settled up to 1995-96 only due to certain  problems in the State Board for which every efforts are
being made to settle the accounts as soon as possible.  The accounts of all aided voluntary organizations under crèche scheme
have been settled up to 2005-06. Funds are released after obtaining utilization certificate from the implementing agencies.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 5.7
         The Committee notes that the monitoring of crèches which is a continuing process has been assigned to
States/Women study centres of the Universities and State Women Development Corporations during the current financial
year.  So far, feedback has been received from monitoring         agencies in respect of 276 crèches being run in the States of
Delhi, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Orissa, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee
may be apprised about the feed back on the implementation of the scheme.
 
Action Taken
 
Feed-back on the implementation of the scheme received from independent monitoring agencies indicates normal
running of the creches excepting a few discrepancies like running of the creches for less duration, shortage of accommodation,
etc. A number of crèche workers are untrained. It has also been pointed out by the monitoring agencies that the organizations
have not been able to collect user charges as some of the parents are too poor to pay user charges.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 5.9   The component of the crèche workers training has been added to the scheme to
 orient the crèche workers for providing better services and building child friendly environment in the crèche centres.  A 10
days training module for 30 crèche workers training has been finalized in consultation with the National Institute of Public
Cooperation and Child Development, New Delhi. The Committee recommends that this training may be given to all the crèche
workers in a phased manner.  The Committee hopes that this training programme will help in achieving the target.  The
Committee may also be apprised of the targets and achievements made so far.
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Action Taken
 
For crèche workers training during 2006-07, grant-in-aid of Rs 200 lakh was released to the programme implementing
organizations to train approx. 10,000 crèche workers. Necessary funds to train remaining crèche workers in phased manner
would be released to the programme implementing organizations.
 
 
VII.     INTEGRATED SCHEME FOR STREET CHILDREN
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 7.4           The Committee notes that against utilization of Rs. 10.59 crores and Rs. 9.43 crores in 2005-06 and 2006-2007,
number of NGOs assisted is 192 and 79 (up to 22.2.07) respectively and the North East States share is nil. Overall figures
indicate that there are no fixed norms under the scheme. The Committee has been given to understand that depending upon the
type of activity and the nature of service, an appropriate amount not exceeding Rs. 15 lakh per annum can be sanctioned as
recurring cost for each project.   As a result the  Committee observes that there were very wide variations between the
expenditure incurred and the number of beneficiaries among various states during  2006-2007.  The details are given below: -
 
Name of the State/Union Territory Expenditure incurred (Amount in
Lakh)
No. of beneficiaries
Andhra Pradesh 35.24 2450
Assam 12 800
Karnataka 34.06 2300
Maharashtra 508.86 600
Rajasthan 11.34 800
Tamil Nadu 43.94 3538
Chandigarh 4.46 300
 
Plan allocation of Rs. 9.00 crore has been made under the Scheme for the year 2007-08.
 
Action Taken
 
The wide variations between the expenditure incurred and the number of beneficiaries among various states during
2006-07 were  due to the following  reasons:
  
(a)        The Childline India Foundation, Mumbai[Maharashtra] was block grants of  Rs.501.17 lakh during 2006-07  for
meeting its administrative expenditure of CIF’s offices  and disbursement to the Childline partner organizations for running
projects in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar
Island, Chandigarh and Delhi. The  Childline beneficiaries were not quantifiable and was not shown against the expenditure.
 
(b)
               In case of Tamil Nadu an amount of Rs.16.10 lakh was released  to the Indian Council for Child Welfare,
Chennai[Tamil Nadu]  for providing Counseling Service to the children in tsunami affected districts of Nagapattinam,
Cuddalore and Kaniyakumari. 1750 children were provided  counseling through this project and there was  substantive
increase in the number of beneficiaries with respect to expenditure.
(c)
                In other cases the grants were released on the basis of the budgetary  requirements for the type of activities  and
services  provided  by the NGOs.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 7.5           The Committee was informed that in 2006-2007, no expansion/ new project was possible under this scheme
pending all India evaluation as the stipulation imposed by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. The
Committee recommends that the evaluation should be completed at the earliest and the Committee may be apprised of the
outcome of the evaluation.
 
Action Taken
 
The National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development recently completed its study on “Evaluation of
the Scheme – An Integrated Programme for Street Children”. The study has been completed within a period of six months and

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
submitted its report to the Ministry Brief of the out come of the evaluation is placed at Annexure–X.
 
            A copy of the report was sent to the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance to consider lifting the ban
imposed  on expansion of this scheme. In reply, the Department of Expenditure has  communicated that since the Ministry of
Women and Child Development is formulating a new scheme –‘Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS)’ by incorporating
the elements of the schemes i,e, An Integrated Programme for Street Children, Scheme for Assistance to Homes (Shishu
Greh), CARA and Childline, etc. there is no justification for the expansion of scope of the existing scheme which are  under
consideration.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 7.6           Child Line service having a 24 hour toll free telephone service available to all children in distress is also a
component of the Integrated Scheme for Street Children. This Service is coordinated, monitored and expanded by Childline
India Foundation.  The Committee, while appreciating the objective behind this service would  like to point out that only 73
lines in different cities cannot be considered adequate for such a vast country like ours.  There is a need for having such a
facility in every town/ city of the country.  The Committee also strongly feels that due publicity needs to be given to such a
service so that its services are made accessible to all needy children.
 
Action Taken
 
            Since D/o Expenditure, M/o Finance did not agree to the expansion of scope of the existing scheme i.e. An Integrated
Programme for Street Children, it would not be possible to  expand   Childline service to every district/town across the country
under the existing scheme. It would be possible  only after the introduction of the new scheme -  Integrated Child Protection
Scheme (ICPS).
 
            However, this Ministry have requested  to the M/o Railways, D/o Post, M/o Labour, D/o Elementary Education, M/o
Information & Broadcasting to give wide publicity of Childline service. Apart from this, all State Governments/Union
Territory Administrations in which Childline service is presently operational has also been  requested to give wide publicity of 
Childline service by using banners etc. in important places like of schools colleges, bus stands, railway stations and industrial
units etc.
 
VIII.    SCHEME FOR WELFARE OF WORKING CHILDREN AND CHILDREN IN NEED OF CARE AND
PROTECTION
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 8.4            The scheme formulated on the direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India has been implemented from
January, 2005.  For the year 2005-2006, it is stated that, as a new scheme, sufficient number of complete proposals were not
received from the NGOs and hence, expenditure was low as compared to budget allocation. As per the details provided to the
Committee about the fund allocation during 2006-07 and number of beneficiaries, it seems that there are no fixed norms NGO-
wise and programme  component-wise as Rs.2.52 crore were released to 13 States benefiting 4,400 children.  The Committee
is of the opinion that there should be reasonable and prescribed  criteria for allocation of funds to NGOs.
 
Action Taken 
 
            The grant-in-aids, under the ‘Scheme for Welfare of Working Children in Need of Care and Protection’, are released to
all the Non Governmental Organizations (NGOs) after following the norms of the scheme. The scheme specifies fixed norms/
amount to be provided for each items under this scheme and total number of beneficiaries in each centre is fixed ie, 100
children.
 
A Project Screening Committee(PSC) under the Chairpersonship of Secretary(WCD) has been constituted for
scrutinizing and recommending the suitable projects proposals for financial assistance under this scheme. The Secretary-in-
chare of the concerned Department of the State Government, Financial Adviser(WCD) are the Members and Joint
Secretary(Child Welfare) is the Member-Secretary of the Committee.
 
The concerned State Governments recommended proposals are initially examined  in details keeping in view the norms
of the scheme and only suitable proposals  are placed before the Committee for consideration and  recommendation.
 
The Committee examines all proposals in details  keeping in view  the norms of the scheme, uniform, regional and

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
inter-state balance. Priority is given to cover uncovered districts under this scheme.
 
IX.       PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF JUVENILE MALADJUSTMENT
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para  9.3          The Committee was informed that state-wise allocation under the scheme is not done as the disbursals are made
on the basis of complete proposals received from the State Governments/ UT Administrations subject to State Matching
Shares  available in their State Budget. The Utilization Certificates are sought from the State Governments/UT
Administrations for the previous grant-in-aid released in earlier years.  Unspent balance is adjusted in the grant-in-aid due for
the current year.  The status of unspent balances is as follows:
                                    (Rs. in crores)
State Grant-in aid released during
2005-2006
Unspent balance with the States/UTs as on
31.3.2006
Assam 24.11
 
12.00
Gujarat 133.98 101.98
Haryana 41.55 22.86
 
The amount of unspent balance lying with the above mentioned states is a matter of concern to the Committee. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that corrective steps should be initiated for timely  and judicious  utilisation of all allocated
funds.
 
Action Taken
 
Assam:-The grant-in-aid of Rs.24,10,750/- was released for the financial year 2005-06 to the Government of Assam in
December, 2005 and this grant could  not  utilized  by the State Government  within remaining 3 months period of  2005-06.
Late receipt of proposal from the State Government  was the cause of unspent balance. The said unspent balance was adjusted
while releasing grants to the Government of Assam for 2006-07.
           
Gujarat:- The grant-in-aid for the  financial year 2005-06 was released  to the  State Government of Gujarat, in two phases –
(i) In 1
st phase - Rs.70,00,000/-  and (ii) in 2 nd phase Rs.63,97,810/-. Due to late receipt of proposal from the State
Government, grants in 2 nd phase was released at the end of the financial year. This might be the cause of unspent balance at
the end of the financial year 2005-06. However, the State Government of Gujarat was given permission during last financial
year 2006-07  to utilize the unspent balance for the same purpose.
 
Haryana:- The State Government of Haryana was released grants of Rs.35,13,681/- [Rs.8,00,000/- during 2004-05 &
Rs.27,13,681/- during 2005-06] for construction of  Juvenile Observation Home at Madhuban in Karnal district with capacity
of 200 inmates. Consequent upon release of this grants, Arpana Trust, an NGO from Karnal  represented against the
construction of the home because  location of the proposed home was nearby a Ashram Complex. A court case against the
construction of this home was also pending in the High Court of  Haryana and Punjab. As per the direction of the Hon’ble
High Court, the Government of Haryana dropped the proposal  and decided to construct 4 new homes at Faridabad, Karnal
Ambala and Hisar. Thereafter, permission was given during 2005-06  to the Government of Haryana to utilize Rs.12,76,500/-
for construction of observation homes each at Faridabad and Karnal out of Rs.35,13,681/- available with the State
Government. During last financial year 2006-07, permission was also given to utilize Rs.3,61,000/- to complete construction
work of observation home at Faridabad and Rs.70,500/- to complete construction work of observation home at Karnal.
 
The balance of Rs.18,05,681/- is available with the State Government for construction of 2 homes at Ambala and Hisar.
Proposal is awaited from the State Government.  As soon as it is received, permission will be given for construction of two
homes out of this grants.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 9.4           The Committee was informed that the recent amendment to the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2000 has brought in a new provision as per which the Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate shall review the pendency of cases of the Juvenile Justice Board at every six months and shall direct the Board to
increase the frequency of its sittings or may cause the constitution of additional Boards. The Committee hopes that necessity
for more sittings should be conveyed to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate so that the cases are
cleared early.  The Committee may be apprised about the number of cases pending in Juvenile Justice Board alongwith their

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
period of pendency.
 
 
 
 
Action Taken
 
            As per Section 4 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, the State Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitutes for a district or a group of districts specified in the notification, one or more
Juvenile Justice Boards for exercising the powers and discharging the duties conferred or imposed on such Boards in relation
to juveniles in conflict with law under this Act. A Board shall consist of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class, as the case may be designated as Principal Magistrate and two social workers as Members of the Board.  The
Principal Magistrate and Members of the Board are appointed by the State Governments.
           
            As per Section 14(2) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2006, the Chief
Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall review the pendency of cases of the Board at every six months,
and shall direct the Board to increase the frequency of its sittings or may cause the constitution of additional Boards.
  
All the State Governments/ UT Administrations have been requesting from time to time take appropriate actions for
proper implementation of the provisions of the Act in true spirit.
    
            The information regarding number of cases pending in Juvenile Justice Board alongwith their period of pendency are
not maintained by the Ministry. However, Ministry is in the process for setting up of detailed database on juvenile system in
the country, information regarding number of cases pending in JJB alongwith their period of pendency is part of that exercise.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 9.5           The Committee notes that no State has so far constituted State Commission as per the records available in the
Ministry.  The Ministry has been writing to the States for setting up of State Commissions. The Committee is concerned with
the reply of the Ministry. It seems no state is ready to hear the plights of children and the child related issues are not getting
required attention of the State Governments. The Committee therefore recommends that time bound action plan should be
made and states should be directed to adhere to the plan.
 
Action Taken
 
Only Goa has so far set up  State Commission for Children.  The Ministry of Women &  Child Development has been
writing to the Sate and Union Territories from time to time to constitute the State Commission in their respective States/UTs. 
Most of the States are in the process of constituting the State Commissions and the others are considering the proposal in
consultation with other Departments within the State Governments.  These State Governments include Punjab, Haryana,
Daman & Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Jammu and Kashmir, Delhi, UP, MP, Bihar, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Rajasthan  and 
Orissa.  The Ministry will continue to impress upon the States to set up the State Commissions.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 9.7           The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that Juvenile Justice Boards and Welfare
Committees are set up in all States. The Committee notes that the number of Homes assisted under the Programme for Juvenile
Justice indicate that States like Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Manipur, Uttaranchal
and UTs like Pondicherry, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagara Haveli, Daman and Diu and
Lakshwadweep do not have even a single such home. Besides that, details furnished indicate that maximum number of such
homes are in the State of Maharashtra. The Committee would like the Ministry to go deep into the reasons for lack of interest
shown by some of the States and concentration of a very large number of homes in a few States.
 
Action Taken
 
As per Section 4(1) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2006, the State
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for every  district specified in the notification, one or more
Juvenile Justice Boards for exercising the powers and discharging the duties conferred or imposed on such Boards in relation
to juveniles in conflict with law under this Act, within a period of one year from the date of commencement of the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2006.         

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
After Notification of the Amendment Act, 2006 in the Gazette, all the State Governments/ UT Administrations have
been requested to take necessary action for proper implementation of the provisions of the Act on top priority basis.
 
Ministry is implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme –“A Programme for Juvenile Justice” under which grant-in-
aids are released to the State Governments/UT Administrations to meet 50 per cent expenditure requirements for
establishment, upgradation  of homes under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 and maintenance
grants of the  children staying in these homes. 
 
As per the norms of the scheme, State Governments/ UT Administrations are required to meet remaining 50 per cent
expenditure from their State Budget. Some of the State Governments like Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, etc. expressed their
inability to make arrangements of necessary budget provisions in their State Budget to meet remaining 50 per cent expenditure
under the scheme.
 
The UTs like Lakshdweep and Dadra & Nagar Haveli have intimated the Ministry that they do not have problem of
juveniles and there is no home in these UTs under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000. If any case
comes to notice, he/she is kept in Working Women Hostel, Khavaratti (Lakshdweep) and by Dadra & Nagar Haveli in
Navisari and Surat districts in Gujarat.
 
The UT of Chandigarh Administration also informed  the Ministry that they did not require central assistance for
running the existing homes in the UT . They are meeting the expenditure from their  State Budget.
 
The State Governments of Uttaranchal  and Pondicherry were release grants of Rs.35,34,686/- and Rs.31,88,560/-
respectively  under the scheme during the financial year 2006-07.
           
The proposals as received under the scheme  from the State Governments of  Himachal Pradesh and Jharkhand  were
not complete. Both the  State Governments were requested  to furnish requisite information to consider the proposals. No reply
has been received so far from the State Governments. As soon as it is received, grants will be released to these State
Governments.
 
Ministry have been requesting all the State Governments/ UT Administrations  from time to time to submit proposals
under the scheme for release of central share of grants to the State Governments/ UT Administrations but no response has been
received so far from  the State Governments/ UTs like Jammu & Kashmir, Andaman & Nicobar, Daman & Diu, etc.
 
As per Section 8(1) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, any State Government may
establish and maintain either by itself or under an agreement with voluntary organisations, observation homes in every district
or a group of districts, as may be required for the temporary reception of  any juvenile in conflict with law during the pendency
of any inquiry regarding them under this Act.
 
As per Section 34(1) of the Act, the State Government may establish and maintain either by itself or in association with
the voluntary organisations, children’s home, in every district or group of districts, as the case may be, for the reception of
child in need of care and protection during the pendency of any inquiry and subsequently for their care, treatment, education,
training, development and rehabilitation.
           
There is no restriction on the number of homes to be set up by the State Government for the juveniles under the Act. It
is subject to conditions that (i) homes has been set up/notified by the State Governments in the Official Gazette; and (ii) the
State Government has made necessary budget provision in the State Budget to meet 50 per cent expenditure of these homes.
           
In the last financial year 2006-07, the Government of Maharashtra submitted proposals to the Ministry seeking
financial assistance for 273 homes covering 15,520 beneficiaries. The State Government had made budgetary provision of
Rs.914.26 lakhs in their State Budget to meet  remaining 50 per cent expenditure of these homes under the scheme. The
Ministry examined the proposal keeping in view the norms of the scheme and released Rs.5,97,32,735/- for the financial year
2006-07.
 
 
 
X.        CENTRAL ADOPTION RESOURCE AGENCY (CARA)
 
Recommendations/Observations

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
Para 10.3         The Committee notes that in the year 2005, 3151 children were adopted. However, keeping in view large
number of children waiting for adoption, the Committee feels that the scheme should be revisited for simplifying procedures. 
There is also need for obtaining feedback from the parents to know their difficulties during adoption after adoption.   The
Committee may also be apprised about the procedure adopted by CARA to monitor the life of the adopted children for a few
years after adoption.
 
Action Taken
 
Efforts are being made to have more adoptable children in the adoption loop. A Committee has been constituted by
CARA to further revise existing Guidelines to make it simpler. As far as feedbacks from parents are concerned, Indian
Federation of  Adoptive Families Associations, Mumbai has been given membership in CARA’s Management Committee.
CARA also replies large number of queries received on day to day basis from prospective adoptive parents.
           
As per Para 6.6 of the Guidelines for Adoption from India-2006, the EFAA/ 
Central Authority with reference to every child, shall send, follow up reports with photographs of the child on a six monthly
basis for a period of 2 years or until such time as the legal adoption is completed and citizenship is acquired in the receiving
country to CARA, the court that awarded the guardianship in India, the RIPA and the concerned Indian Diplomatic Mission.
CARA receives regular progress reports about the children placed in inter-country adoption from its enlisted foreign agencies
and central authorities.
 
XII.        OTHER SCHEMES (CHILD WELFARE)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 12.3         As per the information made available to the Committee, there was a provision of Rs. 2.25 crore for this
Scheme during 2006-07, against which expenditure reported upto 15
th March, 2007 is only Rs. 54.26 lakhs. The Committee
would like to have full details about proposed interventions under this scheme during 2007-08 for which enhanced allocation
has been made to CSWB for 2007-08.  The Committee would also like to understand the work done by CSWB under the
Innovative Scheme during the Tenth Plan.  The Committee also strongly feels that with a number of Child Protection Schemes
transferred from the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to the Ministry and the proposed launching of a new
composite scheme by the Ministry, viability of Innovative Scheme as a separate scheme also needs to be looked into.  The
Committee accordingly, recommends that necessary measures may be initiated by the Ministry.
 
 
Action Taken
 
Under the Innovative Programme, the Central Social Welfare Board proposes to take initiatives in the following areas
during 2007-08
                         
·        The Board is contemplating to launch a new residential scheme to provide institutional care to senior citizens and
destitute children under one roof to supplement each other’s social, psychological and emotional needs.
 
·        There have been increasing incidents of NRIs visiting various parts of the country only to fetch brides who are
generally being used as maidservants or in flesh trade in other countries. A strong need is felt to assess the magnitude
of the problem and to launch special programmes to provide succour to such victims.
 
·
        Media has reported several instances of farmers/families committing suicide in various regions of the country due to
heavy debts. Special package is being proposed to provide support and rehabilitation to such families.
 
·        Board is contemplating special package of programmes for traditional artisans and weavers located in certain pockets
of the country that are facing acute competition in the market. Promotion and protection of arts and crafts as cultural
heritage of the country will be an integral part of this special scheme.
 
·
        Special empowerment camps will be conducted for adolescent girls in the age group of 12-16 years with component of
training in leadership self-defense, skill development and capacity building.
 
Achievements of 10th plan under the Innovative Scheme are as follows:-

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
Year Physical Financial (Rs.)
2002-03 13 19,09,698
2003-04 21 30,08,503
2004-05 20 42,80,570
2005-06 27 41,14,252
2006-07 31 57,08,440
 
During 2006-07, an expenditure of Rs. 57,08,440/- has been made to voluntary organizations and the following type of
activities were undertaking during the year:
 
Statewise details of the number of programmes under the Innovative Scheme
 
 
 
 
 
Name of the State No. of programmes Details of programmes
Andhra Pradesh 6 Medical Health Camp and relief material to
rehabilitate the flood affected victims
Arunachal Pradesh 1 Child Guidance Centre including clinical treatment
to mentally and physically challenged children.
Bihar 2 ·
        Rehabilitation of deprived community
(Scavanger Women)
·        Swa-shakti Kendra
Chandigarh 3 ·        Centre for the adolescent girls for imparting 
them life skills to make them self-reliant
·        Recreation training and rehabilitation disabled
women.
·        Enhancing the development of self-help skills
and language development of the delayed,
deprived and mentally retarded children
Delhi 3 ·
        Crime home children project
·        Workshop on children theatre
·        Toys/books/clothes/banks for children
Karnataka 1 ·        Development of women prisoners of Central
Prison
Maharashtra 10 ·        Supply of relief material to flood affected
victims
·        Display of banners and holding of rallies for
disaster management in Mumbai
·        FCC/Creche/VT for children and women rag
pickers
·        Education to adolescent girls
·        AGP camp for adolescent and mentally
retarded children
Madhya Pradesh 2 ·        Supply of relief material to the flood affected
victims
·        Vocational/craft training to prostitutes and
skill/craft training to their children
Uttar Pradesh 2 ·        Child Development Centre for children of
prostitutes at Allahabad.
·        Child Development Centre for children of
prostitutes at Varanasi
West Bengal 2 ·        Education and vocational training to minor

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
adolescent girls of prostitutes.
·        Mainstream/rehabilitation of leprosy sufferers
children
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 12.4         The Committee hopes that with the proposed provision of Rs. 10.00 crores for the National Commission for
Protection of Child Rights in 2007-08, the Commission would finally start working. The Committee has also been observing
that only a token provision was being made for ‘Information Technology’ during the Tenth Plan. Position remains unchanged
during 2007-08 also. The Committee would like to understand the reasons therefore.
 
Action Taken
 
The Government has constituted the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights which has started functioning
w.e.f. 5th March, 2007.  The Commission has also appointed necessary staff for its smooth functioning and has started
incurring expenditure from the budget provision earmarked for the Commission.
 
XIII.    CONDENSED COURSES FOR WOMEN EDUCATION
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 13.4         The Committee notes that number of beneficiaries  has been increased from 10,100 in 2003-04 to 14,625 in
2004-05  to 17,500 in 2005-06 and 5550 upto 31.12.2006.  The Committee was given to understand that the programme has
gained immense popularity due to its flexible approach and combination of formal and non-formal structure. However, during
the 2006-07 year, in the absence of any demand, no sanction for Residential Courses has been issued and only non-residential
courses could be conducted. The Committee desires that more publicity may be given to the residential courses so that more
NGOs are coming forward to run the scheme.
 
Action Taken 
 
Directions/Guideline's have been issued to all the State Boards to encourage NGOs for
 residential Courses and this is being followed up through meetings.
 
 
 
 
 
XIV.    SCHEMES TRANSFERRED TO STATES           
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
SWAWLAMBAN
Para 14.6   Swawlamban Scheme has been transferred to States w.e.f. 1 st  April, 2006. The Committee is, however, surprised
to note that as on 28.02.07, as many as 1711 Utilisation Certificates were pending.  Besides that, 78 proposals from Women
Development Corporations for release of 2 nd Installment were received during 2006-07 and funds were released  accordingly.
The Committee hopes that with the beginning  of Eleventh Plan, there may be no committed liability pending with the
Ministry and the scheme of Swawlamban has been finally transferred to States in all respects.
 
Action Taken
 
The proposals for past liabilities which were received during 2006-07 and were found in order were settled.  
Swawlamban Scheme has been finally closed w.e.f. 1.4.2007 and no budget provision for meeting past liabilities has been
made during 2007-08.. Regarding utilization certificates, concerted efforts are being made to settle the pending UCs.
 
XVI.    SUPPORT TO TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMME FOR WOMEN (STEP)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Para 16.2         The plan allocation of Rs. 16.00 crore for 2006-07 has been increased to Rs. 20.00 crore in 2007-08.  The
Committee was informed that Projects sanctioned under the scheme are of the duration of 2-4 years. The funds to the
implementing agencies are released in instalments during the year. The subsequent instalments of funds in respect of projects
sanctioned during previous years as well as during the current financial year are likely to be released during the next financial
year. The increased allocation for BE 2007-08 will be utilized for release of funds towards subsequent instalment of funds in
respect of ongoing projects and also for the new projects likely to be sanctioned during the year 2007-08 to benefit more
beneficiaries (targeted) than that of the current financial year. The Committee, however, is concerned whether the increased
allocation would be utilised in 2007-08 in view of an expenditure of Rs. 10.89 crore as on 16.03.07 against an allocation of Rs.
16.00 crore reported in 2006-07. During the entire Tenth Plan Period, against an approved outlay of Rs. 150.00 crore, only Rs.
81.34 crore could be utilized with 2, 16,000 beneficiaries  reported against the target of 2.50 lakhs. The Ministry will have to
make concerted efforts to optimally and judiciously utilise the allocation.
 
Action Taken
 
The figure of actual expenditure and number of beneficiaries indicated for the year 2006-07 in the para is up to
16.03.07.  However, the actual expenditure incurred during the year 2006-07 (upto 31 March, 2007) is Rs. 15,976 crore which
is 99.85 %   of the budget allocation for the year i.e. Rs. 16.00 crore.  For the remaining amount also , sanction was issued but
the evaluating agency did not furnish the necessary PSR and bonds and therefore the amount  (only 0.15%  of the budget
allocation) could not be released. The figures taken into account in the para for the last year of 10
th Plan i.e. from 2002-07 is
upto 16.03.2007.  However, during the entire 10th Plan  period  (upto 31st March, 2007) the amount utilized is Rs. 85.87 crore
and the number of beneficiaries is 2,31,133.
 
Earnest efforts will be made to optimally and judiciously utilize the allocation for 2007-08 as desired by the
Committee.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 16.4         The Committee notes that the target in 2006-07 could not be achieved. However, the target and allocation is
increased considerably in the current year.  The Committee desires that effective steps should be taken to complete the
formalities in the first quarter itself for fully utilising the allocation.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should
approach and encourage those implementing agencies in the States where there is enough potential.
 
Action Taken
 
As mentioned in the reply to the above para no. 16.2 the  utilization of funds during the year 2006-07 (upto 31
st March,
2007) was 99.85%  of the budget allocation.  During the year 2007-08 the increase allocation will be utilize towards the
increase number of intended beneficiaries i.e. 40,000.
 
As desired by the Committee, steps have already been taken in the 1
st quarter of the financial year.  In the month of
June, 2007 the Project Sanctioning Committee meeting was convened to consider new STEP projects and the approved
projects have been sent to Finance Division for concurrence of release of funds.  The implementing agencies are also been
reminded to submit required documents in respect of ongoing projects for release of subsequent installment of funds.
 
All these will facilitate to optimally utilize the budget allocation for the year 2007-08 and achieve the envisaged
objectives of the Scheme.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 16.5         The Committee also notes that in 2005-06 only 16 states benefited and in 2006-07 it came down to 15. In 2006-
07, Rs. 3.996 lakhs and Rs. 2.25 lakhs were released to Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal respectively but details of
beneficiaries are not available. The Committee desires that more publicity should be given regarding the benefits of this
scheme. The scheme, if required, may be modified to suit the needs of various states and local areas.
 
 
 
Action Taken
 
Evaluation of the STEP Scheme has been done by an independent agency  namely Institute of Social Studies Trust

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
(ISST), New Delhi.  The evaluation agency has submitted its final Evaluation Report, which is under examination by a Core
Group constituted in this Ministry for the purpose.  The Scheme will be revised/modified to suit the needs of various States
and local areas as per recommendations of the Core Group.                                                                                 
                                                                         
 
XVII.               CENTRAL SOCIAL WELFARE BOARD (CSWB)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
17.5     The Committee views with serious concern the status of unspent balances available under different schemes.  This is all
the more worrisome due to the fact that Central Social Welfare Board is the nodal agency established more than 50 years ago
with State Boards spread across the country.  Even then, schemes under the Board are somehow not showing a satisfactory
performance.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a review of procedure of release of funds to implementing agencies
and utilization thereof may be taken up by CSWB.
 
Action Taken
 
The position of Scheme-wise unspent balances lying with CSWB as on 31.3.2007(Un-audited) is as under :-
                                                                                                            ( Rs. in Lakh)
            Name of the Programme
 
Unspent Balance as on 31.3.2007(Un-audited)
Condensed Courses    54.20
AGP 272.02
Rajiv Gandhi National Creche Scheme 2263.33
Swalamban (Norad) 318.66
Vatsalaya Mela (BAMM) -
National Creche Fund 1.99
CrecheWorking Trg 0.24
International Women Day 4.43
 
            Unspent Balance under Condensed Courses and National Creche Fund has been utilized .  Unspent Balance under AGP
and Rajiv Gandhi National Creche Scheme will be utilized in the current financial year i.e. 2007-08.
 
The CSWB has implemented the procedure of remittance through Electronic ClearingSystem/Core Banking system in
the CSWB from current financial year 2007-08.
 
 
 
 
XVIII.             RASHTRIYA MAHILA KOSH (RMK)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 18.2        The Committee notes that Rashtriya Mahila Kosh over the last 13 years has sanctioned Rs. 215 crores and
disbursed Rs. 165 crores through channelising agencies benefiting about 6 lakh women in 24 States of the country. RMK’s
credit disbursal during 2006-07 (as on 31.12.2006) is Rs. 1101.60 lakh. It has been maintaining a very good recovery rate of
more than 90% due to its prudent recovery management.  It has also been reported that representations are being received
regularly by Rashtriya Mahila Kosh from its default partners to waive interest, penal interest, principal and other costs as they
are not getting back loans from the SHG members because of genuine reasons. A Sub-Committee is presently examining the
issue of extending certain relaxations/ concessions in waiving interest/ penal interest/ principal etc.  The Committee hopes that
the study will be completed in a time bound manner.
 
Action Taken
 
            Reporting of achievement figures is correct. The Sub-Committee examining the issue of extending certain
relaxations/concessions in waiving interest/penel interest/principal etc. had three sitting on the issue. The finalization of its
recommendations is likely soon. Thereafter the same will be put up before the governing Board of RMK for its approval.
 
Recommendations/Observations

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
Para 18.4      The Committee may be apprised of the follow-up action initiated on the recommendations of the above study.
The Committee also notes that another study is to be conducted to assess the impact of credit scheme on women beneficiaries
during the last five years. The Committee hopes that this study would be completed at the earliest so that benefits under RMK
reach maximum beneficiaries.
 
Action Taken
 
            The study to assess the impact of RMK loans on women beneficiaries have been awarded to a reputed consultancy and
the report will be received by the end of Sep’07.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 18.5    The Committee in its earlier Report had pointed out that RMK charges interest @ 8% on reducing balance from
the borrowing agency which in turn charges any rate on or above 8% on reducing balance from the ultimate beneficiaries
subject to maximum upto 18%.  Reports have been received by the Committee that there are instances of implementing
agencies charging 24% as interest rate from the beneficiaries.  The Committee recommends that this issue need to be looked
into and check should be prevented from doing so and a cap should be put on the interest charged, under this scheme
 
 
Action Taken
 
The RMK has put an upper cap at 18% on reducing balance which the intermediaries/NGO’s can charge from the
women beneficiaries. The NGO/IMO has to give an undertaking on this count before sanctioning of loan and also during the
post-sanction study its duly verified that the NGO is not charging above that.
As far as RMK beneficiaries are concerned no one is being charge more than 18% on reducing balance terms.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 18.8.     The Committee notes the recommendation of the sub-committee in respect of North-eastern region which inter-
alia states that RMK should take immediate steps to promote some of potential NGOs of regions who will co-ordinate and
facilitate the credit linkage to grass root units (SHG/Federations/Co-operatives) with RMK.  As there are very few old
voluntary organizations working in these regions, RMK should promote new organizations by relaxing its lending operational
norms, interest rate, margin etc for quick implementation of its programme. The Committee desires that keeping in view of
special focus on NE region, RMK should immediately take steps to give impetus to NE region.  Besides this, capacity
building, training, skill development, skill up gradation etc are some of the key components of micro-credit programme which
need to be provided to SHG beneficiaries.
 
Action Taken
 
To give impetus to RMK’S operation in the North-East Region a package of special concessions has been given as
under:
 
·
        The organization having completed one year of its registration (Presently 3 years) can apply for the loan.
·        Margin on loans reduced from 10% to 5%.
·        The grace period on repayment of loan enhanced from 6 months to 12 months.
·        The repayment period of loan enhanced to five years invariably for all schemes.
·        The NGO will be supported with 10% of the loan sanctioned as capacity building assistance.
·        RMK will provide to and fro sleeper class rail-fare and where there is no rail link, cheapest class air-fare upto-
two members of the NGOs to come to Delhi for execution of documents.
 
The Social Welfare Department of the Nagaland State has been roped in as RMK’s Nodal Agency. Besides we have 3
more Nodal agencies catering exclusively to the NE Region for felicitating credit delivery, capacity building, training etc.
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Para 18.9   The Committee was informed that the functioning of RMK is concentrated in certain States of the country; almost
60 per cent of the loans are going to Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh.  The Committee also notes that the RMK is NGOs
driven scheme. The composition of the RMK itself is such that those who have knowledge of it continue to have knowledge of
it, monopolies the knowledge and in turn monopolies the funds which is not a sustainable concept.  The Committee notes that
RMK is aimed to empower the poor by providing credit women.   However, the poor woman has to approach the NGOs first to
get credit, as the entire RMK is NGO driven.  The poor women are not aware of the nitty-gritty’s of the scheme. Combination
of the individual based loans and through SHGs is the need of the hour. The Ministry should take care of these aspects.
 
Action Taken
 
          Since the Southern states like Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu are traditionally much ahead of other states as far as
NGO/SHG movement is concerned, there has been a greater flow of loans in these areas. However we are constantly
contemplating to narrow down this gap gradually.
 
Since RMK operates only through its corporate office at Delhi, it would be difficult for any individual poor women to
avail loan directly. She may not be able to even comply with the minimal loan delivery formalities that we have. RMK may be
termed as NGO driven scheme but it’s totally SHG centric. At all stages of credit disbursal be it pre sanction or post sanction
scrutiny, the experience, capacity and orientation of the applicant NGO  towards formation and capacity building of SHG’s is a
major factor taken into consideration.
 
            We have also established Nodal Agencies in almost all the states and these are facilitating the small NGOs for availing
RMK loans by persuation, publicity, training and awareness generation in their respective areas.
 
SWAYAMSIDDHA
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 19.2         Plan allocation of  Rs. 27.00 crore in RE 2006-07 has been doubled to  Rs. 45.81 crore in BE 2007-08. The
Committee was informed that  Rs.27.29 crore is for completion of unfinished tasks for Phase-I such as refresher training
programmes to SHG members, creation of community assets, cost involved in formation of clusters of SHGs and block level
federations of SHGs in States.  Rs.18.52 crores is for preparatory work for Phase-II which would include conducting surveys,
holding workshops and seminars with various agencies involved in formation of SHGs and women development, preparation
and approval of project proposal etc. The expenditure reported upto 16.03.07 was Rs. 23.58 crore.The Committee notes that
unspent balance of Rs. 15.34 crore are lying with States/UTs as on 31.12.2006. The Committee views this with serious
concern. The Committee is of the view that monitoring mechanism needs to be reviewed so that necessary  checks can be
made. The Ministry should also insist on utilisation certificates before releasing further funds.
 
Action Taken
 
Release of  grants under Swayamsidha to States being a continuous process, even fresh grants released to the states a
day before is also reflected as unspent balance with the States.  Grants are released to States only after the States report at least
80% expenditure.  In some cases grants are released to States after 100% fund utilized is reported.  In order to ensure proper
fund utilization, the expenditure position of States is reviewed in each quarter with the State Nodal Officers for 
Swayamsidha.  Therefore, it is felt that unspent balance with States under Swayamsidha is not alarming.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 19.3
    The target and achievement under the scheme for its various components is as follows:                                 
                                                                       
Coverage of Blocks Formation of SHGs NO. of SHG members Formation of clusters Formation of Block
Federations
Target Achie-
vement
Target Achie-
vement
Target Achie-
vement
Target Achie-
vement
Target Achie-
vement
650 650 65000 69156 1137500 1002302 6500 5069 650 554
 
 
The Committee notes that the formation of SHG is encouraging. Formation of clusters and  formation of block
federations is however, not upto the target. The Committee feels that it need to look into the reasons for less achievement and
make concerted efforts to attain the same.

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
Action Taken
 
Although there are a large number of agencies in the country both Govt. and private forming SHGs.  However, most of
these agencies do not go beyond formation of SHGs.  Very few agencies from Panchayat level clusters and block level
federations of SHGs.  The experience of such agencies is that it takes 7-8 years for the SHGs to reach clusters/federations
level.  The initial approved duration of Swayamsidha was 5 years which has been found insufficient to reach the
clusters/federations level. Therefore, extension of Scheme upto 31.3.2008 is being sought to achieve the targets for clusters
and federations envisaged under the scheme.
 
XX.      PREVENTION OF SEXUAL HARASSSMENT AT WORKPLACE
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 21. 4   To ensure Gender Budgeting in true sense, in 2006-07 the Ministry adopted a multi pronged strategy to effectively
wield gender budgeting as a tool for women’s empowerment. Initiatives ranged from advocacy, training and capacity building
to strengthening partnerships, supporting policy dialogues and strategy sessions. However, the Committee notes that more pro-
active action is required to be taken to effectively handle the concept of Gender Budgeting. Preparation of training manual
which is indispensable tool of the concept is under formulation by sub-committee. It seems it will take another 2-3 years to
finalise the things. The Committee recommends that immediate step should be taken to finalise the training manual in a time-
bound manner. The Ministry should evolve a monitoring mechanism to ensure that all the Government
Ministries/Departments/Undertakings are taking necessary action for resorting to Gender Budgeting.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 21. 5        It has come to the notice of the Committee that many expenditures being incurred by different
Ministries/Departments, which are not directly women specific were being shown in the Gender budgeting.  This, Committee
notes, results in inflated figures that does not reflect the actual allocation for women.  The Committee recommends that this
practice should be stopped immediately and the Gender budgeting should reflect only those expenditure/allocation that are cent
percent women specific.
 
Action Taken (Para 21.4 & 21.5)
 
            In the 11
th Five Year Plan, a proposal has been mooted for setting up of a Gender Budgeting Bureau within MWCD. 
An allocation of Rs. 2.5 crores has already been made for the Annual Year 2007-08.
 
 A GB Manual by M WCD in consultation with UNIFEM, IIPA is already in the final stages of drafting to undertake Gender
Budgeting activities in various Central Ministries.
 
 
CHAPTER-III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
II.
                BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 2.1     Plan allocation for the Ministry has been made at Rs.5793.00 crore in BE 2007-08 against the projected
requirement of Rs.9463.58 crore for Annual Plan 2007-08 which was going to have an adverse impact on sixteen schemes of
the Ministry.  Important among them are ICDS, Gender Budgeting, Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS), Rashtriya
Mahila Kosh, Swadhar, Comprehensive Scheme for Combating Trafficking of Women and Children; and Relief and
Rehabilitation of Rape victims.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that under all these schemes, funds have
remained more or  less under-utilised, if the performance during the last three years is taken into account. Underutilization is in
those areas where need is most.  There appear to be great laxity in implementation of these schemes.   The Committee strongly
feels that an assessment of schemes falling behind their targets should be carried out without any further  delay so as to make a
justifiable proposition before the Planning Commission. The Committee understands that this advice has already been given by
the Planning Commission.

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
Action Taken
 
The observation of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation regarding optimum utilization of funds which would
then substantiate the demand of the Ministry for additional funds.  The Committee believes that the implementation of sixteen
schemes of the Ministry should not suffer at any cost due to paucity of funds and also due to under-utilization of available
funds.  The Ministry has not given any information whether it has carried out an assessment of the schemes which are falling
behind their targets.  The Ministry should make a time-bound plan for carrying out the assessment of schemes.             Reasons
for under-utilization of funds should be ascertained and the procedural bottlenecks should be removed so as to pave the way
for timely implementation of schemes and optimum   and judicious utilization of funds and resources.  The Committee hopes
that the assurance given by the Ministry regarding compliance of the recommendations of the Committee given in its earlier
report is genuine as it has wide ramifications for more than half of the population of our country.
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para
 2.3           The year 2007-08 marks the beginning of Eleventh Plan period.  The Committee observes that overall
performance of the Ministry during the Tenth Plan can be considered satisfactory, keeping  in view utilization of Rs. 14656.25
crore against the approved outlay of Rs. 13,780.00 crore. However, separate assessment of women and children-related
schemes leads to a somewhat different position.  Whereas in the case of schemes relating to child development, both physical
and financial targets could be achieved, status of women related schemes having lesser allocation is very discouraging. The
Committee notes that under Central Schemes for women, utilization figures are less than half of the approved outlay.  Against
an outlay of Rs. 971.11 crore, expenditure reported is only Rs. 434.47 crores. Similarly, for central sponsored schemes for
women, only Rs. 130.48 crores could be utilized by the end of Tenth Plan against an allocation of Rs. 275.01 crore.  The
Committee is also constrained to observe that performance  of six schemes of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
transferred to the Ministry of Women and Child Development during the Tenth Plan was far from satisfactory. Against an
approved  outlay of Rs. 245.35 crore, only Rs. 166.70 crore could be spent.  The Committee would also like to point out the
under the children sector also, the only exceptions are the Flagship Scheme of ICDS and Creche Scheme.  In case of Training
Programme under ICDS, National Nutrition Mission, allocated funds remained under-utilised/ unutilized.
 
Action Taken
 
The observations of the Committee regarding the slow pace of expenditure during the Xth Plan have been noted by the
Ministry. Most of the women related schemes of the Ministry like Swadhar, STEP constructions of Working Women Hostels,
Short Stay Homes etc. are NGOs driven.  Due to non-receipt of viable proposals from the NGOs and constraints faced due to
procedural formalities, the allocation made could not be fully utilized.  However, in the XIth Plan all out efforts are being
made to improve the progress of expenditure.  Most of the schemes are being revamped to increase their scope and content and
streamline the procedures for release of grants.  The above holds for the year 2006-07 also, being the last year of the Xth Plan.
 
The observations of the committee have been noted.  As regards ICDS Training Programme under World Bank assisted
UDISHA project, during the period1998-99 to 2005-06 as against allocation of Rs. 383.00 crores, a total amount of Rs. 382.22
crores (99.80%) was released to the States and other organisations which reported an expenditure of Rs. 341.45 crores
(89.30%).
 
After, close of UDISHA Project, on 31.3.2006, ICDS Training has been continued with domestic funds during 2006-
07. During the year, as against a budget provision of Rs.87.02 crores, a total amount of Rs.65.56 crores (75.34 % of budget) 
was released to the States against which an expenditure of Rs.40.58 crores(62 %)  has been reported. A statement showing
funds released and expenditure incurred by the States  is at Annexure-I .   In addition, an amount of Rs.2.30 crores was also 
released to NIPCCD and FNB under this Ministry for organizing ICDS Training Programme,  making a total release of 
Rs.67.86   (78 % )of total budget), during 2006-07.
As regard  schemes of Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment transferred to this Ministry during the Xth Plan, the 
position is explained as under:
 
Under the scheme -  A Programme for Juvenile Justice, 50 per cent of the expenditure is borne by the State

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Governments/UTs.  Low expenditure under this scheme was due to non receipt of proposals from some of the State
Governments/UT Administrations.  Some of the States also did not have resources for meeting 50 per cent expenditure from
their State budget as per the norms of the scheme.
 
Under the schemes of Integrated Programme for Street Children and Assistance to Homes [ Shishu Greh] to Promote
In-country Adoptions, Ministry provides financial assistance to Non- Governmental Organisations [NGOS] as well as State
Governments Agencies/Institutions. During financial year 2005-06, Sanction  of new projects schemes was not allowed
pending  all India evaluation of these two schemes. Due to the fact, no expansion of schemes were possible during financial
year 2005-06 & 2006-07 and hence, expenditure was low as compared to budget allocation.
 
The Scheme for Welfare of Working Children in Need of Care and Protection was sanctioned in January 2005 in
pursuance of the direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court in a  Writ Petition. As a new scheme, sufficient number of complete
proposals were not received from the NGOs and hence, expenditure was low as compared to budget allocation.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            Non-receipt of viable proposals from the NGOs and constraints faced due to procedural formalities have been cited as
the main factors responsible for slow pace of expenditure under the women-related schemes during the Tenth Plan.  The
Committee has been given to understand that most of the schemes are proposed to be revamped so as to increase their scope
and content and streamline the procedure for release of grants during the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee hopes that with such
an objective for Eleventh Plan, targeted beneficiaries would get the maximum benefits envisaged under the different
components of various women-related schemes.
The Committee has been informed that under ICDS Training Programme, against a budget provision of Rs.87.02 crores
during 2006-07, an amount of Rs.65.56 crores (75.34% of budget) was released to the states against which an expenditure of
Rs.40.58 crores (62%) has been reported.  The Committee would like to point-out that all India figures seem to be quite
satisfactory.  However, state-wise details indicate a dismal scenario in respect of some states as indicated below.
                                                                                                (Rs. In lakhs)
State Allocation Funds released as on
31.3.07
Exp. Reported Unspent Balance
Bihar 934.43 626.00 59.23 566.77
Mizoram 14.44 14.44 1.72 12.72
Tamil Nadu 530.67 531.00 114.53 416.47
 
                 The Committee observes that in majority of the States, quantum of funds released is less than the approved
allocation and that too remained under-utilized.  The Committee is of the firm view that state specific interventions are
required to be made so as to remove regional imbalance being noticed under such a vital porogramme.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 2.4           Committee’s attention has also been drawn by the CAG observations contained in Report No. 1 of 2006,
according to which Test Check of appropriation accounts with reference to re-appropriation orders for 2004-05 revealed that
heavy re-appropriation of funds amounting to Rs. 462 crore were made between the different primary units of re-appropriation
defeating the original purpose/activity as authorized by Parliament.  The Committee apprehends that things may have
remained unchanged in the subsequent years of Tenth Plan also. The Committee thus would like to know the details of
reappropriation of funds made during the last three years and whether the approval of Ministry of Finance was given or not.
The Committee recommends that the emphasis should not be on the quantity of expenditure but on the quality of output that is
coming out of the Schemes/Programmes which is the ultimate objective of all the Schemes/programmes.  The Committee also
emphasizes that re-appropriation is a bad practice of financial management and the Ministry should try to utilize the funds for 
the purposes for which the funds are allocated.
 
Action Taken
  
During 2004-05 re-appropriation of funds amounting to Rs. 461.60 crore was made.  This included Rs. 240.00 crore
from the lump-sum provision for schemes for benefit of NER and Sikkim; Rs. 129.30 crore on account of ICDS and the
remaining amount of Rs. 92.30 crore was re-appropriated on account of 22 other schemes keeping in view the savings and

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
requirements of the schemes.
 
The re-appropriation of Rs 129.30 crore on account of ICDS was due to the fact that when the budget for 2004-05 was
finalized, World Bank assisted Projects were scheduled to close on 30.9.2004, but later, it was extended up to 31.03.06 and
funds had to be re-appropriated from ICDS-General to World Bank assisted Projects.
 
During 2005-06, a total of  Rs. 834.67 crore was re-appropriated. This included Rs. 387.53 from the lump-sum
provision for schemes for benefit of NER and Sikkim, Rs. 218.75 crore from one primary unit of appropriation to another
primary unit of appropriation under the same sub-Head of ICDS and Rs. 180.81 crore to the World Bank assisted ICDS
Projects, which were extended up to 31.03.06.  The remaining Rs. 47.58 crore was re-appropriated on account of 22 other
schemes keeping in view the savings and requirements of the schemes.
 
During 2006-07 a total of Rs. 626.46 crore was re-appropriated.  This is inclusive of Rs. 410.45 crore from the lump-
sum provision for schemes for benefit of NER and  Sikkim and Rs. 123.04 crore from ICDS to reimburse the expenditure
incurred by some States on account of World Bank assisted ICDS Projects.  The remaining amount of Rs. 92.97 crore was re-
appropriated on account of various other schemes keeping in view the savings and requirements of the schemes.
 
Re-appropriation of funds is done in accordance with the delegation of financial power rules and Ministry of Finance’s
instructions.  Wherever required, the approval of Ministry of Finance is taken. However, the suggestions of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee have been noted for compliance in future.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is constrained to note that inspite of CAG observations about re-appropriation of funds amounting to
Rs.462.00 crore during 2004-05, the trend continued during 2005-06 and 2006-07 also.  The Committee has been given to
understand that major reappropriation of funds had valid reasons.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that
Rs.92.30 crore was reappropriated on account of 22 schemes during 2004-05, followed by re-appropriation of Rs.47.58 crore
for 22 schemes during 2005-06 and Rs.92.97 crore during 2006-07 for these schemes only.  Such a scenario confirms the
apprehensions of the Committee that inherent problem areas continue to be there for a large number of schemes resulting in
earmarked funds not being utilized as envisaged.
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 2.8           Pendency of Utilisation Certificates under the various schemes handled by the Ministry continues to be an area
of concern for the Committee. The Committee was informed that a total of 6765 UCs have been pending as on date.  The year-
wise position is as under: -
Period No. of UCs pending
1986-87 to 2001-02 4697
2002 -03 to 2004-05 1089
2005-06 to 2006-07 979 (recent UCs)
Total: - 6765
           
The Committee is deeply disturbed by the status of outstanding Utilisation Certificates. As many as 4697 UCs
outstanding for the period 1986-87 to 2001-02 compels the Committee to conclude that role of the Ministry is perhaps
confined to only disbursement of funds. Year after year, Central Funds are being released to State Govts./ implementing
agencies.  Ministry’s efforts for pursuing the matter with the State Governments as well as the State nodal agencies for
submission of the pending UCs on priority basis seem to have made no impact.  The Committee is also not inclined to believe
the contention of the Ministry that  no further grant is released to any NGO/ implementing agency where UCs are pending.
This is borne out by the pertinent  observations made in the  Audit Report No.3 of 2006 (Para No. 1.4) that “the Certificates of
utilization of grants were required to be furnished by the Ministries/Departments concerned to the Controller General of
Accounts in respect of grants released to statutory bodies, non-government organizations etc. to ensure that grants had been
properly utilized for the purpose for which they were sanctioned. In the case of Ministry of Women and Child Development,
5934 Utilization certificates (UCs) involving an amount of Rs. 316.04 crore in respect of grants released up to March 2004,
which were due by 31st March 2005 are stated to be outstanding at the time of audit.
 
Audit has observed that the Ministries/Departments before releasing grants to statutory bodies and non-government
organizations did not satisfy themselves about utilization of grants in 85% cases involving 59% of the total grant released.”
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 2.9           The Committee wonders as to why inspite of guidelines being issued by the Ministry of Finance from time to
time and also Audit observations, pendency of  UCs has been allowed to continue since long.  pendency for more than two
decades clearly indicates that fiscal management has not been given its due importance so far.  The Committee would once
again emphasize that this issue  should be taken up with the highest authorities at the State level so that old cases are cleared
and also for identification of  the inherent drawbacks/hindrances--systematic, procedural and others.  The Committee may be
furnished details of implementing agencies (state-wise, scheme-wise) who are yet to submit UCs and the steps taken to
minimise the pending UCs.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 2.10   Committee has also been observing the availability of unspent balances with the implementing agencies under
different schemes. As a test case, the Committee would like to point out that under the two Centrally Sponsored Schemes,
ICDS and Swayamsiddha, there were unspent balances amounting to Rs. 61.00 crore and Rs. 13.70 crore available respectively
as on 01.04.06. By 31
st December, 2006, these figures reached to Rs. 156.91 crore and Rs. 15.34 crores under the two schemes
respectively.  State-wise analysis about availability of unspent balances raises doubt about adherence of the financial norm of
releasing of funds only after adjustment of unspent balance from the previous year.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 2.12         The Committee may be apprised about the details of those agencies and organizations who are in receipt of
funds from the Ministry even after the UCs are pending from those agencies and organizations and also non-adjustment of
unspent balance in any case. At the same time, the Committee would also like to point out that non-submission of Utilisation
Certificates  and availability of unspent balances with the implementing agencies for a long period only establishes the fact
that schemes are not being implemented as envisaged and targeted beneficiaries  continue to remain deprived of the benefits.
Ideal position for a scheme would be judicious and optimum utilization of allocated funds and achievement of physical targets.
Annual Action Plans  chalked out religiously every year need to be implemented in the real sense.  The Committee would,
therefore, recommend that both monitoring mechanism and financial management needs to be strengthened.
 
Action taken [ 2.8, 2.9, 2.10 and 2.12]
 
The issue of unspent balance with the grantee institutions has been taken up by the Ministry  seriously and the position
is constantly reviewed in the Ministry.
 
            As regards release of funds to the grantee institutions (State Governments, UTs/NGOs), relevant provisions, guidelines
contained in the GFRs and DFPRs and also the instructions dated 8
th August 2006 issued by the Department of Expenditure
are scrupulously followed in the Ministry.  It is invariably ensured by the Ministry that unspent balances available with the
States and implementing agencies are always taken into account before further releases are made.
           
The year-wise details and position of UCs pending as on 31.07.07 as per PAO (WCD) is as under :
 
           (i)        4679 for the period 1986-87 to 2001-02.
(ii)
                961 for the period 2002-03 to 2004-05.
(iii)               827 for the period 2005-06 to 2006-07.
 
The issue of pending UCs with the grantee institutions has been taken up by the Ministry seriously and the position is
constantly reviewed in the Ministry at the level of Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA) / Financial Adviser. It is ensured that
no fresh release is made to NGOs having pending UCs.  Grants are released in respect of those organizations whose UCs are
pending only when relaxations are obtained from Ministry of Finance on case to case basis and keeping in mind the smooth
continuation of the schemes. For instance, relaxation was obtained from Min of Finance in respect of Central Social Welfare
Board (CSWB). In the cases of Indian Council of Child Welfare (ICCW) and Bhartiya Adimjati Sewa Sangh (BAJSS) releases
were made under the Rajiv Gandhi National Creche Scheme only after adjusting the amount against UCs due with the
approval of Ministry of Finance. However, the concern and advice of Hon’ble Committee has been noted for compliance in
future.
As regard the unspent balance position in respect of ICDS and Swayamsidha, the position is given below :
As on         ICDS     Swayamsidha
 
01.04.06     61.00 cr       13.70 cr

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
31.12.06    156.91 cr      15.32 cr
01.04.07        (-) 26.05 cr*  18.86 cr
 
* Information in respect of four States (Bihar, Goa, Kerala & Uttaranchal) have not yet been received.
                
From the above, it is seen that though the unspent balance under ICDS increased from Rs 61 crore on 31.03.06 to Rs
156.91 crore by the end of December 2006, by the end of March 2007 there is a negative balance. It may be noted here that in
the major schemes like ICDS where large release of funds is involved some amount of unspent balance is inevitable. For
instance the total release under ICDS in 2006-07 was to the tune of Rs. 2691.38 crore.  However, it is invariably ensured by
the Ministry that unspent balances available with States and implementing agencies are always taken into account before
further releases are made.
 
Under Swayamsidha also, the funds are released to State Governments on continuous basis only after they have
reported at least 80% expenditure of the grant released to them.   In order to ensure proper fund utilization, the expenditure
position of States is reviewed in each quarter with the State Nodal Officers for Swayamsidha. It is felt that that unspent balance
with States is the amount they require to run the programme.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is constrained to observe that there is only marginal improvement in the pendency of Utilization
Certificates as per the updated information submitted to it by the Ministry.  Against 6765 UCs reported last, total number of
pending UCs as on 31
st July, 2007 is 6467.  What is more worrisome is that against the maximum number of 4697 outstanding
UCs pertaining to the earliest period (1986-87 to 2001-02), latest figures are 4679.  The Committee is compelled to conclude
that serious efforts and constant review claimed to have been made by the Ministry have failed to make any impact on the UCs
outstanding for last two decades.  The Committee also apprehends that records for this period may not be available with the
Ministry.  Had they been available, Committee’s direction for furnishing details of implementing agencies (State-wise,
Scheme-wise) which were yet to submit UCs would not have remained unattended.  The Committee would appreciate if this
information is furnished by the Ministry without any further delay. 
 
Committee had made specific observation on the availability of unspent balance under two major schemes .i.e ICDS
and Swayamsiddha.  The Committee finds that under ICDS, position has improved considerably by showing negative balance
by the end of March, 2007.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that in the absence of details from four States -
Bihar, Goa, Kerala and Uttranchal, this improvement level cannot be considered totally correct.  The Committee is also not
inclined to agree with justification given by the increasing unspent balcnce from Rs. 13.70 crore as on 1
st  April, 2006 to Rs.
18.86 crore as on 1 st April 2007 under Swayam Siddha Scheme.  To say that unspent balance with States is the amount
required for running the scheme defeats the very basis of implementation of a scheme with targets fixed and funds allocated
for every quarter and reviewed by the Department with State Nodal officers.
 
The Committee has been given to understand that grants are released in respect of those organizations whose UCs are
pending only when relaxations are obtained from the Ministry of Finance on case-to-case basis, keeping in mind the smooth
functioning of the schemes.  The Committee finds it hard to believe that the Ministry of Finance would have given relaxation
in a routine manner keeping in view such a large number of UCs remaining outstanding for yeas together.
 
            The Committee reiterates the need for evolving an effective monitoring mechanism for the clearing of pending UCs. 
Also, the Committee recommends the Ministry to guide the States Govts/statutory bodies/NGOs in clearing the pending UCs
and also to adopt a concept of fiscal responsibility for better fiscal management.  Hence, the Committee urges the Ministry to
make concerted efforts for solving this pressing problem of pendency of UCs. 
 
 III       INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES (ICDS) SCHEME
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
  Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.6           The Committee has been given to understand that it takes almost a year to make an AWC operational. The
Committee, however, observes that State-wise details reveal a different picture in respect of some States as indicated below –
 
State AWCs sanctioned upto 31.03.05 Operational as on 30.09.06
Bihar 60813 57707
Gujarat 37961 37512
J&K 18772 10398
Jharkhand 24171 21459
West Bengal 57540 55064
 
Not only this, out of total 10,52,786 AWCs sanctioned as on 15.03.07, 9,46,060 were sanctioned upto 2005-06. All
these AWCs should have become operational by 2006-07. However, details made available reveal that as on 30.09.06, only
7,81,208 AWCs could become operational.  In the absence of latest data, the Committee can only conclude that in majority of
cases, it takes more than a year to make an AWC operational. The Committee can only emphasize that four tier monitoring
mechanism should be constantly reviewed so as to identify the problem areas in the task of making an AWC operational.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that all conceivable steps should be taken to make the AWCs operational within the
shortest time possible.
 
Action taken
 
As per an exercise conducted by the Ministry sometime back, adopting Critical Path Method (CPM)/PERT Chart,
operationalisation of AWC requires about 12 months.  However, due  to reasons like elections, delays in administrative
sanctions, court cases etc, recruitment of AWWs and AWHs gets delayed in the States/UTs, leading to delays in
operationalisation.
 
This Ministry is continuously monitoring and reviewing the implementation of ICDS Scheme with the State
Governments/ UT Administrations and requesting them to take all required administrative measures for  operationalisation of
sanctioned AWCs.  As a result, there has been a significant progress in the operationalisation of AWCs in the last 2-3 years or
so as is borne out by the table below:
 
Year ending No. of operational projects No. of operational AWCs
31.03.2004 5267 649307
31.03.2005 5422 706872
31.03.2006 5659 748229
31.03.2007 5829 844743
 
The number of operational AWCs in the country has increased from 781208 in 30.09.2006 to 844743 as on 31.3.2007.
State-wise details of sanctioned and operational AWCs, as on 31.3.2007, are annexed (Annexure-II).
 
Details of AWCs operational in the State of Bihar, Gujarat, J&K, Jharkhand and West Bengal as on 30.9.2006 and as
on 31.3.2007 are indicated below.  It is seen that some progress was made by these States, though not satisfactory, and these
States are being pursued to expedite the operationalisation.
 
 
State AWCs sanctioned up to
31.03.05
Operational as on 30.09.06 Operational as on
31.03.2007
Bihar 60813 57707 57767
Gujarat 37961 37512 38391
J&K 18772 10398 16409
Jharkhand 24171 21459 22304
West Bengal 57540 55064 56774
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee has been expressing its concern on the prolonged process of making sanctioned AWCs operational. 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Although the latest details made available to the Committee indicate some progress made in this vital area, the fact remains
that quite a few states continue to lag behind.  It would not be wrong to conclude that average target of 12 months in making
an AWC operational seems to be unachievable in respect of some major states.  Committee is perturbed to point out again that
there is a shortfall even in AWCs sanctioned upto 31.3.05 and the status as on 31.3.07 as indicated below-
                               
State Sanctioned upto 31.3.08 Operational as on 31.3.07
Bihar 60,813 57,767
Jammu & Kashmir 18,772 16,409
Jharkhand 24,171 22,304
West Bengal 57,540 56,774
 
States like Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Nagaland and Punjab have not gone beyond the AWCs sanctioned during 2004-05. 
Majority of the States are yet to make any noticeable progress with regard to AWCs sanctioned upto 31
st March, 2006.
            The Committee has been given to understand that due to elections, delay in administrative sanctions, court cases, etc.
recruitment of AWWs and AWHs gets delayed; with the result sanctioned AWCs remain un-operational.  The Committee
would again emphasize that it is high time that these problem areas are removed. Continuous monitoring and review by the
Ministry with the State authorities do not seem to have yielded any noticeable results.  The Committee strongly feels that
recruitment procedure for AWWs/AWHs may be reviewed thoroughly and revamped with state-specific interventions,
wherever required. 
         
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.10         The Committee strongly recommends that immediate corrective measures need to be initiated on the gap areas
highlighted in the NIPCCD Study.  If this is the state of affairs after more than thirty years of ICDS being launched and crores
of funds being provided under the Flagship Scheme of the Ministry, then it would be better if the so-called multi-level
monitoring mechanism is simply done away with.
 
Action Taken   
 
The Evaluation Study entitled ‘Three Decades of ICDS: An Appraisal’ conducted by NIPCCD in December, 2006 was
circulated to all State Governments/UTs.  A presentation was also made in the Conference of State Secretaries dealing with
ICDS requesting them to take urgent steps to rectify the deficiencies pointed in the Study.
 
It may, however, be noted that ever since its launch in 1975, the Scheme does not provide for construction of AWC
building or safe drinking water/sanitation facilities in the AWCs.  It was envisaged that the local community would provide the
infrastructure.  There has been, though, provision for hiring a suitable building on rent. To enable the Angawandi Workers to
deliver the services under the Scheme efficiently, it has been proposed to provide for construction of AWC building including
kitchen and toilet in the 11th Five Year Plan. Action has been intensified to provide safe drinking water and toilet facilities in
the anganwadi centre through convergence with schemes like Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme, Total Sanitation
Campaign being administered by the Ministry of Rural Development.  Efforts are also being made, as the requirement of funds
is very large, to explore the possibility of utilizing funds available under existing schemes of various Ministries like NREGA,
Backward Region Grant Fund, MPLADS and SCSP, TASP etc. for strengthening the infrastructure at AWC.
 
The Statements of Expenditure sent by the States have a column specifying procurement of PSE kits.  It is reflected
from the SOEs  that some of the States were not procuring PSE kits as per their entitlement. These States have been requested
to procure the same at the earliest so that the benefit of PSE reaches all the beneficiaries.  There is a provision of Rs. 5000/- in
the Scheme for purchase of cooking and serving utensils among other things at the time of operationalisation of AWCs.  There
is also a provision of contingencies at AWCs level of Rs. 600/- which could be used for replacement of utensils.
 
It has also been observed from the expenditure statement received as on  31.3.07 that many States have spent more than
their allocated share of Supplementary Nutrition. However, (12 out of 23 which reported) States which have not been incurring
90 per cent of their estimated expenditure of the SNP budget were requested to spend as per the norms by providing adequate
funds in their budget of 2007-08 (Assam and Orissa are part of theses 12).
 
The States have also been requested to utilize the available amount of Rs 25,000 per project for IEC activities so that

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
the beneficiaries could get full benefit from their provisions regarding health & nutrition education alongwith other
information, education and communication activities.  As per the Statements of Expenditure for 2005-06, around 10 States
have spent more than 75% of their entitlement.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Committee’s attention has been drawn by the disturbing findings brought out in an Evaluation Study entitled ‘Three
Decades of ICDS: An Appraisal’ conducted by NIPCCD in December, 2006.  In response to Committee’s recommendation for
initiating corrective measures, the Ministry has come forward with a detailed reply,  outlining the various initiatives to be
taken to provide the required infrastructure and basic facilities at AWCs.  The Committee is dismayed to note that it has taken
more than three decades for the Ministry to realize that AWCs were lacking the minimum facilities and participation of local
community was simply not there.  The Committee can only say that the task ahead is very difficult as convergence of various
schemes handled by different Ministries is proposed during the 11
th  plan for making AWCs functional in the real sense. 
Relying only on the Statements of Expenditure sent by the State Governments for analyzing the judicious utilization of
allocated funds will not serve the purpose now. 
            The Committee would like to emphasize that in the backdrop of States failing to effectively implement the Scheme,
due to one reason or the other, Centre need to play a more pro-active role.  This can be easily done by making surprise visits,
analyzing with State implementing agencies the problem areas and finding out the ways and means to tackle the same.  The
Committee strongly feels that along with the implementing agencies, time has also come for reaching out to the targeted
beneficiaries directly. Once, they are made aware, through media and local authorities, the multi-level monitoring mechanism
will get the real strength and lead to fulfillment of all the objectives of this Flagship Scheme of the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.12         The Committee expresses its serious reservations on the lack of feedback from the States.  This shows their
lackadaisical approach towards the ICDS programme.  The Committee recommends that all the States may be directed to
submit their suggestions to remove the shortcomings noticed in the survey.
 
Action Taken
 
As per the Rapid Facility Survey by NCAER, out of the total number of 287,684 AWCs which were surveyed during
2002-03, the following status was observed:
 
AWCs
surveyed
Pucca Bldg. Semi
Pucca
Kutcha Bldg. Partial Open space Others Total:AWCs
287,684 132653 60989 41952 9489 26380 16221 287684
 
2.         State-wise details of the extracts of Rapid Facility Survey of Infrastructure at AWCs is placed below.
 
            This Ministry has been pursuing the matter with the States/ UTs for creating a database on the infrastructural facilities
available at the AWCs. So far, 18 States/UTs namely Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Nagaland, Goa, Sikkim, Mizoram, Kerala,
Chandigarh, Chattisgarh, Daman and Diu, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Lakshadweep, Assam, Karnataka, Orissa, Arunachal Pradesh,
Meghalaya and Pondicherry have furnished the data (Annexure-III ). The States/ UTs which have not furnished the
information as yet, have been reminded. In the reported 18 States, 52.46% AWCs running from Pucca Building, 2.89% from
Kutcha Building, 17.89% running from rented buildings, 24.64% from building owned by community allotted to AWCs and
2.10% AWCs are running from open space. Separately this Ministry has sought information from States/ UTs on drinking
water and toilet facilities available in Government building and Private Buildings. 30 States have sent the information so far
(Annexure-IV). In these 30 States, out of 555459 reported AWCs,  8.68% AWCs have toilet and drinking water facilities
both, 19.58% AWCs have only Toilet facilities, 40.87% AWCs have only drinking water supply and 30.87% AWCs neither
have toilet nor drinking water supply.
 
            It may be noted that ever since its launch in 1975, the ICDS Scheme does not provide for construction of AWC
building. It was envisaged that the local community would provide the infrastructure though there has been a provision for
hiring a suitable building on rent for running of an AWC.  While it is true that certain information is still pending from States,
the Ministry, however, has already taken a view, based on the findings of NCAER, to focus on creation of infrastructure so

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
that the services under the Scheme could be delivered more efficiently.  It has been proposed to provide for construction of
AWC building etc. in the 11th Five Year Plan.  If the same is approved, there will be significant improvement in the
availability of infrastructure under the programme. 
 
Simultaneously, the Ministry is  also exploring the possibility of utilizing funds available under existing schemes of
various Ministries like NREGA, Backward Region Grant Fund, MPLADS,  SCSP, TASP etc. for strengthening the
infrastructure at AWCs.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee notes that attempts of the Ministry for creating a database on the infrastructural facilities available at
AWCs have not proved to be very successful.  Information from only 18 States has been received and the major States like
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Chattisgarh, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh are
still to send the information.  The Committee strongly feels that average percentage of pucca building of AWCs would come
down once data from all the States/UTs is available.  The Committee finds that  data from 30 States/UTs is available so far as
availability of drinking water and toilet facilities at AWCs is concerned.  In these 30 States, having 5,55,459 AWCs, 30.8%
AWCs neither have toilet nor drinking water supply, and only 8.68% AWCs having both the facilities.  Here also major States
like Bihar, Assam, Karnataka, Jammu & Kashmir are not included.  Condition of AWCs will make a dismal reading, if data
from all the operational 8,44,743 AWCs is available. The Committee apprehends that ground realities would prove to be more
disheartening as this data is mainly based on the information sent by State Governments.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.14         The Committee notes that Ministry is doing all out efforts to universalize the ICDS Scheme.  The Secretary
submitted before the Committee that there seems to be a lack of motivation at the grass-root level and there is a case for a
much stronger community participation.             The Committee feels that the Ministry should come forward to revamp,
redesign and recast the ICDS scheme in all possible ways.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.16   The Committee recommends that since the flow of money from the Centre to the Implementing agencies is taking
lot of time, efforts may be made for quicker and expeditious dispersal of money.  If need be, the ICDS scheme may be
converted into a Mission Mode Scheme so that intermediate agencies can be removed.
 
Action Taken   (Paras 3.14 & 3.16)
 
            To mould the ICDS Scheme to suit the present day requirements, a proposal to revamp the Scheme and  implement it in
a “Mission Mode” in the 11
th Plan on the pattern of Sarv Siksha Abhiyan (SSA)/ National Rural Health Mission (NRHM), is
under active consideration.  
          
Under the restructured ICDSScheme, delegation of financial and administrative powers is also contemplated. To allow
for greater flexibility in flow of funds, it is proposed to set up  State and District level Societies which would be registered and
would prepare a District Child Development Plan and the Central funds would flow to the District Society through the State
Society as in the case of NRHM and SSA.
           
The concept of flexi funds is also proposed to be introduced with a view to enable the Committees at District Block and
Village levels to utilize funds as per locally identified needs and  priorities.
          
To tackle the problem of lack of motivation at the grass roots level, involvement of the community through PRIs, Self-
Help Groups of Women, Stake-holders Committee such as the Mothers Committee, etc. is envisaged in the 11
th Plan so that
ICDS becomes a truly community-driven rather than government-driven programme.   
 
 In the XI Plan, public-private partnership is also proposed to be encouraged to leverage the strength of the private (not
for profit) sector entities in implementation, supervision and monitoring of the Scheme.
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry is considering revamping of the Scheme and implementing it is a
“Mission Mode on the pattern of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and Natilonal/Rural Health Mission” in the 11th Plan period.  The
Committee however, would like to remind that the 11 th plan period has begun and this exercise should be finalized at the
earliest for the timely implementation of the scheme with its new facets.  Preparatory exercises like setting up of State and
District level societies for ensuring smooth and timely flow of funds and apprising the PRIs, SHGs of women, State-holders
Committee such as Mothers Committee etc of their involvement in motivation and support to the scheme, need to be done
beforehand.  The Committee is of the view that experience of the Ministries of Human Resource Development and Health and
Family Welfare so far in administering SSA and NRHM in Mission Mode may be shared by the Ministry so as to ensure a
fully effective monitoring mechanism under ICDS. 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.18         From 2005-2006, the Government of India were to support states upto 50% of the financial norms or 50 % of
the expenditure incurred by thereon for supplementary nutrition whichever is less. Financial norms for supplementary nutrition
fixed in 1991 have been revised in October, 2004, for children from 6 months to 6 years, Rs. 2.00 per day per child and for
severely malnourished children, Rs. 2.70 per child per day.  On  a specific query about the number of children covered under
ICDS and getting nutrition, the Committee was informed that as per Census 2001, total number of children in the age group 0-
6 years is 15.78 crores. Of these, 10.49 crore children have been reported as child population as per Anganwadi Survey
Register under ICDS as on 30.09.06.  The Committee is, however, surprised to note that only 5.43 crore children out of 10.49
crore children under ICDS were getting supplementary nutrition as on 30.09.06.  Such a huge gap between targeted children
and those covered under ICDS and between children under ICDS and getting supplementary nutrition depicts a very dismal
scenario.  If the State-wise figures are analysed, shortfall and gaps are noticed across the country. The Committee is extremely 
disturbed to note that there are States where need is the maximum, but out of less than half of targeted children covered under
ICDS, only 50 per cent are getting the benefit of supplementary nutrition.
 
Action Taken
 
As on 31.3.2007, 10.76 crore children have been reported as child population as per Anganwadi Survey Registers
under ICDS.  Of these, 5.82 crore children were getting supplementary nutrition.  The Ministry is reviewing regularly and
monitoring the progress of coverage of beneficiaries.  State-wise details are given in Annexure-V.  State Governments have
been requested to register all the children (0-6 years) at the AWCs and provide the services under the Scheme.  22 States have
provided supplementary nutrition to more than 50% of targeted children, whereas remaining 13 States have provided less than
50% of child population covered under AWCs. 
 
            It may be noted that during X plan period i.e. from 01.04.2002 to 31.03.2007, the number of beneficiaries for
supplementary nutrition and pre-school education have increased significantly as is borne out by the data given below:
 
Year
ending
No. of supplementary nutrition
beneficiaries [Children (6 months – 6
years) & Pregnant & lactating Mothers]
No. of         pre–school education
beneficiaries
[Children (3-6 years)]
31.03.2002 375.10 lakh 166.56 lakh
31.03.2003 387.84 lakh 188.02 lakh
31.03.2004 415.08 lakh 204.38 lakh
31.03.2005 484.42 lakh 218.41 lakh
31.03.2006 562.18 lakh 244.92 lakh
31.03.2007 705.43 lakh 300.81 lakh
With the operationalisation of AWCs sanctioned in the first and second phase of expansion, these numbers would go
up further.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee observes that there is no noticeable improvement so far as children            (6 months-6 years) receiving
supplementary nutrition is concerned.  Out of 15.78 crore eligible children, 10.49 crore children were covered under ICDS and
only 5.43 crore children were receiving supplementary nutrition as on 30
th September, 2006.  The Committee finds that

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
position remains unchanged as on 31 st March, 2007.  Out of 10.76 crore children under ICDS, only 5.82 crore children were
getting supplementary nutrition.  It seems that regular review and monitoring of the coverage of beneficiaries has failed to
make any difference as in 13 States, less than 50% child population was being covered.  Coverage in States like Assam
(26.04%), Bihar (35.92%), Kerala (35.40%), Rajasthan (33.03%), Jammu & Kashmir (37.13%) was very discouraging.  The
Committee fails to understand the constraints for supplementary nutrition not being provided to all the children registered in an
AWC when required finds were reported to be available.  Latest data made available to the Committee indicates that in the
case of many States, release of State-share seems to have been delayed as major expenditure is reported to be made during the
last quarter of the year.
            Hence, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure timely release of funds to the States.  Also, close
monitoring and review of the implementation of scheme and coverage of Ministries needs to be carried out on a regular basis
for effective operationalisation of the Scheme.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.19   The Committee was informed that the States have reported total expenditure of Rs.2142.70 crore during the year
2005-06 and Rs.1567.72 crore during the year 2006-07 so far.    As per the number of beneficiaries and financial norms for
supplementary nutrition for 300 days, 50% of the estimated expenditure comes to Rs.1508.37 crore and Rs.1790.28 crore for
2005-06 [based on beneficiaries as on 31.3.2005] and 2006-07 [based on beneficiaries as on 31.03.06] respectively.
 
 
 
 
 
 (Rs. in lakhs)
State/UT
Releases (As on
28.02.07)
Expenditure
including State
share reported by
the States.
UPTO 50% of the
estimated States
share as per norms
***
Actual
expenditure of
states share
incurred by States
 
Chhattisgarh 2953.64 3306.16 31.12.06 5907.29 352.52
Goa 175.41 221.06 31.12.06 143.17 45.65
Gujarat 3946.29 5306.10 31.12.06 5983.92
1359.81
 
Haryana 2829.56 1781.44 30.9.06 3688.32 -1048.12
Himachal Pradesh 629.63 1356.04 30.9.06 1318.81
 
726.41
Jammu & Kashmir 563.09 22.12 30.9.06 884.53
 
-540.97
Jharkhand 11154.47 15698.92 31.12.06 5957.98 4544.45
Karnataka 5707.61 10092.34 31.12.06 9449.98 4384.73
Kerala 3666.11 5313.79 31.12.06 3110.58 1647.68
Madhya Pradesh 5770.97 9003.95 31.12.06 10252.94
 
3232.98
Maharashtra 8443.33 7974.06 30.9.06 20311.33 -469.27
Orissa 6646.40 3269.72 30.9.06 9607.12 -3376.68
Punjab 3138.07 3514.52 31.12.06 1844.15 376.45
Rajasthan 6661.68 9745.90 31.12.06 9815.15 3084.22
Tamil Nadu 3451.94 3704.00 31.12.06 3684.49 252.06
Uttar Pradesh 39216.88 28069.51 30.9.06 30300.90 -11147.37
Uttaranchal 1347.89 1512.35 31.12.06 1446.49 164.46
West Bengal 5916.07 8709.02 31.12.06 12942.50 2792.95
A & N Islands 93.67 342.48 31.12.06 88.42 248.81
Chandigarh 154.76 122.45 30.9.06 134.20 -32.31
Dadra & N Haveli 22.59 0.59 30.6.06 45.18 -22.00
Daman & Diu 13.74   27.46 -13.74

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Lakshadweep 39.91 29.80 30.9.06 24.35 -10.11
Delhi 694.29 239.70 30.9.06 1435.54 -454.59
Pondicherry 55.03   119.27 -55.03
Arunachal
Pradesh** 379.84 1015.34 31.12.06 461.11
 
635.50
Assam 3711.54 832.97 30.9.06 7423.08 -2878.57
Manipur 914.32 1329.16 30.9.06 884.49 414.84
Meghalaya 1023.42 1175.59 30.9.06 692.68 152.17
Mizoram 488.97 868.08 30.9.06 471.24 379.11
Nagaland 1188.71 1113.74 30.9.06 1169.09 -74.97
Sikkim 95.77 479.37 31.12.06 109.09 383.60
Tripura 707.69 823.12 31.12.06 770.37 115.83
 
As may be seen that most of the states were not in a position to allocate their share of Supplementary Nutrition. 
Benefit of increase in the financial norms for supplementary nutrition thus has failed to reach the beneficiaries. The Committee
is of the opinion that this issue should be taken up with the concerned State authorities in right earnest.  Simultaneously,
exercise should be initiated to bring all the targeted children under ICDS. Both these matters should be closely monitored by
the Ministry with special focus on States lagging behind.
 
Action taken
 
The updated details of funds released during the year 2006-07 and expenditure including State share reported by the
States upto 31.12.2006/ 31.3.2007 on supplementary nutrition
 
are given as under:-
 
RELEASES-EXPENDITURE ON SUPPLEMENTARY NUTRITION- 2006-07                 
(Rs. In Lakh)
Sl. No. State/UT
Releases (As on
31.03.07)
Expenditure
including State
share reported by
the States.
Expenditure
reported upto
50% of the
estimated States
share as per norms*
Actual
expenditure of
States share
incurred by
States.
1 2 3 4 5 6  
1. Chhattisgarh 2953.64 7017.56 31.03.07 5907.29 4063.92
2. Goa 175.41 303.58 31.03.07 143.17 128.17
3. Gujarat 4297.21 7781.86 31.03.07 5983.92 3484.65
4. Haryana 2829.56 7273.83 31.03.07 3688.32 4444.27
5. Himachal Pradesh 629.63 1387.41 31.12.06 1318.81 757.78
6. Jammu & Kashmir 653.20 2811.91 31.03.07 884.53 2158.71
7. Jharkhand 11154.47 15698.92 31.12.06 5957.98 4544.45
8. Karnataka 9407.65 19116.76 31.03.07 9449.98 9709.11
9. Kerala 3666.11 5313.79 31.12.06 3110.58 1647.68
10. Madhya Pradesh 5770.97 17159.58 31.03.07 10252.94 11388.61
11. Maharashtra 8443.33 19581.30 31.12.06 20311.33 11137.97
12. Orissa 6646.40 7977.99 31.03.07 9607.12 1331.59
13 Punjab 3138.07 3514.52 31.12.06 1844.15 376.45
14. Rajasthan 8571.57 15722.10 31.03.07 9815.15 7150.53
15. Tamil Nadu 3451.94 6235.00 31.03.07 3684.49 2783.06
16. Uttar Pradesh 41902.48 79421.07 31.03.07 30300.90 37518.59
17. Uttaranchal 1347.89 1512.35 31.12.06 1446.49 164.46
18. West Bengal 5916.07 8709.02 31.12.06 12942.50 2792.95
19. A & N Islands 93.67 387.68 31.03.07 88.42 294.01
20. Chandigarh 154.76 211.75 31.03.07 134.20 56.99
21. Dadra & N Haveli 22.59 88.43 31.03.07 45.18 65.84
22. Daman & Diu 13.74 63.00 31.03.07 27.46 49.26
23. Lakshadweep 39.91 77.64 31.03.07 24.35 37.73

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
24. Delhi 694.29 704.33 31.12.06 1435.54 10.04
25. Puducherry 55.03 343.71 31.03.07 119.27 288.68
26. Arunachal Pradesh     879.60 1015.34 31.12.06 461.11 135.74
27. Assam 3711.54 4799.71 31.03.07 7423.08 1088.17
28. Manipur 914.32 1778.50 31.03.07 884.49 864.18
29. Meghalaya 1023.42 2092.65 31.03.07 692.68 1069.23
30. Mizoram 488.97 1365.21 31.03.07 471.24 876.24
31. Nagaland 1188.71 1798.71 31.03.07 1169.09 610.00
32. Sikkim 95.77 521.77 31.03.07 109.09 426.00
33. Tripura 707.69 1711.90 31.03.07 770.37 1004.21
 Total 151920.57 280032.86  179028.20 128301.46
 * Based on beneficiaries as on 31.03.2006.   
 
            It may be seen that some  States who have reported expenditure upto 31.3.2007,  have spent more than their allocated
share of supplementary nutrition.  The Ministry has written to the remaining States pointing out this shortfall in actual
expenditure vis-a-vis the estimated expenditure as per financial norms and requested them to spend as per the norms by
providing adequately in their budget of 2007-08.  Such letters have been issued to 12 States which incurred less than 90% of
the estimated expenditure.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee would appreciate if feedback about the bottlenecks/problem areas besides paucity of funds, being faced
by the States lagging behind in making supplementary nutrition available to the targeted children, is furnished to it.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.23         The Committee is of the view that a final view on the recommendations of the Review Committee should be
taken at the earliest. While doing so, it should be kept in mind that AWWs/ Helpers need to be given all the required
incentives.  Success of ICDS Scheme depends upon the effective functioning of these two functionaries.
 
 
 
Action Taken      
 
Recommendation has been noted.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 2007-08, the Committee was informed that the Review
Committee to examine the current levels of honorarium and related issues of Anganwadi Workers and Helpers set up on the
22
nd September, 2006, had submitted its Report which was under the consideration of the Government.  Committee in its
Report presented to the Parliament on the 27th April, 2007, had hoped that a final view on the recommendations of the Review
Committee would be taken at the earliest.  The Committee, however, is surprised to note that although more than a year has
passed since the submission of Review Committee Report, it still continues to be under the consideration of the Ministry as no
Status Report has been given in the Action Taken Note.  The Committee takes a serious view of this and impresses upon the
Ministry to do the needful without any further delay.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.24        On a specific query about the status of reservation of 25% of vacant posts of Supervisors for Anganwadi
Workers, the Committee was informed that 18 states have issued instructions on reservation ranging from 25% to 100%  posts
for AWWs in the recruitment of Supervisors. No information was available from 16 states and the matter was sub-judice in
one state. The Committee also notes that as a new policy initiative, instructions have been issued by Govt. for reservation  of
25% of vacancies of AWWs for Helpers on the 6
th October, 2006.  While welcoming this new initiative, the Committee

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
would like the Ministry to pursue with all the State Govts. to keep the prescribed percentage of posts reserved for AWWs and
Helpers. Such an incentive for key functionaries of AWCs would go a long way in strengthening the ICDS Scheme.
 
Action Taken
     
Instructions have already been issued to States/UTs for reservation of 25% of vacancies of Supervisors for AWWs and
similar percentage in vacancies of AWWs for AWHs. These instructions have also been reiterated from time to time.
Information from 21 States have been received that they have reserved the posts of Supervisors to be fill up from amongst the
AWCs.  In one State, the matter is still sub-judice.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.25         Anganwadi Workers and Helpers are the two key functionaries in the absence of whom an Anganwadi Centre
cannot be considered functional.  The Committee has been monitoring the progress being made in the appointment of these
two functionaries over the years.  All India  figures of 7,64,704 AWWs in position against 9,46,060 sanctioned posts and
7,57,388 Helpers in position against 9,46,060 sanctioned posts can be considered satisfactory, if number of operational AWCs
i.e. 7,81,208 is kept in mind.  However, State-wise data as on 30.09.06 made available to the Committee reveals glaring 
disparities between the number of sanctioned posts of AWWs and those in position, applicable in the case of Helpers also.  In
some States, posts of AWWs and Helpers sanctioned upto 31.03.05 still remain to be filled up as indicated below –
 
State AWWs sanctioned
upto 31.03.05
In position as on
30.09.06
Helpers sanctioned 
upto 31.03.05
In position as on
30.09.06
Andhra Pradesh 56204 55734 -- --
Bihar 60813 60041 60813 59797
Gujarat 37961 34406 37961 33789
J&K 18772 10520 18772 10363
Jharkhand 24171 20948 24171 20760
M.P. 49787 49267 49787 48290
West Bengal 57540 54031 57540 53448
Tamil Nadu -- -- 42677 36258
 
In all these States, although additional posts of AWWs and Helpers have been sanctioned during 2005-06, but till
30.09.06 not even a single post could be filled up.
 
Action taken
 
Details of AWWs and Helpers in-position as on 31.3.2007 has shown improvement compared to 30.09.2006. State-
wise details are at Annexure-VI. The Ministry has been pursuing with States/UTs to fill-up all sanctioned posts of
AWWs/Helpers. There have been delays in recruitment of AWWs/Helpers, on account of elections, delays in Administrative
sanctions, court cases etc. The details of no. of posts of AWWs and helpers sanctioned upto 31.3.2005, in-position as on
30.9.2006 and as on 31.3.2007 in respect of the above mentioned states are indicated below :
 
State AWWs
sanctioned
upto 31.03.05
In position as
on 30.09.06
In position as
on 31.03.07
Helpers
sanctioned
upto 31.03.05
In position as
on 30.09.06
In position as
on 31.03.07
Andhra Pradesh 56204 55734 60173 - - 60141
Bihar 60813 60041 60041 60813 59797 59797
Gujarat 37961 34406 35837 37961 33789 35285
J&K 18772 10520 16409 18772 10363 16409
Jharkhand 24171 20948 22257 24171 20760 22193
M.P 49787 49267 52667 49787 48290 51608
West Bengal 57540 54031 52714 57540 53448 50102
Tamil Nadu - - 43946 42677 36258 38806
 
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.27         In view of the backlog of vacancies  of AWWs, Helpers and Supervisors and the observations of the Ministry,

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
the Committee strongly feels that the recruitment process for various functionaries needs a thorough revamping. All the
problem areas need to be removed without any further delay. If need be, concerned States may be sensitized  on this issue. 
Position becomes more discouraging if status of posts of Supervisors sanctioned and filled up is looked into.  The Committee
is constrained to  observe that against 34,489 posts of Supervisors sanctioned upto 31 st March, 2005, only 25085 posts have
been filled up till 30 th September, 2006.  7250 posts sanctioned during 2005-06 remained sanctioned upto 30 th September,
2006. In the absence of data upto December, 2006, the Committee can only hope that there may have been some progress
during the second half of 2006-07. With required number of Supervisors not being in place, specially in States like Bihar,
Chattisgarh, J&K, Jharkhand, Orissa, Rajasthan, U.P., it can only be concluded that without supervision and monitoring,
AWCs cannot be considered functional.  Such a dismal scenario leaves no doubt about the fact that the benefits of this
ambitious programme are yet to reach the majority of targeted beneficiaries.
 
Action taken
 
States are being constantly impressed upon to fill-up the vacant posts at all levels.  State-wise details of posts of
Supervisors sanctioned and in-position as on 31.3.2007 is at Annexure-VII. Total sanctioned posts of supervisors as on
30.9.2006 is 41,740 and in-position is 26,052 which is 62%. Subsequently, 4211 more posts of supervisors have also been
sanctioned.
 
The status of supervisors in-position in respect of above mentioned states as on 31.3.2007 is given below. States are
being persuaded to take immediate action to fill up all existing vacancies.
 
State/UT No. of posts of Supervisors
Sanc-tioned
upto 31.3.2005
In position as
on 30.9.2006
Sanc-tioned
during 2005-
06
Sanc-tioned
during 2006-
07
Total
sanctioned upto
31.3.2007
In-position as
on 31.3.07
Bihar 2492 342 788 15 3295 342
Chhattisgarh 1031 642 366 218 1615 653
Jammu &
Kashmir 782 341 0 268 1050 341
Jharkhand 829 449 267 50 1146 457
Orissa 1742 950 131 169 2042 950
Rajasthan 1735 1287 441 59 2235 1290
Uttar Pradesh 4878 3313 1260 500 6638 3814
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Acute shortage of Anganwadi Workers, Helpers and Supervisors, the three key functionaries of an Anganwadi Centre
in all the States, has been engaging the attention of the Committee for quite some time.  Latest feedback received from the
Ministry, however, reveals a discouraging scenario.  The Committee is not inclined to agree with the claim of the Ministry that
there has been improvement in the recruitment of AWWs and Helpers as on 31.03.2007, compared with the position as on
30.09.2006.  The Committee also has its reservation about the 62% in-position strength of Supervisors vis-a-vis sanctioned
strength as on 30.09.2006.  Like last year, glaring disparities between the number of sanctioned posts of all the three key
functionaries of AWC in some of the very crucial States continue to persist as revealed in the latest data made available to the
Committee.  The Committee is constrained to observe that in States like Assam, Bihar, Gujrat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Nagaland,  Punjab, West Bengal, even all the posts of AWWs and Helpers sanctioned as on 31.03.2005,
have not been filled up upto 31.03.2007.  It is true that posts have been duly sanctioned in subsequent years, but it is very
disturbing to note that not even a single State has succeeded in recruiting AWWs and Helpers against at the posts sanctioned in
2005-06.   Position with respect to Supervisors is more grim.  With only 26,052 Supervisors to oversee 8,44,743 AWCs, one
can imagine the ground realities at such Centres. 
            The Committee has been informed that instructions have already been issued to States/UTs for reservation of 25% of

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
vacancies of Supervisors for AWWs and similar percentage in vacancies AWWs for AWHs.  Information from 21 States has
been received that 25 percent posts of Supervisors have been reserved to be filled up from AWWs.  The Committee fails to
understand that inspite of such initiatives, sanctioned posts of all the three categories continue to remain vacant.  The
Committee has no option but to reiterate that thorough revamping of the entire recruitment procedure is required to be
undertaken in active co-ordination with States, specially those having the maximum vacancies.
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.29         The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry and hopes that the scheme will run successfully. The
Committee may also like to be apprised about the details regarding the claimants from the scheme.  The Committee
recommends that premium amount to be collected from the ICDS functionaries may be waived.
 
Action Taken
 
The details of claims settled as reported by LIC under Anganwadi Karyakartri Bima Yojana is as under:- 
 
                                            (Amount in thousands)
2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 (upto 31.10.2006
Natural Death Accident Natural Death Accident Natural Death Accident
No.
of
cases
Amount No.
of
cases
Amount No.
of
cases
Amount No.
of
cases
Amount No.
of
cases
Amount No.
of
cases
Amount
31 620 2 100 356 7120 14 625 258 5160 13 650
 
 
Claims settled for critical illness (as reported by LIC)
 
2005-06 2006-07
No. of cases Amount No. of cases Amount
2 40 11 220
 
There was no critical illness claim lodged during 2004-05
 
The premium to the tune of Rs. 80/- per beneficiary  payable by the insured members viz. Anganwadi Workers/Helpers
has been waived w.e.f  01.4.2007,  for a period of two years.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is happy to note that benefits of Anganwadi Kanyakartri Bima Yojana have started reaching the
Anganwadi Workers and Helpers.  The Committee, however, finds that premium of Rs.80/- per beneficiary payable by the
insured Anganwadi Workrs/Helpers has been waived w.e.f. 1.4.07 for a period of two years.  The Committee fails to
comprehend the waiving of premium only for two years.  The Committee reiterates that this facility should be extended to all
concerned without imposing any condition therein.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para  3.31        The Committee is happy by the efforts made by the Ministry in putting an effective monitoring mechanism in
place for the scheme of ICDS. The Committee hopes that this will streamline the Scheme and also improve achievement level
both physical and financial targets set thereunder.  The feedback received from the State-level institutes selected for
monitoring should be shared with the Committee as and when received.
 
Action Taken
 
            The Government of India has decided to set up a regular Monitoring and Supervisory Mechanism of the ICDS Scheme

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
through NIPCCD, in addition to the existing Monitoring and Evaluation Unit in the Ministry of Women and Child
Development. The new monitoring and supervision set up will be a three-tier system, monitoring at community level, state and
national level. In the new monitoring set up, Medical Colleges, Home Science Colleges, Schools of Social Work and other
reputed institutions across the country are being involved to have an independent and fair assessment and analysis of the
impact and effectiveness of the scheme.
The detailed guidelines for monitoring of ICDS by select institutions have  been proposed and are being finalised. Once the
guidelines are finalised, the selected institutions will be formally engaged for carrying out the tasks of monitoring and
supervision.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            While deliberating on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 2007-08, the Committee was informed that a Central
Monitoring Unit had been set up at the National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development (NIPCCD) for
monitoring ICDS through independent professional organization in each State/UT.  All the 44 organizations participating in a
workshop conducted by NIPCCD had unanimously agreed to act as select/state level institutions for monitoring of ICDS.  The
Committee was given to understand that detailed guidelines for monitoring were being finalized.  This was the position in
April, 2007.  Since then, more than seven months have passed but the detailed guidelines are yet to be finalized.  The
Committee is not happy with such state of affairs.  The Committee is not aware by when the guidelines would be finalized. 
Only thereafter the process for formally engaging the selected institutions would start.  The Committee has been emphasizing
again and again that schemes should come out of procedural formalities so as to ensure their benefits reaching out to the
targeted beneficiaries.  The Committee can only reiterate that the new monitoring mechanism envisaged for ICDS should be
activated at the earliest.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 3.32 After examining the data provided by the Ministry regarding the number of AWCs sanctioned, operationalised, the
amount of allocation made and the pace of construction activities, the Committee has apprehension that the Ministry will find
it difficult to achieve the target set by the Supreme Court for universalisation of ICDS Scheme in all human habitations.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should chalk out a road map and allocate adequate funds to implement
and reach the target before the Ministry in time.
 
Action Taken   
 
            As the Committee is aware, the ICDS Scheme has been expanded twice in 2005-06 & 2006-07, increasing the total
number of sanctioned ICDS Projects and AWCs to 6284 and 10.53 lakh respectively. Government has also relaxed the
population norms for setting up of an AWC and has already initiated the process for the third phase of expansion by addressing
the States/UTs to furnish the requirements of additional Projects/AWCs/Mini-AWCs. It is expected to sanction and
operationalize these AWCs  by December 2008 the date indicated by the Apex Court.
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
            The Committee notes that 10.53 lakh AWCs have been sanctioned upto 31
st March, 2007 and the third phase of
expansion of AWCs has already been initiated by the Department.  All these AWCs are expected to be operationalized by
December, 2008, the date indicated by the Supreme Court.  The Committee can only say that it is a very ambitious plan as
ground realities are entirely different.  As per the feedback given by the Ministry, out of 10.52 lakh AWCs sanctioned upto
31st March, 2007, 8.44 lakh AWCs were operational on that date.  The Committee would like to point out that all these
operational AWCs could not be considered operational as a large number of AWCs were not having the required manpower. 
In the absence of key functionaries like AWW/Helper/Supervisor, an AWC cannot be considered functional in the real sense. 
The Committee, therefore, observes that Supreme Court directive can only be carried out through an Action Plan in co-
ordination with State Governments at all the levels.
IV.
              TRAINING PROGRAMME UNDER ICDS
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para  4.4          The Committee fails to understand the low level of performance specially because of required funds also being
available with the States.  This is all the more disturbing when State Training Action Plans have been duly formulated by the
States themselves. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry should make an immediate assessment of the
problem areas under the Training Programme and take remedial steps in coordination with the  concerned State Govts. The
Committee hopes that with some initiatives like providing training through Mobile Training Teams, situation would improve.
 
Action Taken
             
 In so far as unspent balance as on 01.04.2006 is concerned, States are constantly being persuaded to refund the unspent
balance of the erstwhile World Bank assisted Project Udisha.
 
 The information mentioned at para 4.3 in respect of physical status of ICDS training as on 31.12.2006, was based on
the Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) received from 15 States/UTs as on Feb 2007. Physical status of ICDS training in
respect of all four types of ICDS functionaries has been updated as on March 31, 2007 and is placed below:
 
    II.                               Refresher Training as on 31.3.2007
AWWs AWHs Supervisors CDPOs
Target Trained Target Trained Target Trained Target Trained
222,986 129,407 165,769 71,788 8,545 4,380 2,566 553
 
    III.                                   Job Training as on 31.3.2007
138,867
 
61,451 190,318 58,167 5,296 1,605 1,450 282
 
 It is submitted that physical targets during 2006-07 were kept on higher side keeping in view the expansion of ICDS
scheme during 2005-06 and 2006-07. Several States had kept targets higher than the previous years, especially in respect of
'job' training of AWWs. These targets included anticipated recruitments during 2006-07 along with the existing backlogs as on
31.3.2006. Due to reasons like elections, delays in administrative sanctions, court cases etc, recruitment of AWWs and AWHs
gets delayed in some States/UTs. This affected the implementation of training plans approved by the Govt. of India.
 
State-wise performances in respect of Job and Refresher Trainings of ICDS functionaries as on March 31, 2007 are
given in Annexure-VIII.
 
 The Committee’s concerns/suggestions, however, have been taken note of for compliance and the implementation of
the ICDS Training programme would be monitored more closely including through periodic review meetings with the
States/UTs.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            Training programme of ICDS functionaries continues to be an area of concern for the Committee.  The Committee had
observed that during the first three quarters of 2006-07, achievement level for training of different functionaries remained well
below the physical targets.  However, the Committee is surprised to note that the last quarter of 2006-07 could be considered
very successful.  It seems that out of the total number of functionaries trained during the entire year, more than half of them
were imparted training during the last quarter.  Even then, overall average rate of training had remained below 50 percent, with
some of the states showing very unsatisfactory level.  Reasons like targets set on the higher side, recruitment of
AWWs/Helpers getting delayed due to elections, delay in administrative sanctions, court cases etc. cited by the Ministry do not
seem to be very convincing.  The Committee would again emphasize that all out efforts need to be made by all concerned so
that all the functionaries under ICDS get proper and timely training.  One must not forget that only trained manpower can play
an effective role in reaching out to the targeted beneficiaries under ICDS.
 
V         RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL CRECHE SCHEME FOR THE CHILDREN OF WORKING MOTHERS
 
Recommendations/Observations
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Para 5.5           While not disputing the considerable experience of the three implementing agencies handling the Crèche
Scheme, the Committee would like to draw attention to two problem areas.  First is the uneven spread of Crèches across the
country. Out of total 30,902 crèches in the country, maximum concentration is in Andhra Pradesh (3902), M.P.(2740),
Maharashtra (2292), Tamil Nadu (1928), U.P.(1868) and West Bengal (2203). The Committee strongly feels that there is a
need for conducting a survey across the country so as to bring the uncovered cities under the scheme.  This task can be easily
handled by the State monitoring agencies like State Women Development Corporations, NIPCCD etc.
 
 
 
 
 
Action Taken
 
            The Monitoring Agencies will be requested to conduct the desired survey. However, all out efforts have been made to
cover all the Districts all over the country. For this,  all uncovered cities will be covered if the scheme is approved for further
expansion during 11
th Plan. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is concerned with the concentration of crèches in some States. The Committee is happy to note that the
Ministry has initiated action to expand the coverage under the Rajiv Gandhi National Creche Scheme.  The Committee hopes
that uncovered areas would be brought under this scheme during the 11
th Plan in a time bound manner.
 
XI        NEW SCHEMES
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 11.2         Committee’s experience about new schemes proposed to be launched by the Ministry has not been very
encouraging. Committee has been observing that new schemes are proposed without any preliminary exercise about
formulation of their components.  A token provision is duly made which continues for years together due to a number of
procedural formalities to be completed at different levels. New schemes should be announced only after the text of the scheme
is ready.  Comprehensive Scheme for Combating Trafficking of Women and Children and Scheme for Relief and
Rehabilitation of Rape Victims are two such schemes. Comprehensive Scheme for Combating Trafficking of Women and
Children was introduced during the Tenth Plan.  As per the information available with the Committee, there was an allocation
of Rs. 3.00 crore for the Scheme in 2004-05, reduced to Rs. 30 lakhs in 2005-06 and Rs. 50 lakhs provided in 2006-07.
Provision for 2007-08 is Rs. 1.00 crore. The only progress which seems to have been made is the change in its name. The very
fact that it is proposed to be launched as a new scheme inspite of being in the formulation stage during the Tenth Plan indicates
that there is not going to be any progress in the near future.  Scheme for Relief and Rehabilitation  of Rape Victims is the other
scheme which was introduced in 2006-07 with a token provision of Rs. 1.00 crore. Same provision is there for 2007-08 and it
continues to be at the proposal stage.
 
Action Taken
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted. So far as Comprehensive Scheme for Combating
Trafficking of Women & Children is concerned,  the EFC meeting has already taken place and minutes circulated to all
concerned. The final approval of Ministry of Finance is awaited before the scheme is formally launched. As regard the scheme
on ‘Relief and Rehabilitation of Rape Victims”, in principal approval from for the scheme from the Planning Commission is
still awaited. Hence, provisions made could not be utilized.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee has been voicing its deep concern on the practice of launching/announcing of new schemes and their
remaining in formulation stage.  The Committee finds that approach of the Ministry remains unchanged.  The Committee had
highlighted the status of two new schemes in its earlier report.  The Committee is constrained to observe that those two
schemes, ie Comprehensive Scheme for Combating Trafficking of Women and Children and Scheme for Relief and

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Rehabilitation of Rape Victims continue to remain in the formulation stage.  While the first scheme awaits the approval of the
Ministry of Finance before its formal launch, in-principle approval from the Planning Commission is awaited in the case of
second scheme.  The Committee can only hope that Comprehensive Scheme for Combating Trafficking of Women and
Children will perhaps be launched in 2008-09.  However, the same expectation cannot be made in respect of the Scheme for
Relief and Rehabilitation of Rape Victims.  The Committee would once again emphasize that the Ministry needs to take the
initiative in minimizing the time required for launch of a new scheme in the real sense.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 11.4         The Committee has noted that the problem of malnutrition being multi-sectoral is being tackled by as many as
10 schemes/ programmes under different Ministries of the Government of India.  The Committee was informed that a National
Level Coordination Committee consisting of representatives from all concerned Ministries has been constituted in the year
2005 under the chairmanship of Minister of WCD to coordinate the various schemes.  The Committee may be apprised about
the number of meetings held by the Coordination Committee since its inception and the initiatives taken by them to have a
coordinated approach to tackle the problem of malnutrition.
 
Action Taken
 
The Coordination and Advisory Committee on ICDS Scheme at the National level was set up during the year 2005
under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (WCD).  Though, only one meeting of the Coordination Committee at National level
has been held, consistent efforts have been made by the Government to ensure effective convergence of delivery of services. 
Some of the steps taken in this direction include:
 
issue of a joint letter under the signature of Secretary (WCD) and Secretary (H&FW) to all the States/UTs, defining the
role and responsibilities of Auxillary Nurse Midwife (ANM) and Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA), who are
the key health functionaries at the grass roots level and Anganwadi Workers (AWW), the core ICDS functionary.
Instructions to States for setting up of Coordination Committees at State, District, Block and village level to ensure
effective delivery of services under ICDS in conjunction with the line Ministries/Departments viz.  Ministry of Rural
Development for total sanitation Campaign and Swajaldhara.  States are also constantly being impressed upon to hold
meetings of these committees at regular intervals.  
 
Setting up of a National Level Monitoring Committee under the Chairpersonship of MOS(WCD) in February, 2007. 
First meeting of this Committee is likely to be held shortly.   
 
Setting up of a Central Monitoring Unit at National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            Malnutrition continues to afflict both children and young mothers in our country, inspite of this problem being tackled
through schemes administered by a number of Ministries including the Ministry of Women and Child Development.  The
Committee had noted earlier that a National Level Coordination Committee consisting of representatives from all the
concerned Ministries had been constituted in the year 2005.  On a specific enquiry about the number of meetings held by this
Committee since its inception, the Committee has been informed that only one meeting has been held by the Coordination
Committee so far.  As a pre-liminary exercise, joint letters have been written to all the States/UTs by the Secretary (WCD) and
Secretary (Health).  States have been directed to set up Coordination Committees at different levels.  A national level
Monitoring Committee under the chairpersonship of MOS(WCD) was set up in February, 2007.  The Committee does not
anticipate any significant outcome of these initiatives, reason being that different authorities are yet to be set up and if
constituted, yet to meet.  The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry of WCD needs to take a more pro-active role by
having a regular interaction with the local/state authorities of pockets showing high level of malnutrition.  Only then one can
think of ensuring that our children do not continue to suffer from malnutrition. 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 11.5         The Committee would also like to draw the attention towards the status of National Nutrition Mission which

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
was set up in 2003. Since then, token provision is being made.  2007-08 also seems to be no exception as a token provision of
Rs. 10 lakhs has been made for the proposed launch of National Nutrition Mission.  The Committee views with serious
concern element of undue delay on such a vital issue.  The Committee, accordingly,  recommends that a final decision in this
matter may be taken at the earliest.
 
Action Taken
 
 The National Nutrition Mission (NNM) was notified in July 2003 through a Gazette Notification having a two tier
supervisory structure, the NNM under the chairmanship of the Hon’ble Prime Minister and its Executive Committee under the
Minister of State for WCD.  The first meeting of the Executive Committee of NNM was held on 3 rd September, 2004 under
the Chairpersonship of the MOS (WCD).  As decided in the meeting, a small Core Group was constituted to draft agenda for
the first meeting of NNM.  Two meetings of the Core Group were held and the Hon’ble Prime Minister requested by the HRM
in November 2004 to call the meeting of the NNM.  A meeting was scheduled to be taken by the Principal Secretary, PMO on
7
th June, 2005 with Secretaries of Ministries/Department of Health & Family Welfare, Women & Child Development, Food
and Public Distribution and Planning Commission.  The meeting was, however, postponed.  Subsequently as advised by the
PMO second meeting of the Executive Committee of NNM was held on 17 th May, 2006 which identified the areas that need
attention of NNM.  Action taken notes on the minutes of the first meeting along with minutes of the second meeting of the
executive committee were provided to the PMO as desired.
 
          Although the meeting of the NNM has not been held, the Ministry has undertaken various nutrition initiatives during the
last two years.  Some of the initiatives are as under:
 
i)        Nutrition Advocacy and Sensitization on Micronutrient Malnutrition – Nutrition advocacy of the concerned
Ministries/Departments namely Health & Family Welfare, Food and Public Distribution, School Education & Literacy was
undertaken on the following issues respectively -
 Reinstating ban on sale of non-iodized salt, early launch of double fortified salt, extending vitamin A supplementation
programme upto 5 years.
 
Including iodized salt in PDS
Using only iodized salt in the mid day meal
 
ii)         Five Regional Consultation Meets on Nutrition were organized in the country during 2005 and 2006 to promote
strategies for uplifting nutritional status of the people with special emphasis on vulnerable groups. 
 
            Recommendations of the Consultation Meets have been put on the website of the Ministry.
 
iii)         Infant and Young Child Nutrition – National Guidelines on Infant and Young Child Feeding were developed in
2004 and disseminated to various organisations.  The same were integrated in the Reproductive and Child Health Programme
and ICDS.  The Guidelines have been updated and the 2
nd edition released in May 2006 in the meeting of the Executive
Committee of NNM.  These guidelines are being printed in all regional languages for wider dissemination. 
 
            Regional Consultations on Infant and Young Child Nutrition are also being organized in collaboration with
Breastfeeding Promotion Network of India.
 
iv)         Nutrition Education and Awareness Generation has been intensified through celebration of annual nutrition events
namely National Nutrition Week, World Breastfeeding Week, World Food Day, Global IDD Prevention Day.  Advertisement
campaigns and mass awareness campaigns through participation in fairs/melas/exhibitions/parade have been undertaken.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee finds it unfortunate that such an important body like National Nutrition Mission (NNM), which is
headed by no less than Hon'ble Prime Minister has not met even once since its inception in July, 2003.  The Executive
Committee and the said Core Group, it appears have not been as serious as it should have been.  Instead, Ministry has tried to
justify unsuccessfully by citing reasons like national advocacy, sensitisation, etc.  The Committee feels that the Ministry
should be more serious on the matter.
 
Recommendations/Observations

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
Para 11.6         The Committee notes that the Ministry proposes to combine the existing child protection schemes under one
Centrally Sponsored Scheme, Integrated Child Protection Scheme.  Integrated Child Protection Scheme needs to be launched
to avoid any hindrance/ adverse impact on the existing components of different schemes.  The Committee hopes that due care
must have been taken about the drawbacks/ difficulties in the existing schemes and formulation of the new scheme
accordingly. While welcoming the initiative, the Committee would like to point out that all formalities like in principle
approval of Planning  Commission followed by approval from EFC should be completed within the minimum possible time
span.  The Committee notes that separate provision  for all the child protection schemes to be brought under proposed ICDS
Scheme and also for ICPS scheme has been made for 2007-08. This is a clear indication that the proposed ICPS scheme   is
likely to remain in the formulation stage during 2007-08.  The Committee urges upon the Ministry to finalise the Scheme at the
earliest.
 
Action Taken
 
               This Ministry has formulated a new centrally sponsored  scheme – “Integrated Child Protection Schemes (ICPS)”
aimed at providing  a suitable environment for the comprehensive development of the children in the country, merging the
existing schemes namely (i) A Programme for Juvenile Justice, (ii)  An Integrated Programme for Street Children and (iii) 
Scheme for Assistance to Homes (Shishu Greh) for Children to Promote In-country Adoption.  Besides, the ICPS would also
have several new components to cover the gap areas in child protection.  This scheme is planned to be implemented during the
11
th Plan Period .  The objectives of the scheme are:
 
i)                    Institutionalizing essential services and strengthening delivery structures;
ii)                   Enhancing capabilities at all levels;
iii)                 Creating database and knowledge base for child protection services;
iv)                 Strengthening child protection at family and community level; and
v)                  Ensuring appropriate inter-sectoral response at all levels.
 
               While preparing the draft scheme, the Planning Commission was requested to provide ‘In Principal Approval’ and
after going through the scheme, the Planning Commission in its letter dated 12 th March, 2007 has stated, “ As per guidelines,
the in principle approval of Planning Commission in such cases will not be required before circulating the proposal for EFC
approval of the scheme”.
 
                With the approval of Integrated Finance Division (WCD) and Hon’ble  MOS(WCD), the Draft EFC Memorandum
has been circulated on 11
th July, 2007 to all concerned Ministries/Departments seeking their comments by 13.8.07.  As soon as
comments/suggestions are received from these Ministries/Departments, initiatives will be taken for holding EFC meeting.
 
             This new scheme has been included in the Annual Plan 2007-08 with an budget allocation of Rs. 95.00 crore.  Ministry
proposes to implement this scheme during the 11
th Plan Period in phased manner.  In 1 st phase during 2007-08, it is to be
implemented in five States which are to likely to be  Andhra Pradesh , Madhdya Pradesh, Delhi & NCR, Meghalaya and
Mizoram.
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is not aware whether comments sought by August 13, 2007 has been received or not & also the
meeting of EFC has taken place or not.  The Committee would like to know the status of the scheme as nearly three quarters of
the year 2007-08 has already elapsed.  The Committee further recommends that the scheme be launched throughout the
country at one go and not in phases.
 
XIII     CONDENSED COURSES FOR WOMEN EDUCATION
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 13.5         The Committee was informed that the National Working Group on this programme constituted in 2004 has
given its Report in May, 2006.  Committee has been given to understand that the Working Group has recommended
continuation of the Scheme with modified objective and framework. The Committee is, however, surprised to note that the

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Report of the Working Group continues to be under the consideration of the Ministry.  The Committee is of the opinion that
with the Eleventh Plan Period starting from 2007-08, there should not be any further delay and the programme should be
implemented in the revised form as recommended by the Working Group from the first year of the Eleventh Plan Period itself.
 
Action Taken
 
            Final report of the National working Group on Condensed Courses of Education for Women has been submitted to the
Ministry and decision is still awaited. Reminder has also been sent to Ministry of Women & Child Development to expedite
the approval.
 
Comments of the Committee
           
The Committee notes with disappointment that the Ministry is yet to consider the final report of the National Working
Group on Condensed Courses of Education for women submitted in May, 2006, i.e. more than a year ago.  The Committee
fails to understand the reasons for unduly long time being taken by the Ministry in the matter.  Ministry’s response of a
reminder sent to it for expediting the approval of the recommendations made by the Working Group makes little sense.  The
Committee can only hope that the Ministry would take a final view and revamp the Scheme of Condensed Courses for Women
Education as suggested by the Working Group.  The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation of expediting the
implementation of the revised programme as recommended by the Working  Group from the very outset of  11
th Plan period.
 
XIV.    SCHEMES TRANSFERRED TO STATES
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
BALIKA SAMRIDDHI YOJANA (BSY)
 
Para 14.3         The Committee has been expressing its serious concern on the undue delay in arriving at a final decision about
the status of Balika Samridhi Yojana. That scheme has failed to achieve the desired objective is evident from the availability of
unspent balances with all the State Govts.  The Committee has also been cautioning the Ministry every year in this regard. The
Committee is unable to judge the reasons for delay in the final decision to be taken by the Planning Commission for transfer of
the Scheme to the State Sector.  The Committee may be informed about the reasons for delay.  The Committee may also be
apprised of the steps made for recovery of unspent balances available with the above-mentioned States and the status as on
31.3.2007.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 14.4         Committee’s apprehensions about the efficacy of the Scheme have  proved to be right as evident in the several
constraints reported by the States regarding implementation of Balika Samridhi Yojana in reply to a Parliamentary Question
No. 706 dated 5.3.2007: -
-    Amount received was meager and the waiting period before maturity was too long -Rs. 6700 total amount was
received after waiting for 18 years;
-    after first deposit at birth, there was a gap of 6 years where the deposit had to be kept alive without any
transaction;
-
         issue of keeping fixed deposits for over 5 years was another technical
      hitch;
-     families do not benefit in the present as amounts were locked;
-     scholarships amounts are blocked, therefore no incentive for girl to be retained in school;
-
         multi agency delivery mechanism and hence administrative costs were
       high;
-     scheme did not provide adequately for administration costs of the scheme;
-
         the time and effort in implementation was high-more than 11 transactions for an amount of Rs. 6700.
 
 Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 14.5    The Committee wonders  that with so many constraints reported by States on the functioning of the scheme
whether the proposed move for transfer of the scheme to States can be considered appropriate.  The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that  a final decision may be taken at the earliest.

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
Action Taken (Para 14.3, 14.4 & 14.5)                                      
 
As per the decision of the Planning Commission the scheme of BSY is slated for transfer to the State sector from 2005-06 and
is currently under the consideration of National Development Committee.
 
Comments of the Committee                                     
 
The Committee expresses its serious reservation on the response received from the Ministry on the status of Balika
Samridhi Yojana.  A Scheme continuing to remain slated for transfer to the State sector on a decision by the Planning
Commission for more than ten years, awaiting consideration of the National Development Council is indeed beyond
comprehension.  This is all the more disturbing, as authentic feedback of the State Governments having reservation about the
efficacy of the Scheme is also there.  The Committee can only point out that this is a classic case of a scheme lying entangled
in complex procedural formalities.  Situation becomes more grave if huge amount of public funds are also involved and
unaccounted for.  The Committee would like to remind the Ministry that yet another plan period has started without things
moving.  Being the administrative Ministry it is mainly the responsibility of the Ministry to expedite a decision from the
concerned authorities.
 
XV ASSISTANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION/EXPANSION OF HOSTEL BUILDINGS FOR WORKING WOMEN
WITH DAY CARE CENTRES FOR CHILDREN
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
Para 15.4         The Committee has been monitoring the performance level of this Scheme over the years and has been
constantly drawing the attention of the Ministry towards inherent drawbacks under the Scheme resulting in its improper 
implementation  and non-achievement of envisaged  goals.  The Committee is constrained  to note that during the Tenth Plan
against an approved outlay of Rs. 85.00 crore, expenditure reported by the end of Plan Period was only Rs. 22.61 crore.  Out of
125 Hostels to be constructed only 48 could be completed with only 5576 beneficiaries against the target of 12,500.
 
 Para 15.5        The Committee would like to reiterate that there should not be any further delay in the revamping of this
Scheme as already much delay has taken place. There is need for urgency to speed up the matter so that the scheme is made
functional in the revised form from the first year of  Eleventh Plan itself.
 
Para 15.6           The Committee was informed that all State Governments including NE States were requested to carry out a
demand survey for Working Women's Hostels. The Committee may be apprised of the feedback received from States in this
regard. 
 
 Action Taken (Paras  15.4, 15.5 & 15.6)
 
The drawbacks in the Scheme are being addressed in the Scheme’s revamping which is proposed to be effected in the
current financial year itself (1st year of Eleventh Plan).
 
No feedback has been received from any state regarding any demand survey done by it for the requirement of working
women’s hostels. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee does not anticipate the launching of the revamped Scheme of Assistance for Construction/Expansion of
Hostel Buildings for Working Women with Day Care centres for children during the current year as assured by the Ministry
earlier.  The Committee would impress upon the Ministry to pursue with all the State Governments for expediting demand
survey for Working Women’s Hostels.
 
XX.      PREVENTION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACE
 
Recommendations/Observations

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
Para 20.2         The Committee further notes that the judgment of the Supreme Court in the Vishaka case is applicable to all
workplaces/employer’s organizations throughout the country, whether in the public or private sector. Details of the complaints
committees set up in the country in terms of the said judgment are not centrally maintained by the Ministry as it has not been
found feasible to do so. However, in the Action Taken Note the Committee was informed that the NCW has issued reminders
to all the organisations and Universities which have not set up complaint committees or which have not furnished any
information in this regard. The Committee would like to be apprised about the information received from various States.  The
Committee recommends that the directions contained in the Supreme Court Judgment in Vishaka case may be implemented in
all the Central Government Departments, and its autonomous and subordinate offices and organizations immediately.  The
Committee may be apprised about the organizations/Departments of the Central Government which have not taken steps to
implement the direction of the Supreme Court.
 
 
 
Action Taken
 
The Commission has so far received  95 letters of confirmation regarding  the
Formation of the Complaint Committee from Universities.  Central Ministries, State Governments and other institutions like
Hospitals, Limited Companies etc.
         The break-up is as follows
 
        Total number of letters received                           95
        
           1.     Letters from Universities                            63
           2.     Central Ministries/Departments              10
           3.     State Government                                      4
4.
          Others (Hospitals, Limited
Companies etc.)                                       18
 
 The Commission is in the process of collecting fresh information from all the Government Departments with respect to
constitution of this Committee on Sexual Harassment at Work Place and the complaints received and disposed off during the
past 3 years.  Collection of the information would take a considerable time and therefore it is requested that the Commission
may be allow time up to 31.3.2008 to submit a detailed and a compiled report after receipt of this information.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            Supreme Court judgment in the Vishaka case is applicable to all work places throughout the country, both in the public
and private sector.  Latest feedback received from the Ministry reveals that only 95 letters of confirmation regarding the
formation of the Complaint Committees have been received so far as given below –
            -           Letters from Universities                                   -           63
            -           Central Ministries/Departments             -          10
            -           State Governments                                           -           04
            -           Others (Hospitals, Limited Companies etc.)  -   18       
 
            The Committee views this undue delay on the part of all concerned in such a vital area with serious concern.    Being
the nodal Ministry, the Ministry of Women and Child Development should pursue this matter vigorously and impress upon all
concerned to do the needful.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE
STILL AWAITED

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
 
-Nil-
 
 
 
 
 
*****
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
II.
                BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation regarding optimum utilization of funds which would
then substantiate the demand of the Ministry for additional funds.  The Committee believes that the implementation of sixteen
schemes of the Ministry should not suffer at any cost due to paucity of funds and also due to under-utilization of available
funds.  The Ministry has not given any information whether it has carried out an assessment of the schemes which are falling
behind their targets.  The Ministry should make a time-bound plan for carrying out the assessment of schemes.             Reasons
for under-utilization of funds should be ascertained and the procedural bottlenecks should be removed so as to pave the way
for timely implementation of schemes and optimum   and judicious utilization of funds and resources.  The Committee hopes
that the assurance given by the Ministry regarding compliance of the recommendations of the Committee given in its earlier
report is genuine as it has wide ramifications for more than half of the population of our country.          
                                                                   (Para 2.1)    
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            Non-receipt of viable proposals from the NGOs and constraints faced due to procedural formalities have been cited as
the main factors responsible for slow pace of expenditure under the women-related schemes during the Tenth Plan.  The
Committee has been given to understand that most of the schemes are proposed to be revamped so as to increase their scope
and content and streamline the procedure for release of grants during the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee hopes that with such
an objective for Eleventh Plan, targeted beneficiaries would get the maximum benefits envisaged under the different
components of various women-related schemes.
The Committee has been informed that under ICDS Training Programme, against a budget provision of Rs.87.02 crores
during 2006-07, an amount of Rs.65.56 crores (75.34% of budget) was released to the states against which an expenditure of
Rs.40.58 crores (62%) has been reported.  The Committee would like to point-out that all India figures seem to be quite
satisfactory.  However, state-wise details indicate a dismal scenario in respect of some states as indicated below.
                                                                                                (Rs. In lakhs)
State Allocation Funds released as on
31.3.07
Exp. Reported Unspent Balance
Bihar 934.43 626.00 59.23 566.77
Mizoram 14.44 14.44 1.72 12.72
Tamil Nadu 530.67 531.00 114.53 416.47
 
                 The Committee observes that in majority of the States, quantum of funds released is less than the approved
allocation and that too remained under-utilized.  The Committee is of the firm view that state specific interventions are
required to be made so as to remove regional imbalance being noticed under such a vital porogramme.         (Para 2.3)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is constrained to note that inspite of CAG observations about re-appropriation of funds amounting to
Rs.462.00 crore during 2004-05, the trend continued during 2005-06 and 2006-07 also.  The Committee has been given to
understand that major reappropriation of funds had valid reasons.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that
Rs.92.30 crore was reappropriated on account of 22 schemes during 2004-05, followed by re-appropriation of Rs.47.58 crore
for 22 schemes during 2005-06 and Rs.92.97 crore during 2006-07 for these schemes only.  Such a scenario confirms the
apprehensions of the Committee that inherent problem areas continue to be there for a large number of schemes resulting in
earmarked funds not being utilized as envisaged.                          (Para 2.4)

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is constrained to observe that there is only marginal improvement in the pendency of Utilization
Certificates as per the updated information submitted to it by the Ministry.  Against 6765 UCs reported last, total number of
pending UCs as on 31st July, 2007 is 6467.  What is more worrisome is that against the maximum number of 4697 outstanding
UCs pertaining to the earliest period (1986-87 to 2001-02), latest figures are 4679.  The Committee is compelled to conclude
that serious efforts and constant review claimed to have been made by the Ministry have failed to make any impact on the UCs
outstanding for last two decades.  The Committee also apprehends that records for this period may not be available with the
Ministry.  Had they been available, Committee’s direction for furnishing details of implementing agencies (State-wise,
Scheme-wise) which were yet to submit UCs would not have remained unattended.  The Committee would appreciate if this
information is furnished by the Ministry without any further delay. 
 
Committee had made specific observation on the availability of unspent balance under two major schemes .i.e ICDS
and Swayamsiddha.  The Committee finds that under ICDS, position has improved considerably by showing negative balance
by the end of March, 2007.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that in the absence of details from four States -
Bihar, Goa, Kerala and Uttranchal, this improvement level cannot be considered totally correct.  The Committee is also not
inclined to agree with justification given by the increasing unspent balcnce from Rs. 13.70 crore as on 1
st  April, 2006 to Rs.
18.86 crore as on 1 st April 2007 under Swayam Siddha Scheme.  To say that unspent balance with States is the amount
required for running the scheme defeats the very basis of implementation of a scheme with targets fixed and funds allocated
for every quarter and reviewed by the Department with State Nodal officers.
 
The Committee has been given to understand that grants are released in respect of those organizations whose UCs are
pending only when relaxations are obtained from the Ministry of Finance on case-to-case basis, keeping in mind the smooth
functioning of the schemes.  The Committee finds it hard to believe that the Ministry of Finance would have given relaxation
in a routine manner keeping in view such a large number of UCs remaining outstanding for yeas together.
             The Committee reiterates the need for evolving an effective monitoring mechanism for the clearing of pending UCs. 
Also, the Committee recommends the Ministry to guide the States Govts/statutory bodies/NGOs in clearing the pending UCs
and also to adopt a concept of fiscal responsibility for better fiscal management.  Hence, the Committee urges the Ministry to
make concerted efforts for solving this pressing problem of pendency of UCs.                                             
                                              (Paras 2.8, 2.9, 2.10 and 2.12)
 
III        INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES (ICDS) SCHEME
 
  Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee has been expressing its concern on the prolonged process of making sanctioned AWCs operational. 
Although the latest details made available to the Committee indicate some progress made in this vital area, the fact remains
that quite a few states continue to lag behind.  It would not be wrong to conclude that average target of 12 months in making
an AWC operational seems to be unachievable in respect of some major states.  Committee is perturbed to point out again that
there is a shortfall even in AWCs sanctioned upto 31.3.05 and the status as on 31.3.07 as indicated below-
                               
State Sanctioned upto 31.3.08 Operational as on 31.3.07
Bihar 60,813 57,767
Jammu & Kashmir 18,772 16,409
Jharkhand 24,171 22,304
West Bengal 57,540 56,774
 
States like Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Nagaland and Punjab have not gone beyond the AWCs sanctioned during 2004-05. 
Majority of the States are yet to make any noticeable progress with regard to AWCs sanctioned upto 31
st March, 2006.
            The Committee has been given to understand that due to elections, delay in administrative sanctions, court cases, etc.
recruitment of AWWs and AWHs gets delayed; with the result sanctioned AWCs remain un-operational.  The Committee
would again emphasize that it is high time that these problem areas are removed. Continuous monitoring and review by the
Ministry with the State authorities do not seem to have yielded any noticeable results.  The Committee strongly feels that
recruitment procedure for AWWs/AWHs may be reviewed thoroughly and revamped with state-specific interventions,
wherever required.                                                                                      (Para 3.6)
 
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
         
Comments of the Committee
 
Committee’s attention has been drawn by the disturbing findings brought out in an Evaluation Study entitled ‘Three
Decades of ICDS: An Appraisal’ conducted by NIPCCD in December, 2006.  In response to Committee’s recommendation for
initiating corrective measures, the Ministry has come forward with a detailed reply,  outlining the various initiatives to be
taken to provide the required infrastructure and basic facilities at AWCs.  The Committee is dismayed to note that it has taken
more than three decades for the Ministry to realize that AWCs were lacking the minimum facilities and participation of local
community was simply not there.  The Committee can only say that the task ahead is very difficult as convergence of various
schemes handled by different Ministries is proposed during the 11
th plan for making AWCs functional in the real sense. 
Relying only on the Statements of Expenditure sent by the State Governments for analyzing the judicious utilization of
allocated funds will not serve the purpose now. 
            The Committee would like to emphasize that in the backdrop of States failing to effectively implement the Scheme,
due to one reason or the other, Centre need to play a more pro-active role.  This can be easily done by making surprise visits,
analyzing with State implementing agencies the problem areas and finding out the ways and means to tackle the same.  The
Committee strongly feels that along with the implementing agencies, time has also come for reaching out to the targeted
beneficiaries directly. Once, they are made aware, through media and local authorities, the multi-level monitoring mechanism
will get the real strength and lead to fulfillment of all the objectives of this Flagship Scheme of the Ministry.                     
                                                                                    (Para 3.10)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee notes that attempts of the Ministry for creating a database on the infrastructural facilities available at
AWCs have not proved to be very successful.  Information from only 18 States has been received and the major States like
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Chattisgarh, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh are
still to send the information.  The Committee strongly feels that average percentage of pucca building of AWCs would come
down once data from all the States/UTs is available.  The Committee finds that  data from 30 States/UTs is available so far as
availability of drinking water and toilet facilities at AWCs is concerned.  In these 30 States, having 5,55,459 AWCs, 30.8%
AWCs neither have toilet nor drinking water supply, and only 8.68% AWCs having both the facilities.  Here also major States
like Bihar, Assam, Karnataka, Jammu & Kashmir are not included.  Condition of AWCs will make a dismal reading, if data
from all the operational 8,44,743 AWCs is available. The Committee apprehends that ground realities would prove to be more
disheartening as this data is mainly based on the information sent by State Governments.                                 (Para 3.12)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry is considering revamping of the Scheme and implementing it is a
“Mission Mode on the pattern of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and Natilonal/Rural Health Mission” in the 11
th Plan period.  The
Committee however, would like to remind that the 11 th plan period has begun and this exercise should be finalized at the
earliest for the timely implementation of the scheme with its new facets.  Preparatory exercises like setting up of State and
District level societies for ensuring smooth and timely flow of funds and apprising the PRIs, SHGs of women, State-holders
Committee such as Mothers Committee etc of their involvement in motivation and support to the scheme, need to be done
beforehand.  The Committee is of the view that experience of the Ministries of Human Resource Development and Health and
Family Welfare so far in administering SSA and NRHM in Mission Mode may be shared by the Ministry so as to ensure a
fully effective monitoring mechanism under ICDS.                   (Paras 3.14 & 3.16)
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee observes that there is no noticeable improvement so far as children            (6 months-6 years) receiving
supplementary nutrition is concerned.  Out of 15.78 crore eligible children, 10.49 crore children were covered under ICDS and
only 5.43 crore children were receiving supplementary nutrition as on 30
th September, 2006.  The Committee finds that
position remains unchanged as on 31 st March, 2007.  Out of 10.76 crore children under ICDS, only 5.82 crore children were
getting supplementary nutrition.  It seems that regular review and monitoring of the coverage of beneficiaries has failed to
make any difference as in 13 States, less than 50% child population was being covered.  Coverage in States like Assam
(26.04%), Bihar (35.92%), Kerala (35.40%), Rajasthan (33.03%), Jammu & Kashmir (37.13%) was very discouraging.  The
Committee fails to understand the constraints for supplementary nutrition not being provided to all the children registered in an
AWC when required finds were reported to be available.  Latest data made available to the Committee indicates that in the
case of many States, release of State-share seems to have been delayed as major expenditure is reported to be made during the
last quarter of the year.

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
            Hence, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure timely release of funds to the States.  Also, close
monitoring and review of the implementation of scheme and coverage of Ministries needs to be carried out on a regular basis
for effective operationalisation of the Scheme.                                                                            (Para 3.18)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee would appreciate if feedback about the bottlenecks/problem areas besides paucity of funds, being faced
by the States lagging behind in making supplementary nutrition available to the targeted children, is furnished to it.    (Para
3.19)  
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 2007-08, the Committee was informed that the Review
Committee to examine the current levels of honorarium and related issues of Anganwadi Workers and Helpers set up on the
22
nd September, 2006, had submitted its Report which was under the consideration of the Government.  Committee in its
Report presented to the Parliament on the 27th April, 2007, had hoped that a final view on the recommendations of the Review
Committee would be taken at the earliest.  The Committee, however, is surprised to note that although more than a year has
passed since the submission of Review Committee Report, it still continues to be under the consideration of the Ministry as no
Status Report has been given in the Action Taken Note.  The Committee takes a serious view of this and impresses upon the
Ministry to do the needful without any further delay.                                                 (Para 3.23)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Acute shortage of Anganwadi Workers, Helpers and Supervisors, the three key functionaries of an Anganwadi Centre
in all the States, has been engaging the attention of the Committee for quite some time.  Latest feedback received from the
Ministry, however, reveals a discouraging scenario.  The Committee is not inclined to agree with the claim of the Ministry that
there has been improvement in the recruitment of AWWs and Helpers as on 31.03.2007, compared with the position as on
30.09.2006.  The Committee also has its reservation about the 62% in-position strength of Supervisors vis-a-vis sanctioned
strength as on 30.09.2006.  Like last year, glaring disparities between the number of sanctioned posts of all the three key
functionaries of AWC in some of the very crucial States continue to persist as revealed in the latest data made available to the
Committee.  The Committee is constrained to observe that in States like Assam, Bihar, Gujrat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Nagaland,  Punjab, West Bengal, even all the posts of AWWs and Helpers sanctioned as on 31.03.2005,
have not been filled up upto 31.03.2007.  It is true that posts have been duly sanctioned in subsequent years, but it is very
disturbing to note that not even a single State has succeeded in recruiting AWWs and Helpers against at the posts sanctioned in
2005-06.   Position with respect to Supervisors is more grim.  With only 26,052 Supervisors to oversee 8,44,743 AWCs, one
can imagine the ground realities at such Centres. 
            The Committee has been informed that instructions have already been issued to States/UTs for reservation of 25% of
vacancies of Supervisors for AWWs and similar percentage in vacancies AWWs for AWHs.  Information from 21 States has
been received that 25 percent posts of Supervisors have been reserved to be filled up from AWWs.  The Committee fails to
understand that inspite of such initiatives, sanctioned posts of all the three categories continue to remain vacant.  The
Committee has no option but to reiterate that thorough revamping of the entire recruitment procedure is required to be
undertaken in active co-ordination with States, specially those having the maximum vacancies.
(Paras 3.24, 3.25 & 3.27)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is happy to note that benefits of Anganwadi Kanyakartri Bima Yojana have started reaching the
Anganwadi Workers and Helpers.  The Committee, however, finds that premium of Rs.80/- per beneficiary payable by the
insured Anganwadi Workrs/Helpers has been waived w.e.f. 1.4.07 for a period of two years.  The Committee fails to
comprehend the waiving of premium only for two years.  The Committee reiterates that this facility should be extended to all
concerned without imposing any condition therein.                                                                                                                    
(Para 3.29)        
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            While deliberating on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 2007-08, the Committee was informed that a Central
Monitoring Unit had been set up at the National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development (NIPCCD) for
monitoring ICDS through independent professional organization in each State/UT.  All the 44 organizations participating in a
workshop conducted by NIPCCD had unanimously agreed to act as select/state level institutions for monitoring of ICDS.  The

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
Committee was given to understand that detailed guidelines for monitoring were being finalized.  This was the position in
April, 2007.  Since then, more than seven months have passed but the detailed guidelines are yet to be finalized.  The
Committee is not happy with such state of affairs.  The Committee is not aware by when the guidelines would be finalized. 
Only thereafter the process for formally engaging the selected institutions would start.  The Committee has been emphasizing
again and again that schemes should come out of procedural formalities so as to ensure their benefits reaching out to the
targeted beneficiaries.  The Committee can only reiterate that the new monitoring mechanism envisaged for ICDS should be
activated at the earliest.                                                                                                         (Para  3.31)
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
            The Committee notes that 10.53 lakh AWCs have been sanctioned upto 31
st March, 2007 and the third phase of
expansion of AWCs has already been initiated by the Department.  All these AWCs are expected to be operationalized by
December, 2008, the date indicated by the Supreme Court.  The Committee can only say that it is a very ambitious plan as
ground realities are entirely different.  As per the feedback given by the Ministry, out of 10.52 lakh AWCs sanctioned upto
31st March, 2007, 8.44 lakh AWCs were operational on that date.  The Committee would like to point out that all these
operational AWCs could not be considered operational as a large number of AWCs were not having the required manpower. 
In the absence of key functionaries like AWW/Helper/Supervisor, an AWC cannot be considered functional in the real sense. 
The Committee, therefore, observes that Supreme Court directive can only be carried out through an Action Plan in co-
ordination with State Governments at all the levels.                                        (Para 3.32)
 
IV.
              TRAINING PROGRAMME UNDER ICDS
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            Training programme of ICDS functionaries continues to be an area of concern for the Committee.  The Committee had
observed that during the first three quarters of 2006-07, achievement level for training of different functionaries remained well
below the physical targets.  However, the Committee is surprised to note that the last quarter of 2006-07 could be considered
very successful.  It seems that out of the total number of functionaries trained during the entire year; more than half of them
were imparted training during the last quarter.  Even then, overall average rate of training had remained below 50 percent, with
some of the states showing very unsatisfactory level.  Reasons like targets set on the higher side, recruitment of
AWWs/Helpers getting delayed due to elections, delay in administrative sanctions, court cases etc. cited by the Ministry do not
seem to be very convincing.  The Committee would again emphasize that all out efforts need to be made by all concerned so
that all the functionaries under ICDS get proper and timely training.  One must not forget that only trained manpower can play
an effective role in reaching out to the targeted beneficiaries under ICDS.                            (Para  4.4)
 
V         RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL CRECHE SCHEME FOR THE CHILDREN OF WORKING MOTHERS
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is concerned with the concentration of crèches in some States. The Committee is happy to note that the
Ministry has initiated action to expand the coverage under the Rajiv Gandhi National Creche Scheme.  The Committee hopes
that uncovered areas would be brought under this scheme during the 11
th Plan in a time bound manner.
(Para 5.5)
 
XI        NEW SCHEMES
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee has been voicing its deep concern on the practice of launching/announcing of new schemes and their
remaining in formulation stage.  The Committee finds that approach of the Ministry remains unchanged.  The Committee had
highlighted the status of two new schemes in its earlier report.  The Committee is constrained to observe that those two
schemes, ie Comprehensive Scheme for Combating Trafficking of Women and Children and Scheme for Relief and
Rehabilitation of Rape Victims continue to remain in the formulation stage.  While the first scheme awaits the approval of the
Ministry of Finance before its formal launch, in-principle approval from the Planning Commission is awaited in the case of
second scheme.  The Committee can only hope that Comprehensive Scheme for Combating Trafficking of Women and
Children will perhaps be launched in 2008-09.  However, the same expectation cannot be made in respect of the Scheme for
Relief and Rehabilitation of Rape Victims.  The Committee would once again emphasize that the Ministry needs to take the
initiative in minimizing the time required for launch of a new scheme in the real sense.                                                 (Para
11.2)

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            Malnutrition continues to afflict both children and young mothers in our country, inspite of this problem being tackled
through schemes administered by a number of Ministries including the Ministry of Women and Child Development.  The
Committee had noted earlier that a National Level Coordination Committee consisting of representatives from all the
concerned Ministries had been constituted in the year 2005.  On a specific enquiry about the number of meetings held by this
Committee since its inception, the Committee has been informed that only one meeting has been held by the Coordination
Committee so far.  As a pre-liminary exercise, joint letters have been written to all the States/UTs by the Secretary (WCD) and
Secretary (Health).  States have been directed to set up Coordination Committees at different levels.  A national level
Monitoring Committee under the chairpersonship of MOS(WCD) was set up in February, 2007.  The Committee does not
anticipate any significant outcome of these initiatives, reason being that different authorities are yet to be set up and if
constituted, yet to meet.  The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry of WCD needs to take a more pro-active role by
having a regular interaction with the local/state authorities of pockets showing high level of malnutrition.  Only then one can
think of ensuring that our children do not continue to suffer from malnutrition.                                                                 
                        (Para 11.4)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee finds it unfortunate that such an important body like National Nutrition Mission (NNM), which is
headed by no less than Hon'ble Prime Minister has not met even once since its inception in July, 2003.  The Executive
Committee and the said Core Group, it appears have not been as serious as it should have been.  Instead, Ministry has tried to
justify unsuccessfully by citing reasons like national advocacy, sensitization, etc.  The Committee feels that the Ministry
should be more serious on the matter.
(Para 11.5)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is not aware whether comments sought by August 13, 2007 has been received or not & also the
meeting of EFC has taken place or not.  The Committee would like to know the status of the scheme as nearly three quarters of
the year 2007-08 has already elapsed.  The Committee further recommends that the scheme be launched throughout the
country at one go and not in phases.                                          (Para 11.6)
 
XIII      CONDENSED COURSES FOR WOMEN EDUCATION
 
Comments of the Committee
           
The Committee notes with disappointment that the Ministry is yet to consider the final report of the National Working
Group on Condensed Courses of Education for women submitted in May, 2006, i.e. more than a year ago.  The Committee
fails to understand the reasons for unduly long time being taken by the Ministry in the matter.  Ministry’s response of a
reminder sent to it for expediting the approval of the recommendations made by the Working Group makes little sense.  The
Committee can only hope that the Ministry would take a final view and revamp the Scheme of Condensed Courses for Women
Education as suggested by the Working Group.  The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation of expediting the
implementation of the revised programme as recommended by the Working Group from the very outset of 11
th Plan period.
                                                                                                                        (Para 13.5)
 
XIV.    SCHEMES TRANSFERRED TO STATES
 
BALIKA SAMRIDDHI YOJANA (BSY)
 
Comments of the Committee                                      
 
The Committee expresses its serious reservation on the response received from the Ministry on the status of Balika
Samridhi Yojana.  A Scheme continuing to remain slated for transfer to the State sector on a decision by the Planning
Commission for more than ten years, awaiting consideration of the National Development Council is indeed beyond
comprehension.  This is all the more disturbing, as authentic feedback of the State Governments having reservation about the
efficacy of the Scheme is also there.  The Committee can only point out that this is a classic case of a scheme lying entangled
in complex procedural formalities.  Situation becomes more grave if huge amount of public funds are also involved and
unaccounted for.  The Committee would like to remind the Ministry that yet another plan period has started without things

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
moving.  Being the administrative Ministry it is mainly the responsibility of the Ministry to expedite a decision from the
concerned authorities.                                                   (Para 14.3, 14.4 & 14.5)
 
XV ASSISTANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION/EXPANSION OF HOSTEL BUILDINGS FOR WORKING WOMEN WITH
DAY CARE CENTRES FOR CHILDREN
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee does not anticipate the launching of the revamped Scheme of Assistance for Construction/Expansion of
Hostel Buildings for Working Women with Day Care centres for children during the current year as assured by the Ministry
earlier.  The Committee would impress upon the Ministry to pursue with all the State Governments for expediting demand
survey for Working Women’s Hostels.             (Paras  15.4, 15.5 & 15.6)
 
XX.      PREVENTION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACE
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            Supreme Court judgment in the Vishaka case is applicable to all work places throughout the country, both in the public
and private sector.  Latest feedback received from the Ministry reveals that only 95 letters of confirmation regarding the
formation of the Complaint Committees have been received so far as given below –
 
            -           Letters from Universities                                   -           63
            -           Central Ministries/Departments             -          10
            -           State Governments                                           -           04
            -           Others (Hospitals, Limited Companies etc.)  -   18       
 
            The Committee views this undue delay on the part of all concerned in such a vital area with serious concern.    Being
the nodal Ministry, the Ministry of Women and Child Development should pursue this matter vigorously and impress upon all
concerned to do the needful.                                                                                                                 (Para 20.2)
 
 
 
******
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
MINUTES
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 15 th November, 2007 in
Committee Room `63', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
 
1.      Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
2.      Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.      Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4.      Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
5.      Shri Uday Pratap Singh
6.      Shrimati Brinda Karat
7.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
8.      Shrimati Supriya Sule
 
LOK SABHA
 
9.      Shri Basudeb Barman
10.  Shri Ramswaroop Koli
11.  Shrimati Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
12.  Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
13.  Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
14.  Dr. Meinya Thokchom
15.  Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
16.  Shri K. Virupakshappa
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Director
Shri Amit Kumar, Committee Officer
 
 
 
2.         ***                                                      ***                                                      ***
 
3.         ***                                                      ***                                                      ***     
4.         The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet again at 4 p.m. on the 29
th November, 2007 to consider and adopt the draft
Action Taken Reports pertaining to the Committee’s Reports on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Departments/Ministries
under its purview ***
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                                               N.K.
SINGH                                                                         15th NOVEMBER, 2007                                                                    
                        DIRECTOR
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________________________
***Relates to other matter.
III
THIRD MEETING
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 29 th November, 2007 in
Committee Room `A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
 
1. Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
4. Shrimati Brinda Karat
5. Shrimati Supriya Sule
 
LOK SABHA
 
6. Shri Harisinh Chavda
7. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
8. Dr. Meinya Thokchom
9. Shri Francis K. George
10. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Director
Shri Amit Kumar, Committee Officer
 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee, thereafter, took up for
consideration the draft Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the Committee's Reports on Demands for Grants
2007-08 of the (i) *** (ii) *** (iii) Ministry of Women and Child Development (iv) *** The Committee discussed and adopted
these Reports with certain modifications. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to fix a suitable date to present/lay the
Reports during the current session of Parliament and also nominate members from both the Houses to present/lay the reports.
 
3.         ***                                                      ***                                                      ***
 
4.         ***                                                      ***                                                      ***
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m.

203 rd report on hrd committe
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/203rdreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:45:48]
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                                   N.K.SINGH
29th November, 2007                                                                                       DIRECTOR
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________________________
***Relates to other matter.