PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA
JAIPUR

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25.2.97)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 25.2.97)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 1997/PHALGUNA, 1918 (SAKA)


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA
JAIPUR

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25.2.97)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25.2.97)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 1997/Phalguna, 1918 (Saka)

2612/LS/F—1-A


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1996-97)

. Shri S. B. Chavan—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra $. Deo

Dr. B.B. Dutta
Dr. M. Aram
Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Shri Raj Nath Singh

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandhu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Dr. Mohan Babu

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shri Jai Prakash

. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Shrimati Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

. Dr. C. Silvera

. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
. Shri Dutta Meghe

. Shri 1.0. Sanadi

. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao

. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

. Shri Pawan Diwan

. Shri Krishna

. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

. Shri Samik Lahiri

. Shri 5.6. Karvendhan

. Shri Mukhtar Anees

. Dr. M. Jagannath

0)

2612/LS/ F—2-A.


42.
43.
44.
45.

(i)
Dr. Bali Ram
Shri Ranen Barman
Shri Surender Singh
Shri Pradeep Jaiswal
SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2612/LS/F—2-B


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty-third Report of the Committee on the
National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur under the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
& Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.

2. A Study Group of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development visited the National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur on
5th November, 1996 to make an on the spot Study and also to get first hand information
about the functioning of the National Institute of Ayurveda. A list of Members who visited
the National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur is enclosed as Annexure-l.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the
16th January, 1997.

New De.ut; 5.8. CHAVAN
16th January 1997 Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary

26 Pausa, 1918 (Saka) Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development.

(iii)


REPORT

I. INTRODUCTION

1. The National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur was established on 7th February, 1976 as
an Autonomous Body under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare by taking over the
erstwhile Government Ayurvedic College, Jaipur. The Institute complex is spread over in an
area of 13 acres of land situated within the walled city. The activities of the Institute are
controlled and managed by the following 3 Standing Committees:

1. Governing Body

2. Finance Committee

3. Scientific Advisory Committee.

Il. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

2. The NIA is an apex Institute of Ayurveda engaged in teaching, research and health

care. The main objectives for which the Institute is established are as follows:

1. To promote the growth and development of Ayurveda;

2. To produce graduates and post-graduates in all branches of Ayurveda;

3. To conduct research on various aspects of Ayurveda;

4. To provide medical care through Ayurvedic System of Medicine to the suffering
humanity;

5. To provide and assist in providing services and facilities of the highest order for
research, evaluation, training, consultation and guidance to Ayurvedic System of
Medicine;

6. To conduct experiments and develop patterns of teaching in under-graduate and
post-graduate education in all branches of Ayurveda.

या. INFRASTRUCTURE

3. The Institute has Academic Block, Hospital Block, Hostels for Boys and Girls,
Animal House, Kitchen Block, Pharmacy etc. The Committee was, however, informed that
the Institute has no facility for residential quarters for Staff, Guest House, Administrative
Block etc. Steps are being taken to have separate Administrative Block, Guest House etc.,
the Committee was informed. An amount of Rs. 50.00 lakhs was sanctioned and
negotiations, in this regard, were being made with the Rajasthan Housing Board, it was
added. The Committee desires that immediate steps may be taken for early finalisation.

IV. EQUIPMENTS
4. Major Equipments and Machineries available with the Institute are:
X-Ray Machines (300 MA & 50 MA);
Ultra Sound Sonography Machine (Supplied by WHO);
Anaesthesia Ventilator-Respiratory Gas Monitor;
Dental Unit with X-Ray Machine;
Medicare 8 Channel Polyrite; and Electric Bhatti etc.

1

2612/LS/F—3-A


The Committee was, however, informed that the Institute still requires a number of
equipments for proper running and development of various facilities. It was also stated that
the Finance Committee had already approved purchase of the equipment, on availability of
funds. An amount of Rs. 66.07 lakhs is required for acquiring the equipments, it was added
Clarifying the position in this regard, the Director of the Institute stated that the
Department of ISM&H gives a lumpsum amount as grant to the Institute and whenever
some amount is available out of this grant, it would be spent on purchasing the equipment.
In this manner it would take a long time to purchase all the equipments listed and by the
time this list is.exhausted, another list will be ready. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that sufficient additional funds may be made available to the Institute for acquiring necessary
equipments.

Vv. STAFF POSITION
5.1 The staff positition of the Institute is as under:

Teaching:

Sanctioned Available i Vacant Addl.
Requirement
Professor 10 Nil 10 3
Associate Prof. 23 9 14 12
Assistant Prof. 24 10 14 5
Lecturer 22 15 qi _
Jr. Lecturer 16 16 ase न
Toran: 95 10050 45 20

Non-Teaching:
Group A 6 3 3 9
Group B 8 1 i 5
Group C 213 128 85 75
Group D 206 181 25 58
TOTAL: 433 O10) 120 147

From the above, it is very clear that the Institute is running without even a single professor
inspite of 10 sanctioned posts. Out of 95 sanctioned posts on teaching side only about half
are in position. In this connection, the Director of the Institute clarified that in September,
94 there were 39 vacancies on teaching side and they continued to remain vacant. Besides
these vacancies, 6 more posts fell vacant from September, 94 till date adding the number
upto 45, he added. The Committee understands that the quality of teaching is affected to a
great extent by this. When asked about the reasons for this state of affairs and the action
taken to fill up vacant posts, it was stated that the NIA Service Rules including the
Recruitment Rules made in 1982, were outdated and inappropriate. Some words were
ambiguously worded leading to many litigations. Modified rules were drafted keeping with
the pattern of University system and Medical Colleges. These were got approved by Hon’ble
Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare and notified on 28th September, 1996. With
these new Recruitment Rules, a revised advertisement is being made for various posts, the
Director of the Institute informed the Committee.

2612/LS / F—3-B


5.2 The Committee views this with great concern, The Committee is not in a position to
understand as to how the training courses and the hospital are being run with such a large
number of posts lying vacant, on both teaching and non-teaching side. Now since the rules
have already been modified, there should not be any difficulty in recruiting the staff as per
the requirement. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that immediate steps may
be taken to fill up all the sanctioned posts. The additional posts may also be sanctioned as
per requirement

VI. TEACHING ACTIVITIES

6.1 The Committee has noted that the Under-graduate course of Ayurved-acharya
(B.A.M.S.) is spread over to 44 years of the main course and one year of Internship. 60
students are admitted each year. Admission is made after conducting a pre-Ayurveda Test.
The Committee was informed that upto 1989 the Test was conducted by the Institute on All-
India basis and from 1990 onwards, the University of Rajasthan is conducting it. The
Committee is, however, constrained to note that during the years 1993 to 1995, no admission
was made because the University did not conduct the Test. While, the University wanted to
admit the students with the oriental Sanskrit course of ‘Upadhyaya’, the CCIM insisted on
admitting students with Biological Sciences at 10+2. The case went upto the Supreme Court
and the Supreme Court held that the CCIM regulations should only be adopted. It is
unfortunate that on such a small issue the whole admission process was stopped and the
admissions could not be held for 3 years. The Committee hopes that this would not recur
again.

6.2 The Committee was given to understand that the students are admitted in the course
practically from Rajasthan and nearby areas and. there is no National Character as such. The
Committee also regrets to note that the Institute is functioning as one of the local Ayurvedic
Colleges. The Syllabus, and Curriculum are also not of high standards. This is compounded
by the large number of teaching posts lying vacant and the sub-standard teaching being
imparted. Another problem which is also of a great concern is that examinations are not
conducted as per schedule, as a result of which, the 54 years course is stretched over to 7 or
8 years. When the Vice-Chancellor of Rajasthan University was asked about the affiliation
itute, he informed that the affiliation for the graduation course was granted about
ago, initially on a provisional basis for a few years and thereafter on a permanent

is. The Committee feels that with so many problems afflicting the Institute and due to
lack of basic facilities such as sufficient teaching faculty and equipment, the Institute cannot
impart education of the standard expected of a national institute. The Institute should first
set itself right including provision of the basic facilities before admitting students in future,
starting with the next academic year itself. The Department of ISM&H should also make
necessary endeavours in this regard. Otherwise, with the present sub-standard education
being imparted in the Institute, the products of the Institute cannot be expected to give a
better treatment to the patients.

6.3 The Committee has also noted that Post-Graduation Courses are offered in
9 Departments with an intake capacity of 5 in each Department. For the first time, the P.G.
course was started in one Department in 1971. Later on, in 1981 five Departments, in 1987
one Department and in 1988 two Departments started the P.G. courses.

6.4 During the course of the visit of the Committee to the Institute, the Committee held
dis ons with the Vice-Chancellor, Rajasthan University alongwith the Director, NIA and
the Joint Secretary, Department of ISM&H. During the visit, the Vice-Chancellor informed
the Committee that the Rajasthan University did not grant any affiliation to the Post
Graduate course. However, the Department of ISM&H later informed the Committee that



4

affiliation was granted to the P.G. courses from the respective years when the courses were
started. In view of the condtradictory statements given by the Vice-Chancellor and the
Department, the Chairman again sought clarifications from the Vice-Chancellor, Rajasthan
University and the Secretary, Department of Indian Systems of Medicines and Homoeopathy
on the 4th January, 1997.

6.5 The Vice-Chancellor of gthe Rajasthan University while clarifying the position
corrected his earlier statement and informed that the University has granted provisional
affiliation. He further stated that the provisional affiliation is reviewed after five years and if
found satisfactory, permanent affiliation is granted. He further informed the Committee that
even though a regular review is not undertaken every year, yet if the performance is found
unsatisfactory or in case any complaints are received, the provisional affiliation can be
withdrawn. The Director of the Institute informed the Committee that the degree given is
not recognised by the Central Council of Indian Medicines.

6.6 The Committee expresses its concern over the unsatisfactory state of affairs prevailing
in the Institute and the casual approach shown towards the important aspect of affiliation of
the Institute with the University by all the concerned authorities i.e. the National Institute of
Ayurveda, the Department of Indian Systems of Medicines and Homoeopathy; and last but
not least the Central Council of Indian Medicines (CCIM). The Committee takes a very
serious note and observes that the Department of ISM & H and the CCIM, have totally
neglected the Institute all these years. Even though the CCIM is supposed to review the
functioning of the Institute every year, it does not appear to have taken any measures to
improve the academic standard of the Institute, for recruitment of staff and for overall
improvement. The Committee takes a strong objection to the casual approach adopted by
CCIM towards the NIA, Jaipur, particularly when it has not so far recognised the degrees
given by the Institute and has thus put a blind eye to the fact that examinations are being
held regularly. After the CCIM has reviewed, the Committee is not able to understand as to
why they did not insist on maintaining certain standards. Any deficiency found should have
been brought to the notice of the Institute and within a given time limit the infrastructural
deficiency should have been made good. The Five year rule may be the University’s concern
but for granting provisional affiliation also it is the bounden duty of the CCIM to see that
the deficiency has been made good within the stipulated time laid down by it.

6.7 Even though the first P.G. Course was started in 1971 and the Rajasthan University is
supposed to review it after five years, it does not appear to have reviewed the provisional
affiliation so far. To a specific query, the Vice-Chancellor, could not clarify the position
relating to the conditions laid down by the University for granting provisional affiliation. In
fact the Committee does not see any logic as to why the affiliation is reviewed after five
years. The University should take a final decision in the matter immediately and if the
Institute meets all the requirements, the affiliation should be granted without further loss of
time as it directly affects the future career of students enrolled in the Institute for P.G.
courses,

6.8 The CCIM should also conduct its own review and find out the necessary requirements
that are to be met and should take appropriate steps at the earliest. The Department of ISM
& H should not leave any efforts for improving the performance of the Institute and to meet
all the requirements for Graduation and Post-Graduation Courses. The Committee would:
very much like that the responsibility should be fixed for not making any effects for getting
permanent affiliation for the Post Graduation Courses of the Institute to the Rajasthan
University even though the first Post Graduation Course was started in 1971. The
Department should give a compliance report to the Committee within two months.



6.9 The Committee is also constrained to note that national character has not yet been
developed in the Institute. Majority of the teaching staff are taken over employees of the
erstwhile Government Ayurvedic College who do not possess the required qualifications. The
teachers as well as the students have developed the habit of evading classes due to which there is
difficulty in conducting classes regularly. The Committee feels that the things should no longer
be allowed to continue in this manner. A total over-hauling of the functioning is required. The
immediate step should be to appoint the required staff.

6.10 The Director also stated that the Institute has applied to the Rajasthan University for
autonomy. This would enable the Institute to hold examinations on its own from all over the
country and give a national character, he added. He also stated that the autonomy would also
help in improving academic performance. But the Committee has got its own doubts on this.
When the Institute is not able to function well under the control of the University, then it cannot
be expected to improve its functioning without University’s supervision. The Committee,
however, not only agrees that the Institute should reach the level of autonomous Institution but
also expects it to attain the deemed university status. But at present, the Institute is not in a
position to do either. Firstly, it is required to be set right. For this, the Director of the NIA, the
Vice-Chancellor of Rajasthan University and the representatives of the Department of ISM &
H should sit together, discuss the problems and find solutions. The question of autonomy can be
considered after an year or two when the Institute starts functioning with adequate teaching
staff.

VII. PHARMACY

7.1 The Institute has a Pharmacy having modern as well as conventional equipments and
instruments. It is engaged in the manufacture of medicines for research mostly for IPD and
OPD. When asked to comment on the scope of large-scale and commercial manufacture of
medicines, it was clarified that the Pharmacy has a good scope to manufacture more medicines if
the vacant posts are filled up. The Committee feels that there is a tremendous demand for
Ayurvedic medicines in the country. This potential can be tapped well if the medicines are
produced to the maximum capacity. The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in the
preceding paragraphs to fill up vacancies at the earliest as the rules have already been modified.
The Director also informed the Committee that the Institute would start a herbal garden if the
State Government of Rajasthan provides land. The Committee recommends that the
Department of Indian Systems of Medicines and Homoeopathy may take up the matter with the
State Government in this regard.

VIII. RESEARCH

8.1 The Committee views with concern to note that no research activity worth mentioning is
undertaken in the Institute. The presently available faculty members are not tuned to the work
culture expected in such an Institution of national importance. Research work is undertaken in a
very few areas such as Sciatica, Neuralgia etc. with Agni Karma. Considerable work on Fistula
and Piles with the use of Ksharasutra has been done by an Associate Professor of the Institute
for which he was awarded many Merit Certificates including one by the Governor of Rajasthan.
The Director of the Institute also informed the Committee that the research work being
undertaken in the Institute is not of the standard of a National Institute. Efforts are, therefore,
required to be made to uplift the Institute to the status and level to which it is ordained for and
to enable it to achieve its objectives. The Allopathic medicines are becoming very costly day-by-
day, besides giving side-effects. Improving the research activities is all the more necessary in
view of the Post Graduation and Ph.D. Courses being run in the Institute. The Institute should
therefore, rise to the occasion and prove the effectiveness of Ayurvedic medicines, old and
newly invented, through its research so that people look towards Ayurveda.


ati ti

IX. PATIENT CARE ACTIVITIES

9.1 The Institute has 2 Hospitals having a capacity of 200 beds at present. Since the
inception of the Institute, 6.34 lakh patients (medicine days) have been treated for various
diseases. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the average occupancy is only
about 63%.

9.2 The turn out of patients in the Hospital is comparatively low. The Committee is of the
view that the mishandling of the Institute on all fronts is the main reason for this. All-out
efforts are, therefore, required to be taken to reverse the trend and to make the Institute a
real National Institute in trué sense of the term. With the revised recruitment rules, it is
expected that the Institute will get better talent and with that, the Hospital will improve
qualitatively. Confidence among the people is also required to be increased on the
effectiveness of the treatment in the Institute so that people in large numbers come to the
Institute for treatment.

X. GOVERNING BODY

10.1 The Committee is constrained to learn that the Governing Body of the Institute has
not been able to meet for the last six years. The last meeting was held on 23.9.90 after
which the Governing Body could not meet. The reasons given for not having regular
meetings of the Governing Body is that the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare
who happens to be the ex-officio President of the National Institute of Ayurveda, is not able
to give time for convening regular meetings of the Governing Body due to his pre-
occupation. In making the Minister of Health as the President of the Governing Body, the
idea must have been to take full advantage of his presence for taking the decisions on the
problems/issues confronting the Institute but the fact that the Governing Body has not been
able to meet for a number of years, has frustrated the very purpose. Since the Governing
Body is the main forum for decision-making and review of the work, many issues and
problems relating to the efficient functioning of the Institute have been lying unresolved all
these years. When the Committee sought to know the action being taken in this regard, the
representative of Department of ISM & H informed that efforts are being made to amend
the bye-laws to ensure regular meetings of the Governing Body. The Department of ISM &
H is squarely responsible for not holding regular meetings of the Governing Body and for
allowing the Institute to deteriorate to the present level. The Committee takes a strong
exception to this attitude of the Department (Department of ISM & H now and Department
of Health earlier). The Committee strongly recommends that immediate meeting to resolve
all pending problems, should be called. The Committee also recommends that the rules and
bye-laws of the Governing Body should be amended so as to make provision for
appointment of a person, other than the Minister of Health, as Chairman of the Governing
Body, who is high enough in the hierarchy to take prompt decisions.

XI. BUDGET
11.1 The allocations made for the Institution during the last three years are as under:—
; (Rs. in thousands)

Actual Exp. B.E. R.E. B.E.

(1994-95) (1995-96) (1995-96) (1996-97)

PLAN 170,00... 200,00 170,00 200,00-
NON-PLAN 200,00 222,00 204,00 224.00

From the above, it may be seen that during 1995-96 the Budget Estimate of Rs. 200



Z.

lakhs was reduced to Rs. 170 lakhs in R.E. on Plan side. On this the Department have
stated that the reduction at the R.E. stage was mainly due to slow construction. The
Committee takes a very serious view of the slow pace of construction activities going on in
the Institute. This, the Committee feels is mainly due to lack of any monitoring on the.
construction activities. The construction activities going on in the Institute are for a Boys
Hostel, Over head Water Tank, Kitchen Block etc. The Committee desires that there shall
be a regular monitoring of the construction work. As already suggested earlier, the
Department may grant additional funds to the Institute for acquiring necessary modern
equipments.

11.2 The Committee has also noted that the Institute is in the practice of depositing in
the Bank as FDRs, certain amount meant for construction work. When the Committee
sought clarification on this, the representative of the Department of ISM&H stated that the
grants are given by the Department to the Institute, using the State P.W.D. as an agency to
carry out construction work. The Institute has a Finance Committee chaired by the
Secretary, the Department of ISM&H and the Finance Committee took a decision that since
the P.W.D. was taking a long time in completing the works, the amount should be given to
the P.W.D. in instalments, spread over a period of time. He also stated that the funds are
released as and when the P.W.D. require. In accordance with this decision, grants which are
given to the Institution were deposited as FDRs in the name of Executive Engineer and as
and when they required funds, the funds are released, it was added. The Committee feels
that it is an irregular practice which cannot be allowed in a Government Department. Even
if the funds lapse on the completion of the financial year, it is the responsibility of the Union
Department to allocate the required funds in the next financial year. The Committee,
therefore, desires that the Department may look into this in the light of the financial rules
and take necessary action accordingly.

11.3. The Committee was surprised to find that different methods were being followed
in the case of committed expenditure of the previous plan. According to the understanding
of the Committee, committed expenditure will not get reflected in any shape or form in the
subsequent plan. What is termed as a non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan becomes
relevant only to the expenditure of new non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan period.
This applies in the case of both autonomous as well as deemed university institutions. In
order to get further clarification in the matter the Secretary and the Financial Adviser of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare were specially called to clarify as to whether this
view of the Committee is correct or not. The Secretary could not come because of illness.
The Financial Adviser appeared before the Chairman and he confirmed that the non-plan
committed expenditure of the previous plan should not get reflected into the non-plan
expenditure of the subsequent plan. He also confirmed that they are not making any
distinction between the Government institution and other autonomous and deemed
university institutions which naturally means that the confusion which is prevailing in some
of institutions in treating committed expenditure as part of the new non-plan expenditure
should be clarified by the department concerned to all the institutions in the country so that
there should be uniformity in matters of procedure of not including the committed non-plan
expenditure. in the subsequent plan’s non-plan expenditure.

11.4. The Committee also noticed that in some of the institutions where vacancies were
available, there were utilising the funds’ meant for vacancies, for the purpose of non-plan
expenditure, which according to the Committee is not a desirable feature. Plan money can
not be diverted for non-plan side or even the non-plan expenditure should not have any
element of the scheme provided under the plan. All the vacancies prevailing in different


8

institutions will have to be filled in against the non-plan expenditure of the subsequent plan
as the burden of the expenditure will not be there.

XII. THE STATUS OF THE INSTITUTE

12.1 The Committee was informed that the National Institute of Ayurveda is a
registered society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. It is an autonomous institution
with a Governing Body. As an autonomous body, the Institute functions independently vis-
a-vis the Department of ISM&H. The Director of the Institute, in a note submitted to the
Committee, pleaded that this autonomous status is not helping the Institute in any manner
and may be converted into an attached body of the Department of ISM&H on the pattern of
Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research, Pondicherry which
is functioning under the Department of Health. The Director stated that this would
effectively check the decay in the Institute and it will help in its progress. Since it is a policy
matter, the Commitee does not want to go into the merits and de-merits of the proposal.
The Committee desires that the Department of ISM&H may examine the proposal and take
the decision as quickly as possible.

XIII. CONCLUSION

The Committee trusts that the recommendations made in the preceding paragraphs
would be implemented in letter and spirit. The Department of ISM&H may send an Action
Taken note within two months.


ANNEXURE-I

NAME OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE WHO VISITED NATIONAL INSTITUTE

Pee
RON

Pa
SOPIAAWA LYNE

OF AYURVEDA, JAIPUR ON 5TH NOVEMBER, 1996

Shri S.B. Chavan

Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Shri Jai Prakash

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Shrimati Krishna Bose

. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

. Dr. M. Jagannath


MINUTES



VII
“SEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 110 September 1996 in
Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS

1. Shri $,8. Chavan—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo

Dr. 8.8. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

10. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
LOK SABHA

11, Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

12. Shri Sartaj Singh

13. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

14. Dr. C. Silvera

15. Shri 1.6, Sanadi

16. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose

17. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy

18. Shri Krishna

19, Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi

20. Shri Samik Lahiri

21. Dr. M. Jagannath

22. Dr. Bali Ram

23. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal
SECRETARIAT
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary

0 9 :3 ०७ ४ + ०

“Minutes of Ist-VIth meeting relate to matters not included in this report.

13


14

2. The Committee at the first instance discussed about its future programme. After some
discussion, the Committee identified the following items, which, the Committee feels,
require detailed examination:—

MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

*

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
A. Department of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy
(1) Functioning of:—

(i) National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.

*

The Committee has, however, decided to take up the following initially:—
1, Value based education
2. Vocational education
3. The problem of drop-outs
4. Functioning of National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta
5. Functioning of National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur

3. The Committee then decided to visit Calcutta and Jaipur to make an on the spot visit to
the National Institute of Homoeopathy at Calcutta and the National Institute of Ayurveda at
Jaipur and also to make a detailed examination of the issue of value based education.
During the visits, the Committee decided to visit some of the reputed Voluntary
Organisations and to hold discussions with them and State Governments on the issue of
value based education.

4, The Committee further decided to visit Indian Museum, National Library and Netaji
Memorial Museum at Calcutta and to visit the project sites of Lok Jumbish and Sikhsakarmi
Projects at Jaipur and also to hold discussions with them. The Committee formed two Study
Groups, one for visiting Calcutta and the other for Jaipur and Mount Abu. ‘The Chairman of
the Committee directed that the consent of the Members may be taken for finalising the
Study Groups.

5. The Committee decided that the Study Group visiting Calcutta should undertake the
visit from the 8th to 11th October, 1996 and the Study Group visiting Jaipur and Mount Abu
should visit there from 4th to 8th November, 1996. The Committee authorised its Chairman
to finalise the details of the tour programmes and to approach Hlon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sahba, for his permission for the visits of the Study Groups to Calcutta, Jaipur and Mount
Abu.

6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

***Relates to other matters.


x

“TENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 16th January, 1997 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.B. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri V. Kishore Chandra $. Deo
Dr. M. Aram
Shri Raj Nath Singh
Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Dr. Mohan Babu
LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
9. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
10. Shri Jai Prakash
11. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Chaudhary Paragi Lal
14. Dr. C. Silvera
15, Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
16. Shri 1.G. Sanadi
17. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
18. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
19. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhai
20. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
21. Shri Samik Lahiri
22. Dr. Bali Ram
23. Shri Ranen Barman
24. Shri Surender Singh

ete

SEY

25. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal
SECRETARIAT

Shri $.C. Jarodia, Director

"Minutes of शाह & IXth mecting relate to matters not included in this report.

15


16

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports on the National Institute
of Ayurveda, Jaipur, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, Bangalore
and All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore. After some discussion the
Committee adopted the Reports with some modifications.

3. The Committee then authorised its Chairman to decide the names of the members for
presentation/laying of the Reports in both Houses of the Parliament during the ensuing
Session.

Cs * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *

7. The Committee than adjourned at 12.00 noon.

***Relate to other matters.