 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August  , 2018/ Sravana , 1940 (Saka) 
306 
THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THREE 
HUNDRED AND THIRD REPORT ON THE DEMAND FOR GRANTS 2018-2019 
OF THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th August, 2018) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on9th August, 2018) 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THREE HUNDRED 
AND THIRD REPORT ON THE DEMAND FOR GRANTS 2018-2019 OF THE 
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th August, 2018) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on9th August, 2018) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August  , 2018/ Sravana , 1940 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …........................................................... (i)-(ii)   
2.        INTRODUCTION.......................................................................................................... (iii) 
3.  REPORT.........................................................................................…............................  1-22 
Chapter-I  -   Observations/recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ................................................................... 1-7 
Chapter -II  -  Observations/recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies............. 8-13 
Chapter-III -  Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee... 14-21 
Chapter-IV -  Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government is still awaited.........................................................       22 
   
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE…. 23-24 
6. MINUTES............................................................................................................................. 25-26 
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN 
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2017) 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
3. Smt. Vandana Chavan 
4. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
5. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
6. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
8. Dr.  Sasikala Pushpa Ramaswamy 
9. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
10. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
  
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13. Shri Nihal Chand 
14. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali  (Patil) 
15. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
16. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli  
17. Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19. Shri Ramachandran Mullappally  
20. Shrimati Neelam Sonker 
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey 
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
23. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
25. Shri M.I. Shanavas 
26. Dr. Nepal Singh   
27. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
28. Shri Satyapal Singh 
29.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
30.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher 
(i) 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Smt   Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary 
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer 
Shri Mohit Mishra, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Sixth  Report of the Committee o n the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Three Hundred 
and Third Report on t he Demand For Gran ts(2018-2019) of  the Ministry o f Youth Affairs a nd 
Sports. 
2.  Three Hundred and  Third Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2018 
and simultaneously laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2018 .  Replies of the 
Government to the observations/recommendations contained in the Report were considered by the 
Committee at its meeting held on the 8th August, 2018. 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
8th August, 2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
NEW DELHI 
  August 8th ,2018  
  Saravana, 1940 (Saka) 
  
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on  Human Resource 
Development                                                                    

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in its Three Hundred and Third  Report on the Demand s for Grants (201 8-2019) of the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. The 303 rd Report was presented to both the houses of the 
Parliament on 8th March, 2018. 
2. The  Action Taken Replies in respect of recommendations contained in above mentioned Report 
were received from the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports vide their communication dated 21 st May, 
2018 (Department of Sports) and 30 th May, 2018 (Department of Youth Affairs) . These have been 
categorized as follows:  
(i) Chapter-I:  Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras –7,9,11,23,34,2.3,3.4,3.7,5.3,6.2,7.4,9.3 
Total – 12  
(ii) Chapter-II: Observations /Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies- 
Paras -   4,16,18,28,37,10.3,11.3,12.4,12.11,13.2,14.4 
Total – 11 
(iii) Chapter-III:   Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee –  
Paras –    32, 44, 8.8, 4.4, 8.9, 9.5, 10.7, 11.9, 12.9, 15.8 
Total –10 
(iv)   Chapter-IV:  Observations /Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are  still awaited.  
Paras – Nil 
Total - Nil 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT 
Department of Youth Affairs  
Budgetary Allocation 
Observation / Recommendation 
1 The Committee observes the expenditure pattern of different schemes run by the Department of 
Youth Affairs. The Committee finds that the speed of expenditure is little slow and a major chunk has 
been kept for the last quarter of the financial year. The Committee is unable to understand that against a 
projected demand of Rs.904.73 crore for the year 2017 -18, it got Rs.550.00 crore at BE which was 
further reduced to Rs.544.95 c rore at RE and the Department still has more than Rs.150 crore to spend. 
The Committee feels that there is a disconnect between projected demand and expenditure. The 
Committee therefore, recommends that the Department should take a cautious approach while making a 
projection and the allocation should also be spent in a time bound manner. 
(Para 7) 
Action Taken 
Noted for compliance. 
Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakaram (RYSK) 
Observation / Recommendation  
2. The Committee observes that under Rashtriya Yuva Sa shaktikaran Karyakaram (RYSK) there 
are 8 components and each component has got allocation separately. Out of total projected demand of 
Rs.644.05 crore, the Ministry has got Rs.408 crore only and the maximum cut has been affected in 
Nehru Yuva Kendra Sanga than i.e. only Rs.255 crore out of a demand of Rs.471.30 crore. The 
Committee feels that it may affect the programmes of NYKS adversely. The Committee recommends 
that all the programmes of different schemes may run in coherence and budget may be distributed as and 
where required so that the work gets done on time. The Committee further recommends that if the 
budget is required more than the allocated at BE 2018-19 it may be taken up at the RE stage. 
(Para  9) 
Action Taken 
Noted for compliance. 
  

3 
 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
3. The Committee is convinced with the steps taken by the Ministry to restructure the schemes for a 
better coherence and consolidated result. The Committee feels that even in future, the Ministry should 
desist from starting any scheme as stand alone. 
(Para  11) 
Action Taken 
Noted for compliance. 
National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development (NPYAD) 
Observation / Recommendation 
4. The Committee observed that for NPYAD, the Ministry has been allocated Rs.25 crore of BE 
2018-19 i.e. Rs.1 crore more over RE 2017 -18. The Ministry has exhausted almost the entire amount 
allocated to it. The Committee hopes that NPYAD will keep on doing good job at their hand. 
(Para 23) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry accepts the suggestions. 
 
National Young Leaders Programme 
Observation / Recommendation 
5. The Committee observes that the Ministry has relaxed certain norms for implementation of 
schemes for appropriate utilization of budget meant for the scheme under National Young Leaders 
Programme. The Com mittee finds that the budget has been allocated at BE stage to the tune of Rs.20 
crore, which is around Rs.6 crore more than the RE stage. The Committee recommends that Block level 
programme as well as village level programmes may be conducted regularly an d the fund given for it 
may be spent judiciously. 
(Para 34) 
Action Taken 
Noted for compliance. 
Department of Sports 
Budgetary Allocation 
Observation / Recommendation 
7. The Committee notes the Budget for the Department of Sports for the financial year 2018 -19. 
There is an increase of Rs.181 crores, including the National Programmes of Department of Sports 
“Khelo India” from the last year. As regards the allocations for 20 18-19, the Committee observes that 
against the projected budget estimate that of Rs. 2193.05 crore, the Department has got only Rs.1575.15 
crore i.e. a deficit of Rs.617.90 crore. The Committee wonders how the Department of Sports is going to 
cope-up with such a huge gap between the projected demand and the allocated amount. As the three 
major events of international games viz., Commonwealth Games -2018, Asian games-2019 and Olympic 
Games -2020 are scheduled within two years time, the Committee apprehends, h ow the Department is 

4 
 
going to complete its target of training sportspersons to compete at international level. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department should take up the matter of budget deficit at RE stage with 
the Ministry of Finance, so  that the preparation for mega events should not suffer due to shortage of 
money. 
(Para  2.3) 
Action Taken 
The Scheme of Assistance to NSFs is the main source of funding for preparation of the national 
teams for Commonwealth Games (CWG), Asian Games and the Olympic Games as well as other major 
international tournaments.   
Keeping in view the increase in activit ies relating to training and participation of Indian athletes 
in mega international events scheduled in 2018-19 the budget allocation would be adequate. However, if 
there be any requirement for more funds under this Scheme, the same will be taken up with M inistry of 
Finance at RE stage. 
Sports Authority of India (SAI) 
Observation / Recommendation 
8. The Committee expresses its concern over the pruning of budget for Sports Authority of India 
(SAI) for the financial year 2018 -19. At RE 2017 -18, it was Rs. 495.73  crore which has been further 
decreased to Rs.429.56 crore against a projected demand of Rs.621 crore. The Committee is aware of 
the role of SAI for the Development  of Sports in the country. The Committee feels that it may be 
difficult for the authority to  run its programme and maintain the existing infrastructure. Hence, the 
Committee recommends that the Department of Sports should make concerted efforts for more budget to 
be allocated to SAI at RE stage for its various development works going on in differ ent parts of the 
country. 
(Para  3.4) 
 
Action Taken 
The Budget of SAI has been streamlined in view of the new scheme of Khelo India. Some of the 
activities of SAI will now be covered under the new scheme. 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
 The Committee notes the reply submitted by the Department. However, the Committee 
desires to be informed about the activities of SAI which would be covered under the new scheme. 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
9. The Committee feels that there is a need of enhancing the role of SAI in trapping talents from 
tribal, rural and backward areas of the country. The Committee is of the view that it may not be feasible 
to achieve the goal of identifying the Sports talent and train them for major events by SAI alone. The 
Committee suggests that the Department of Sports should explore the possibilities of roping in the 
relevant agencies like, the State Governments and its bodies, Public Sector Undertakings, the Corporate 
Sector etc. extending the SAI’s outreach to those areas. 
(Para  3.7) 
 

5 
 
 
Action Taken 
Apart from other sports promotional schemes implemented by SAI for identification and nurturing of 
sports talent, the Special Area Games Scheme lay emphasis at scouting of natural talent for modern 
competitive sports and games from the inaccessible tribal, rural, coastal and hilly areas of the country.  
The Scheme also envisages tapping of talent from the regions/communities which are either genetically 
or geographically advantageous for excellence in a particular sports discipline. 
 
As pointed out in the 303 rd Report of the Department Related Parliament Standing Committee on HRD 
on Demand for Grants 2018 -19 on Item No. 3 of the ATN, Sports Authority of India has directed its all 
the Regional Heads vide letter dated 23.3.2018 to carry out district wise mapping o f sports talent so that 
sports potential from the tribal, rural and backward areas of the country could be identified and nurtured 
to achieve excellence in the national and international level competitions.  
 
Further, as recommended by the Committee possib ilities to explore roping in the relevant agencies like 
State Govt., PSUs, the Corporate Sector etc. will also be initiated immediately.  Efforts will also be 
made to tie up with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for mapping of sports talent from the specific  tribal 
belts of the country. 
Some PSU’s, corporate  sector etc have contrib uted funds/agreed to contribute  funds for promotion of 
Sports.  
 
          Further, some private partners are providing sponsorship to SAI, in terms of facilities as per 
details for few Academies as under:- 
1. National Swimming Academy at Delhi: - “Talent Identification, Development and Management” 
(TIDM) for SAI National Swimming Academy is being supported by Glenmark Aquatic Foundation 
(GAF) contributing for following: 
i. Talent Identification for SAI NSA –Talent Nurturing – Recruitment & Compensation for Coaching 
& support staff  
ii. Talent Nurturing – Training Programme design & Management  
iii. Talent Nurturing – Athlete Sponsorship  
iv. Advanced foreign training & competition (Amounting to Rs. 1.9 Cr. per year). 
2. National Athletic Academy at Bhopal: - Procam International is contributing following for the SAI 
National Athletics Academy at Bhopal for 5 year w.e.f Jan 2016. 
i. SAI CRC Bhopal is running National Athletic Academy for Middle and Long Distance  from 
December 2014 with PP Partnership with Procam International.   
ii. The Procam International is providing 1 Foreign Coach for the Academy during selection & 
selection camps and also foreign exposure of 6 trainees and 1 coach of National Athletics 
Academy for 6 weeks in Kenya. 
3. National Cycling Academy at Delhi: - World Cycling Centre, Aigle, Switzerland is contributing 
following for the SAI National Cycling Academy at I G Sports Complex  for 5 year w.e.f 2015. 
i. 24 Road Bikes alongwith 24 Helmets received in the Month of October 2015. 
ii. Coaching Course was organized in the current year where 14 Asian Countries took part. 
 
 
National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA) 

6 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
10. The Committee observes that the budget for National Dope Testing Laboratory, National Anti-
Doping Agency has been allocated as per projected budget estimate. The Committee is concerned over 
the number of cases found as positive is not coming down over the years. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should run Awareness Progra m against Doping more vigorously to wipe out this 
menace completely. 
(Para  5.3) 
Action Taken 
Awareness Programme against doping being conducted from time to time. 
NADA is conducting education/awareness program on anti doping in sports by way of educating the 
sportspersons, coaches and support personnel on the ill effects of doping through teaching 
sessions/seminars/workshops and also dissemination of anti doping information. 
As a result, the number of anti -doping rule violations reduced from an all -time high figure of 123 cases 
in the year 2010 to 73 cases in the year 2016, and 79 during the year 2017. 73nos. of educational 
programs/workshops on anti doping in sports have been organized by NADA in current year, with 
greater emphasis in the year 2017 -18 with  the launch of Mass Athlete Awareness Program Against 
Doping.  
To run anti doping awareness campaign vigorously, NADA has redesigned its existing website having 
new features. To further outreach the stakeholders wrt anti doping education and awareness campaign, 
two agencies/NGOs are empanelled by NADA in current year.  Short anti doping video clips were 
prepared by NADA and the same was aired on television channels for wide publicity amongst 
sportspersons.   
 
National Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL) 
Observation / Recommendation 
11. The Committee observes that NDTL is performing its duties well and the Committee hopes that 
the NDTL will keep on maintaining its standard and impartiality on Dope Test as per international 
norm. 
(Para  6.2) 
Action Taken 
NDTL will maintain its standard and impartiality on Dope Testing as per WADA guidelines. 
National Sports University(NSU) 
Observation / Recommendation 
12. The Committee is happy to note the facts that a National Sports University is coming up in the 
State of Manipur. The Committee feels that the construction of the University should be completed on 
priority so that it could start functioning soon in full fledged manner. The Committee hopes that the 
Ministry would ensure that requisite funds are made available so that this project is completed without 
any interruption. 
(Para 7.4) 
  

7 
 
 
Action Taken 
Pending finalization of NSU Bill, National Sports University Society established under the 
Manipur Societies Registration Act, 1989, have started functioning from the Khuman Lampak Sports 
Complex at Imphal. The Academic Session of 2017 -18 commenced w.e.f. 15th January 2018 with two 
courses namely BPES and B. Sc (Sports Coaching). 
M/s. Hindustan Steelworks Construction Ltd. has been engaged as Project Management 
Construction and the Site Development for main campus at Kautruk is in full swi ng. The Tender for 
Construction of the main Campus is likely be finalized shortly. Till March, 2017 an amount of Rs.23.25 
Crores has been released to HSCL for pre -investment activities. Requisite Fund will be made available 
for construction of NSU Campus. 
 
National Centre for Sports Science & Research(NCSSR) 
Observation / Recommendation 
13. The Committee observes that the budget of Rs.40 crores for 2018 -19 provided for NC SSR 
appears to be adequate and hopes that the additional budget may be provided by the Mini stry as and 
when it is required by the Institute. The Committee is of the view that since the area of the sports science 
and sports medicine have gained importance in the recent times, it is a welcome step in right direction to 
establish such a Research Ce ntre in Sports Science and Sports medicine within a stipulated time frame 
and desires to be apprised of the progress of the developments in the matter time to time. 
(Para  9.3) 
Action Taken 
Proposed budget for National Centre of Sports Science & Research is Rs.34.84 Crores and if additional 
Budget is required, the same will be demanded in Revised Estimates 2018-19. 
Present Status of National Centre for Sports Science & Research (NCSSR), Patiala -  
 Equipment procurement has been done for the centre. 
 Renovation and planning for new building structure is under process.  
 Director in charge has been appointed to look after the NCSSR activity.  
 Faculty and staff for the centre are under induction process. 
 
  

8 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
Department of Youth Affairs 
Budgetary Allocation 
Observation / Recommendation 
1.    The Committee observes that the Ministry has been allocated Rs.621.20 crore at BE 2018 -19, 
whereas it was Rs.544.95 crore at RE 2017-18 i.e. there is an increase of 13%. The Committee finds that 
trend of percentage of utilization in last three financial year is good and hopes that remaining 17% of 
budget will be utilized by the Ministry before the conclusion of the current financial year. 
(Para  4) 
Action Taken 
Noted for compliance. 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
 The Committee comprehends that by the time the Action Taken Replies were submitted to 
the Committee, the status of utilization of remaining  17% of the budget could have been made 
available to the Committee. The Committee desires the Department to send comprehensive replies 
to the Committee, so that it could assess performance of the Department systematically.  
Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) 
Observation / Recommendation 
2. The Committee observes the various projects undertaken by the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
with appreciation. NYKS have been allotted Rs.255 crore for the year 2018 -19 but the Committee feels 
that the various types of coo rdination activities undertaken by this Sangathan may not run effectively if 
there is a budget crunch. Hence, the Committee recommends that appropriate amount may be allocated 
under this head for the work. The Committee appreciates that quantum of work com pleted by NYKS 
under Punar Jagaran Yatra. The Committee agrees with the suggestions given by the Ministry regarding 
strengthening the programmes under NYKS. The Committee is concerned about the decreasing number 
of manpower in the organization which are af fecting the schemes. The Committee recommends that the 
long time vacant posts in the organization may be filled. 
(Para  16) 
Action Taken 
Demand made by NYKS for BE 2018 -19 is as under. Allocation of Rs.255.00 crore is made for BE 
2018-19.  
SN Head Demand(Rs. 
in crore) 
Justifications for enhancement (beside 10% increase on RE) 
1 Salary 138.25 Rs.10.00 crore for filling up of 1/3rd  vacant posts  
2 Other exp on 
establishment 
31.90 Rs.3.00 crore for training of new recruits  filling up of 1/3rd  
vacant posts 

9 
 
3 Office expenses 60.73 Rs.14.99 crore for wages of 300 programme officer to be 
deployed  
4 Core 
Programmes 
218.91 For core Programme and other activities in 706 districts of 
the country. 
5 IT 3.50 For providing laptop in 623 district NYKs and software  
development for efficient reporting 
6 Capital 4.00 For construction of 20 NYK buildings on the land provided 
by the State Govt. @ Rs.20.00 lakh each 
7 New NYKs in 
83 districts  
14.01 For office expenses and deployment of staff in the remaining 
districts of India 
 Total 471.30  
 
In addition to above, demand of Rs.413.70 crore was also made for one time contribution for 
retirement dues; arising under the directions of various courts.  
Due to reduced allocation of Rs.255.00 crore for BE 2018 -19, plans for  Core programmes have to be 
reduced to Rs.70.00 crore for 2018 -19. Extension plan of NYKs in 83 new districts has to be dropped.  
Plan for deployment of new staff against the existing vacancies also have to be curtailed.  
The total sanctioned strength of NYKS is 2,273 posts, of which 1,378 posts are filled -up at present and 
as on 01.01.2018 (including 19 posts of District Youth Coordinators (DYCs) filled up temporarily by 
taking officers on deputation and 29 posts filled up temporarily through engagement o f UNV-DYCs 
under the UNV/UNDP Project). The remaining 895 posts are vacant. 
Now, NYKS is processing the revival of various posts in NYKS as the same were lying vacant for 
several years.  
However, process of direct recruitment of 26 DYCs   and 15 Account Clerk cum Typist (ACT) 
based on the current vacancies (from Janury -2016 to June -2017) has been started through the 
recruitment agency IBPS. In addition to above NYKS is also  deploying 300   Programme  Coordinator  
through outsource  Agency. 
 
National Youth Corps (NYC) 
Observation / Recommendation 
 
3. The Committee feels that the BE for National Youth Corps has been given as Rs.80 crore. The 
Committee is happy to note that the honorarium for Nat ional Youth Volunteers has been increased from 
Rs.2500/- to Rs.5000/- per month. The Committee wants to know that the exposure given to National 
Youth Volunteers has been providing them  benefit or  not in making  their career. 
(Para  18) 
 
Action Taken 
Point noted down for further action.   However  it is  submitted that  each  NYC   volunteers  is  
acting as  link  between youth and  NYKS/other department and  they  are  actively  involved in 
demonstrating  their  leadership  ability  while organizing  v arious  youth activities.  It  is  found  that  
many  volunteers  after completion of the term were  able  to  get into  employment  based  on their  
experience. 
 

10 
 
International Co-operation (IC) 
Observation / Recommendation 
4. The Committee has been informed that MoU with more number of countries have been signed 
for youth exchange programme. The Committee hopes that exchange programme with other countries 
will give youth international exposure and such exposure will enlighten them on various youth issues. 
(Para  28) 
Action Taken 
It is constant endeavour of the Ministry to improve the quality of the youth exchange programmes and to 
provide a good exposure to our youth to enlighten them on various youth issues. 
 
National Service Scheme (NSS) 
Observation / Recommendation 
5. The Committee observes that the Ministry has been allocated Rs.160 crore for the National 
Service Scheme for BE -2018-19. It is approximately Rs.16 crore more than the RE 2017 -18. The 
Committee is constrained to note that only Rs.104.09 crore  has been spent upto 31 st January, 2018. The 
Committee hopes that with the enhanced budget, the Ministry would increase the number of NSS 
volunteers. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make vigorous effort in helping the 
State Governments to set up more NSS units. The Committee feels that unless and until there is a close 
monitoring by the Ministry is done the efficacy of institutes cannot be achieved. 
(Para  37) 
Action Taken 
Noted. The Ministry will make vigorous efforts in helping State Gov ernments to set up more 
NSS Units in the country.  The Ministry will monitor the progress made by the State NSS 
Unit/Institutions in achieving the target. 
 
Department of Sports 
 
Netaji Subhash Institute of Sports Science, Patiala 
Observation / Recommendation 
6. The Committee observes that Netaji Subhash Institute of Sports Science, Patiala is playing very 
important role in training the sports professionals, conducting research in sports and sports sciences, 
providing coaching to sportspersons in va rious disciplines and giving scientific support to elite 
sportspersons. The Committee feels that in modern times for promotion and excellence of sports at 
international level, the country needs institute like NSISS, Patiala to run with the time. The Commit tee 
recommends that the Ministry while giving financial support to this institute also make endeavor to 
establish such institute in other parts of the country. 
(Para  10.3) 
  

11 
 
Action Taken 
Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports has been the “Mecca” of Indian Sports and has 
produced Coaches of high caliber and significantly contributed in rendering their expertise and 
assistance in the preparation of the national teams for various International competitions besides 
conducting research in sports and sport s sciences. In the SAI regional centres scientific departments 
have also been equipped to provide scientific support .Diploma in different coaching program is being 
conducted in SAI Kolkata and SAI Banglore  centres. In the Northeast side Manipur Sports Un iversity 
has been inaugurated. It has started Bachelor Degree in Coaching to produce High calibre coaches. The 
recommendation of the Committee to make endeavour to establish such Institutes in other parts of the 
country would be given due consideration. 
 
National Coaching Scheme 
Observation / Recommendation 
7. The Committee is of the view that training is the backbone of any sport and continuous training 
facility is required for improvemen t of talent in any sportsperson . The Committee recommends that the 
optimum number of coaches should be made available for the training programme and for that purpose; 
appointment of more coaches should be done as per the requirement.  
(Para  11.3) 
Action Taken 
SAI offered of appointment to 167 applicants for the post of Asstt. Coach in SAI in 2017. Out of 
167 applicants, 165 joined as Asstt. Coach in SAI. Also coaches on contract are recruited as and when 
needed.  
Khelo India and Olympics 
Observation / Recommendation 
 
8. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry regarding preparation for 3 major 
events within a period of 2 years. The Committee hopes that these efforts would yield the desirable 
results in the forthcoming international events. 
(Para  12.4) 
Action Taken 
During the next 2 years following 4 major International events are scheduled/held:- 
i) 2018 Commonwealth Games at Gold Cost City, Australia from 4-15 April, 2018. 
ii) 2018 Asian Games at Indonesia, Jakarta from 18 August to 2 September, 2018. 
iii) 2018 Summer Youth Olympic Games at Buenos Aires, Argentina from 6 –18 October  2018 in 
Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
iv) 2020 Olympic Games at Tokyo, Japan from 24 July to 9 August, 2020. 
 
The probable sportspersons for the above events are already identified and provided with requisite 
support from the ACTC and TOP Scheme. 
 
 

12 
 
 
 
Promotion of Sports among Women 
Observation / Recommendation 
 
9. The Committee hopes that the steps taken for the promotion of sports among the women will 
show positive results in future. There is a need of identifying talents from rural and backward areas also. 
(Para  12.11) 
Action Taken 
To structure Khelo India National Women Sports Competitions in such a manner to make it very 
attractive for participants and to identify the intrusting sports discipline for women competitions a High 
Level Committee under the Chairpersonship of DG SAI has been constituted. The Khelo India scheme 
has provisions for talent identification and Long Term Athlete Development (LTAD) Programme which 
will be beneficial for women from rural and backward areas also.  
 
Sports for Peace and Development  
Observation / Recommendation 
9. The Committee appreciates that the J&K has been given a special package for the promotion of 
sports and enhancement of sports facilities in the state. The Committee is of the view that since J&K is 
disturbed for years due to terrorism such packages will infuse new enthusiasm in youth towards sports 
and it will leave a positive imprint on their minds. The Committee recommends that the budget 
earmarked for Jammu and Kashmir is utilized completely and so that the expected outcome may be 
achieved. 
(Para  13.2) 
Action Taken 
This year budget earmarked for J&K could not be utilized because no funds could be released 
either to the J&K State Sports Council or the Project Management Consultant (PMC) as both the 
entities have significant unspent balances out of funds released to them in the previous years. Projects 
are being monitored closely. Meetings are being taken at Secretary level to ensure optimum physical 
and financial progress of the J&K Special package. 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
 The Commi ttee notes the re ply furnished by the Department.However,it desires  the 
Department to share the details of significant unspent balances out of the funds released for 
sports facilities in J&K.  
  

13 
 
 
Promotion of Sports among persons with disabilities 
Observation / Recommendation 
10. The Committee notes that the promotion of sports among the persons with disabilities 
component has been merged with the scheme ‘Khelo India’. The Committee wishes that in any case it 
should not loose the desired level of attention by such a merger. As the Sportspersons with disabilities 
need extra care for their performance, the committee desires that the Department of  Sports should 
continue to give special attention to them. 
(Para  14.4) 
Action Taken 
Under the ve rtical ‘Promotion of Sports among persons with disabilities’, Financial assistance 
will be provided to States/UTs and SAI for creation of specialist sports infrastructure for persons with 
disabilities. Funds required for making stadia disabled friendly / b arrier free will be accessed from 
Scheme for Implementation of Persons with Disabilities Act (SIPDA) of Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities. The funds provided under this vertical will be used for classification of 
players, equipment, tr aining and preparation of teams for Paralympic Games and disciplines and 
competitions. These steps will help ensure special attention to sportsperson with disabilities. 
 

14 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Department of Youth Affairs 
Youth Hostels (YH) 
Observation / Recommendation 
1. The Committee observes that Rs.1.70 crore has been allocated at BE 2018 -19 for Youth Hostels 
which is Rs.10 lakhs more than the projected demand. The Committee took note of the fact that a 
number of Youth Hostels has been encroached upon by the State Governments and are being utilized for 
purposes like running Sainik school in it, using it as an international bus terminal or running a private 
university from it. The Committee expresses its concern over the issue and urges the department to take 
up the issue s with due seriousness with the State Governments and ensure that the Youth Hostels are 
used for the purpose they are setup for. 
 
(Para  32) 
Action Taken 
The matter has been taken up at the level of Secretary (YA) with the Chief Secretary of the 
concerned States/UTs for removing encroachment in the Youth Hostels. 
 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The Committee points out 
that the youth hostel were setup for providing accommodation to volunteers working under NYKS 
at a very low tariff.  The Committee, therefore , strongly recommends that the Department of 
Youth Affairs may ensure that the encroached youth hostels are vacated and  strong steps should 
be taken to make sure th at such incidents don't happen  in future. The Committee also firmly 
desires that the  matter needs to be  taken up exclusively at the  highest level with the respective  
State Governments.  
 
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development (RGNIYD) 
Observation / Recommendation 
2. The Committee wants to know the hurdles which are stopping RGNIYD to appoint training 
programme officers and director in the Institute. Many construction works of hostels blocks are going on 
with NPCC and other agencies under RGNIYD. The Committee recommends that the undergoing 
projects should be monitored properly and the money involved in it may be taken care of for its 
judicious utilization. 
(Para  44) 
 
Action Taken 
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development (RGNIYD) is having both Academic and 
Training Programmes which run concurrently. Initially the incumbents are recruited as Training Officers 
and conduct the training. Later on when they acquire desired q ualification for the post of Assistant 
Professor the said training officers are re -designated as Assistant Professor.  In order to obviate this 

15 
 
difficulty it is proposed to recruit 10 training officers on contract exclusively to cater to the need of 
training.  As regards appointment of Director a new incumbent was appointed on regular basis by the 
Ministry in the month of July, 2017. 
As regards construction works (Academic Hostels and Staff Quarters) NPCC awarded the work 
in the month of November, 2017 and the foundation work is in progress.  The work is expected to be 
completed by December, 2019. In regards to monitoring the progress of construction it is monitored on 
day to day basis by a Consultant Engineer.  This apart, the monitoring is being done by fo rtnightly 
review meeting with NPCC by RGNIYD chaired by the Registrar.  The progress is also reported to the 
Building and Works Committee periodically for directions.  This apart, third party quality control is also 
being exercised through IIT, Madras. 
 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
 The Committee points out th at RGNIYD is one of the premier  institutes of the country to 
provide training and increase the broad reach of the programme for capacity building of the 
youth across the country. The Committee feels that the delay in the construction of the academic 
hostels and staff quarters will affect the students pursuing the programme there. The  Committee 
recommends that the D epartment should take steps for speedy completion of the hostels and staff 
quarters. 
 
Department of Sports 
National Sports Federation (NSF) 
Observation / Recommendation 
3. The Committee feels that National Sports Federation (NSF) is a bridge between the 
sportspersons and the Ministry. The Federation have got very important functions relating to promotion 
and development of various sports at national and international level. The Committee finds that the 
amount allocated for assistance to various federations to the tune of Rs. 3 42 crore would be sufficient. 
However, the Committee feels that spending this money in prudent manner is more important and hope 
that the federations will set examples for others to follow. 
(Para  8.8) 
Action Taken 
Annual Calendar for Training & Competitions of the NSFs are prepared, discussed and approved 
at the level of Secretary (Sports). Only such events are approved under the ACTC, which would help the 
sportspersons to raise their level and bring laurels to the Country. Also the funding are u sed to provide 
facilities of international standard at the national camp held at SAI Centres. 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendations that the money allocated to various 
federations for training of sports persons should be spent prudently an d steps should be taken by 
the D epartment to monitor the allocated amount to the federations for training  is  utilized in a 
judicious manner and spent on training only.   
  

16 
 
 
Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior 
Observation / Recommendation 
4. The Committee is constrained to note that the Budget Estimate 2018 -19 for Lakshmibai National 
Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior has been kept at Rs. 45 crores against a projected Demand of 
Rs.65 crores for the financial year 2018-19. The Committee is aware about the role of LNIPE, Gwalior 
in promoting the progammes of Physical Education and Sports in the country. The Committee suggests 
that efforts may be made by the Ministry to help the Institute in improving t he skills of aspirants who 
wants to excel in the field of Sports at National and international level. The Committee expresses its 
concern over shortage of teaching and non teaching staff at LNIPE, Gwalior and North Eastern Regional 
Centre, Guwahati and recommends that the appointment of required number of staff may be made at the 
earliest to these institutes. 
(Para  4.4) 
Action Taken 
The Institute is making sincere efforts to increase the internal sources of receipts to cope -up the 
requirements for meeting urgent demands. The suggestions of the Committee are welcomed and the 
Institute has initiated programmes like Certificate Courses in Coaching and Officiating in corroborations 
with the Sports governing Bodies apart from its regular courses. As regards shor tage of teaching and 
non-teaching staff at LNIPE, Gwalior and LNIPE -NERC Guwahati, it is submitted that process of 
recruitment of teaching and non -teaching staff has almost been completed and the appointment orders 
for teaching staff have been issued and i mplemented after the approval of BOM meeting on 23 rd April 
2018.  This action will help in improving the skills of aspirants who want to excel in Sports at National 
and International level. 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department to recruit teachers and staff 
at LNIPE, Gwalior and LNIPE-NERC,Guwahati. The Committee, however, recommends that the 
department should help the institutes to impart proper training and orientation programmes to 
the newly recruited teachers to deal with the students coming to these institutes for academic 
purposes. As the students come from different socio -economic and cultural background such  
orientation programme would help in integrating the students with the Institutions 
 
National Sports Federations (NSF) 
Observation / Recommendation 
5. The Committee also observes that everything is not in line as far as the functioning of 
Federations is concerned. Regular elections are not held for various posts and rules are not followed as 
per the instructions laid down for the federations. The Committee is concerned over the matter if the 
federations are not functioning properly, it will cause immense loss to related sportspersons and 
ultimately the sports. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the Federations 
hold elections to choose their representatives, office bearers on regular interval and function properly. 
The Ministry should monitor the functioning of the Federations in the interest of promoting sports. 
 
(Para  8.9) 

17 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry regularly monitors the functioning of the NSFs. As per the provisions of National 
Sports Development Code of India (NSDCI), 2011, NSFs are required to follow, inter -alia, proper  
democratic and healthy management practices to ensure greater accountability and transparency at all 
levels; adherence to age and tenure restrictions of office bearers; and holding of elections as per the 
Model election guidelines issued by the Government ; etc. Whenever NSFs are found not holding 
elections after it has become due, Ministry withhold the annual recognition of such NSFs. Recognition 
is considered and revived only after the elections are held. In the interregnum, if any, SAI takes care of 
the teams of such sports disciplines towards their training and participation in the international events. 
 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
  The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should make sure that 
the National Sport Development Cod e of India, 2011 is followed by the National Sports 
Federations and the requisite conditions of the code are strictly implemented. The Committee 
further recommends that SAI should also have some punitive measures to punish erring National 
Sports Federations.  
 
National Centre for Sports Sciences and Research (NCSSR) 
 
Observation / Recommendation 
6. The Committee feels that the Selection of Institutes for setting up Sports Sciences Development 
is also important and such places may be given priority from where large number of Sports 
persons/talents comes to play various games. The Committee thinks that  many Sports talents are coming 
from North Eastern Region. Hence, the Committee recommends that the medical college or institutes 
may be selected, anywhere but accessible place in North Eastern Region to establish a Sports Science 
Development Institute there. The Committee feels that it will be of great help for budding talents in the 
region, who would perform in various games with more vigor and enthusiasm. 
(Para  9.5) 
 
Action Taken 
With a view to support Sports Sciences and Sports Medicine Departments in selected 
Universities and Medical Colleges, six Universities and four Medical Colleges have already been 
selected and grants have been released to them for setting up of Departments of Sports Sciences and 
Sports Medicine respectively therein. University of  Calcutta, Calcutta is one of the six Universities 
which have been selected for setting up Department of Sports Sciences. The same may cater to the needs 
of North-Eastern Region. The process of selection of two more Medical Colleges for funding for setting  
up Departments of Sports Medicine is also underway. Expressions o f Interests have been called from 
eligible applicants. 
  Further, in the recently concluded 105 th Indian Science Congress organized at Manipur, Imphal, 
Hon’ble Prime Minister laid the foundation stone for the creation of Sports Infrastructure & Academics 
under the banner of National Sports University at Imphal. The academic programme under NSU, Imphal  
are in progress from this year. 

18 
 
To create awareness of the Ministry about various sports science development programmes an 
exhibition was also organized by MYAS during Indian Science Congress. It was a huge success and the 
stall received THE MOST INTERACTIVE STALL award by the organizers. 
In a nutshell it may please be informed that various steps are being taken for sports science 
development which may bear fruits after 3 -4 years when the qualified personnel will be available to 
work with the athletes for scientific support. 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
 The Committee appreciates steps taken to establish and support Sport Sciences and Sport 
Medicine department in Universities and Medical Colleges. The Committee ,however, would like 
to recommend t hat the Department should ensure that these departments should not just be 
catering to small part s of the country but also similar initiative s should also be taken in  other 
State Universities and Medical Colleges so that other areas with sports talent also get benefits. 
 
Training of Elite Athletes and Management Support (TEAMS) 
Observation / Recommendation 
7. The Committee observes that TEAMS wing of SAI is handling the training programmes of 
national probables  in various sports disciplines. The Committee desires that it intensively focuses on the 
designing the training programmes specifically for those games/events in which medal prospects are 
very high at forthcoming international events. 
(Para  10.7) 
Action Taken 
Based on standard of Indian athletes/teams at International level and their probability to win 
medal or give respectable performance at International level,  sports disciplines are being identified and 
categorized in four categories i.e. High Priority,  Priority, General & Others.   Accordingly, sports 
disciplines having high medals prospects at the forthcoming international events are kept under High 
Priority category and major portion of the budget allocated to provide support and allied facilities of 
International standard from the scheme of Assistance to National Sports Federation’s’.  
Preparation of Indian sportsperson / teams for International events including Olympic Games is an 
ongoing process.  Government provides assistance to the elite sportspe rsons preparing for the major 
International events such as Olympic, Asian, Commonwealth Games etc. through its scheme of  Scheme 
of Assistance to National Sports Federations (NSFs) & Target Olympic Podium (TOP) Scheme as per 
the details mentioned below:-  
Scheme of Assistance to National Sports Federations (NSFs) 
For preparation of Indian sportsperson and teams for major international events, all requisite 
assistance is provided from the scheme as per the approved Annual Calendar of Training and 
Competition (ACTC) finalised in consultation with the concerned NSF.  
Under the scheme of ‘Assistance to National Sports Federation’s’, identified promising 
sportspersons/teams are provided with all the requisite facilities for their preparations, such as 
wholesome n utritious diet, food supplements, equipments, state -of-the-art infrastructure, lodging & 

19 
 
travelling facilities, services of reputed Indian and Foreign Coaches/Supporting staff, Scientific & 
Medical supports, Sports Kit etc. besides financial assistance for  their abroad training and participation 
in International Competitions in India and abroad.   
Target Olympic Podium (TOP) Scheme 
Target Olympic Podium (TOP) Scheme was introduced by Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports in 
July, 2014 to give focused attention  for better performance of our athletes in Olympic & Paralympic 
Games 2016 and 2020.  
Under the Target Olympic Podium (TOP) Scheme, a high level of individual support is provided 
to identified sportspersons who have performed exceptionally well in internat ional events.  This scheme 
includes a monthly stipend of Rs. 50,000/ - for each athlete.  In addition, support is given for 
personalized coaching from both international and national coaches, support staff, participation in 
international events and purchase of sports equipment. 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
The Committe e appreciate s the steps taken by  the Department for grooming the 
sportspersons for the international events. The Committee is of the opinion that the views of the 
sportspersons should also be given due importance as it would help government  overcoming the 
shortcomings in the efforts being made by the Department.  
National Coaching Scheme 
Observation / Recommendation 
8. The Committee feels that the international exposure to our coac hes and sportspersons is 
necessary when they are g oing to compete with the sports persons of international standard. The 
Committee suggests that the Department of Sports should look into it and help the institute in hiring 
foreign coach/faculty to improve the coaching standard in our country. 
(Para 11.9) 
Action Taken 
Under the Annual Calendar for Training & Competitions ( ACTC)  provision of requisite number of 
International exposures / build -up competitions are been made  for the sportspersons and their coaches.  
In addition a high level of individual support is provided to identified sportspersons who have performed 
exceptionally well in international events from TOP scheme.  This scheme includes a monthly stipend of 
Rs. 50,000/ - for each athlete.  In addition, support is given for personalized coaching from both 
international and national coaches, support staff, participa tion in international events and purchase of 
sports equipment. 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the steps taken by the Ministry for coaching 
of talented sportspersons at international level. The Committee further emphasizes that the 
athletes should be given all necessary help and expertise to groom them into sportsperson of 
international repute. 
  

20 
 
 
Khelo India 
Observation / Recommendation 
9. The Committee observes that the total budget outlay from the Khelo India Campaign is Rs. 1756 
crore for the years 2017 -18 and 2019 -20. For the financial year 2018 -19, the amount allocated for the 
financial year 2018-19 is Rs.520.09 crore, an increase of Rs.370 crore on RE 2017 -18. The Committee 
feels that the revamped ‘Khelo India Scheme’ is very ambitious plan with an overall development of 
sports. The Committee wants to know that through the National Talent Search Portal, how many talents 
have been identified/ selected so far for fu rther training. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may make a concerted effort to make the campaign successful as it involves huge money and also 
carries the hopes of millions to excel in the field of sports. 
(Para  12.9) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry is reviewing the progress of Khelo India Scheme time-to-time and concerted efforts 
are being taken to ensure the success of the scheme. For creation of a sustainable organizational 
structure for efficient and effective Khelo India Scheme in thoroughly prof essional manner, 9 of the 
twelve verticals are being implemented through SAI and LNIPE. This Ministry is directly implementing 
3 verticals. Further the Ministry is dealing with coordination and monitoring of the entire scheme and 
policy related matters. 
As on date,  538 players have been selected during the 1 st Khelo India School Games 2018 under 
the Revamped Khelo India Scheme,   in 16 sports disciplines namely, Archery, Athletics, Badminton, 
Basketball, Boxing, Gymnastics, Judo, Hockey, Kabaddi, Kho -Kho, Football, Shooting, Swimming, 
Volleyball, Wrestling, Weightlifting. The TID is in the process of identifying further talent by the 
members of the Talent Screening Committee and the Talent Identification and Development Committee.  
As regards talent identif ied/ selected so far for further training through the National Talent Search 
Portal, the inputs may be obtained from Operations Division, SAI who is looking after this scheme. 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
 The Committee urges the Department to assess the impact of  the 'Khelo India Scheme' in 
consultation with all the stakeholders  i.e the coaches, sportspersons, sports administrat ors and so 
on. The modalities followed in other countries may also be compared to 'Khelo India Scheme'. 
This would help the scheme bec ome a success and bring greater glory to Indian Sports persons at 
international level.   
National Sports Development Fund (NSDF)  
Observation / Recommendation 
10. The Committee observe s that National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) is a corpus which 
provides financial assistance to various institutes and sportspersons for development of sports. It has 
given Rs.52.81 crore to such organization/institutes/universities in the year 2017 -18 for various sports 
activities. The Committee is constrained to note that in the financial year 2017-18, contribution to NSDF 
from Private and Public Sector is only RS 60.05 lakh, whereas it was Rs.42.28 crore in the financial year 

21 
 
2016-17. There is a steep  fall in the contribution to  NSDF. The Committee is very much concerned 
about this decline. The Committee desires that the Department should find out the reasons therefore and 
apprise the same to Committee along with the suggestions so as to what can be don e to give it a boost in 
its action taken replies. 
(Para  15.8) 
Action Taken 
The actual contribution received for the period 2017-18 is Rs.1065.05 Lakh. (Till 28.03.2018.)  
For augmenting the contributions to NSDF, the Government is regularly interacting with 
CPSUs/PSBs for contribution to the NSDF. They are also encouraged to contribute to the NSDF under 
CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility).  
To make contribution to NSDF at tractive there is 100% exemption from  income tax under 
section 80(G) Income Tax Act 1961.  
The Ministry will organize seminars/workshops in major cities to create awareness about NSDF. 
The Department will also depute its teams to potential donors explainin g them about existence of NSDF 
and requesting them to contribute to NSDF. The Ministry will also prepare publicity material such as 
brochures, pamphlets; videos etc. about NSDF and distribute the same among donors. 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department for creating awareness 
about NSDF among PSUs/PSB s. The Committee , however, would like to suggest that the 
Department should also ask the Companies in the corporate /private sector to contribute to NSDF. 
The Department should appoint some officials to interact with the Companies in the corporate 
/private sector and encourage them to contribute to NSDF. 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED. 
-NIL- 

23 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF  THE  COMMITTEE  -AT A GLANCE 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 The Committee comprehends that by the time the Action Taken Replies were submitted to 
the Committee, the status of utilization of remaining 17% of the budge t could have been made 
available to the Committee. The Committee desires the Department to send comprehensive replies 
to the Committee, so that it could assess performance of the Department systematically. 
(Para  4) 
SPORTS FOR PEACE AND DEVELOPMENT  
 The Committee notes the re ply furnished by the Department.However,it desires  the 
Department to share the details of significant unspent balances out of the funds released for 
sports facilities in J&K.  
(Para  13.2) 
YOUTH HOSTELS (YH) 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The Committee points out 
that the youth hostel were setup for providing accommodation to volunteers working under NYKS 
at a very low tariff.  The Committee, therefore , strongly recommends that the Department of 
Youth Affairs may ensure that the encroached youth hostels are vacated and strong steps should 
be taken to make sure that such incidents don't happen in future. The Committee also firmly 
desires that the  matter needs to be  taken up exclusively at the  high est level with the respective  
State Governments.  
(Para  32) 
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD) 
 The Committee points out that RGNIYD is one of the premier institutes of the country to 
provide training and increase the broad rea ch of the programme for capacity building of the 
youth across the country. The Committee feels that the delay in the construction of the academic 
hostels and staff quarters will affect the students pursuing the programme there. The Committee 
recommends that the Department should take steps for speedy completion of the hostels and staff 
quarters. 
(Para  44) 
NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATION (NSF)  
 The Committee reiterates its recommendations that the money allocated to various 
federations for training of sports persons should be spent prudently and steps should be taken by 
the Department to monitor the allocated amount to the federations for training  is  utilized in a 
judicious manner and spent on training only.   
(Para  8.8) 
LAKSHMIBAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION, GWALIOR 
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department to recruit teachers and staff 
at LNIPE, Gwalior and LNIPE-NERC,Guwahati. The Committee, however, recommends that the 
department should help the institutes to impart proper tr aining and orientation programmes to 
the newly recruited teachers to deal with the students coming to these institutes for academic 
purposes. As the students come from different socio -economic and cultural background such 
orientation programme would help in integrating the students with the Institutions 
(Para  4.4) 
 
NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS (NSF) 
  The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should make sure that 
the National Sport Development Code of India, 2011 is followed by the National Sports 
Federations and the requisite conditions of the code are strictly implemented. The Committee 
further recommends that SAI should also have some punitive measures to punish erring National 
Sports Federations.  
(Para  8.9) 

24 
 
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR SPORTS SCIENCES AND RESEARCH (NCSSR) 
 
 The Committee appreciates steps taken to establish and support Sport Sc iences and Sport 
Medicine department in Universities and Medical Colleges. The Committee ,however, would like 
to recommend that the Department should ensure that these departments should not just be 
catering to small parts of the country but also similar i nitiatives should also be taken in other 
State Universities and Medical Colleges so that other areas with sports talent also get benefits. 
(Para  9.5) 
TRAINING OF ELITE ATHLETES AND MANAGEMENT SUPPORT (TEAMS) 
The Committee appreciate s the steps taken by the Department for grooming the 
sportspersons for the international events. The Committee is of the opinion that the views of the 
sportspersons should also be given due importance as it would help government  overcoming the 
shortcomings in the efforts being made by the Department.  
(Para  10.7) 
NATIONAL COACHING SCHEME 
 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the steps taken by the Ministry for coaching 
of talented sportspersons at international level. The Committee further emphasiz es that the 
athletes should be given all necessary help and expertise to groom the m into sportsperson of 
international repute. 
(Para 11.9) 
KHELO INDIA 
 The Committee urges the Department to assess the impact of  the 'Khelo India Scheme' in 
consultation with all the stakeholders i.e the coaches, sportspersons, sports administrat ors and so 
on. The modalities followed in other countries may also be compared to 'Khelo India Scheme'. 
This would help the scheme bec ome a success and bring greater glory to Indian Sp ortspersons at 
international level.   
(Para  12.9) 
NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND (NSDF)  
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department for creating awareness 
about NSDF among PSUs/PSB s. The Committee , however, would like to suggest that the 
Department should also ask the Companies in the corporate /private sector to contribute to NSDF. 
The Department should appoint some officials to interact with the Companies in the corporate 
/private sector and encourage them to contribute to NSDF. 
(Para  15.8) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
 
XVII 
SEVENTEETH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.30 a.m. on Wednesday, the 8th 
August, 2018 in Committee Room No. '62', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.   Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2.   Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
3.   Shri Jogen Chowdhury 
4.   Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5.   Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
[  
LOK SABHA 
 
6.   Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
7.   Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
8.   Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
9.   Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
10. Shri Ramachandran Mullappaly 
11. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary 
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer 
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer  
 
  

26 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened 
to consider and adopt the draft 306th Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Three Hundred and third Report on Demands for Grants 
(2018-19) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. 
 
2. The Committee considered the draft 306th Report and adopted it after some discussion.  
3. The Committee, then, decided to present/lay the 306 th Report to both the Houses of the 
Parliament on 9 th August, 2018.  The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Shri 
Gopal Narayan Singh, Member, Rajya Sabha to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Bhairon 
Prasad Mishra, Member, Lok Sabha and in his absence Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat, Member, Lok Sabha 
to lay the Report in the Lok Sabha. 
4.  The Committee then adjourned at 11.00 a.m. 
 
 
 
 