PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SIXTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1997-98 (DEMAND NO. 49) OF THE

DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the' Rajya Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd April, 1997)

RRA TTA

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 1997/Chaitra, 1919 (Saka)

1666/ RS F—1-A


CONTENTS

2७685
1. ComposiTION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii)
2. PREFACE (iii)
३. REPORT 1-24

4. MINUTES 25-29


qatTIMMeO ant AO Morncose)

Ata



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1996-97)

1. Shri S.B. Chavan —- Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
. Shri V. Kishore Chandra $. Deo
. Dr. 8.8. Dutta
Dr. M. Aram
. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik
. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Shri Raj Nath Singh
. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
. Shri R. Margabandu
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
. Dr. Mohan Babu ~
. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

9 90 3 9 ७ PWN

न दल न 5 क+ ४5
७ # ७0 ७ ES

LOK SABHA
16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
17. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
18. Shri Sartaj Singh
19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Shri Jai Prakash
21. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
22. Shrimati Divya Singh
23. Shri Mahant Abedyanath
24. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
2S. Chaudhary Paragi Lal
26. Dr. C. Silvera
27. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda

1666 / RS F—2-A


28.
29.
30.
oly
82;
33.
34.
है. «मे
36.
37.
38.
39.

41.
42.
43.
*44,
45.

(ii)
Shri Dutta Meghe
Shri 1.6. Sanadi
Shrimati Krishna Bose
Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao
Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi
Shri Pawan Diwan
Shri Krishna
Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri S.K. Karvendhan
Shri Mukhtar 21065
Dr. M. Jagannath
Dr. Bali Ram
Shri Banen Barman
Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego
Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

“Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 26th February, 1997.

1666/RS F—2-B


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixty-Second Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 49) of the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports,
Ministry of Human Resource Development for the year 1997-98.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, Ministry of Human Resource Development
and also heard the Secretary and other officials of that Department on the said Demands for
Grants in its meeting held on 3rd April, 1997.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 19th April,
1997.

New Deni; S.B. CHAVAN
19th April, 1997 Chairman,
जा मम Department-related Parliamentary
Chaitra 29, 1919 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development.

(iii)


SY
 Sphiginelinst
00७03



REPORT

I. INTRODUCTION

1.1 The main objective of the Department is to ensure qualitative and quantitative
improvements in Youth Programme and also on broad basing and’ bringing about awareness
of sports and physical fitness amongst school children and youth. The programmes
undertaken by the Department are mainly Sports and Games and Youth Programme.

1.2 The Department finances various youth welfare programmes ranging from
personality development to vocational training. Most of these programmes are implemented
by reputed institutions, non-governmental organisations as well as State Governments
whereby financial assistance is provided by the Department as per the stipulated norms. The
major schemes for youth development are: National Service Scheme, Nehru Yuva Kendra
Sangathan, National Integration Programmes, Youth Hostels and National Service
Volunteers Scheme, etc.

_ 1.3 The Department also finances a number of programmes which aim at promotion of
sports, including creation of sports infrastructure in all parts of the country, grants for laying
of synthetic surfaces, spotting and nurturing of talents through the schemes of Sports
Authority of India, grants to National Sports Federations, National Championships,
organising of tournaments for rural youth, women and in the North-Eastern Region etc.

II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS

2. The total outlay, both Plan and Non-Plan taken together provided to the Department
for the year 1996-97 was Rs. 136.24 crores in BE which was increased to Rs. 144.32 at RE
stage. The allocation made for the year 1997-98 is Rs. 159:33 crores. (Plan Rs. 125.00 crores
and Non-Plan Rs. 34.33 crores). The Committee was informed that the actual requirement
of plan funds of the Department during 1997-98 as projected in the proposal sent to Planning
Commission was Rs. 276.7 crores. However, during discussion with Planning Commission,
an outlay of Rs. 128 crores was agreed to against which Rs. 125 crores has been allocated.
On the insistence by the Department, Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission has written
to the Ministry of Finance to consider favourably an additional amount of Rs. 70 crores at
RE stage. It was added. The Committee is of the firm belief that the Planning Commission
has not given much thought to the much felt need of improving India’s performance in
sports and to make an about turn from Indian sportspersons’ failures in international events
iticluding Olympics. That India with second largest population in the world could win only
one Bronze medal.in the recent Olympics is a testimony to the seriousness we are attaching
to sports. Unless something radical is done. India can not go forward in sports.

Ill. EIGHTH FIVE YEAR PLAN

3.1 The total approved outlay of the Department for the 8th plan is Rs. 350 crores.
However, the Department has been allocated a total amount of Rs. 436.11 crores. Out of
this amount, Sports Division and Youth Division were provided a sum of Rs. 250.50 and
185.61 crores respectively. Coming to the actual expenditure made, the expenditure of
Sports Division and Youth Division has been at the level of Rs. 274.55 and 171.25 crores
respectively totalling to an amount of 445.80 crores for the. entire department. The

“ ec


2

Committee has noted there is an increase of Rs. 145.80 crores of expenditure against the
approved outlay for the 8th plan. However, the Committee is constrained to note that the
achievement of targets made by the both in terms of financial and physical has: been
unsatisfactory. As regards the sports wing is concerned, the allocations have been fully
utilised by the wing. But the net result is zero. The country has not made any improvement
in its performance in international sports. If we have to make our presence felt in
international sports some radical steps are required to be taken.

3.2 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over ineffective and
inefficient running youth schemes. The Committee finds a very casual approach in the
implementation of the programmes. Youth are the foundation for the development of the
country and unless we lay emphasis on youth programme and put the youth on the right
track and right direction, the ultimate goal of nation building can not be achieved. The
Committee is, therefore, of the strong opinion that all the schemes meant for youth should
be totally revised. Similarly in regard to sports also, the Committee is not happy with the
way the sportspersons are trained in India. There is lack of sports infrastructure right froni
the village level. There is no proper training. The coaching of sportspersons starts just before
the international events were to commence. This approach has to change. The Coaching
should start much more in advance. Sufficient infrastructure should be provided at every
level. There is a necessity of reviewing the National Sports Policy.

Iv. APPROACH TO THE NINTH FIVE YEAR PLAN

4.1 The Committee has taken note of the approach on Youth Affairs and Sports during
the Ninth Plan period. The contents of relevant paras from the Approach Paper to the Ninth
Five Year Plan are reproduced as follows:

“The thrust in Youth Affairs will be to consolidate and expand youth activities by
involving youths in the entire gamut of the developmental process as the youth are a major
resource in the task of nation building. Youth activities will focus on environmental and
health programmes such as greening of wastelands. Solid waste management, anti-smoking
campaign, prevention of drug abuse, health education with emphasis on reproductive health
and prevention of AIDS, population control as well as various adventure activities. Greater
access will be given to the rural and marginalised youth in the vocational training
programmes of Nehru Yuva Kendras by involving the NGOs, self-help groups and
community polytechnics in the task.

The thrust in sports will be on providing greater access to sport facilities through
substantial investments in physical education, infrastructure development including centres of
sport physiology and sports medicine and in creating wide spread awareness for physical
fitness through nutrition, health education and yoga with special focus on school children.
Area specific sports programmes recognising the traditionally sports skills of the inhabitants,
specially tribal population will receive priority consideration. Rural sports programmes will
be revamped in order to tap vast talents available in the rural areas. Special attention will be
given for the promotion of sports and games among the disabled. The need for a holistic
approach that will integrate youth and sports activities and programmes within the context of
education is well recognised and will guide all actions”

4.2 The Committee hopes that Government would atleast now realise the importance of
sports and take necessary steps to tap the vast talents available in the country. If dedicated
efforts are made, the approach laid down above would no doubt go a long way in bringing
about a change in the sports scenario.


V. YOUTH AFFAIRS PROGRAMMES

5. The total allocation made for Youth Affairs for the year 1997-98 is Rs. 70.54 crores.
This amount includes Rs. 49.04 crores on Plan side and Rs. 21.50 on Non-Plan side. These
allocations are against Budgetary allocations of Rs. 60.75 crores consisting of Rs. 39.25
crores (Plan) and Rs. 21.50 crores (Non-Plan) made last year. Though the allocation on Plan
side this year has been increased by about Rs. 10 crores, the Committee feels that the
overall annual plan allocation is not sufficient keeping in view the schemes being
implemented by the Department, under the pressure of inflation and the increasing youth
population in the country. The Committee is aware of the existing scenario of youth
problems, which is reflected in the unlawful activities of misguided youth of the country.
Youth power, if directed properly, can change the socio-economic scenario of the country.
The Committee, however, is constrained to note that the achievement of targets made by
the youth wing both financial and physical has not been satisfactory. Infact on the financial
target side, the expenditure in the first four years of the Eighth Five Year Plan could not
reach the actual allocation. Similarly in many of the schemes of the youth wing, achievement
of physical target are far behind the targets fixed. For example, in Nehru Yuva Kendra
Sangathan the physical targets could not be achieved in any of the first four years of the
Eighth Plan period. The Committee in this connection agrees with the view expressed by the
Approach Paper to the Ninth Plan that the social sector programme have not performed
upto mark. The Committee feels that the monitoring and evaluation system either does not
exist and even if it exists, the findings of it are not put to use. These are the main reasons
due to which the targets could not be achieved on both financial and physical fronts. The
Committee therefore strongly recommends that the Ministry should tighten and strengthen
its monitoring system to ensure efficient achievement of targets. The Committee, yet feels its
duty to recommend that the two vital factors-inflation and increasing number of youth be
kept in mind while making allocations to the Department.

VI. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN

6.1 Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan, an autonomous organisation under the
Department, aims to bring rural youth and non-student youth into the mainstream of
national development. At present it is the largest grass root level organisation in the Asia-
Pacific region, which caters to the needs of more than 8 million non-student rural youth in
the age group of 15-35 years spread over 1.82 lakh village based youth clubs.

6.2 For the vast varieties of activities concerning with nation-building, Nehru Yuva
Kendra Sangathan has been allocated Rs. 19.11 crores out of Rs. 70.54 crores allocated for
youth programmes for this year. As recommended by the Committee for an increased
allocation, the allocation of plan side has been increased from Rs. 10.20 crores last year to
Rs. 12.00 crores for the current year. However due to inflationary impact as well as opening
of new Kendras, the cost of existing programmes of NYKS has gone up. The increase in
budgetary allocation will therefore hardly be able to meet this cost and no new project can
be undertaken, the Department stated. The Committee finds that due to expansion of Nehru
Yuva Kendra Sangathan network, the Sangathan is able -to attract considerable fund from
the international organisations and from various Ministries/Departments. The Committee, in
view of this, would like to recommend that every effort be made to attract more funds from
other organisations. The Committee is however not happy with the achievement of targets
under this scheme on both financial and physical fronts. The physical targets were not
achieved during any year in the entire Eighth Plan period. The financial allocations could
not be utilised fully during 1992-93 and 1994-95 and marginally in 1995-96. During 1996-97


4

the Department anticipated full utilisation of Rs. 10.20 crores allocated. The Committee,
however, has its own doubts on this. The targets and achievements made under this scheme
are as under:

(Rs. in lakhs)
Physical Financial
Year Targets Achievements Targets Achievements
(No of Programmes
to be Organised)
1992-93 11.694 है 7.984 900.00 896.00
1993-94 11.418 9.873 1017.00 1017.00
1994-95 10.779 8.694 1017.00 829.00
1995-96 5.435 4.917 1020.00 1019.00
1996-97 6.651 6.165 1020.00 1020.00

The Committee is of firm belief that the monitoring system has not functioned properly
to oversee the activities of the Sangathan which resulted in the non-achievment of targets.
Unless all the loopholes are plagged, the Committee doubts the achievement of targets in
future. as well. E

शा. NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEMES

7.1 The budgetary allocation for the scheme during the current year is Rs. 17.75 crores
(Rs. 13.10 crores-Plan and Rs. 4.65 crores Non Plan) as against Rs. 17.30 crores (Rs. 12.60
crores Plan and Rs. 4.70 crores Non-Plan) for RE last year. According to the Department,
while the increased allocation is expected to only take care of the inflationary impact
partially, the Department has decided to enhance its share of expenditure from 7:5 to 9:1 in
the case-of North Eastern States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur,
Mizoram, Meghalaya and Tripura. The Department also envisage 10% annual increase in
the strength of NSS volunteers every year during the 9th Five year Plan. For 1997-98, the
target is to enrol 14.50 lakh student volunteers, and to conduct 7,500 special camps on the
theme “Youth for Sustainable Development”. Watershed Management and Watershed
Development have also been integrated into the NSS Programmes. According to the
Department there is tremendous scope for further increase in the number of NSS volunteers
in the country, but due to resource crunch, it has not been found possible. The Department
informed the Committee that the additional funds required for enhancement of programme
fund comes to Rs. 7 crores. The Committee, however, has been recommending year after
year for increasing the programme fund from present rates of Rs. 120 and Rs. 200 to
Rs. 160 and Rs. 300. The Committee is dismayed to note that the Department of
Expenditure asked the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports to find financial support
from corporations and other donor agencies. The Committee agrees with.the Department
that the outside support could not be forthcoming for-runing programmes in a normal
manner. The Government will have to provide funds. The Committee therefore,
recommends that necessary higher provisions may be considered by the Planning
Commission for increasing the programme fund as well as for expansion of the scheme as
the scheme has to be run effectively.

7.2 The Committee is however not impressed by the shortfall in the achievement in the
targets particularly financial. The plan outlay during the entire Plan period was Rs. 56.81
crores whereas actual expenditure made was Rs. 45.74 crores. Similarly on non-plan side
total allocation was Rs. 23.70 crores and the actual expenditure incurred during the period
was Rs. 21.71 crores. The reason for under utilisation as explained by the Department is


5

that the States of Assam, West Bengal, Bihar and Andhra Pradesh have already considerable
under-utilised amount of earlier grants. The Committee, however, has found the shortfall every
year. Since there is a shortfall in the funds utilisation, the Department should try to increase the
programme fund or expand the scheme. The Department should be able to do this within its

existing resources.

VIII. ASSISTANCE TO VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS WORKING IN THE FIELD OF
YOUTH

8.1 This scheme is being implemented by giving assistance to voluntary organisations like
resistered bodies, Public Trusts and non-profit making companies for the purpose of involving
youth in development activities specially in rural areas. The main focus of the scheme is on
vocational training programme to promote self-employment. According to the Department
significant achievements have been observed in the field of agro-based industries, tailoring,
embroidery, carpentary etc. However, surprisingly, the vocational training component of the
scheme is being aken away from the scheme and a scheme of exhibitions for youth is going to be
included under the scheme. The plea being put forward in this matter is that the scheme will be
made more viable. The Committee fails to understand as to in what manner, the scheme of
exhibitions in place of vocational training would be helpful for youth in getting self employment.

8.2 During the financial year 1996-97 upto 10.3.97 amount of Rs. 72.00 lakh allocated for the
year had been released to voluntary organisation/educational institutions for the benefit of
16,665 youth against a target of 9000 youth. This year a provision of Rs. 94.00 lakh has been
made and the target fixed to assist 10,000 youth. The Committee is constrained to note that the
physical targets were not achieved during 1993-94, 1994-95 and 1995-96 even though the finacial
allocations were fully utilized. The Committee desires that the scheme should be evaluated and
necesary action may be taken to plug the loopholes. The Committee believes that there are
mushrooming number of voluntary organisation without any track record an dedication. While
selecting the organisations under the scheme, the proven track record of the organisations may
be kept in mind and those which are doing good work need to be encouraged.

IX. NATIONAL INTEGRATION PROGRAMME

9.1 This scheme aims to cut the web of mischievous designs of external as well as internal
forces which are bent upon dividing India by arousing regionalism, linguistic chauvinism and
castiest sentiments of the people. During the last year camps were organised to spread the
message of brotherhood, communal harmony and compassion and youth took the ‘National
Solidarity Pledge’ to remain vigilant against the forces inimical to the national interest.
Accordingly, a new component namely ‘Sadbhavana Shivirs’ has been introduced.

9.2 During 1997-98, there has been no increase in last year’s (1996-97) allocation of
Rs. 3,00 crores for this scheme. On the recommendation of the Committee for increased
allocation at RE stage for conducting more national integration camps and inter-state youth
Exchange Programme, the Department has informed that the Ministry of Finance was
requested to provide Rs. 3.26 crores at RE stage, but it did not agree. This year allocation of
fund at the level of last year’s allocation, in view of the Committee, is bound to reduce the
activities under this programme considering the inflation factor which may be kept in view while
finalising revised estimates. The Committee feels that under the programme, priority should be
given to terrorism affected states. During 1996-97 out of Rs. 306.97 lakhs spent on the
programme. Only Rs. 21.90 was spent on the entire North-East. This trend should be changed
and need based priorities and some specific target groups and target areas should be fixed.

1666/RS F—4-A


6

X. RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT

10.1 This institute situated at Sriperumbudur in Tamil Nadu is responsible for training,
documentation, research and evaluation and extension for all youth related activities in the
country. Construction of the 1st and 2nd phase of its building has already been started which
is expected to be completed in the middle of 1997.

10.2 The allocation for the institute has been substantially increased from Rs. 2.11 crores
(RE 1996-97) to Rs. 8.04 crores (BE 1997-98) by diverting funds from other schemes/
programmes to this institute so that its construction work is completed smoothly at the
earliest. The Department has also informed that the cost of construction has escalated upto
Rs. 16.31 crores due to price rise in the items of cement, steel etc. The Committee is of the
view that cost escalation could be avoided by adhering to the time-schedule in completing
the work. The Department should therefore take effective steps to ensure timely completion.

XI. YOUTH HOSTELS

11.1 The scheme is a joint venture between Central and State Governments. While the
Central Government bears the cost of construction, the State Government provides the
developed land free of cost with water, electricity, approach road and staff quarters. So far
48 hostels have been commissioned/functional and construction of 24 hostels is in progress.
Youth hostels, after construction, are handed over to the State Government for management
on a nominal fee of Rs. 1/- per month and the State Governments meet operational cost.
Normal maintenance is the responsibility of State Government, but major and special repairs
are carried out by Central Government. The Committee was informed that it was earlier
decided by NDC to transfer the scheme to States and the proposal is being re-considered in
consultation with NDC. The Committee feels that an early decision on this would give the
much needed fillip to, the programme.

11.2 The allocation for the scheme has been increased by merely Rs. 25 lakhs. During the
current year, a sum of Rs. 2 crores has been provided against last year BE and RE of
Rs. 1.75 crores. On being asked whether the amount would be sufficient, the Department
informed that due to overall shortage of budgetary resources, the Department has been
concentrating more on completing the construction work in respect of those youth hostels
where the construction work has already started rather than sanctioning any new youth
hostel.

11.3 The Committee agrees with the contention of the Department of concentrating on
completing the work which has been in progress. However, for this, the Department should
ensure completion in time and adherence to the schedule. The Committee is also of the
considered view that the scheme should not be transferred to States. The Committee is also
not happy with the shortfall in achieving physical target in 1994-95 and 1995-96. This, the
Committee believes, is mainly due to delay and cost escalation. Unless these problems are
addressed to properly, it would be difficult to achieve the targets. The monitoring
mechanism should also be strengthened.

XII. YOUTH CLUBS

12.1 The scheme is being implemented through Nehru Yuvak Kendra Sangathan and
State Governments/Union Territory Administrations. It aims at assisting newly set up youth
clubs to enable them to start their activities and get established. One time financial
assistance of Rs. 5000 is given to registered youth clubs. During the year 1996-97, 924
youth clubs were given financial assistance. Accordjng to the information furnished by the
Department, Haryana has become the first State in the country where every village has a


registered youth club. The Committee was given to understand that a scheme of awards to
outstanding youth clubs is in existence for promotion of youth clubs at district, State and
national level.

12.2 The Committee is happy to note that this year a provision of Rs. 50 lakhs has been
made against last years allocation of Rs. 25 lakhs so that more youth clubs could be covered
under the scheme. The Committee was also informed that the working group, set up to
review various ongoing schemes of the Department for the Ninth Five Year Plan, was of the
view that the scheme of sports clubs should be integrated with the youth clubs and the youth
clubs should be funded not only for cultural and youth development activities but also for
promotion of sports. The Committee endorses the view of the working group and
recommends that the proposal be considered seriously and if found feasible, it should be
implemented this year itself with more effective monitoring as increased assistance requires
more vigilance. The Committee feels that in view of inflationary pressure, a sum of
Rs. 5000 given to a youth club is very little and recommends that the amount of assistance
be suitably increased.

XI. PROGRAMME OF TRAINING OF YOUTH

13.1 The Scheme aims at motivating youth through the spread of knowledge for
participating in training courses based on local needs and talents for promoting self
employment and better employment. The training covers a wide range of disciplines like
agriculture, animal husbandry, dairy, poultry etc.

13.2 The allocation for the scheme is Rs. 1 crore this year against the same level of
allocation jast year. During the financial eyar 1996-97 (upto 10.3.1997), an amount of Rs.
90.31 lakh has been released to voluntary organisations for training of 3228 youths. As per
information provided to the Committee a target of 2000 youth has been fixed by assisting 50
voluntary organisation during the year 1997-98. This target is the lowest target fixed during
the Eighth Five Year Plan. The Committee was informed that the scheme was being revised
during Ninth Five Year Plan to make it more purposeful and viable.

13.3 The Committee is constrained to note that this programme is facing a shortfall in the
achievement of physical targets during the first three years of the plan period. Infact in 1992-
93 out of 7000 youths to be trained, only 998 youths could be trained. As regards, financial
targets also, the programme faced shortfall during the first three years of the plan period.
Even though there is a sligiht improvement in the last two years much is left to be desired
for improving the programme. दर

XIV. SPECIAL SCHEME FOR TRIBAL YOUTH

14.1 The scheme aims at promoting youth activities among the youth of backward tribes,
based on their needs and potential. Under this scheme financial assistance is given to
voluntary organisations, NSS Regional Centres, Educational Institutions including
universities. Nehru Yuva Kendras, Bharat Scouts and Guides and*also to the State
Governments/UT Administrations. A sum of Rs. 1 crore has been allocated for this scheme
and the targets for number of youth for imparting vocational training, Youth leadership
training, participating in National Integration Scheme has been fixed at 2000, 2500, 1500
respectively. The Department also intends to organise 25 exhibitions besides assisting 50
voluntary organisations during the‘current financial year.

14.2 The Committee is not satisfied. with the manner in which the targets are being
achieved. This becomes evident from the information furnished to the Committee. Upto


8 हि

31.12.1996, during 1996-97 an amount of 23.08 lakh was released for the benefit of 1990
tribal youth against a target of 6000. The Committee is surprised to know that within about
two months and one week, this figure would rise to 9485. The Committee doubts this
particularly in view of the shortfall faced by this programme in achieving physical targets
during the first three years of the plan period. The Committee hopes that the trend of
shortfall would not recur in future. The Committee is also surprised to note that there was a
shortfall in utilising the financial allocations made every year during the plan period. It is
distressing to note that during 1992-93 out of Rs. one crore allocated, only 18.15 lakh were
spent. Similarly in 1993-94 also, the utilisation was only about 25% which, however, has
improved about 70% from 1994-95 onwards. The Committee strongly recommends that the
Department should review this programme thoroughly and take necessary step to avoid any
shortfall.

XV. YOUTH DEVELOPMENT CENTRES

15.1 This scheme was introduced during 1994-95. The main obejctive of the scheme is to
develop community infrastructure in a cluster of ten villages for the social, political,
economic environmental development of villages with a credit extension of Rs. 30,000 each.
Each centre is managed by a youth committee drawn from the youth of the constituent
villages and operation and maintenance is raised by the Committee. According to the
Department. this scheme is an innovative scheme to give a fillip to participation of rural
youth in development activities.

15.2 The Committee has been informed that the scheme was going to be scrapped
during the Ninth Five Year Plan and 2 new scheme for establishing District Information and
resource Centre would be introduced. The Committee is unhappy to note that the
Department intends to scrap the scheme, even though it calls the scheme innovative, within
a very short span or 2-3 years of its launching. The Committee strongly feels that several
social sector programmes are formulated without addressing the question of substainability
of their benefits. Sometimes the schemes are either revised without assessing the actual
impact of the scheme or reviewing the scheme which has not perhaps reached the
beneficiaries fully. The Committee, therefore, recommends that either a scheme should be
started after giving thought to all pros and cones and once having started. It should be
allowed to see the light of the day atleast for sometime for assessing its impact.

XVI. GAMES AND SPORTS

16.1 The total allocation made for games and sports activities of the Department during
the year 1997-98 is Rs. 86.01 crores (Plan Rs. 75.66 crores and Non-Plan Rs. 10.35 crores)
as against Revised Estimates of 1996-97 of Rs. 80.79 crores (Rs. 55.60 crores Plan and Rs.
25.29 crores Non-Plan). On the recommendation of the Committee for providing additional
grants to SAI, the BE of Rs. 72.76 crores was increased to RE of Rs. 80.79 crores so as to
adjust non-plan liabilities of SAI. Besides, four crores were also provided for plan
expenditure out of the savings of the department. Thus additional grant of Rs. 10.50 crores
was given to SAI for the purpose. During the current year significant increase on plan side
has been effected in the following sport and games activities of the Department:

RE 1996-97 BE 1997-98
# Sport Authority of India 33.50 35.00
Ze Grant to Sports Federation 8.00 15.00

3 Grants to Universities and Colleges 2.00 3.25



RE 1996-97 BE 1997-98
4. Incentives for promotion of Sport Activities Bret 4.00
5. Creation of Sports Infrastructure 6.50 9.00
6. Laying of Synthetic tracks and surfaces 1.50 4.50

In total there has been an increase of Rs. 20.16 crores on plan side for the current year.
The increase is still meagre keeping in view the vastness of the country and the amount of
effort required to be made. However the Committee appreciates this increase.

XVII. GRANTS TO SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA

17.1 The Sports Authority of India is the apex body in the country for development of
sports. The Authority has six Regional Centres and all the centres are well equipped with
provisions and facilities for sports to provide a conducive sports environment, essential for
development of excellence.

17.2 The Committee was given to understand that about 40% of the Indian contingent
which participated in Atlanta Olympics. 1996 comprised of players hailing from different
SAI schemes. However, the whole country was disappointed by the poor performance of the
players in Atlanta Olympics. The Committee feels that the expectations from the Authority
has been belied. However, the Authority alone is not to be blamed. Every year, the
Authority was not given sufficient funds for its activities. This year also, allocation for the
Authority has been reduced to Rs. 41 crores from Rs. 46 crores in RE of the last year
inspite of repeated recommendations of the Committee for higher allocation. The
Committee has been given to understand that the Ministry of Finance wanted the Authority
to improve its own earnings by the commercial use of stadia etc. so that it can atlest meet its
operational cost from its own resources. The funding has been made on the ‘meet the deficit’
basis. This situation has led the Authority to face financial crunch during the last few years.
The Committee feels that this is not in the interest of sports development and the approach
of the Ministry of Finance needs to be corrected as the Authority is not a commercial
organisation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Authority while being asked
for improving its earnings, should also be given higher allocation at RE stage particularly in
view of making preparations for Asian and Commonwealth Games in 1998 and Olympics in
2000. The Committee shares the view of the Department on the allocation to SAI that the
amount would not be sufficient for SAI to even continue its on-going schemes effectively.

17.3 So far as performance of SAI is concerned, the Committee had already made an
in-depth study on the subject including performance of SAI and feels that its
recommendations therein are still relevent. The Committee has received a sketchy action
taken report in the matter and directed the Secretary of the Department during the course
of his oral evidence before the Committee on the Demands for Grants to furnish a revised
actién taken report expeditiously. As and when the revised ATR is received, the Committee
would consider and give its reporting thereon
XVIU. GRANTS TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS

18. The allocation for Sports Federations has been increased from
Rs. 8.73 crores for 1996-97 (Rs. 8.00 crores plan and 0.73 crores Non-plan) to Rs. 16.73
crores (Rs. 15.00 crores Plan and 1.73 crores Non-plan) for the year 1997-98. On being
asked for such a hike in allocation, the Department stated that for preparing our teams for
forthcoming Asian Games and Commonwealth Games being held in 1998, the Department
had finalised long term Development Plans where in coaching Camps and Pre-Asian Games
exposures have been chalked out. Guidelines for Assistance to National Sports Federations
have been revised which are expected to come into force during 1997-98. However the


10

Department further stated that to meet various expenses on holding of coaching camps,
purchase of sport equipment, hiring the services of foreign coaches, foreign exposures of
Indian Teams and payment of enhanced assistance to Federations for organising National
Championship and meeting, boarding and lodging expenses of teams going abroad etc., the
Department estimated its requirement for 1997-98 at Rs. 25 crores. Against this, allocation
of only 15 crores has been made for 1997-98, which in view of the Department, is not
enough to meet various expenses. The Department further informed the Committee that it
had sought an additional allocation of Rs. 245.00 crores for the Ninth Five Year Plan for
preparation/participation of teams in the forthcoming Asian Games, Commonwealth Games
and all other major international tournaments upto and including the Olympic Games 2000.
The Committee feels that keeping in view the forthcoming international Games, the
Planning Commission should consider increasing the allocation. However the Department
should also make reasonably better allocations to only those sports activities in which the
country stands chance of winning medals in international events. The Committee last year
recommended that the guidelines for the Federations should be finalised at the earliest. On
this, the Department stated that a draft of the fresh guidelines for giving more assistance to
the National Sports Federations had been prepared and referred to the Expenditure Finance
Committee. A meeting of this Committee was proposed to be held shortly to finalise the
guidelines it was added. The Committee desire that the Department may get it cleared by
the EFC at the earliest.

XIX. GRANTS TO UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES

19.1 This scheme is being implemented mainly through three agencies, namely the
University Grants Commission (UGC). Association of Indian Universities and the Sports
Authority of India. Under the scheme, a lump-sum grant between Rs. 1.00 crore to Rs. 1.50
crore is normally placed at the disposal to the U.G.C. for disbursement to General
Universities/Colleges for creation of Sports infrastructure and requests for grants for
infrastructure from engineering/medical/agricultural colleges are considered directly in the
Department. Roughly Rs. 50-60 lakhs annually are given to Association of Indian
Universities for conducting Inter-University Tournaments and organising coaching/training
programmes under this scheme. Scholarship is also given to talented university players
through Sports Authority of India.

19.2 A provision of Rs. 3.25 crores has been made for the current year effecting a
nominal increase against BE of last year at Rs. 3.00 crores. The Committee was informed
that the allocation of BE 1996 was reduced at RE stage by the Rs. 1.00 crore to provide
funds to the Sports Authority of India for meeting their urgent and inescapable needs. The
Committee notes with regret that on this account. AIU could not be given its due share and
grants to other professional institutes and expresses its reservations on diversion of fund
from this account to Sports Authority of India. This is the field where synthesis of sports and
education takes place and any restriction to this activity has serious implications. The
Committee hopes that in future, this type of reduction should not occur particularly in the
matter concerning sports in educational institutions.

XX. RURAL SPORTS PROGRAMME

20.1 The scheme aims to provide opportunities to rural sports talent to get notices at a
very early age. The scheme envisages to complement the efforts of the State Governments,
in organising the annual rural tournaments upto the village level with the involvement of
voluntary sports clubs and organisation of NE festival.

20.2 On being asked whether there is a need to enhance the allocation for rural/tribal


ll

sports, the Department informed the Committee that the funds under rural sports
programme for the year 1997-98 have been increased from Rs.50 lakh to Rs.1.00 crore for
organising rural sports tournaments. Apart from this under the scheme, grants upto Rs. 1
lakh is given for development of playfield and sports equipment to rural schemes. It was also
informed that special attempts to identify talent from rural and tribal areas are made.

20.3 The Committee is of the view, that the talented can be picked up at the grassroot
level for comprehensive training and development. The Committee, in this connection, feels
that the role of village panchayat could be useful in searching talent in sports field.
Therefore some percentage of fund should be earmarked on sports for village Panchayats.

XXI. INCENTIVES FOR PROMOTION OF SPORTS ACTIVITIES

21.1 The Scheme is primarily meant for generating competitive sport spirit and sport
activities. Under the scheme, there are four components viz school Prize Money, Pension to
meritorious sportspersons, Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Awards and Special Awards to winner
of medals in International Sports events. The Committee was informed that one of the major
components of the scheme viz promotion of Sports and Games in Schools through Prize
Money was not under implementation and the scheme was kept in abeyance keeping in view
the fact that the States have found it difficult to conduct prize money tournaments as
separate from school level competitions being conducted by them at the district level.
According to the Department the scheme has been revised and it is proposed to start
implementation of the scheme during the current year. Besides, it has been decided to
extend to pensionary benefits to the medalists of world cup and World Championship also
under the scheme of Sports Fund for Pension to Sportspersons.

21.2 The allocation for the scheme has been substantially increased from the RE of
Rs.0.75 crores to Rs.4.00 crores. The Committee notes the peculiar feature of allocation to
the scheme. It was allocated Rs.3.5 crores at BE 1995-96 and reduced to Rs.1.5 crores at
RE stage. Again in BE 1996-97, Rs.1.25 crores was allocated and it was slashed down to
Rs.0.75 crores at RE stage. The reasons explained by the Department are that the RE
1996-97 was reduced for making savings for Sports Authority of India and the increase in BE
for 1997-98 is to extend coverage of cash incentives to events like world Cup/Championship
and a pensionary benefit for life long to outstanding sportspersons.

21.3 The Committee is of the view that incentives are essential for encouragement of
sportspersons. The Committee in this connection, would like to recommend that the funds
earmarked for the scheme be utilised in an efficient manner.

XXII. CREATION OF SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE

22.1 This scheme has been continued during the Eighth Plan with certain -amenaments.
The scale of central grant is 50% of the estimated cost of plain areas and 75% for hilly/
Tribal areas subject to stipulated ceilings. These ceillings were considerably enhanced during
the Eighth Plan.

22.2 The total allocation under the scheme during 1996-97 was Rs. 8.00 crores which
was reduced to Rs.6.50 crores at RE stage to provide funds to SAI for their urgent need.
For the current year, a provision of Rs.9.00 crores has been made. The Committee was
informed that in certain ripe cases, where release of grants had become due on account of
submission of requisite documents by the sponsors, the grant could not be released. In order
to provide scope for release of grants for such projects and to meet the existing committed
liabilities, an allocation of Rs.9.00 crores has bee agreed for the current financial year, it
was stated.


12

22.3 The Committee is aware of the total lack of sports infrastructure at the grassroot
level through out the country. All schools do not have playgrounds. There is dearth of
facilities in rural and tribal areas. The Committee therefore recommends that efforts are
required to be stepped up under the programme for spreading the sports infrastructure
through the length and breath of the country.

22.4 About the proposal to evolve standard low cost design for creating sports
infrastructure, the department stated that the school of Planning and Architecture has been
approached to prepare a Handbook of sports and Recreation Facilities covering the aspect of
standard low cost design also for Sports Infrastructure. The school has been directed to
compete the assignment by October, 1997. An advance of Rs. 4.00 lakh has already been
placed at the disposal of the School, it was added. The Committee desires that the project
may be completed as per schedule.

XXIII. 34TH REPORT ON INDIA’S PERFORMANCE IN INTERNATIONAL SPORTS

23. The Committee made a detailed examination of the sports scenario in the country
and presented its 34th Report on India’s Performance in International Sports. The Action
Taken Report received from the Department was considered by the Committee. The
Committee was not satisfied and directed the Department to furnish the revised Action
Taken Report at the earliest. The Committee, however, reiterates the recommendations
made in the above Report which are as under:

1. The Committee feels that it should be our objective to see that every child takes part in
sports and games, and that every parent encourages the child to do so. It should also be our
endeavour to see that as children grow, they do not lose their enthusiasm for sports, nor do
the pressure of studies towards a bright career diminish their interest for participating in
sports and games. (para 31)

2. Our performance in creating a conducive environment for sports should also ensure
that boys and girls with high potential are encouraged to remain active in sports through a
system which offers them due social recognition and encouragement, as well as financial
benefit. This is very essential, if we are to become competitive internationally as a nation.
(para 31)

3. The Committee emphasises that physical education and sports should be made an
essential and integral part of educational activity in schools and colleges. There is need for
reducing academic burden on the children, particularly at the primary stage, so that they
could spare enough time for sports. (paras 33 & 34).

4. Ideally all the schools and ¢dlleges must have physical education teachers/coaches.
Until it is possible, physical education teachers may be provided in each secondary school and
one in a group of primary schools. The Committee feels that unless some financial support is
pidVided to the schoois and colieges specifically for this purpose and for purchase of simple
and basic sports equipments and consumable sports items, this objective would not be
achieved. (para 34)

5. There is also a need to develop at least one sports school, preferably residential, in
each district with the requisite playing facilities and equipments. These schools could
ultimately be developed as Centres of Excellence in sports, on the same pattern as is being
done by China and East European -countries. (para 35)

6. The University Grants Commission should identify a few colleges, preferably physical
education colleges, which, in addition to giving theoretical knowledge, should encourage their


13

students to participate in performance sports. The Government should also seriously think of
establishing a sports university to which all the colleges of physical education could be
affiliated. (para 36).

7. The Committee strongly recommends that the functioning of the Association of Indian
Universities should be revamped to increase sports activities in the universities and improving
thereby their’ contribution to sports. The Inter-university Sports Board, which existed before
the Independence, should be revived, so as to supervise sports activities in our universities and
their affiliated colleges. (para 37)

8. Coupled with the absence of sports consciousness and culture in the country, there is
almost total lack of sports infrastructure at the grassroot level all over the country. The
Committee found that the infrastructure, so far created, is mainly confined to the metro
cities, big industrial townships, defence cantonments, etc. and caters to the needs of people
living in the urban areas, whereas 80 per cent of the population, which lives in- the villages
and small towns, is generally deprived of this benefit. The tribal and rural areas, with their
age-old games, are devoid of any sports infrastructure worth the name. (paras 39 & 40)

9. One of the reasons citied for the lack of sports infrastructure in the country is the non-
availability of sufficient funds for the promotion of sports. The amount provided for sports in
the Central Government is less than 0.0001 per cent of the Government’s total budget. even
taking into consideration the States’ provisions for sports, the percentage of allocation does
not improve either, which shows that sports is not a priority area. (para 41)

10. The Committee feels that Government should plan the development of sports in a
phased manner so that necessary infrastructure is built up over a period of time and scarce
resources earmarked for the purpose are optimally utilised. (para 42)

11. The Committee feels that, as far as possible, there should be a condition regarding
provision of a playfield while granting permission for opening a school or college in rural, as
well as urban areas. Where, however, it is not possible to have a separate playfield in the
urban areas for want of space, a group of schools/colleges could be allowed to use a common
playfield at different timings. Surplus land available with different Ministries, including
Railways, Defence, Civil Aviation and Tourism, etc. should be allowed to be used as playfiled.
All the Municipal Corporations, Cantonment Boards and Development Authorities should also
be directed to ban the use of playfields for any other purposes. (para 43)

12. The Committee, while visiting the Regional Centres of Sports Authority of India,
LNCPEs, NIS and the important stadia/sports complexes, found it distressing that barring the
Bangalore, Calcutta and Gandhinagar Regional Centres, the condition of most of the sports
complexes/stadia was from satisfactory (para 45).

13. The Committee recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports should
work out a proper plan and schedule for maintenance of these buildings/stadia constructed at
a huge cost. The Department should also introduce a system of regular monitoring and
inspection of these buildings by senior officials so as to esnure their proper maintenance and
upkeep, (para 48)

14. The Conynittee, during its visit to Lakshmibai National College of Physical
Education, Gwalior, noted that even though it has been made a deemed university, no
Director has been appointed for the Institute so far. The Committee desires that the Director
be appointed to the Institute expeditiously. (para 52)

15. the Government has eracted huge and massive sports infrastructure in the metro


14

cities and big towns. These structures are used only when national or international
tournaments take place. For the rest of the period, they are just lying idle or under-utilised.
Some of them are rented out for cultural programme and other shows. There is a problem of
their maintenance as well. A plan should be drawn up for utilisation of the infrastructure.
(para 53)

16. The Committee feels that instead of organising the games at the State capitals, many
of the games couid be held in other places in the State so that the sports infrastructure is not
concentreatred in one particular area. (para 55)

17. Several cases of jndisciplined behaviour of many of our sports persons are reported,
quite often, in the press, Coaches and Managers are scared of reporting against them because
of various reasons. The Committee is of the firm view that the country can ill-afford to take
lightly the instances of indiscipline and lack of sportsmanship, particularly from persons
representing the country in international arena. The authorities, the Committee feels, have to
be firm and strict in handling the instances of indiscipline amongst sportspersons and esnure
that such people do not find place in the Indian contingents going abroad for international
tournaments. (paras 58 & 60)

18. The Committee feels that if we really want to promote sports in the country we will
have to make available adequate incentives, good job opportunities and recognition of talent
and achievements. At present, there are very few incentives/rewards for our talented and
outstanding sportspersons. The Central Government, the State Governments and the public
sector undertakings do not offer good job opportunities for our sportspersons. (paras 61 & 62)

19. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for fixing a percentage of jobs in
each and every organisation for sportspersons. This would definitely prove to be strong
incentive to take sports as a career, provided all the organisations like Banks, Railways,
Airlines, public sector undertakings, etc. meticulously implement the scheme of employment
of sportspersons under this category. At present, there is no mechanism to monitor this aspect
by the Government. (para 63)

20. The Committee feels that in schools and colleges students, who perform well in
sports, may be given some percentage of grace marks in each subject. Similarly, certain
percentage of seats for admission in colleges should be reserved for students who have excelled
in sports. (para 64)

21. The Committee desires that, as an incentive sportspersons who have participated in
the State, national and international events should be allotted houses or plots by Housing
Boards and Urban Development Authorities on priority basis and at concessional rates. They
may also be given house building loans by Banks and other financial institutions at low
interest. Eminent sportspersons, who, after retirement, intend to start their own industry/
business etc. may be given licenses for the purpose, alongwith bank loans and land, if
necessary. (para 65)

22. The Committee was shocked to learn that till March, 1995, only .25 persons were
recruited as sportspersons in the 25 Ministries/Departments of the Government of India
(except in Railways and Defence) and that too in the Group ‘C’ category. (para 67)

23. The Committee feels that there is a lack of will and determination also in
implementing the existing guidelines in employing sportspersons by the Government. There is
no provision for promotion of outstanding sportspersons or giving them adequate cash awards
after they win medals and bring laurels to the country. (para 69)

24. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should have (i) a


a5

definite policy for recruiting sportspersons in various ministries/departments and public sector
undertakings; (ii) effective monitoring to get regular feedback and to ensure proper
implementation of the provisions of the policy, which is virtually non-existent as on date; (iii) the
Department of Sports and Youth Affairs should act as a nodal agency for this purpose; (iv) the
Government should also issue clear-cut guidelines to the Union Public Service Commission for
recruiting sportspersons in Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ services also as there are many sportspersons of
iniernativual standard having adequate educational qualifications for these categories of posts.
(para 70)

25. The Committee does realise the sportspersons’ concern about not getting adequate time
for practice due to pressure of work in their jobs. In such a situation, the Committee feels, it is the
duty, both of the sportspersons and their employers, to give topmost priority to sports so long as
the person is in full form and is in a position to win medals. (para 71)

26. The Committee notes that the existing cash awards system is not adequate to give the
much-needed financial support to sportspersons; and that cash awards for juniors and seniors are
highly disproportionate; and that for some sports these are incredibly higher. (para 72)

27. The amount of cash awards and pension being given to sportspersons by the
Government should be increased substantially so as to make sports more attractive and lucrative.
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Railways and the airlines operating in the
country, both private and the Government, should provide free/concessional tickets to eminent
sportspersons. (paras 73 & 75)

28. The Committee also recommends that certain categories of sportspersons should be
given preference in the allotment of soft loans by the banks, petrol and LP gas agencies and other
such incentives/benefits by the Government. (para 76)

29. The Committee recommends that one of the outstanding sportspersons may be
nominated to the Rajya Sabha in recognition of his/her distinguished service to the country
(para 77)

30. The Committee suggests that the Government should ensure that no player or team is
sent abroad for participation in international tournaments unless they are accompanied by
qualified sports medicine doctors alongwith the necessary kits and other aids. (para 78)

31. The Committee was informed that, in some cases, the Government is paying only 90% of
the fare and the remaining 10% is to be borne by the player himself or herself. The Government
should investigate as to why part payment of air fare is being made to players attending
international meets and ensure that such a thing is not repeated in future. (paras 79 & 80)

32. The Committee is of the opinion that training forms the core of good performance and
champions cannot be produced by training the sportspersons just for a few months before the
games. The training system in the country, the Committee feels, leaves much to be desired. Sports
training has to be properly planned and controlled for achieving the best results. (para 81)

33. The Committee feels that kits should be provided to players and teams well in advance
before they leave for international meets. (para 82)

34. Efforts should be made to ensure that the diet available to sportsmen and women has the
nutritional value necessary to meet the specific requirements of different games and sports in
which they participate. The Committee is of the firm opinion that the Government should
immediately raise the amount of diet 2!!owance substantially so that players can get a rich and
nutritious diet. (paras 83 & 84)

35. The Government should evolve a system of proper monitoring and evaluation of the


16

performance of SAI coaches deployed at various places. Coaches who work hard and show
good results should be suitably rewarded. Simultaneously, those who do not take interest in
sports or fail to give any tangible results need to be dealt with sternly. (para 86)

36. The Committee feels that once a good report is established between the coach and the
students, it would not be advisable to disturb such coaches in the overall interest of the
students and the sports. (para 87)

37. Outstanding sportspersons who have represented the country in the international
games and have now retired from active sports, can work as good coaches. The Committee
feels that services of such sportspersons would be both beneficial and economical and it would
also give them the much needed financial help and recognition of their talent. The Committee
desires that this system could be initially tried on an experimental basis which could be
subsequently extended or discontinued depending upon the results. (para 88)

38. The Committee suggests that either the entire control of the SAI coaches should be
given to the State Governments who have comparatively better mechanism for their close
monitoring or they may be completely withdrawn. The State Governments should be given
full authority for all the service matters of SAI coaches, including their postings and transfers.
(para 89)

39. One of the problems raised by the coaches deployed in the schools was that they did
not have accommodation either in the school premises or anywhere near the school. The
Committee feels that it is a genuine problem which needs to be looked into sympathetically
and Government should try to give residential accommodation to these coaches either in the
school premises itself, or just near to their working place so that they could reach the ground
carly in the morning. (para 90)

40. The Committee emphasises the need for continuous skill development and orientation
of coaches in view of the rapid changes in the techniques of various games. The Committee
desires that the SAI should identify certain specialised training institutes in various sports
disciplines, both within the country and abroad, so that our coaches could be deputed for
refresher training courses from time to time to upgrade their skills. The Committee came to
know that, at present, there was no policy with regard to training of the coaches and that
only a handful of coaches were repeatedly being sent for foreign exposure. The Committee
expresses its unhappiness over such a state of affairs and recommends that a uniform policy
be evolved for training the coaches without any discrimination. (para 91)

41. The Committee strongly recommends that the practice of making frequent changes of
coaches be avoided and whenever any team or player performs well, the credit should also be
given to the coaches who are basically responsible for their training. (para 92)

42. The Committee feels that government should make arrangements to provide personal
coaches to those sportspersons who have adequate potential and hope of winning medals at
international level. These personal coaches should also accompany the sportspersons whenever
they go abroad to participate in international tournaments. (para 93)

43. A comprehensive plan to upgrade the skills and qualifications of technical officials,
referees and judges in the identified disciplines needs to be taken up as quickly as possible.
(para 95)

44. The various federations/associations in the country are alleged to be the weakest link
in the chain of sports management and their functioning has been described as perfunctory.
The selection of teams and players by them is also stated to be lopsided, based on favouritism,


17

nepotism and arbitrariness. There is no democratic functioning at all in most of them. It is
also stated that huge amounts of money are spent on the election of office-bearers. Many
Federations/associations are being headed by people who have nothing to do with sports.
(para 96)

45. Federations must hold their elections regularly and democratically. The first and the
most important task before each national federation is to mobilise its energies and efforts for
obtaining sponsorship and financial support from various sources. (para 98)

46. It is essential that the national federations organise competitions, tournaments and
championships on a regular basis throughout the sporting season. This can be achieved by
monitoring, guiding and motivating their State/district units. (para 99)

47. The national federations are also responsible for enforcing -the rules of the game and
for ensuring that officials who conduct games, tournaments and competitions are fully
competent and fit for the purpose. The national federations should ensure that the rules
approved by the international federations to which they are affiliated, are followed in
recognised netional championships. (para 100)

48. While it will take some time for federations to become financially independent, and to
organise their work and responsibilities along structured and well regulated lines, assistnce
from the Government of India for various purposes may have to continue. However,
Government may impose certain conditions with regard to such matters as democratic
functioning, appointment of selection committees, dope testing, age verification procedure,
etc., as are considered necessary to protect our sportspersons from exploitation, and also to
ensure against adverse publicity in India and abroad. (para 102)

49. An important areas of resource mobilisation in which the Government can help the
federations greatly is by way of transferring the remaining sum of the advertising revenues
earned by Doordarshan from showing sports programmes to the concerned federations after
deducting its costs. (para 103)

50. The Committee also feels that I.0.A. is not in a position to maintain any effective
control and effect any co-ordination with national sports federations/associations. The I.0.A.
should reiterate to each federation the importance of making long-term development planning
and also ensuring its implementation. (para 104)

51. There is no coordination or cooperation betw various agencies engaged in
promotion of sports. There is no accountability and responsibility for poor performance in
sports in international events. The Committee emphasises the need for clearly demarcating the
duties and responsibilities of each one of the agencies so that accountability could be fixed for
their lapses. (para 105)

52. It is often seen that teams are selected virtually almost on the last day and at times
had reported after the events had already started. The Committee feels that this state of
affairs is highly deplorable and has to be stopped forthwith if we really intend to achieve
medals in the international sports arena. The Committee feels that there is a need for a long-
term planning and selection of teams has to be made much in advance so that players are
aware of their selection and they could concentrate more on sports rather than running
around till the last moment for various clearances. The Committee also desires that once the
teams are selected they should be sent to places of training and also sufficiently in advance to
the venue of the event for proper exposure and acclimatisation to the foreign environment.
(paras 106 & 107)

53. The Committee suggests that each one of the sports organisations should have an


18

annual calendar of events giving the details of events, their venues and the dates for the entire
year. The Committee also suggests that there should be only one National Calendar of Events
of various disciplines which should be finalised after consulting different agencies involved in
its promotion. This calendar of events should be sent to the Sports Authority of India (SAI)
by the concerned sports federations for consolidation and publication. (para 109).

54. The Committee is happy to know that the sports goods industry had come a long way
in producing good quality equipments which are in great demand and that some of these have
been approved even for Olympic games. The Committee, however, feels that such quality
production is confined to a few games like tennis and cricket which are very costly. India still
does not produce good quality and reasonably priced sports items of common use. The
Committee is of the opinion that making sports equipment easily available, upto the grassroot
level at economical cost, is absolutely necessary which would contribute not only to broad-
basing the participation but also creating a mass sports movement in the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs & Sports should
have a meeting with the representatives of sports goods industry to identify their problems,
which should be sorted out in consultation with the Ministries of Commerce, Finance and
Industry. The Committee also feels that small and cottage industries involved in production of
sports goods should be encouraged so that they can sell their products to local buyers at
reasonable prices. (paras 112, 113 & 114).

55. During its visits to various places, the Committee received a number of complaints
from players and organisers of various sports events that sports, except a few like cricket,
tennis and golf, are not given adequate coverage by the government-owned electronic media,
particularly Doordarshan. (para 115).

56. The Committee is of the opinion that media, particularly Doordarshan, is a potent
and powerful instrument for popularising sports. The Committee, keeping the condition of
sports in the country in view, feels that endeavour should be made to cover live, as far as
possible, or through highlights, all the national championships at senior and junior levels. The
Committee feels that there is a need to increase the equipments and other facilities available
with Doordarshan and AIR so that they do not feel handicapped in covering important and
major sports events. The Committee also emphasises the need for improving the quality of live
coverge and commentaries. Doordarshan and AIR may also play an effective role in
projecting the techniques and style of eminent sportspersons by showing them in slow motion
on the national hook-up. There is also a need for calling eminent sportspersons in
programmes on fitness, yoga, sports and games. (para 119).

57. The Committee is concerned to learn that some of the federations/boards are giving
the telecasting/broadcasting rights to foreign media companies, which is depriving
Doordarshan of an opportunity to earn revenues for its expansion and improvement. The
Committee notes the suggestion of Director General, Doordarshan, to have a legislation
Geciariag some sports as of national importance so that national media would be bound to
cover the important events connected with them, as is being done in Britain. (para 120).

58. The Committee noticed that neither the sports psychology nor the sports medicine
was being given any priority in India. The Committee feels that all the organisations working
towards promotion of sports must give due attention and priority to both these disciplines.
The Committee recommends that the services of good sports physiologists, psychologists and
sports medical experts be made available to our players on the ground. There is a need for a
more coordinated effort on the part of coaches, sports scientists and sports medicine doctors


19

to help sportspersons enhance their performance. Though SAI has made a beginning in this
direction, yet a lot more needs to be done. (paras 122 & 123)

59. In view of the decentralisation of resources to panchayats, Government should ensure
that there is a sports complex in each panchayat. Panchayats should also hold sports
competitions and championships periodically. There is also need for scouting talent at an early
age and select them on scientific basis because it is all the more easier to train the young ones.
Panchayat bodies should take up this responsibility. (para 124)

60. The Committee finds it disappointing that most of the State Governments have not
made any concrete plans to streamline the procedure for selection of sportspersons, their
coaching and participation in the national events so far. Improper selection of sportspersons,
coupled with lack of modern and rigorous training, results in disastrous performance at the
international level. The Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for streamlining the entire
system of selection of sportspersons and their training so as to achieve the best results. State
Governments should be asked to evolve long-term development programmes and also match
them with adequate budget. (para 126)

61. The Committee finds that so far neither the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports
‘teok thé federations have taken any particular interest in the development of sports among
Indian women and whatever distinction women have achieved so far is largely due to their
individual efforts. (para 128)

62. The Committee feels there is a need to give good incentives in the form of cash
awards and medals so as to attract mass participation by women. Many parents would like to
send their daughters to play games but they are hesitant to do so because of security and
safety reasons. The Committee noticed that out of 18 sports hostels of SAI, there is only one
sports hostel for wonten and there is no exclusive SPDA hostel for girls. Therefore, the
Committee feels, there is a need for proper planning to develop sports amongst women, by
opening more sports hostels and adopting more sports-oriented girls schools. (para 129)

63. Iw India, there is a club culture but it is restricted only to football, cricket and
wrestling. Club culture can be developed by organising inter-ciub competitions and by
providing patronage at different levels by Government agencies as well as business
estabiisnments. Tne Committee feels that the club culture needs to be encouraged right from
the panchayat level. The Committee feels that the Government should probe into the workings:
of the National Sports Club of India. The Committee also desires that the other sports clubs
existing in various parts of the country should throw open their facilities/infrastructure to
sportspersons on concessional basis. (para 135)

64. At present, there are about 32 to 34 disciplines in sports on which the country is
spending a lot of money. The Committee feels that due to paucity of funds we should not
spread our scarce resources thinly on each one of the games and it would be desirable to
concentrate on a few selected games and try to bag medals in these games at the international
arena. (para 136)

65. The Committee emphasises the need for concentrating on traditional rural and tribal
sports like kho-kho, archery and kabaddi in which India could always do better than other
countries. (para 138)

66. The Committee also feels that we should not send our teams to international sports
events in the disciplines where we do not have any chance of bagging medals. It would
perhaps be better not to participate than participating and losing in all the games, which
would have a demoralising effect. Before participating in international events, our players


20

should be given enough exposure at the national level and, if need be, we may invite foreign
teams to India to participate in competitions. (para 139)

67. The Committee feels that lack of funds and budgetary constraints are coming in the
way of development and promotion of sports. The amount earmarked by Government of India
for sports in 1995-96 is only Rs. 68.86 crores, which works out to 0.0001% of the total budget
of the Government. The Committee recommends that, to begin with, atleast 0.5 per cent of
the total budget should be earmarked for sports promotion. (para 144)

68. Members of Parliament are given Rs. 1 crore every year under the MPs’ Local Area
Development Scheme by the Central Government. MLAs are also given special discretionary
funds by the respective State Governments. A suggestion has come to the Committee that the
MPs and MLAs may be requested to earmark at least one to five per cent of this money every
year for purchasing sports equipments in the schools/colleges in their respective
constituencies. (para 148)

69. The Committee feels that the Government alone cannot deliver the goods. Public and
private sectors’ involvement is necessary in supplementing the governmental efforts. The
Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for a joint and coordinated approach by all the
agencies, including public and private sectors, in pooling their resources to promote sports in
the country. This is particularly necessary in the context of financial constraints, both at the
central and state levels. (para 149)

70. The Committee recommends that each major industrial house, both in public and
private sectors, should be asked to adopt one sports discipline and they should take the total
responsibility of scouting talent and nurturing the same, including their participation in
various national and international events. On reciprocal basis, the concerned industrial house
should have its nominee in the particular national federation/associafion. (para 151)

71. s&epresentatives of industrial houses appealed for tax exemption under revenue
expenditure also for scouting talent and training the teams. Such incentives are necessary for
the continued support of industrial houses in sports. The Income-tax Act should therefore, be
suitably amended so as to give substantial tax exemption to organisations investing in sports.
Special Customs Duty exemption for certain categories of imported sports equipments is
required to be made. Liberalised access to foreign exchange for import of sports equipments is
also called for. (paras 152 & 154)

72. There is a lot of duplication of efforts as various sports control boards, such as
Services, Railways, P&T, Banks and Para-military police forces, Steel Plants, Coal-fields etc.,
are contributing in their own way for promotion of sports without any coordination with each
other. Much worse is the lack of cooperation and communication between these bodies on the
one hand and the Sports Authority of India (SAI) and the federation on the other. The
Committee is not happy with this chaotic situation and lack of coordination among various
bodies is resulting in loss of scarce resources and time. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports should take immediate steps to
develop an effective machinery for regular dialogue and coordination with various
organisations so that no effort is duplicated and wastage of time and money could be
avoided.(para 155)

73. The Committee found that very limited sports infrastructure has been provided in the
whale of the North-Eastern region. The region is also denied major sports tournaments and
hampionships. The Committee, therefore recommends that governments and SAI, as well as
national sports federations, should concentrate in this sports fertile. area, not only for


21

scouting and nurturing of potential sports persons and providing adequate and suitable
infrastructure in this region but also for holding more and more competitions. (para 132)

74. The Committee is quite disappointed to learn that we have not been able to, till now,
identify the sports persons who would represent India in the 1996 Olympics at Atlanta even
though only seven months are left now. The Committee strongly recommends that we should
start selecting our players/teams without further delay not only for Olympics 1996 and Asian
Games 1998 but also for Olympics 2000 and prepare them scientifically with a view to
winning medals for the country. (para 156)

75. The Committee feels that unless Sports is also brought under the “Concurrent List”
of the Constitution, sports activities in the country cannot be uniformly regulated in an
effective and coordinated manner. (para 157)

76 The Committee also recommends that the Government should bring forward a Central
legislation, specifying the roles and responsibilities of the SAI, federations/associations and of
the state bodies so that a uniform and common approach could be adopted towards promotion
of sports by different agencies. This law should also provide for an effective regulatory
mechanism in the sports arena without impairing the autonomy of various agencies. Such
legislations are already in existencetin countries like USA, Germany, Thailand, Sri Lanka and
China. (para 157)

77. The Committee has come to the conclusion that the bureaucratic functioning of the
SAI is proving to be a major obstacle in the free and smooth operation of the regional centres.
The Committee feels that unless these Centres are strengthened, we cannot expect better
results from them. The SAI office in Delhi could be just a coordinating authority and should
concentrate on policy, planning and monitoring. There should be a Sub-regional centre of SAI
in each State, with a Director in charge of it. (para 162)

78. At present, there are six Regional Centres at Chandigarh, Delhi, Bangalore, Calcutta,
Imphal and Gandhinagar. The Central Region, which is at present located in Delhi, should be
shifted to Lucknow, as originally contemplated. The North-Eastern region, comprising eight
states including Si should have two centres, one located at Imphal and the other at
pera rm Rigy Committee desires that each one of the Regional Centres should be
headed by a Regional Director, with almost full powers. Two Executive Directors in Delhi
could look after the administrative and coordinating works of the organisation, as well as
matters relating to teams. The Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, should not
be the Director-General of SAI. Instead, a full-time Chairman-cum-MD, with good sports
background or interest in sports, should be appointed by the Government. (para-163)

79. The SAI governing body shall consist of fifteen members, including the Chairman-cum-
MD, two Executive Directors, seven Regional Directors, one Financial Advisor and four non-
official Members elected by the General Council. The General Council of SAI, headed by the
Minister of Human Resource Development, shall consist of the Minister of Sports, the
Secretary, Deptt. of Youth Affairs & Sports, the Chairman-cum-MD of SAI, the Financial
Advisor, the Executive Directors, Regional Directors and Directors of SAI sub-centres,
representatives of the State Sports Authorities/Sports Council, Joint Secretary in the Ministry
of HRD, five Arjuna Awardees/ Olympians, three coaches, Secretary General, IOA, five
representatives of national sports federations, two representatives of public sector sports
control boards, five sports experts such as sports journalists and commentators and three
Members of Parliament. The number shall not exceed 100. (para 163)

80. The Committee feels that the National Sports Talent Contest Scheme appears to be


very sound, reaching upto the village or panchayat level. However, in actual practice, it has
achieved very limited results. After ten years of its implementation, the scheme has thrown up
very few outstanding sports-persons. The scheme is not operated only in 44 schools in the
country. SAI and State Government do not seem to be paying attention to give adequate
publicity to it.

The Committee, therefore, feels that a wide publicity campaign should be launched
through mass media/local newspapers and also through locally elected bodies, well before the
selection process starts. The Committee also expresses its concern over the implementatin
aspect of the scheme, which is fraught with various flaws and loopholes. The Sports Authority
of India should periodically monitor the functioning of each school and also insist on
improving the sports infrastructure and boarding/lodging facilities. The Committee finds that
no serious thought has been given to the number of schools to be adopted which is borne out
by the fact that the number of schools adopted is not commensurate with the number of
children selected. Henceforth, preference should be given under NSTC Scheme to Kendriya
Vidyalayas, Navodaya Vidyalays, Sainik Schools and government boys/girls schools. (paras
169, 170, 171, 172 & 176)

81. Out of 78 SPDA Centres proposed to be set up, only 33 centres have started
functioning so far. The Committee expresses its displeasure over such a tardy progress of the
scheme and strongly urges upon the central as well as the State Governments to work in close
tandem with each other in the larger interest of development of sports. As regards the
suggestion of the Tata Consultancy Services to phase out the SPDA scheme, the Committee is
of the view that it is not based on a sound proposition. To wind up the scheme simply on the
pretext of States’ failure is not sound. The SPDA centres should be converted into SAI Sub-
regional Centres in course of time, with additional inputs. (paras 182 & 190)

82. Although the Committee expresses its overall satisfaction with the functioning and
performance of the Special Area Games Scheme as far as archery, hockey and watersports
are concerned, it is constrained to observe that the achievements in other disciplines,
particularly gymnastic and athletics, have not been upto the mark. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that based on the population/concentration of tribal and other communities,
Government should try to expand this scheme in the rural and tribal areas and take all
necessary measures to streamline and revamp the scheme. (paras 191 & 192)

83. The Committee recommends that government should review the National Coaching
Scheme to set right shortcoming and stremline the functioning of the scheme at the earliest.
The concept of sports hostel. should be reoriented and focussed towards achievement of
excellence at the international level. (para 196)

84. The Committee is also of the view that it is imperative to priorities disciplines for
sports hostel scheme and select only those games in which India has the potentiality of
achieving results in the international arena. (para 201)

85. The Committee found that the Army Boys Sports Company Scheme is functioning
very efficiently because the overall atmosphere of discipline in the Regimental Centres is quite
conducive for the development of sporting skills amongst children. The Committee is of the
opinion that the amount of Rs. 35 being given for diet per head under this scheme is quite
inadequate and should be increased substantially. During the course of their interaction with
the Committee, representatives of the Services Sports Control Board expressed a desire to
have one school in each Regiment. SAI may have to enlarge the scheme, accordingly, as it is
likely to pay better dividends. The Committee recommends that apart from extending the
scheme to other regiments of the army, the scheme should be extended to the central


23

para-military forces also who are keen to run schools on the same lines as by army regiments.
(paras 203, 204 & 205)

XXIV. GENERAL

24.1 Monitoring Mechanism. The approach paper to the Ninth Five Year Plan felt that
more practical approach to the programme formulation. Particularly for social sector ,
programmes was to put the lessons learnt from the experience to the implementation. The ~
approach papers also felt that in spite of the existence of an elaborate monitoring and
evaluation system, the findings made by the monitoring and evaluation system are not put to
use. The Committee takes a very serious note on this aspect and strongly recommends to the
Department to first strengthen the monitoring mechanism on various schemes and ensure
strict implementation of the finding made by the monitoring agencies. The Committees also
observes with concern that the schemes being taken up by the Central Government are not
properly monitored by the State Governments. Merely handing over the money and getting
report from the State Government is not going to serve any purpose. The Committee is of the
definite view that the State Governments, where the financial position is bad, divert the funds,
given by the Central Government for a particular scheme to other purposes such as for giving
salaries to the employees of the State Government etc. The Committee, therefore desires that
the Centre should impress upon the States about the need to develop a mechanism to find out
whether the money being given to the State for implementation of various programmes is
utilised for the purpose specified and fix responsibility in case the purpose is defeated.

24.2 NGOs: There are certain areas where the Adivasis are the worst affected lot. The
Committee is constrained to note that not many NGOs are present in tribal areas, one will
find them mostly in areas where the atmosphere and the living conditions are very good. They
would not like to leave big and smaller cities and go into rural areas. The Adivasis are mostly
located in far flung areas. The Committee, therefore, desires that NGOs which are working in
adivasi areas should be given encouragement.

24.3 There is no doubt that there are committed and devoted NGOs in the field, but at
the same time, one cannot rule out the possibility of mushroom growth of NGOs which are
merely interested in getting assistance from the Government of India. The Deptt. should,
therefore, strengthen its monitoring mechanism to see whether they are working properly or
not and only those NGOs’,which have proven track record should be given assistance.

XXV. COMMITTED LIABILITY

25.1 The Committee has noted that the committed liability of the plan schemes has not
been reflected in the budgetary allocations for 1997-98 which is the first year of the Ninth
Plan. The Committed expenditure which is accounted in the subsequent plan at the
termination of the previous plan is taken out from the plan and becomes a séparate committed
expenditure. If this is not done, the Department will be handicapped by this amount of plan
expenditure. The exercise of identifying committed liability has not been done by any of the
Departments for 1997-98. Committee in this connection has considered the report of the
Tenth Finance Commission. The Tenth Finance Commission have observed in this regard as
under:

“Although the Tenth Finance Commission have gone by their terms of reference in
deciding the cut-off date for transfer of committed liability of account of plan
scheme, the incremental labilities that would arise in 1997-98 on account of 8th Plan
scheme completed in the next two financial years would have to be provided for.
The commission are therefore of the view that the Planning Commission may
consider providing for the maintenance of such schemes till 1999-2000 in the Plan
itself as was done for the schemes of the two Annual Plans of 1990-91 and 1991-92.”


24

25.2 Committee was also given to understand that the Planning Commission issued
circular to all the Departments dated November 5, 1996 sending therewith guidelines for
classification of expenditure. The Ministries were also requested to make necessary provision
as committed non-plan expenditure for the upkeep of existing assets etc. Accordingly, all the
Ministries / Departments were asked to adopt the guidelines while submitting the plan
proposals for Ninth Five Year Plan and annual plan 1997-98. However the Departments
have not done this exercise. The Committee in this connection heard the views of the
Secretary. Department of Expenditure to clarify the position. He informed the Committee
that even through communications were sent to various Ministries, the Ministries could not
identify the committed expenditure in time. Accordingly a lumpsum amount has been
provided under Demand No. 31. The Department may approach the Department of
Expenditure for their share. The Committee, also, desires that the Department may
complete the exercise at the earliest so that they may not be handicapped on account of this.

25.3 The Committee is also constrained to note that many Departments have not done
the exercise of identifying committed expenditure and to get it earmarked separately for
several plan periods. Accordingly, committed expenditure on the plan schemes completed in
7th Plan or earlier and the assets created and staff employed in plan schemes has been
continuing on plan side resulting in severe resource crunch for the Deptts. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Deptt. should make a thorough review of the schemes and
identify the committed liability. The Committee is very much surprised that the guidelines
given earlier were not followed at all. For this, responsibility should be fixed.


MINUTES



XIV
“FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 3rd April, 1997 in Committee
Room 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri $.8. Chavan —— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
. Dr. 8.8. Dutta
Dr. M. Aram
. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik
Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Shri R. Margabandu
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
11. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
12. Shri Dutta Meghe
13. Shri 1.6. Sanadi
14. Shrimati Krishna Bose
15. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy
16. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi
17. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
18. Shri Samik Lahiri
19. Dr. M. Jagannath

20. Shri Ranen Barman

9० 3 9 ७ #+ ७

21. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

*Minutes of the 151 to 13th meetings relate to other matters.

2


WITNESSES
Ministry of Human Resource Development
* * * *

Department of Youth Affairs and Sports

. Shri Bhaskar Barua, Secretary

. Shri P.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary

. Shrimati Asha Swarup, Joint Secretary
. Shri M.N. Buch, 0.0. (SAI)

. Shri Gautam Guha, Deputy Secretary
. Shri Satyamoorthy, Financial Adviser

SECRETARIAT

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses of the
Department of ****** and Youth Affairs and Sports in connection with the examination of
Demands for Grants for the year 1997-98.

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 a.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on
7th April, 1997.

9 ०७ + ७००९५ A


Xv
FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 19th April, 1997 in Committee
Room 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B. Chavan —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
Dr. B.B. Dutta
. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
- Dr. Mohan Babu

9० 3 9 ७ # ७ ७

LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
10. Dr. C. Silvera
11. Shri Dutta Meghe
12. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi
13. Shri Samik Lahiri
14. Shri S.K. Karvendhan
15. Dr. M. Jagannath
16. Shrimati Hedwig Michael Rego

SECRETARIAT
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on the Demands for Grants for 1997-98

of the Department ***** and Youth Affairs and Sports (Demand No. 49). The Committee,
after some discussions, adopted the same with some modifications.

*****Relates to other matters.

29


30

3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati
Ray and Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and
Shri Sartaj Singh and Shri Dau Dayal Joshi to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha. The
Committee decided that the reports may be laid/presented on 22nd April, 1997.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 a.m.


$1.
No.

irrata to the Sixty-Second Report on Demands for Grants

1997-98 (Demand No.
Affairs and Sports.

Page
No.

Para
No.

49) of the Department of Youth

AKKKEK

Line For Read
No.

10,
155
Lier

15.

20

27

23

28 &

aR

30

48

73

80

75.1

43 Banen Ranen
2 resistered registered
7 aken taken
5 Finacial financial
8 an and
1 The This
6 Governments Government
? evar Year
5 Seigiht Slight
10 atlest atleast
2 relevent relevant
3 the =
3 Concen- Concen-
treatred trated
2.4 assistnce assistance
3 hampionships Championships
9 implementatin implemen-
tation.
11 labilities liabilities
1 A.M. eae
3 जज Relate to
other

matters.