PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON

HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FOURTEENTH REPORT
ON

| THE YOGA UNDERTAKING (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT) BILL, 1994

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st December, 1994)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 1994)

pis

aaa जयते

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

DECEMBER 1994/AGRAHAYANA 1916 (SAKA)


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

1. SHRI P. UPENDRA——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri O.P. Kohli

6. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

8. Shri Md. Salim

9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. 1.0. Sanadi :

11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

/ LOK SABHA

1; 16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

" 17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

21. Prof. P. J. Kurien

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

| 24. Shri Z. M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

+ 29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

; 32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K. D. Jeswani

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia

38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

41, Shri Ramchandra Dome

| 42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

@



(ii)
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh, Deputy Director

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer डे



REPORT

| I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
| Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit this Report on its
behalf, present this Fourteenth Report on the Yoga Undertaking (Taking over of Management)
t Bill, 1994. The Bill, which was introduced in Rajya Sabha on the 26th August, 1994, provides
for taking over of the management of the undertaking of the Yoga Society for a limited period
to secure the proper management thereof and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

2, In pursuance of the rules relating: to Department-related Parliamentary Standing
है. Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred the Bill to the Committee for examination
and report.,

3. A Press Communique, inviting suggestions from various individuals, organisations and
4 institutions interested in the subject matter of the Bill, was issued on 13th September, 1994
(Annexure-I)

4. The Committee considered the Bill in four sittings (Annexure-II) and heard the Secretary,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health), and the representatives of the
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Legislative Department), on the various
provisions of the Bill and sought clarifications thereon. The Committee also had the benefit of
he views of the representatives of the Yoga Employees Association and some of the experts on
oga. Names of those who appeared before the Committee are at Annexure-III.

5. At its meeting held on December 20, 1994 the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted it for presentation/aying in both the Houses.

"Background

6. In its note, furnished to the Committee, the Department of Health explained the
| background and the need for taking over the management of the undertaking of the Yoga
,Society. The Vishwayatan Yogashram was registered on Ist March, 1958 as a Society under the
jocieties Registration Act to promote teaching, training, research and study of Yoga in its
manifold aspects. Swami Dhirendra Brahmachari was the Managing Trustee of the Society until
is demise on June 9, 1994

7. The New Delhi Centre of the Vishwayatan Yogashram is situated on 2.08 acres of prime
nd leased to it by the Ministry of Urban Development on Ashok Road, opposite to Gol
‘Dakkhana. In addition to this, the Society owns about 25 acres of land at Katra (Vaishno Devi)
Jammu and Kashmir.

1: 8. The Society had been receiving grant for recurring and non-recurring expenditure for its
two centres at New Delhi and Katra, from the then Ministry of Education and the Ministry of
ealth and Family Welfare (Department of Health).

9. In his capacity as the Managing Trustee of Vishwayatan Yogashram, the late Swami
hirendra Brahmachari also remained the director of Central Research Institute of Yoga
a (CRIV), established by the Government of India in January 1976 to study the effects of Yoga on
Evarious disease conditions.

"Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II para 34714 dated September 7, 1994.



10. Complaints were received about the irregularities in the management of ५००००
Yogashram as early as 1963. Consequent to an enquiry into the utilisation of fu
sanctioned to the Vishwayatan Yogashram and CRIY it was found that money given as
grant-in-aid had been systematically siphoned off by falsification of accounts by the
Managing Trustee of Vishwayatan Yogashram., As such, the Management of Vishwayatan
Yogashram and CRIY was taken over by the government from May 24, 1977 till February
18, 1980 in public interest and in order to secure proper management of the Society.

11. Complaints about the misuse of funds and non-complince of the rules continued to
pour in even thereafier. The enquiry showed that there was truth in these complaints. In the
meantime, Swamiji declared a lock-out in the Vishwayatan Yogashram on April 30, 1990,
followed by a closure notice and the services of 38 employees were terminated.

12. After the ‘demise of the Swamiji, the Board of Trustees of the Vishwayatan
Yogashram, in its meeting held on June 16, 1994, resolved to appoint Dr. S.K. Sharma, an
Officer in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as Managing Trustee: of the
Vishwayatan Yogashram. Systematic records of the working of the Society, as required by
law, are not available as it was being run virtually as a personal fiefdom. The lands,
buildings and other movable and immovable assets of the Vishwayatan Yogashram either
belonged to the Government or have been purchased by utilisation, to a substantial extent,
of the government grants. In the Statement of Objects and Reasons, the Ministry has stated
that the taking over of the management would also prevent possible litigation and claims by
vested interests who might be tempted to lay claim on valuable properties of the
Vishwayatan Yogashram which was under the control of the late Swamiji. It is in this
background that the Ministry has decided to take over the management of the Yoga Society
for a limited period and has brought a Bill-to achieve these objectives.

12.1 The Committee considered the detailed note on the bill submitted by the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health) (Annexure-IV).

Evidence of Secretary, Department of Health

13, The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health),
appeared before the Committee to give his oral evidence, Recapitulating the background
leading to the introduction of the Bill, the Secretary stated that after the demise of Swamiji
the Board of Trustees of the Vishwayatan Yogashram appointed Dr. S.K. Sharma as the
Managing Trustee of the Vishwayatan Yogashram on June 16, 1994, Dr. Sharma was aske¢
to prepare a list of inventories of the properties of the Vishwayatan Yogashram, both at
New Delhi and Katra (Vaishno Devi), Jammu and Kashmir, Secretary, Department of
Health, mentioned that Dr. Sharma had no difficulty in so far as the Delhi Centre wa:
concerned as Swamiji had terminated the services of everyone except two persons. However
as regards the Katra Centre is concerned, the State Government in Jammu and Kashmir is
very particular that it should take over the properties.

13.1 Members asked the Secretary as to what action Government had taken before taking
over the management of the Institution and whether the liabilities are more than the assets
The Members also expressed their surprise that the Ministry official was unable to make ar
inventory of assets at the Katra Centre despite that fact that the State is under the
President’s rule. The Secretary stated that as far as liabilities are concerned, the propertie:
there are valuable which include about 25 acres of land, a guest-house and buildings
Therefore, the liabilities would not exceed the assets. As regards the action taken by the
Government before taking over the management of the Vishwayatan Yogashram, the
Secretary informed that the Ministry had stopped giving grants from March 1990. As regard:



| inventories of assets of the Katra Centre, Secretary, Department, of Health, stated
that it was not possible to physically enter the premises because of obstruction by the
officials of Government of Jammu and Kashmir. Dr. $.K. Sharma, who was deputed by the
Department of Health to go to Katra Ceuise for preparation of inventory, narrated his
experience at the Katra Centre and the difficulties he encountered there in entering the
Centre. Dr. Sharma stated that on reaching the Katra Centre, he was told by the Jammu
and Kashmir police, who were manning the gates, to approach the Vaishno Devi Trust
officials who had the keys of the Katra Centre. On being approached, the Deputy
Administrator of the Vaishno Devi Trust told Dr. Sharma that there were instructions from
the Governor’s House not to permit entry inside the Katra Centre as they did not know who
the real claimants were? Some Members asked as to whether the matter was taken up with
the Home Ministry and the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir for resolution of this matter.
Secretary, Department of Health, replied that the matter was taken up with the Government
of Jammu andKashmir and, in fact, he also spoke to the Adviser, followed by letters to
them. Their perception of the whole thing was totally different. They looked at it differently.
The State Government of Jammu and Kashmir would protect this property with their armed
forces and they would allow the property to be managed if there was some statutory backing
behind it. He added that the State government of Jammu and Kashmir was looking at it not
as a Government of India officer being the managing trustee of the Vishwayatan Yogashram
but Vishwayatan Yogashram as a voluntary organization, as a’ registered society not
receiving any grant from the Government of India. Secretary, Department of Health. felt
that one could not fault them beyond a certain point on this issue. In view of this, he added
that the Government ultimately decided that a statutory backing be given, and their ultimate
aim was not merely to take over the management but also after taking it over, to make a
detailed project to develop it into an excellent national institute of Yoga, with its centres, so
that yoga could be promoted in the country.

| 13.2 Some of the Members were, however, not satisfied with the explanation given by the
| officers of the Department of Health with regard to the preparation of inventory of assets of
the Katra Centre. They felt that the matter should have been taken up at the highest level
particularly, the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, in view of the fact that the State is
under the President’s rule. In response to a pointed query as to whether the Secretary.
Department of Health, spoke to the Home Secretary on this matter and also whether, in the
note submitted to the Cabinet, this position was duly brought out, he mentioned that he was
not aware whether this matter was discussed with Ministry of Home Affairs but he did take
up the matter with the Adviser to the Governor. He added “I can go on record to say that it
would not have yielded any results whatsoever.”

13.3 In response to a query made by the Chairman with regard to the present position of
setting up of the National Institute of Yoga and the reasons for the delay, Secretary,
Department of Health, explained that the Ministry of Finance had not agreed to the
proposal. Therefore, the Department of Health had decided that the management be taken
over first'and a separate proposal would be prepared for setting up of the National Institute
of Yoga.

13.4 Earlier, the Secretary, Department of Health, in his deposition before the Commit-
‘tee, had also mentioned that after the, introduction of the Bili in the Rajya Sabha on
August 25, 1994, which could not be discussed and passed, a proposal was put up to the
Cabinet for issuance of an ordinance which would eventually be replaced by an Act.



Evidence of the Yoga Employees’ Association and others | ‘\

14. The representatives of the Yoga Employees’ Association and the representatives of the
other Yoga institutions’ were in support of the Bill. The representatives of the Yoga
Employees’ Association informed the Committee that they had come to know form the
Katra Centre employees that some of the assets had been shifted to the Mantalai Ashram,
which is known as Aparna Ashram. In fact, even in the Delhi Centre, some of the assets
had been shifted to Gurgaon studio- because, after the death of the late Swamiji on June 9,
1994, there was no office-bearer of the Vishwayatan Yogashram during the period form 9th
to 17th June, 1994,

Conclusions

15. The Committee feels that the propagatiompopularisation and promotion of Yoga is,a
matter of national importance keeping in view its proven role in mental, physical and
spiritual well-being. It is, therefore, necessary to make rational organisational arrangements
for work to be carried out efficiently by establishing a centre of excellence in the shape of an
institution of national importance. The psoposed institute should utilise the valuable
properties and assets which are preséntly in the hands of CRIY and the Vishwayatan
Yogashram and neither of which,-in the present state, can effectively discharge this role. The
trained staff belonging to CRIY can form a nucleus and can be made to function more
effectively by having an appropriately constituted governing body with a Director, having
appropriate experience and qualifications.

16. The lands available with these bodies either belong to the Government or have been
purchased by utilising, to a substantial extent, the government grants. All the other assets
have also been acquired mainly from government grants. The proposed centre of excellence
will ensure proper utilisation of assets created out of government funds and utilisation of the
existing trained manpower available. The Committee, however, feels that the Department of
Health has miserably failed in taking adequate steps to protect the government property and
has not moved with the speed as was required to set-up the centre of excellence for
promotion of Yoga.

Observations and recommendations

17. The Committee, after taking into consideration the submissions made by the
representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and others, makes the
following observations:—

Clause 7(1) (c)

Clause 7(1) (c) provides that no proceeding for the dissolution of the Yoga Society or for
its merger-with any other society or for the appointment of the Receiver in respect of the
undertaking thereof shall lie -in any court except with the consent of the Central
Government. Some Members were apprehensive about the requirement of seeking the
Central Government's consent and felt that this clause needed to be made more elaborate.
In a note submitted to the Committee, the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
(Legislative Department) have clarified that since the lands, buildings and other assets of the
Yoga Society either belong to the Central Government or have been purchased by utilising,
to a substantial extent, the Central Government grants, the Central Government is
therefore, interested in the said Society and hence its prior consent is necessary for
dissolution. The clause 7(1) (c) seeks to temporarily modify the provisions of Societies’
Registration Act, in its application to the Yoga Society so long as the management of the
undertaking of the Yoga Society remains vested with the Central Government.

The Committee, while noting this clarification of the Legislative Department, feels that



provisions may be clarified beyond any doubt and, if necessary, another sub-clause be added.
A copy of the note received. from Legislative-Depariment is at Annexure-V.

Clause 12

Clause 12 of the Bill provides protection to the Administrator and officers of the
government in respect of the action taken by them in good faith. Some Members expressed
doubts about the misuse of this provision. After some discussion, the Committee noted that
this particular provision is meant to afford a certain degree of protection for the officials
exercising their power derived from the statute by protecting them against frivolous litigation
for acts done by them in good faith. The representative of the Legislative Department, who
was requested to examine this clause further, has submitted a note on clause 12 of the Bill. A
copy theréof is enclosed at Annexure-VI.

Clause 14

Clause 14 deals with the power of Administrator to terminate contract of employment of the
employees by giving one month’s notice. The Committee feels that the existing provisions
regarding termination of service be maintained i.e., three months’ notice in case of permanent
employees and one month’s notice in respect of temporary employees, on either side.

18. The Committee agrees with the provisions contained in the remaining clauses of the Bill.

19. The Committee also makes the following observations on certain issues which were
raised during the course of the consideration of the Bill:—

19.1 The Committee is unhappy with the inordinate delay that has taken place in setting up
of the National Institute of Yoga, which requires some gestation period.

19.2 The Committee noted with concern that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
failed to discharge its duty by not being able to prepare a list of inventories at the Katra
Centre. The inability expressed by Dr. Sharma, even to enter the premises of Katra Centre,
shows that the matter has not been handled tactfully and properly by the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare. It is amazing that the Secretary, Department of Health, could not settle
the matter with the officers of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir, which is under the
President’s rule. He did not even consider it necessary to take up the matter with the Ministry
of Home Affairs. The Committee suspects that valuable articles belonging to the Vishwayatan
Yogashram at the Katra Centre might have been taken away. This suspicion is strengthened
by the views expressed by one of the representatives of the Yoga Employees Association.

19.3 The Committee, therefore, recommends that an appropriate enquiry should be
conducted into the entire matter and fix responsibility on the officials concerned for the failure
to discharge the duties entrusted to them.

19.4 The Committee also observes that there is an urgent necessity of streamlining the
administration in the Vishwayatan Yogashram. Further, the employees of the Vishwayatan
Yogashram be screened and undesirable elements, if any, should be removed forthwith.

19.5 During the course of the evidence tendered before the Committee, the Secretary,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health), had assured the Committee
that he would furnish the information as to whether or not in the note submitted to the
Cabinet for issuance of the ordinance to take over the management of the Society, the
behaviour of the officials of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir, who did not allow the
officers of the Department of Health to make an inventory of the assets of the Katra Centre,
was clearly brought out.


19.6 The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department of Health, in its
revised note dated November 8, 1994, submitted to the,Committee, has not replied to these
points. A copy thereof is at Annexure-VII.

New Deut, P. UPENDRA,

20 December, 1994 Chairman
Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development



ANNEXURE—I

THE YOGA UNDERTAKING (TAKING OVER OF
MANAGEMENT) BILL, 1994

The Yoga Undertaking (Taking over of Management) Bill, 1994 as introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on the 26th August, 1994 has been referred to the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee of Human Resource Development, headed by Shri P.
Upendra, M.P., for examination and report.

2. The Bill seeks to provide for taking over, for a limited period, of the Management of
the undertaking of the Yoga Society popularly known as ‘Vishwayatan Yogashram’.

3. Vishwayatan Yogashram was registered on the Ist March, 1958 as a Society under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860, to promote teaching, training, research and study of Yoga
in its manifold aspects. The late Swami Dhirendra Brahmachari was the Managing Trustee
of the Society until his demise on 9th June, 1994. The Society has been receiving
Government grants for its two centres at New Delhi and Katra. Consequent upon an inquiry
into the utilisation of the funds sanctioned to the Vishwayatan Yogashram, it was found that
money given as grant-in-aid has been systematically siphoned away in falsification of the
accounts. The Yogashram was being run virtually as a personal organisation and systematic
records of the working of the Society as required by law, are not available. It would not be
in public interest and in the interest of the Yoga Society to allow this condition to continue
in future. Therefore, taking over of the management would prevent possible litigation and
claims by vested interests who may be tempted to make claims on the valuable properties of
the Vishwayatan Yogashram. The Bill seeks to achieve this objective by providing for taking
over of the management of the undertaking, namely, the Vishwayatan Yogashram.

4. In this connection, it has been decided to invite memoranda, containing the views of
individuals, organisations, institutions, etc. interested in the subject matter of the Bill.
Accordingly, all the interested persons, organisations, institutions, etc. are requested to send
this views by the 30th September, 1994, to the Deputy Secretary, Rajya Sabha Secreteriat,
Parliament House Annexe (Room No. 239), New Delhi-110001.

5. Copies of the Bill can be obtained on requisition from the Committee Section (HRD),
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Room No. 228, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.


ANNEXURE—IL

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

XII

TWELFTH MEETING*

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 7th September, 1994 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

, PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel
. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

8. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

9. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshamanan
10. Dr. Vasant Pawar

11. Prof. P.J. Kurien

12. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

13. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
14. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

15. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

16. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

17. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

18. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

19. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
20. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

21. Shri Anna Joshi

22. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

23. Brahma Nand Mandal

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

NAWEWN

*Minutes of I to XI meetings relate to matters not included in this report.



3. Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary ow?
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Chairman informed Members that the Yoga Undertaking (Taking Over of
' Management) Bill, 1994, had been referred to the Committee for examination and report.

After some discussion, the Committee directed thai a Press Communique inviting views gf
the individuals/institutions etc. on the Bill, may be issued.
3 * . * *
4 + कर * *

5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 AM on Thursday,
the 8th September, 1994, in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

*Relates to other matters.



XIX
के NINETEENTH MEETING*
€
The Committee met at 9.15. A.M. on Wednesday, the 26th October, 1994 in Committee

Room ‘A’ and again at 3.00 P.M. after lunch break in Committee Room ‘D’ Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS
PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—— Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

. Shri O.P. Kohli डर
. Shri Md. Salim

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

6. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

7. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
8. Dr. Vasant Pawar
9
10

UAbUN

. Prof. P.J. Kurien
. Shri Subhash Chandra Nayak
11. Shri, Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
12. Shri Aslam Sher Khan पं
13. Shri Inder Jit
14. Shri Rambadan
15. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
16. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
17. Dr. K.D. Jeswani
18. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
19. Dr, G.L. Kanaujia
20. Shri Anna Joshi
21. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
22. Prof Malini Bhattacharya
23. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
24. Shri Suraj Mandal.

WITNESSES
1.’Shri M.S. Dayal Secretary, Department of Health, Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare.
2. Dr. S.K. Sharma, Deputy Adviser, Ayurveda and Managing Trustee of Vishwayatan
Yogashram.

“Minutes of XIII to XVII meetings of the Committee relate to matters not included in this report.


3. Shri A.P. Dewan, Principal Yoga & Nature Cure Health Centre.
4 Shri Devidatt Kandpal, President, Yoga Employees Association, Central Research
titute for Yoga. Z f
5. Shri Girish Jha, General Secretary, Yoga Employees Association, Central Research
titute for Yoga.
6. Dr. Madhu Gupta Shastri, Principal, Chandra Yoga Prakritic Chikitsa Mahavidyalaya.
CRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu,, Committee Officer

. पु *
. * *
3
. . *
1.
टेक * *
H ४

5, The Committee, then, heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in
inection with the Yoga Undertaking (Taking Over of Management) Bill, 1994.
7. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

3° . .

2, The Committee then adjourned at 6.00 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday,
: 8th November, 1994.

elates to other matter,



XX
TWENTIETH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 8th November, 1994 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS
PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman
RAJYA ‘SABHA
2. Miss Saroj Khaparde
3. Shri O.P. Kohli
4. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
5. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Viswantham Kanithi
7. Shri Z.M. Kahandole
8. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
9. Shri Rambadan

10. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

11, Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya

12. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

13. Shri Anna Joshi

14, Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

15. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

16. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

17. Shri Suraj Mandal

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRIES
1..Shri Indrajit Pal, Director, Department of Family Welfare, Ministry of Health an

Family Welfare.

2. Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel, Legislativ
Department, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. ”

3. Shri Z.S. Negi, Deputy Legislative Counsel, Legislative Department, Ministry c
Law, Justice and Company Affairs
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer
12


“‘anagement) Bill, 1994 which was slated for consideration on 9th Navember, 1994. The
tsmmittee then took up the Yoga Undertaking (Taking over of Management) Bill, 1994 for
(

2,**+ tee see see
3. The Committee, thereafter, decided to take up the Yoga Undertaking (Taking over of
Ause-by-clause consideration.

‘

t Clauses 1—6
The clauses were adopted without any change.
c Clause 7

The Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and
Company Affairs (Legislative Department) to examine the clause and send a note as
to whether it requires any amendment.

Clauses 8—11
The clauses were adopted without any change.
Clause 12

The Committee directed the representative of Legislative Department to further
examine the clause and send a note as to whether an amendment in the clause was
required.

Clause 13
The clause was adotped without any change.
Clause 14

The words ‘one month’s notice’ and ‘one month’’ were substituted by the words
‘Three months notice, and ‘three months’ respectively.

Clause 15
The clause was adopted without any change.

Clause 1, enacting formula and the Title
Adopted without any change.

4. *** aes ee

5. The Committee, then, adjourned at 1.30 p.m.

Relates to other matter.



XXI

TWENTY FIRST MEETING

The Committee on Human Resource Develépment met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 20t!
December, 1994 in Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

aL

MEMBERS
PRESENT
Shri P. Upendra — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

७ 9०0 :3 9 (७ + ४७ 3

<a
Nes

LOK
13.
14.
15,
16.
17.

. Dr. M. Aram

. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

. Miss Saroj Khaparde धर

. Smt. Unmilaben Chimanbhai Patel

Shri ५. Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.0. Sanadi

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

SABHA

Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
Dr. Vasant Pawar

Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary.

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary.

Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director.

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2.*** aoe eee ee

3. The Committee, thereafter considered the Draft Fourteenth Report on the Yog
Undertaking (Taking over of Management) Bill, 1994 and adopted the same with th
‘following modifications :

*
*Relates to other matter.


Page 8 Para 13.4 line 2, after ‘had’, (also) was added.

Page 9 Para 15, line 5 was deleted except the last word ‘It’; line 3 from below, ‘in’
was substituted for ‘at’ and second line from below, for ‘whom’ ‘which’ was

| substituted.
Page 10 Clause 7 (1) (c) line 3, for ‘their’ ‘it’ was substituted.
| Page 12 Clause 12, line 16, from, ‘It is’ till fourth line in page 13 was deleted.

Page 13 Clause 14, line 4, from ‘one’ to line 10 were substituted by the existing
{ provisions regarding termination of service be maintained i.e. three months’
notice in case of permanent employees and one months’ notice in respect of

temporary employees on either side.
Page 15 Para 195, lines 4 and 5 ‘thereof was substituted for ‘of the ...... 1994’
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence Dr. M. Aram and Prof.

* Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma to present the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Reports in Rajya Sabha
3and Dr. Vasant Pawar and Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan to lay the Reports on the

1 Table of Lok Sabha

“Relates to other matter.



4

ANNEXURE—II

NAMES OF PERSONS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE है
1, Shri A.P. Dewan, Principal Yoga & Nature Cure Health Centre.

2. Shri Devidatt Kandpal, President, Yoga Employees Association, Central Research
Institute for Yoga.

3. Shri Girish Jha, General Secretary, Yoga Employees Association, Central Research
Institute for Yoga.

4. Dr. Madhu Gupta Shastri, Principal, Chandra Yoga Prakritic Chikitsa Mahavidyalaya.



यु
j
|

ANNEXURE—IV+

DETAILED NOTE ON YOGA UNDERTAKING (TAKING OVER
OF MANAGEMENT) BILL, 1994 FOR THE USE OF
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT

Vishwayatan Yogashram (VY) was registered on Ist March, 1958-as a Society under the
Societies Registration Act to promote teaching, training, research & study of Yoga in its
manifold aspects. Late Swami Dhirendra Brahmachari was the Managing Trustee of the
Society until his demise on 9th June, 1994.

2. The New Delhi Centre of the Yogashram is situated on 2.08 acres of prime land, leased
to it by Ministry of Urban Development at Plot No. 2 Ashok Road, opposite to Goldak
Khana. In addition to this, the Society also owns about 25 acres of land at Katra, (Vaishno
Devi) in Jammu & Kashmir.

3. This Society has been receiving grants for recurring and non-recurring expenditure for
its two centres at New Delhi and Katra, Vaishno Devi, from the then Ministry of Education
and this Ministry.

4. In his capacity as Managing Trustee of VY Swami Dhirendra Brahmachari also
remained the Director of Central Research Institute of Yoga (CRIY), established by the
Government of India in January, 1976, to study the effects of Yoga on various disease
conditions,

5. Complaints were received about irregularities in the Management of VY as early as in
1963. Consequent on an enquiry into the utilisation of funds sanctioned to VY & CRIY, it
was found that money given as Grant-in-aid had been systematically siphoned away by
falsification of accounts by the Managing Trustee of VY. As such, the Management of
Vishwayatan Yogashram and CRIY was taken over by the Government from 24th May 1977
till 18th February 1980 in public interest and in order to secure proper management of the
society.

6. After the demise of the Late Swamiji, the Board of Trustees of VY in their meeting
held on 16th June, 1994 resolved to appoint Dr. S.K. Sharma, Dy. Adviser-Ayurveda, in the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare as Managing Trustee of VY. On taking over charge,
Dr. Sharma was asked to prepare a list of inventories of VY.

7. 10 has not yet been possible to accurately assess the assets and liabilities of VY.
Systematic records of the working of the society as required by law are not available as it
was being run virtually as a personal organisation. Even records of current membership te
General Body and Board of Trustees, other than Government representatives are not
available. It would not be in the interest of the Yoga and the society to allow this condition
to continue. In the changed situation, there appears to be no rationale for having two
separate societies VY & CRIY with similar objectives. Both the societies have acquired
assets mainly from grants/concessions provided: by the Government and were running mainly
on Government funds.

8. The prcpagation/popularisation and promotion of Yoga is a matter of national =
importance keeping in view its proven role in mental, physical and spiritual well-being’
particularly in the context of degenerative diseases. It is therefore, necessary 10 make’


a

rationale organisational arrangements for the work to be carried out efficiently |
establishing a Centre of Excellence in the shape of an Institution of National =
This can best be achieved by establishing a National Institute ‘of Yoga under law. The
proposed Institute can utilise the valuable properties and assets which are presently in the
hands of the CRIY and VY and neither of whom, in present state, can effectively discharge
this tole. The trained staff belonging to CRIY can form the nucleus and can be made to
function more effectively by having a properly constituted Governing Body with a Director
having appropriate experience and qualifications.

9. The lands available with these bodies either belong to the Government or have been
purchased by utilising, to a substantial extent, the Government grants. All the other assets
have also been acquired mainly from government grants. The proposed Centre of Excellence
will ensure proper utilisation of assets created out of Government funds and also utilisation
of the existing trained manpower available. It will also prevent possible litigation and claims
by vested interests who may be tempted to make claims on the valuable properties of VY.
which were earlier under the control of late Swatiji.

10. Since urgent action was necessary to secure the assets of VY and to provide for its
proper management, it was proposed that its management may be taken over for a period of
one year with the powers to extend the period upto an aggregate period of five years by
issue of an Ordinance prior to its decision on desolution and vesting of its assets in the
proposed National Institute of Yoga. Further steps for setting up of National Institute of
Yoga can follow through appropriate legislation after assets and liabilities of VY have been
properly determined and the status of present litigation is properly assessed or concluded
and after obtaining the comments of Planning. Commission.

11. In view of the positions explained above, a draft Cabinet Note for taking over the
management of Vishwayatan Yogashram by promulgation of an Ordinance was prepared and
circulated in July’ 94, to the Ministries of Law, Urban Development, Human Resource
Development and Finance. All these Ministries concurred in the proposal of this Ministry for
taking over the management of Vishwayatan Yogashram. However, the Ministry of Law
while agreeing to the proposal, desired that a Bill should be introduced in the Parliament for
this purpose instead of an Ordinance, as Parliament had already been summoned.

12. As per the advice of the Ministry of Law, this Ministry decided to take over the
management of Vishwayatan Yogashram through an Act of Parliament by introduction of a
Bill in the Monsoon Session of Parliament. The Cabinet in its meeting held on 16th
August’94 considered the note of this Ministry dated Sth August 94 and approved the
proposal in this regard. In consultation with the Ministry of Law (Legislative Department), a
Bill entitled “The Yoga Undertaking (Taking over of Management) Bill, 1994”, was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 26th August 94, But, due to paucity of time, the Bill
could not be discussed and passed in the Parliament.

13. In order to secure the assets of Vishwayatan Yogashram created out of Government
grants, and to ensure proper management of the Society, a proposal is under active
consideration of this Ministry to take ever the Management of Vishwayatan Yogashram
through promulgation of an Ordinance on th¢ lines of provisions of the pending Bill. After
promulgation of the Ordinance, the Bill will be pursued in the Rajya Sabha after moving
necessary official amendments for replacing the Ordinance.



ANNEXURE—V £

A BRIEF NOTE ON CLAUSE 7(1)(c) OF THE YOGA
UNDERTAKINGS (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT)
BILL, 1994

Vishwayatan Yogashram is a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860
as in force in the National Capital Territory of Delhi. Clause 7(1)(c) of the Yoga
Undertaking (Taking over of Management) Bill, 1994 provides inter alia, that “no
proceeding for the dissolution of the Yoga Society or for their merger with any other society
or for the appointment of a Receiver in respect of the undertaking thereof shall lie in any’
court except with the consent of the Central Government”.

2. Section 13 of the Societies Registration Act, 1860 provides for dissolution of societies
and adjustment of their affairs. The second proviso to that section provides that ‘whenever
any Government is a member of or a contributor to or otherwise interested in, any society
registared under this Act, such society shall not be dissolved without the consent of the
Government of the State of registration.

3. Since the lands, buildings and other assets of the Yoga Society either belong to the
Central Government or have been purchased by utilising to a substantial extent the Central
Government grants, the Central Government is interested in the said Society and hence, its
previous consent is necessary for dissolution. Clause 7(1)(c) seeks to temporarily modify the
provisions of the Societies Registration Act in its application to the Yoga Society so long as
the management of the undertaking of the Yoga Society remains vested under Central
Government. है

4. The Yoga Undertakings (Taking over of Management) Act, 1977 (21 of 1977) contained
a similar provision. Besides this, similar provisions are contained in section 6 of the Parel
Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private Limited (Taking over of
Management) Act, 1979 (29 of 1979) and section 8 of the Textile Undertakings (Taking over
of Management) Act, 1983 (40 of 1983).

Section 4(1)(d) of the Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1980.


ANNEXURE—VI

A BRIEF NOTE ON CLAUSE 12 OF THE YOGA
UNDERTAKINGS (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT)
BILL, 1994

Clause 12 of the Yoga Undertaking (Taking over of Management) Bill, 1994 provides
for protection of action taken in good faith. The said clause is a standard clause contained in
almost all statutes where powers are conferred on the officials (for example section 13 of the
State Bank of Sikkim (Acquisition of Shares) and Miscellaneous Provision Act, 1982, section
11 of the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982, section 10 of the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against
the Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982, section 29 of the Andhra Scientific Company Limited
(Acquisition of and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1982. This clause is meant to afford a
certain degree of protection to the officials exercising their powers derived from the statute
by shielding them against frivolous and vexatious litigation for acts done by them while
exercising their powers and functions under the Act. However, the protection will be
available only for acts done or action taken in good faith. In other words, the said clause
will not afford any protection for action whith is not done in good faith.

2. The expression “good faith” would be construed in the light of the definition given
to it in clause (2) of section 3 of the General Clauses Act, 1987, under which a thing shall be
deemed to be done in good faith where it is in fact done honestly whether it is done
negligently or not. Public officers would thus be protected if they acted or intended to act
honestly under this Act even though they may be guilty of negligence. If, however, the
officers were to act recklessly, that is to say, being aware of possible harm to others by his
action, he still acts instead of, his action shall be worse than negligence. Reckless this record
of consequence and mala fide actions would stand on an equal footing whether the actual _
state of mind of the actor becomes relevant. The protection clause would be of no avail in
such cases.



ANNEXURE—VII

REVISED NOTE ON YOGA UNDERTAKING (TAKING OVER OF
MANAGEMENT) BIIL, 1994 FOR THE USE OF DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

Vishwayatan Yogashram (VY) was registered on Ist March, 1958 ds a Society under the
Societies Registration Act to promote teaching, training, research & study of Yoga in its
manifold aspects. Late Swami Dhirendra Brahmachari was the Managing Trustee of the
Society until his demise on 9th June, 1994.

2. The New.Delhi Centre of the yogashram is situated on a 2.08 acres of prime land,
leased to it by Ministry of Urban Development at Plot No. 2 Ashok Road, opposite to
Goldak Khana vide orders dated 25/08/69 and 17/09/70. In addition to this, the Society also
owns about 25 acres of land at Katra, (Vaishno Devi) in Jammu: & Kashmir.

3. This Society has been receiving grants for recurring and non-recurring expenditure
for its two centres at New Delhi and Katra, Vaishno Devi, from the ‘then Ministry of
Education and this Ministry.

4. In his capacity as Managing Trustee of VY Swami’ Dhirendra Brahmachari also
remained the Director of Central Research Institute of Yoga (CRIY), established by the
Government of India in January, 1976, to study the effects of Yoga on various disease
conditions.

5. The Vishwayatan Yogashram has been receiving grants from 1957-58 from the
Ministry of Education. The Ministry of Education continued to release grants till the year
1976-77. The grants were released separately to Vishwayatan Yogashram at Delhi and Katra.
Year-wise details of grants sanctioned to the Vishwayatan Yogashram by the Ministry of
Education and Ministry of Health & F.W. are at annexure. Complaints were received about
irregularities in the Management of VY as early as in 1963. Consequent on an enquiry into
the utilisation of funds sanctioned to VY & CRIY, it was found that money given as Grant-
in-aid had been systematically siphoned away by falsification of accounts by the Managing
Trustee of VY. As such, the Management of Vishwayatan Yogashram and CRIY was taken
over by the Government from 24th May 1977 till 18th February 1980 in public interest and
in order to secure proper management of the society.

6. Therafter Vishwayatan Yogashram became a grantee institution of this Ministry.
Total grants of Rs. 80.60 lakhs were released to Vishwayatan Yogashram from 18.02.80 to
30.03.90. Year-wise details of releases are at annexure. A number of complaints of
irregularities and mismanagement by Swami Dhirendra Brahmachari were again received.
Inquiries were conducted into the affairs of Central Research Institute for Yoga and
Vishwayatan Yogashram as well as another autonomous body viz. Central Council for
Research in Yoga and Naturopathy whose Chief Executive was also swamiji. Yoga
Employees Association went on hunger strike w.e.f. 27.02.90 on account of number of
complaints relating to non-payment of their dues, service conditions, mis-appropriation and
misuse of assests of these yoga bodies for private ventures controlled by Swamiji. The


enquiries showed that there was truth in these complaints. Swamiji declared a lockout in
Vishwayatan Yogashram on 30.04.90 followed by closure notice and the services of 38
employees were terminated. These developments resulted in litigations involving swamiji in
his personal/official capacity, the Yoga Employees Association and the Central Govern-
ment.

7. In view of the deteriorating situation, the Ministry requested Swamiji to convene a
meeting of Governing Body of CRIY urgently to take stock of the situation and to amend
the rules. However, since Swamiji did not cooperate, the Union Health Minister in his
capacity as President of the Institute, in exercise of his emergency powers, appointed
Dr. S.K. Sharma, Dy. Adviser in the Ministry, as Chief Adminisiiative Officer oi 10.12.90
vested with power to carry out day-to-day functions of CRIY. This action was subsequently
ratified by circulation of a resolution among Members of the Governing Body. Further
progress was held up on account of lack of cooperation from late Swamiji and in view of the
special position he enjoyed under the rules and regulations of these bodies, the stalemate
continued. =

8. After the demise of the Late Swamiji, the Board of Trustees of VY in their meeting
held on 16th June, 1994 resolved to appoint Dr. S.K. Sharma, Dy. Adviser-Ayurveda, in the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare as Managing Trustee of VY. On taking over charge,
Dr. Sharma was asked to prepare a list of inventories of VY.

9. [t has not yet been possible to accurately assess the assets and liabilities of VY.
Systematic records of the working of the society as required by law are not availables as it
was being run virtually as a personal organisation. Even records of current membership of
General Body and Board of Trustees, other than Government representatives are not
available. It would not be in the interest of the Yoga and the society to allow this condition
to continue. In the changed situation, there appears to be no rationale for having two
separate societies VY & CRIY with similar objectives. Both the societies have acquired
assets mainly from grants/concessions provided by the Government and tunning mainly on
Government funds.

10. The propagation/popularisation and promotion of Yoga is a matter of national
importance keeping in view its proven role in mental, physical and spiritual well-being
particularly in the context of degenerative diseases. It is, therefore, necessary to make
rational organisational arrangements for the work to be carried out efficiently by establishing
a Centre of Excellence in the shape of an Institution of National Importance. This can best
be achieved by establishing a National Institute of Yoga under law. The proposed Institute
can utiJse the valuable properties and assets which are presently in the hands of the CRIY
and VY and neither of whom, in the present state, can effectively discharge this role. The
trained staff belonging to CRIY can form the nucleus and can be made to function more
effectively by having a properly constituted Governming Body with a Director having
appropriate experience and qualifications.

11. The lands available with these bodies either belong to the Government or have been
purchased by utilising, to a substantial extent, the Government grants. All the other assets
have also been acquired mainly from gevernment grants. The proposed Centre of Excellence
will ensure proper utilisation of assets created out of Government funds and also utilisation
of the existing trained manpower available. It will also prevent possible litigation and claims
by vested interests who may be tempted to make claims on the valuable properties of VY
which were earlier under the control of late Swamiji.

12. Since urgent action was necessary to secsure the assets of VY and to provide for its
proper management, it was proposed that its management may be taken over for a period of

|
q
|
|
|
4
y
1
।
|]
|
4
3
4

:
3

aq
|



ToT PRN २१:२२:

23

one year with the powers to extend the period upto an’ aggregate period of five years by
issue of an Ordinance prior to its decision on desolutién and vesting of its assets in the
proposed National Institute of Yoga. Further steps for setting up of National Institute of
Yoga can follow through appropriate legislation afier assets and liabilities of VY have been
properly determined and the status of present litigation is properly assessed or concluded
and after obtaining the comments of Planning Commission.

13. In view of the positions explained above, a draft Cabinet Note for taking over the
management of Vishwayatan Yogashram by promulgation of an Ordinance was prepared and
circulated in July, 1994, to the Ministries of Law, Urban Development, Human Resource
Development and Finance. All these Ministries concurred in the proposal of this Ministry for
taking over the management of Vishwayatan Yogashram. However, the Ministry of Law
while agreeing to the proposal, desired that a Bill should be introduced in the Parliament for
this purpose instead of an Ordinance, as Parliament had already been summoned.

14. As per the advice of the Ministry of Law, this Ministry decided to take over the
management of Vishwayatan Yogashram through an Act of Parliament by introduction of a
Bill in the Monsoon Session of Parliament. The Cabinet in its meeting held on 16th August,
1994 considered the note of this Ministry dated 5th August, 1994 and approved the proposal
in this regard. In consultation with the Ministry of Law (Legislative Department), a Bill
entitled “The Yoga Undertaking (Taking over of Management) Bill, 1994” was introduced in
the Rajya Sabha on 26th August, 1994. But, due to paucity of time, the Bill could not be
discussed and passed in the Parliament.

15. In order to secure the assets of Vishwayatan Yogashram created out of Government
grants, and to ensure proper management of the Society, a proposal is under active
consideration of this Ministry to take over the Management of Vishwayatan Yogashram
through promulgation of an Ordinance on the lines of provisions of the pending Bill. After
promulgation of the Ordinance, the Bill will be pursued in the Rajya Sabha after moving
necessary official amendments for replacing the Ordinance.



Year-wise details of releases to Vishwayatan 1

Yogashram
(Amount in Rupees)

[ Year V.Y., DELHI V.¥., Katra Total
A) Min. of
Education 20,000 = 20,000
1957-58
1958-59 a if 50,000 50,000
1959-60 20,000 50,000 70,000
1960-61 20,000 Re न आज ja 20,000
1961-62 30,000 62,000 92,000
1962-63 27,408 fe ee 27,408
1963-65 ee Pea No grants sanc-

tioned on account
of inquiry

1965-66 52,870 ॥ 2100 S| 52,870
1966-67 | 31,000 Eze oom 31,000
1967-68 31,000 45,000 76,000
1968-69 31,000 25,000 56,000
1969-70 43,755 40,000 83,755
1970-71 75,069 69,410 1,44,479
1971-72 44,490 52,000 96,490
1972-73 46,910 46,504 zi 93,414
1973-74 40,000 40,000 80,000
1974-75 59,685 60,375 ~ 1,20,060
1975-76 78,000 95,000 1,73,000
1976-77 98,580 1,34,950 | 2,33,530

Tora 7,49,767 7,70,239 15,20,006

cea |



B) MOHFW

1980-81 7,75,000

1981-82 8,00,000
10,31,500
11,73,000

10,80,000

8,00,000

1986-87 7,00,000
1987-88 7,00,000
1988-89 5,00,000
1989-90 5,00,000
ToraL 80,59,500



दक्ष YOR THR FOURTEENTH REPORT ON THE YOGA UNDERTAKING
‘TAXING OVER OF MANAGEMENT) BILL, 1994 OF THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE OH HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT.

+०००

page 4, para 14, line 7 for ‘form' read 'fron',

page 7, para 4, line 4 for ‘Secreteriat' read 'Secretariat',

a page 13 para 3, clause 13 for ‘adotped’ read 'adopted', =
é page 19, In the heading for ‘unertakings' read ‘undertaking’.

' page 19, para 4, line 1 for ‘undertakings! read tundertaking',

20, In the heading for ‘undertakings' read ‘undertaking',