RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FORTIETH REPORT
ON
DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Seventeenth Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12-03-96)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12-03-96)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 1996/Phalguna, 1917 (Saka)


Moma) 18s nolo]
92 y JOqoN बशि।33॥50७टे:



CONTENTS

COMPOSITION/OF ४४७४ COMMITTER ८ ««२ू२ू- ३३० ४६०,६६७००३००४०३३४७०००१०००००००० भले कक,

INTRODUCTION
Cuapter I

Cuapter II

Cuapter II

Cuapter IV

CuHaPTER V

Minutes...

Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the! Government. 05. sscsccevsstceecsssscseqssceenaeresssscessoune veer tess,

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies .........

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee .....

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Govern-
ment has not given any reply.

PAGEs
(i)-Gi)
(iii)
1-7
8-11
12-13

14

15
16


Mone sdogral
bsarian.
ut 29RD,
ee es 4
111 Preys

Vi warsan?

V aariand:)



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)
1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. M. Aram :
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
4. Miss Saroj Khaparde
5. Shri O.P. Kohli
*6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Md. Salim
9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi
11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani, Shankar Aiyar

20. Dr. Vasant Pawar

21. Vacant

22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar

28. Vacant

29. Shri Inder Jit

30. Shri Anna Joshi

31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

34, Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

38. Shri Rambadan

39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

Nominated w.e.f. 30th March, 1995 vide vacancy caused by appointment of Smt. Urmilaben Chimanbhai Patel as Minister «
State for Power.

@


Gi)

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome
42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal
45. Shri Kanshi Ram
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
3. Shri Om Datta Sharma, Under Secretary

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on
its behalf, present this fortieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in its 17th Report on “Demands for Grants”
(1995-96) of the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Youth Affairs
und Sports).

2. The Seventeenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Commit-
tee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 25th April, 1995
and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th April, 1995. Action Taken Note on the
recommendations contained in the report, received from the Department of Youth Affairs
and Sports, was considered by the Committee and this report was adopted at its sitting held
on 7th March, 1996.

3. As a separate Action Taken Report is expected soon from the Department on the
34th Report of the Committee on “India’s performance in International Sports”, points
relating to Sports are not being dealt with, in detail in this Report.

New DELHI; P. UPENDRA
7th March, 1996 Chairman,
= an Committee on Human
Phalguna, 1917 (Saka) Resource Development.

(iii)


nsmgolsvet basi ah
79: teeta Hadod 2

»780॥३7009005%
wet ae Bod? 808
i हे हे है se ‘ 000 ia तीए no.
or. 19 soomiisagst 81 हि ४ कम 29; enrages thie 1.
ainiog “eho (anolingg a : 2 ह बल ए02 ००) 10 soqeil Att
5] iw. He oth ery. pi, ppaetse :

11९० कआ9



CHAPTER I

» REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Seventeenth Report on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Youth Affairs and Sports) for
the year 1995-96 which was presented to Rajya Sabha on 25.4.95 and laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 25.4.95.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 4,
4.3, 3.2, 5-3;,9:-0, 3.7, 6.2, 12.2. 13:1, | 19.5, "कया 10M; Ay 5

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 5.4, 5.5, 9.1, 12.1, 16.2, 16.3, 17.5, 21.2, 22.3, 25.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 7.2, 8, 9, 10, 10.1, 11.1, 15.4,
20.2.

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been received-nil.

3. The Committee will now deal with some of its recommendations on which the Action

Taken Notes of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:

Observations/Recommendations

Reply

National Service Scheme (NSS)

4.1 The Secretary, Department of
Youth Affairs and Sports stated that the
funds given to the States were not being
passed on to the Universities and also most
of the Universities, instead of giving money
to colleges, were utilising the money for
purposes for which it was not intended. It
was further stated that the Department did
not even get the required feed-back from
the States about the money released to
them.

4.2 The Committee is thus given to
understand that, notwithstanding its earlier
recommendation to secure better coopera-
tion from the States in operating this
scheme, the situation appears to have gone
from back to. worse. The Committee is fully
aware of the practical problems involved in
the entire process, yet it feels that the

The Department also issued circular to
all State Governments/UT Administrations
to send monthly progress report on release
of grants to educational institutions. On the
basis of their monthly progress report, it
was observed that 9 States/UTs released
grants before summer vacation. 7 States
released grants after summer vacation. By
December, 1995, 16 States and UTs have
released grants.

The State Governments/UT Administ-
rations are required to submit statement of
accounts of the amount spent on NSS
programme. The accounts of 8 States are
satisfactory and their position may be seen
in Annexure-I. The States/UTs listed in
Annexure-II is not satisfactory. Department
is aware of the delay in settlement of



Observations/Recommendations

Reply

Department has failed to make adequate
efforts in this regard. Blaming the States
and the Universities does not solve the
problem. It is also deplorable that the
Department did not get any feed-back from
the States. The Committee is not satisfied
with the performance of the Department in
this regard and recommends that it should
make all-out efforts to prevail upon the
States to ensure not only proper utilisation
of the grants but also to pass on sufficient
feed-back about the progress of the scheme
every year.

accounts with the States/UTs and sending
letters to them to update their accounts at
the earliest. But perhaps due to lengthy
procedure involved in getting the accounts
i.e. accounts are to come from colleges and
+2 level schools to Universities and then
from Universities to State Governments
which compile the accounts. Since colleges
and Universities are not able to submit
their accounts timely, the consolidated ac-
counts get delayed. Due to this reason,
State Governments are not able to submit
their up-to-date accounts. The Department
is seriously thinking of simplifying the pro-
cedure of submission of accounts which
needs to be ‘discussed with State Govern-
ments/UT Administrations before any deci-
sion is taken. In National Consultation
Meeting to be held in 1996 with State
Governments, this issue is proposed to be
discussed.

Minister of State for Youth Affairs and
Sports also wrote letters to all the con-
cerned Ministers in States in the month of
September, 1995 requesting them to ensure
timely release of grants to educational in-
stitutions.

Department also gets quarterly and
half-yearly reports on NSS activities from
State Governments. Besides, this Depart-
ment has got 15 NSS Regional Centres
located in Ahmedabad, Chandigarh, Jaipur,
Bhopal, Lucknow, Calcutta, Guwahati,
Bhubaneswar, Hyderabad, Thiruvanan-
thapuram, Madras, Bangalore, Pune, Patna
and New Delhi which regularly liaise with
State Governments/UTs for timely release
of grants, submission of reports and also
they send regular report to the Department
about the State affairs on NSS. As and
when they report any significant problem
with State Governments, this Department
takes up the matter with the concerned
State Government for remedial measures.

However despite the efforts being
made by this Department the programmes



Observations/Recommendations Reply

in Bihar, Assam, Andhra Pradesh and West
Bengal have been unsatisfactory due non-
Telease or delayed release of NSS grants to
the educational institutions. Department
has taken up the matter at Minister’ level
for release of grants in these States. Bihar
Chief Minister has responded that he has
given instructions to the concerned au-
thorities to look into the matter. Govern-
ment of Andhra Pradesh has released some
partial amount during 1995-96. The reply
from the concerned Ministers of Assam and
West Bengal and they are being sent remin-
ders.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is constrained to note that accounts of only 8 States are satisfactory.
Out of the remaining States there are some States whose accounts have not been settled
from 1981-82 onwards. It indicates a very sorry State of affairs in regard to the
implementation of this scheme by the States. Union Government should take up the matter
with the States concerned, if necessary at Ministries level, to clear the accounts. Similarly,
all the States should be advised about the need for timely release of grants to educational
institutions.

4.4 The Committee is of the opinion
that there is a need to recognise the NSS as third dimension of academic activities, it is
a third dimension of the academic activities still under consideration of University
Grants Commission (UGC).

With regard to recognition of NSS as a

and to provide incentives to NSS func-
tionaries in Universities and colleges. The
Committee feels that the recommendation
of the expert Committee, set up by the
Universities Grants Commission on integra-
tion of NSS activities in Universities cur-
riculum, should be pursued effectively and
vigorously.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The Committee feels
that the Department should ask the University Grants Commission to consider the report of
the Experts Committee as expeditiously as possible and should take steps to integrate the
National Service Scheme in the curriculum of the Universities at the earliest.

4.5 The Committee also feels that the With regard to enhancement of NSS

amount of Rs. 12% and Rs. 200 being
provided per volunteer per annum for regu-
lar activities and special camps respectively
needs to be substantially increased to make
the scheme attractive and their work
specified.

programme fund from Rs. 120 and 200-
for Regular activities and special camping
programme respectively, the action was in-
itiated. Concurrence of State Governments
was sought proposing enhancement of
Rs. 120 to Rs. 160% and Rs. 200% to



Observations/Recommendations Reply

Rs. 300+. 10 States namely, Himachal
Pradesh, Gujarat, Mizoram, Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, Haryana, Punjab,
Orissa and Manipur have concurred to the
proposal and also have provided additional
fund in their budget during 1995-96. The
Planning Commission has also approved the
proposal. The proposal ultimately needs to
be cleared by the Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs after the approval of
Economic Finance Committee (EFC). De-
partment is taking up the matter with the
Department of Expenditure for convening
EFC Meeting at the earliest.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels that the Department should impress upon other States also to
increase the amount being provided. The Committee also feels that the Department should
urge upon the Department of Expenditure to convene the Economic Finance Committee
meeting at an early date so that the proposal can ultimately be cleared by the Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs.

Exhibitions for Youth

7.2 The Committee, therefore, recom-
mends that the Deptt. should examine the
matter with a view to merging this scheme
with that of National Integration Scheme so
as to avoid unnecessary duplication which
creates confusion and wastage of resources.

This scheme on the face of it looks similar
to the scheme of National Integration but
basically the aims behind the two schemes
are totally different. Under the Scheme of
National Integration the aim is to spread
the culture of one place to other places

while under exhibitions for Youth the aim
is to promote culture of the same area
among the youth of that area itself as well
as to give them information about the latest
developments in the country in diversified
fields. This scheme is, however, being re-
viewed to make it more viable and informa-
tive.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee does not understand the logic behind the running of the scheme. Many
exhibitions under the scheme relate to the theme of National Integration and are held as a
part of our campaign for national integration. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation made in its seventeenth report that the Department should review the
scheme at the earliest and take steps to merge the scheme with other National Integration
schemes, particularly when there is no justification given for decreasing the number of
exhibits.



Observations/Recommendations

Reply

Scouting & Guiding

8. The Committee expresses its deep
concern over the utilisation of only Rs. 60
lakhs out of an amount of Rs. 92 lakhs
allocated last year under the Scheme. The
Committee feels that the Scheme is not
functioning well and therefore, recom-
mends that the Department itself should
make efforts to pinpoints the factors re-
sponsible for the under-utilisation and take
corrective measures. Evaluation of this
Scheme, undertaken by the Indian Institute
of Management, be-completed early and
follow-up action taken thereon.

Comments of the Committee

Evaluation of this Scheme is being handled
by the Finance Unit who have entrusted
the work to Indian Institute of Manage-
mént, Bangalore. The budget for 1995-96
was reduced to Rs. 65 lakhs.

The ‘Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department and feels that the
Department has not taken adequate steps to pinpoint the factors responsible for under-
utilisation of funds. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the evaluation of
the Scheme, undertaken by the Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, should be

completed soon and follow-up action taken thereon.

Youth Clubs

9. The Committee expressed its un-
happiness over the poor progress of this
Scheme. The Committee is constrained to
observe that the Deptt. is not serious ab-
out the progress of the Scheme and recom-
mends that it should try to achieve the
target set for this year and the allocated
amount be utilised properly.

Comments of the Committee

934 youth clubs have been assisted during
1994-95 through Nehru Yuva Kendra San-
gathan and State Govt. A Quarterly Prog-
ress Report is being obtained from NYKS
to achieve the target of the Scheme during
1995-96.

The Committee feels that the Department has failed to furnish a convincing reply how it
could assist 934 more clubs in a short span of three months, while it has assisted only 17
clubs during 9 months. The Committee is of the view that the Department should take

necessary steps in this regard with the assistance of State Governments.

Training of Youth

10. This Scheme is no exception to the
General Malady of under utilisation of
available resource and failure in achieving
the targets.

10.1 The Committee takes a serious
view of the laxity and disinterestedness
shown by the Deptt. in running this prog-
ramme, in particular, and Youth Welfare

Various steps are being taken up to utilise
the full budget allocation of the Scheme
during 1995-96.

During the year 1995-96 (upto 15.12.95),
an amount of Rs. 72.50 lakh has been
released out of total budget provision of
Rs. 100.00 lakh.



Observations/Recommendations

Schemes, in General and recommends that

this State of Affairs should not be allowed

to persist any more.

Comments of the Committee

- The Committee feels that the Department has failed to give proper training to the youth
in self-employment schemes. The Department should take adequate steps to identify the
youth with the help of local Panchayats and Nagarpalikas so that the target could be

Reply

achieved.

Youth Hostels

11.1 The Committee recommends that
the Government should make all out efforts
to make up this shortfall at the RE level,
keeping in view the fact, that 28
Youth Hostels are under constructions.
Keeping the objectives of this Schemes in
view, the Committee has recommended last
year to locate these Hostels mostly in
places of cultural & historical importance.
The Committee reiterates that new Hostels
should be provided at places from where
Youths get a glimpse of our religious and
‘Cultural diversities and glory of the past,
and also get inspiration for adventurous
uctivities and also where infrastructure is
not available at the moment. The Commit-
tee feels that there is not much awareness
about the existence of such Hostels &
procedures for getting the reservation, etc.
As a result, Youths are not benefited by
the Scheme to the desired extent. The
Committee therefore, recommends that the
Government should take necessary steps to
publicise this Scheme widely, utilising the
Mass Media.

Comments of the Committee

The RE, 1995-96 for Youth Hostel has
been finalised at Rs. 201 lakh & the De-
partment is releasing grants for construction
of Youth Hostels which are either at the
completion stage or at the initial stage.

The Committee is not convinced with the reply furnished by the Department. The
Committee feels that the department has not initiated any steps to open the hostels at places
of cultural and historical importance. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommenda-
tion that steps should be taken to open the hostels at these places.

Games and Sports
15.4 The Committee feels that there is
greater need to lay more emphasis on

sports activities for which the funds pro-
vided for the year 1995-96 are inadequate.

The matter has been taken up at the
Minister’s level with the Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission and with the Finance
Minister. However, the outlays have not



Observations/Recommendations

Reply

The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should take up the
matter at the appropriate level and try to
convince the Ministry of Finance to in-
crease the allocation suitably at the R.E.
level, so that atleast the important and
major schemes/programmes of Department
do not suffer due to lack of funds.

Comments of the Committee

been increased during the current year even
at the RE stage.

The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in this regard. The
Committee, however, feels the Department should continue to urge upon the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance to provide more funds to the Department.

Promotion of Sports and Physical Education among Women and National Sports

Championship for Women
20.2 The Committee fails to appreciate

the logic behind adopting fixed pattern of.

assistance to these schemes. The Commit-
tee is of the opinion that with the present
level of allccation, the Department would
not be able to attract more and more
women to the field of sports. The Commit-
tee, therefore, recommends that the fixed
pattern of assistance should not be applied
to these schemes which are meant specifi-
cally for women.

Comments of the Committee

As per the present policy and guidelines, a
fixed pattern of assistance is considered
most appropriate. However, the scale of
assistance is revised from time to time.

The Committee is not convinced by the reply furnished by the department and reiterates
its recommendation that fixed pattern of assistance should not be applied to schemes which
are specifically for women and feels that these schemes should be strengthened.



CHAPTER-A-II
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

National Service Scheme (NSS)
Recommendation (Para 4)

4. The Committee is deeply concerned about the misutilisation and persistent failure of
the Department to appropriate resources allocated for the scheme during the last four years
and is constrained to observe that this is not a healthy phenomenon and should not be
allowed to continue any more.

Ministry’s Reply

The first instalment of NSS grant for the year 1995-96 was released to 23 States/UTs in

the month of March, 1995 so that State Governments/UT Administrations had enough time

to put in their share and release grants to educational institutions in April and May before
the commencement of summer vacation during which the NSS programmes are conducted.

Recommendation (Para 4.3)

4.3 The Committee finds that the State Liaison Cells, which are basically meant for
maintaining coordination with various agencies involved in the scheme, in matters of timely
release of grants and proper implementation of the programme, were not doing their job at
all. The Committee emphasises the need to activate them.

Ministry’s Reply

With regard to unsatisfactory functioning of State Liaison cells, the matter was looked into
in the Department. The duties and responsibilities of State Liaison Cells have been stream-
lined and circular was issued to make more effective in their functioning. Besides, additional
circular was issued to State Governments to remove additional responsibilities other than
NSS from State Liaison Officers which has been complied with.

Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS)
Recommendation (Para 5.2)

5.2 The Committee, after considering the matter, arrives at the conclusion that there
seems to be some slackness on the part of the Department and that it did not act as
responsibility as it ought to have in this regard. The Committee desires that immediate
action should be taken to ensure an even and smooth flow of funds to the Kendras and
proper utilisation thereof.

Ministry’s Reply

As far as possible, as and when funds are received from the Department of Youth Affairs
& Sports the same are disbursed to the Kendras and their Utilization is monitored by
Regional, Zonal and National Headquarters. However, it is noted that an even and smooth
flow of funds to the kendras will be maintained and Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan will
ensure its proper utilisation. Nevertheless, Department of Youth Affairs & Sports will also
ensure to regulate timely flow of funds to Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan.
Recommendation (Para 5.3)

5.3 The Committee recommends that a proposal should be prepared withna view to
associating people’s representatives at different levels in the working of the NYKS. The

8


9

Committee reiterates its recommendations to make the functioning of NYKS more
democratic and transparent by introducing element of accountability in it.

Ministry’s Reply

In order to ensure adequate representation of people’s representatives in the District
Advisory Committee on Youth Programmes, the previous composition of the Committee has
been revised. In the revised Committee structure, two members would be from among-the
people’s representative. In this regard, a circular has been issued to all the District
Magistrates/Deputy Commissioners/Collectors and all district Nehru Yuva Kendras for
necessary action and follow up.

Recommendation (Para 5.6)

5.6 The Committee is also of the view that the aims of the programmes of Vocational
Training and Training in Self-employment Projects overlap each other. Similar is the case
with schemes like Sports (Block level and District level) and Equipment Purchase and
Vocational Training and Sports Equipment Purchase. The Committee, therefore, suggests
that Vocational Training and Training in Self-employment Project be merged, as well as
schemes like Sports (Block and District level) and Equipments Purchase and Sports
Equipment Purchase, with a view to avoiding duplication of activities in this regard.
Ministry’s Reply

The Programmes, Vocational Training Technical and Non-Technical and Training in Self-
employment project have been merged under a single programme, namely Vocational
Training Programme. Similarly, under sports, a separate and distinct provision for purchase
of sports equipments has been made. In order to avoid duplicacy, it has been decided that
NYKS should only inculcate the spirit of sports among rural youth and should not organize
sports tournaments.

Recommendation (Para 5.7)

5.7 The Committee is not aware if the Department is also assisting the youth trained
under the schemes of Vocational Training and Training in Self-employment Project in setting
up income generating projects. If no such action is undertaken by the Department, the
Committee suggests that suitable action may be initiated to help them in this regard.

Ministry’s Reply

The suggestion of the Committee regarding assisting the youth trained under the schemes
of Vocational Training and Training in Self-Employment Project in setting up income
generating projects will be taken up by this Department soon.

NATIONAL INTEGRATION PROGRAMME
Recommendation (Para 6.2)

6.2 The Committee feels that suitable programmes of interest to the youth be devised with
a view to promoting community living and sharing of common experiences.

Ministry’s Reply

Action in this regard has been initiated and the Department has introduced a new
component ‘‘Sadbhavana Shivir” under the Scheme Promotion of National Integration to
promote the objectives. The existing schemes of National Integration also take care to
promote community living and sharing of common experiences.


10

National Youth Awards and Awards to Outstanding Youth Clubs
Recommendation (Para 12.2)

12.2 The Committee is of the opinion that motivation, which these awards aim is the sine-
qua-non of good performance. It therefore, recommends that the Deptt. should see to it that
selection of sufficient number of youths and youth clubs was done and awards given to them
every year.

Ministry’s Reply

Awards to Outstanding Youth Clubs is being given every year after selection of sufficient
number of youth clubs.

Assistance to Voluntary Organisations Working in the Field of Youth
Recommendation (Para 13.1)
13.1 The Committee is satisfied with the progress of the Scheme. It, however,

recommends that the Department should try to strengthen the scheme and ensure that the
funds were not misutilised possibilities of which cannot be ruled out.

Ministry’s Reply
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
Games and Sports
Recommendation (Para 15.5)

15.5 The Department may frame Rules and Regulations for renting out its stadias and
buildings, and a marketing cell may also be created in SAI for commercial exploitation of
stadia and for exploring other avenues of raising revenue.

Ministry’s Reply

SAI has been advised to frame the necessary Rules and Regulations in this regard. A
special Committee of the Governing Body has been constituted to go into the overall
question of stadia utilisation keeping in mind the need to generate more revenue and at the

same time to maintain the stadias in good condition. Its report has been received and is to.
be implemented. A proposal to create a marketing cell in SAI is under process.

Rural Sports Programme
Recommendation (Para 17.4)

17.4 The Committee recommends a massive publicity campaign about rural sports
programme and feels that involving Panchayats in this regard should also be considered.
Ministry’s Reply

Sports being a ‘State’ subject, this Department is of the view that the development of the
sports activities in the rural areas should be the primary responsibility of States/UTs. Letters
have been addressed to all Chief Ministers to earmark and develop village common lands as
play-fields under schemes like Jawahar Rozgar Yojana. In the light of the report now
received from the Parliamentary Standing Committee we propose to address the State
Governments comprehensively in this regard.

Recommendation (Para 17.6)

17.6 The Department should take immediate steps for providing sports facilities in the
urban slum area.


11
Ministry’s Reply

The existing schemes for providing sports facility in urban areas do not preclude urban
slums. A scheme for encouraging sports activities in the urban slums through State Govts/
Local bodies/voluntary agencies is under formulation.

Accountability
Recommendation (Para 18.4)

18.4 The Committee recommends that the possibility of having a coordinating body at the
national level be explored and suggests that an Expert Committee be set up to look into the
report submitted by the coaches/manager and sports administrators after each international
tournaments with a view to fix the responsibility for poor performance and to pinpoint
reasons therefor.

Ministry’s Reply

The Department is in agreement with these suggestions. The Federations will be advised
to set up expert Committees for this purpose.

Exchange of Sports and Physical Education Team
Recommendation (Para 19.3)

19.3 The Department should see to it that the funds are fully utilised under the
Exchange of Sports and Physical Education schemes and such schemes should have fixed
targets every year.

Ministry's Reply
The Department would take suitable steps in this regard.
General Observations and Recommendations
Recommendation (Para 23.2)

23.2 The Committee therefore, suggests that the Deptt. should examine this aspect and
come out with a comprehensive proposal outlining the manner in which the services of these
bodies could be utilised by the Department, of course, under proper supervision and control.

Ministry’s Reply

The Department feels that the onus for utilising the services of local bodies in respect of
sports and games should primarily remain with the States/UTs. They would be suitably
advised in the matter. The Central Government would also formulate the broad guidelines in
this regard.


CHAPTERA-III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE

Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS)

5.4 The Committee feels that. in view of some new programmes introduced under this
scheme (NYKS), the decrease in the allocation, both plan and non-plan, this year would
adversely affect the progress of the on-going as well as new programmes. Therefore, the
Committee recommends enhancement of the allocation for the scheme adequately.

Ministry’s Reply

The Department will make efforts for enhancement of funds to Nehru Yuva Kendra
Sangathan under the plan.
Recommendation (Para 5.5)

5.5 The Committee also recommends that the net work of Programmes of Training in
Self-employment Project, Vocational Training and Youth Awareness drives should be
considerably expanded and strengthened so as to cover more and more youth of the country,
particularly in the rural and semi-urban areas, with the association of Panchayats and
Nagarpalikas.

Ministry’s Reply

The netwark for imparting training under the programme Vocational Training has been
expanded in the Annual Action Plan 1995-96 and liberty is being given to district NYKS to
select trades keeping in view the availability of raw material and market potential, so that
after training the rural and semi-urban youth can take up self supporting ventires.

Youth Clubs
Recommendation (Para 9.1)

9.1 The Committee, therefore. recommends that the Deptt. should take up the matter
with the State Govt. and help the youth clubs in getting the required registration.

Ministry’s Reply

This matter is being taken up with the State Govts./UT Administrations.
National Youth Awards and Awards to Outstanding Youth Clubs

Recommendation (Para 12.1)

12.1 The Committee feels that the progress of these scheme has not been satisfactory. It
appears that either the Deptt. was not able to identify sufficient number of deserving youths
and youth clubs for giving awards or they were not able to fulfil the standard laid down by
the Deptt. to qualify for these awards.

Ministry’s Reply

An amount of Rs. 14,77,800-was released to Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan to give
163 District Level Awards, 21 State Level Awards and 5 National Level Awards under the
scheme for Awards to Outstanding Youth Clubs during 1994-95.

12


18

Games and Sports
Recommendation (Para 16.2—16.3)

16.2 and 16.3 The Committee agrees with the proposal of amalgamating the SPDA
Centres, Sports Hostel and Special Area Games schemes and suggests that atleast one such
centre should be set up in every State in the first instance.

Ministry’s Reply

The Governing Body of SAI has decided to amalgamate SPDA and Sports Hostel and

treat them as SAI Centres. However, SAG is. being kept as a separate scheme.
Rural Sports Programme
Recommendation (Para 17.5)

17.5 Sufficient money should be earmarked for creating sports infrastructure in rural
areas, particularly for indigenous sports.
Ministry’s Reply

The Central Government is already providing assistance to the States/UTs for creating
sports infrastructure throughout the country, including the rural areas. However, it is
proposed to further advise the States/UTs suitably in this regard. Steps are also being taken
to evolve standard low cost designs for creating sports infrastructure in the rural areas.

NCC Junior Division Troops
Recommendation (Para 21.2)

21.2 The Committee feels that there is a need for a greater inter-action and
coordination with the Ministry of Defence in regard to the funds being made available to the
NCC organisations.

Ministry’s Reply

We feel that the administration of this scheme needs to be transferred to the
Department of Education as this Department is not playing any significant role. Action in
this direction has already been initiated.

National Federations

Recommendation (Para 22.3)

22.3 The Committee is of the opinion that the funds earmarked for the national
federations should have been fully utilised.
Ministry’s Reply

The Department would undertake steps to ensure that in future the funds earmarked for
National Federations are utilised fully. Fresh guidelines for existing federations have been
prepared.

General Observations/Recommendations
Recommendation (Para 25)

25. The Committee suggests that the Department should undertake a general. review of
all these schemes in whose case there is a duplication of activities and merge them to the
extent possible.

Ministry’s Reply

The Department would initiate suitable action in this regard in consultation with SAI

and the other concerned agencies.


CHAPTER-IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Please see Chapter I

14


CHAPTER-V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED

NIL

15


*XXX
THIRTIETH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 7th March, 1996 in Committee Room
‘E’ Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

Shri O.P. Kohli

Shri Md. Salim

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
Prof. 1.6. Sanadi

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

10. Dr. ५. Rajeshwaran

11. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
12. Dr. Vasant Pawar

13. Shri Anna Joshi

14, Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

15. Shri Ramachandra Dome

16. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
2. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer.

2. The Committee considered the Draft Thirty-Fifth and Thirty-Sixth Reports on the
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in its
Twenty-First and Eighteenth Reports and adopted the same with minor changes.

3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram and
Shri Md. Salim to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Vasant Pawar and in his
absence Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi to lay them on the Table of Lok Sabha.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 p.m.

25७ 12० कक 22

*Minutes of Ist to XXIXth meeting relates to matters not included in this Report.

16