RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FORTY-FIRST REPORT

PRIVATE UNIVERSITIES (ESTABLISHMENT AND REGULATION) BILL, 1995

(Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 26 March, 1996)
(Laid in Rajya Sabha on.... as soe
(Laid in Lok Sabha on.

।

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

- = 1996/Chaitra, 1917 (Saka)



Fel 8 बज eR ite
TATTIM MGS

si oso hatwsee 7)
1४-10
J}

FAltanoee ANRAS AYAAT
wav



1
1
1
4
j

(i)
(mi)

(Iv)
(Vv)

CONTENTS

Paces
CoMPoSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii)
PREFACE (iii)
REPORT 1
Introduction 1-3
Need for Private initiative in higher education 3-5
Apprehensions and Safeguards: 5-9
(a) Commercialisation of education
(b) Entry of Carpet Baggers in higher education
(c) Maintenance of parity in academic standards
(d) Non-implementation of reservation policies
_ (e) Unider-representation in rural areas
(f) Over-centralisation and Bureaucratisation
(g) Neglect of research and extension activities
(h) Entry of Multi-National Corporations in education
(i) Constitutional validity of the Provisions
Statement of Objects and Reasons 9
9-24

Clause-by-Clause Analysis:

(a) Short title, extent and commencement

(b) Definitions (clause 2)

(c) Proposal for establishment of university (clause 3)

(d) Fee structure, freeships and scholarships [clause 4(2)(j)]

(e) Project Report [clauses 4(2) (f) and (g)]

(f) Submission of prdject and examination [clauses 5 and 6(3)]

(g) Establishment of permanent endowment fund (clauses 7 & 8)

(h) Establishment and incorporation of universities (clauses 10 & 11)

(i) Accreditation of universities (clause 11)

(j) Universities to be self-financing (clause 12)

(k) Universities open to all classes, castes and creeds (clause 13)

(1) Officers of the university (clause 14)

(m) The Vice-Chancellor (clause 16)

(n) The Board of Governors (clause 21)

(०) The Board of Management (clause 22)

(p) The Academic Council (clause 23)

(q) Powers of the Commission to inspect the universities (clause 25)

(r) The First Statute, the Subsequent Statute and the Ordinance (clauses
26, 27 and 28)

(s) The Annual Report (clause 30)

(t) The Annual Accounts (clause 31)

(u) Management of the university on dissolution and winding up (clauses 35
& 36)

(v) Powers of Central Government (clause 37)

(w) Wider debate needed

Minutes oF Dissent

ANNEXURES 29—45


on 36 10७1053::56ा*
। i i oh ७ २५

| ॥0क्ता।03 39-16 zrswot (७)
aie. és “inpopesd j ४४2 teas (5५

हक हा॥म००२/) 1/ ,
शिकंजा 10 inemiageseM (7)

3 [9४53 क6 7020५
Shabir. sindab-ybi (७)



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1995-96)

1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

4. Miss Saroj Khaparde

5. Shri O.P. Kohli

6. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
7. Shri V. Ha antha Rao

8. Shri Md. Salim
| 9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. 1.6. Senadi

11. Shri‘Ashoke Xumar Sen
{ 12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA
16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
17. Dr V. Raj varan

18. Prof. (Smt.} Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
20. Dr. Vasant Pawar
21. Vacant
22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole
25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar
28. Vacant
29. Shri Inder Jit
30. Shri Anna Joshi
31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
| 34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K.D. Jeswani
36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
! 37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
38. Shri Rambadan
39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

0)


(ii).

41. Shri Ramchandra Dome

42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal.

45. Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

3. Shri Om Datta Sharma, Under Secretary

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer


|
|

PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, present this Forty-
first Report of the Committee on the Private Universities (Establishment and Regulation)
Bill, 1995.

2. The Private Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill, 1995, which was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 25th August, 1995, provides for establishment and
incorporation of self-financing universities and for regulation of their functioning and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

3. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred the Bill to the Committee for examina-
tion and report.

4. A press communique inviting suggestions/views from individuals, organisations and
institutions, interested in the subject matter of the Bill, was issued on the 18th September,
1995 (Annexure-I). Several memoranda containing views/opinions on the Bill were received
by the Committee.

5. The Committee considered the Bill in 8 sittings (Annexure-II) and heard the oral
evidence of some of the eminent academicians, private organisations, representatives of
some national level students and teachers organisations and a few State Governments, the
Secretary, Department of Education, Union Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Secretary, Union Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs and the Chairperson of the
University Grants Commission. A list of witnesses, who appeared before the Committee, is
at Annexure IL.

6. The Committee, in its meeting held on March 19, 1996, considered the Draft report
on the Bill and adopted the same for presentation/aying in both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee also decided that the Minutes of Dissent received from Prof. Malini
Bhattacharya, Shri Md. Salim and Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy, may be appended to the
report.

New DELHI; P. UPENDRA
pe ga, 5 Se Chairman,
March 19, 1996 Committee on Human Resource Development.

(iii)


rita) ७४३४

“GORE (OT Aisa


State universities, over the years, have been appreciably lower than those for the Central
universities. This has, obviously, caused a setback to the quality of education imparted in the
State universities which account for the majority of students enrolled in the university
system. Of late, even the Central universities have started complaining of resource crunch,
Universalisation of elementary education, eradication of illiteracy in the age group of 15 to
35 and strengthening of Vocational Education so as to relate it to the emerging needs in the
urban and rural sectors are the major thrust areas of Eighth Plan in the education sector,

1.5. There can be no compromise on ‘the quality of education, knowledge and skills
being imparted to the student community because of rescurce crunch. All this goes to prove
that there is a need for substantial stepping up in the funding of the existing institutions,
And if qualitative improvement in tertiary education has to be achieved, a suitable legal
framework must be considered to enable establishment of new institutions with funding from
sources other than the conventional source of Government funding. It is, therefore,
imperative to attract private initiative and investment in the tertiary sector so as to
supplement the Governmental efforts in providing quality education to the student

community.

1.6. The National Policy on Education (1986) and its Programme of Action (1992) states
that non-governmental .as well as voluntary effort, including social activist groups, would be
encouraged, subject to proper management and financial assistance provided. It also states
that, at the same time, steps will be taken to prevent establishment of institutions with a
purely profit motive. More particularly, it has been stated that in the interest df maintaining
standards, etc., commercialisation of technical and professional education would be curbed.
An alternative system will be devised to involve private and voluntary effort in the tertiary
sector of education, in conformity with the accepted norms and goals. In keeping with the
above policy pronouncements, the endeavgur is to encourage non-government funding and
support for establishment of, new institutions and thereby provide horizontal expansion in the
tertiary system. The linkages between industries and business, on one side, and the academic
and research institutions, on the other, are equally essential to achieve the three dimensional
objectives of teaching, research and extension in the higher education system. All these
efforts should be to supplement the on-going governmental efforts and these should not be
construed as a substitute for the involvement of the Government.

1.7. Under the Ccastitution of India, ‘Education, including technical education’ but
excluding agriculture, is a subject included in the Concurrent List. Therefore, both the
Central and the State Governments can legislate on matters relating to education, including
the establishment of universities. However, if there is a Central legislation on the subject, its
provisions would prevail over those in the State laws. The States’ power to legislate in
respect of universities is, however, subject+to the provisions of Entry-66 of List-I (the Union
List) relating to Co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions of higher
education or research and scientifi¢ and technical institutions. Similarly, Entry-25 of List-III
(Concurrent List) deals with Education, including technical education, medical education
and universities, subject to the provisions of Entries-63, 64, 65 and 66 of List-I. Even
though, State legislatures are competent to enact a law to enable the establishment of
private universities within their jurisdictions, such a course of action would not be advisable
to avoid inter-State variations in terms of regulation and control of higher education by
various State Governments. Further, if the legislative intervention on the subject is to be in
the form of an enabling Act, the legislative competence for such an enactment would be
referable to Entry-66 of List-1, namely “Co-ordination and determination of standards of

higher educdtion.”



REPORT

I. Introduction

The Private Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill, 1995, was introduced in
the Rajya Sabha on the 25th August, 1995. The Bill seeks to provide for the establishment
and incorporation of self-financing Universities and for regulation of their functioning and
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

1.1, The main objective of the Bill is to provide for establishment of self-financing
universities without any financial support from the Government. Such universities, as per the
statement of reasons and objectives of the Bill, can play a subsidiary but supportive role to
the endeavours of the State-run universities in the tertiary,education sector, particularly in
emerging areas of science and technology. As the establishment of such universities would
require a broadly uniform set of guidelines for ensuring academic standards, prevention of
commercialisation and mismanagement, etc., enactment of an enabling legislation of general
applicability has been considered expedient.

1.2, At present, this country has one of the largest higher education systems in the
world, with 156 universities (including 14 Central Universities), 36 deemed universities and
around 8,000 colleges, with more than five million students enrolled therein. The sheer size
of the population, however, renders these facilities inadequate. The country has'a very low
tertiary enrolment ratio of 2.5 per cent when compared to other countries like Canada
(66%), South Korea (37.7%), Cuba (20%), Philippines (24.4%), Egypt (18.4%), Syria
(17.8%) and Thailand (15.7%). These figures prove; beyond doubt, that the country needs a
substantially larger educational infrastructure in the tertiary sector to meet the growing
needs of higher education, especially in the emerging areas of science and technology.

1.3. Budgetary allocations for Education show an ever-increasing trend throughout the
successive Five Year‘Plans (Annexure-IV). But this trend is not perceptible if the allocations
for Elementary and Higher Education are taken into account. As regards Elementary
Education, starting with 56% of the total allocation for education in the First Five Year Plan
it came down to 35% in the Second Five Year Plan and hovered more or less around the
same figure till the Seventh Plan. However, in the Eighth Five Year Plan, the percentage of
allocation registered a marginal increase to 47% over 37% of the previous one. No uniform
trend is discernible in the allocation for Higher Education either. Starting with nine percent
in the First Five Year Plan, it increased in the two successive Plans, went upto 25% in the
Fourth Five Year Plan. From Fifth Plan onward the percentage of allocation started showing
a receding trend touching its lowest ebb in the Eighth Five Year Plan i.e. eight per cent.

1.3.1. The National Policy on Education, 1986 had emphasised the need for allocation
of 6% of Gross Domestic Product to the Education Sector which is still a distant dream.
Many of the developing countries are already spending 6% or more on education. The
Government of India allocation on education has remained between .2 to 3% in the
successive Plan periods. Due to Budgetary constraints, the Central and State Universities are
starved of funds. It is in this background that the need for private sector to supplement the
effort of the Government becomes ull the more necessary.

1.4. The most important factor coming in the way of expansion of the educational
facilities and infrastructure in the country is the inadequacy of resources with the
Government. The Government is finding it extremely difficult even to maintain the existing
complement of institutions, what to talk of further expansion. The allocations made for the

1



1.8. Article 41 of the Constitution of India, inter-alia, lays down that the State shall, within
the limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective provision for securing the
right to education. Further, Article 45 of the Constitution of India states that the State shall
endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years from the commencement of the Constitution,
free and compulsory education for all children until they complete the age of fourteen years.
Further, Article 46 of the Constitution lays down that the State shall promote, with special care,
the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and in particular,
of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice
and all forms of exploitation.

1.9. At present, private participation in education is confined to certain institutions of
excellence. For a proper appreciation of the issues, it is necessary to understand the role of non-
governmental expenditure on higher education in the country. It may be recalled that the first
two Central universities established in the country were: thé Banaras Hindu University (1915)
and the Aligarh Muslim University (1920). The then Government of India agreed to pass the
relevant legislations only after the promoters of the two Universities deposited the endowment
fund of Rs. 30 lakhs in each case. These two Universities continued to meet roughly 60 per cent
of their expenditure, till 1947-48, from non-Governmental sources. Similarly, Annamalai
University was established in 1929 by an Act of Madras Legislature after its founders Sir
Annamalai Chettiar, created an endowment of Rs. 20 lakhs (to which the Government of
Madras subsequently contributed Rs. 27 lakhs). This University has been meeting most of its
expenditure from its own income and resources. Likewise, Sagar University was created out of
the munificence of late Sir Hari Singh Gaur. Its mairitenance liability was subsequently taken
over by the State Government. About 60 per cent of the colleges, now in existence in the
country, have also been created with initial private investment. Although most of them are
aided by the Government, yet they are established and run by private managements. These facts
clearly demonstrate that establishment of private universities is not at all a novel concept, as it is
made out to be. It is, however, possible that while the motivation in the past was either
philanthropic or advancement of particular communities, the inducement, presently, might
often be less altruistic. This differentiation may have a bearing on the legal framework being
brought through the present legislation to enable private universities to come into existence.

1.10. At present, universities are created either by an Act of Parliament or State
legislature. Another species, “Deemed Universities” has been brought into existence. by the
Central Government through an executive order in terms of Section-3 of the University Grants
Commission Act. In certain States like Maharasiira, it is no longer necessary to pass specific
legislation to set up individual universities. There is an enabling legislation under which
individual universities are established by a resolution of the Legislative Assembly. There are
precedents for essentially private universities being established through both Central (Aligarh
Muslim University and Banaras Hindu University) and provincial (Annamalai and Sagar)
legislations. Even now, both the Union and the State Legislatures, as already stated, are
competent to enact legislation on the subject vide Entry-25 of the Concurrent List.

Il. Need for private initiative in higher education

2. The Government has initiated and is pursuing an economic policy of privatisation and
liberalisation. Just as liberalisation envelops all sectors of economy, it is bound to touch’ the
education sector as well. It is perhaps in this background that an enabling legislation for
establishing private universities has been felt necessary to supplement the Governmental
efforts.

2.1. The policies so far followed in India have placed extensive responsibility for the


expansion and development of education on the State. At the elementary stage, the S|
sponsored schools have been functioning to impart education to children, especially in
areas. Even in urban areas, majority of the schools are run or aided by the State. At th

level of secondary, college and university stage, the public sector has played a dominant roi
in the development of higher education. However, a stage has now come when the State ji
finding it very difficult to meet the needs of the people for higher education due to Paucity.
of resources. It is, therefore, felt that the private sector should be encouraged more and
more to share the burden of the State in funding education. i

2.2. Secondly, there is rapid expansion of avenues of knowledge all over the world and
developing countries have to keep pace with the explosion of knowledge lest they are left
behind. Today, the world is divided into fast moving rich economies that use knowledge
effectively, and slow moving poor economies that do not. Thus, education, is becoming a
key factor in the process of development. This being so, education is no longer viewed as a
mere social service, rather it is considered a necessary economic input, and, as such,
investments in education are treated as a factor contributory to human resource
development.

2.3. Thirdly, as it is seen, the world is passing through a major industrial revolution,
This encompasses genetics, communications, robots, lasers and new industrial materials and
the various tools and products incorporating the micro chip. The growth of satellite TV and
developments in computer technology have further escalated the information revolution.
These technological developments have increased the need for requirements of highly
educated and well-trained technical manpower. Since the public sector, due to the limitations
of resources allocated to education. cannot meet the needs of industry and other sectors of
the economy, it is vital that private sector be associated with the programmes of training
skilled manpower to take advantage of high tech. opportunities.

2.4, Fourthly, privatisation can respond more promptly and efficiently than the public
sector, which is hamstrung with structural and operational inflexibilities, to market signals or
market demand for labour and take effective steps to promote human resource development
to keep pace with the emerging requirements.

2.5. Fifthly, over the years, the public sector has failed to generate resources from the
recipients of education. Education is considered to be, more or less, a free public service. In
fact, a majority of the recipients are not aware of the amount of money that is spent by the
State to provide them a highly specialised education. Charging full or a substantial portion of
the cost of education is likely to generate greater responsibility amongst the recipients of
education i.e, the students. As a consequence, students are likely to insist on greater
efficiency in teaching and improvement in its quality.

2.6. Sixthly, privatisation, by generating more resources from the student fees, would

help in reducing the fiscal burden on the Government. Thus, the proposed universities as
they would be self-financing, would provide considerable financial relief to the Government.

2.7. Lastly, priva on of higher education is not a new phenomenon in the world. In
many countries the private sector has come to play either a limited or predominant role in
higher education. In some countries. the origin of privatisation can be traced back to a few
centuries. But, privatisation has assumed greater significance as a policy strategy for the
development of education in recent times, essentially, but not wholly, due to stagnating—
and, in some countries, declining public budgets for education, on the one hand, and
increasing social demand for higher education, on the other.

2.8. There has been a remarkable growth in privatisation of higher education during the


5

last two to three decades in several countries (Columbia, Japan, Latin America and
Thailand). The reasons for this growth can be summed up in two categories: excess demand
and differentiated demand for aigher education. First, the social demand for higher
education exceeds the public supply, and the private market seeks to meet the unsatisfied
demand. Secondly, demand for different quality (presumably higher quality) and
contentment in education also contributes to increased privatisation. On the supply side,
private entrepreneurs are ready to provide higher education either for philanthropic or dther
altruistic motives, or for profit. The dividends could be social and political gains, of quick
economic profits.

Ill. Apprehensions and Safeguards

(a) Commercialisation of Education

3.1. One of the main apprehensions voiced before the Committee in regard to the
Private Universities Bill is that it would lead to: commercialisation of higher education since
no one would like to start a university purely as a charitable institution or as a part of social
service. The private sector would certainly expect some return either in the form of profit or
in the form of financial benefits or some social reputation in the areas concerned. In the
absence of these advantages, no one would come forward and invest a huge sum of money
in the field of education merely for a social or philanthropic cause.

3.1.1. Government has tried to clarify these points in the background note submitted by
them to the Committee wherein a number of safeguards to keep a check on the
commercialisation of higher education have been spelt out. As per clause 4(2) (j), the fee to
be charged by the universities will be based on unit cost, and sponsors will not be able to
make profit out of it. Moreover, UGC’s prior approval would be necessary for fixing fee and
number of seats, as laid in clause 26 (1) (j) and (k) of the Bill, and the sponsors will not be
allowed to make it a source of profit. Similarly, University Grants Commission’s approval
has been made mandatory for the revision of fee or altering the number of seats, vide clause
27 (1) to (4) of the Bill. The sponsors will, therefore, not be able to treat the
universities as a commercial enterprise. And, lastly, the Central Government will have
overriding powers, vide clause 37(b) & (c) of the Bill, wherein it can issue directions curbing
any activity of the university that may be deterimental to its functioning as an educational
institution, This would ultimately keep check on and prevent commercialisation of higher
education by the private sector. Further, there is a provision in clause 36(1) of the Bill for
winding up the university for mismanagement and forfeiture of the endowment fund. Thus,
sufficient safeguards are provided in the Bill to keep a check on commercialisation.

(b) Entry of “Carpet Baggers” in Higher Education

3.2. Another apprehension foreseen by the Committee in the establishment of private
universities is the entry of ‘carpet-baggers’ or the so-called opportunists, in the field of
higher learning with vested interests and ulterior motives. It is quite likely that those who
have money power may enter the field of education and attempt to exploit this noble
profession by indulging in activities not conducive to the cause of higher education. The
entry is free even to industrialists/big business houses provided one can invest 10 crores of

rupees.
3.2.1. The Government, in its reply given in the background note, ‘has tried to quote
various clauses of the Bill which would prevent the entry of the so-called ‘carpet-baggers’ in
the area of higher education. As per clause 3(2) of the Bill, the Government shall make such
inquiries about the sponsors as it deemed necessary and shall also consult the University
Grants Commission seeking its views on the proposal. Further, as per clause


3(3), the University Grants Commission, before furnishing its views to the Central
Government, shall notify in the official gazette and at least in one daily newspaper having
circulation in the State in which the University is proposed to be established, the fact’ ०7
receipt of the application seeking the views of the general public on the proposal. Thus, if ’
some unscrupulous elements try to enter the field of higher learning, their effort would
immediately be frustrated at the initial stage itself by the Government. Further, the *
Government would also scrutinise and examine.the track record of the sponsoring body as
given in the project report vide clause 4(2) (k) of the Bill. Also the comments of the State
Government are required to be furnished to the Central Government, vide clause 5 of the
Bill. Furthermore, there is a very heavy investment, to the tune of Rs. 10 crores, involved in
the establishment of a private university. Thus, no ordinary person could think of entering
this field unless he has genuine interest in the cause of education. Although there are  ~
sufficient safeguards provided in the Bill to check the entry of carpet baggers in the field of =
higher education, the Committee feels that the Government should ensure that only those
persons who are genuinly interested in the promotion of higher education, should be allowed
to enter this field to prevent the misuse of private universities for profit motives.

(c) Maintenance of Parity in Academic Standards 5

3.3 Another apprehension which comes to the mind of the Committee is about the
maintenance of academic standards in the proposed private universities. Since this will be an
altogether new experiment in the field of higher education in the Indian context, the

- apprehension appears to be genuine, particularly when the future and fate of the country’s
youth is at stake. Universities should not be allowed to run like teaching-shops. The
experience to involve the private sector in education so far has been mixed. While some
privately managed educational institutions are being run very efficiently, others have become
merely teaching shops. The University Grants Commission's proposal to allow private parties
to run only campus universities will, to a large extent, help it to have proper control over {
them.

3.3.1. The Government. in their background note, has stated that the present Bill
ensures maintenance of academic standards by the private universities for which necessary
provisions and safeguards have been made therein. For example, there is a provision for
compulsory accreditation of the university, as provided in clause 11(3) of the Bill. The
accreditation will hay » to be renewed at an interval of every five years thereaier. Further,
the Bill provides for association of an academician in the Board of Governors and the Board
of Management, vide clauses 21 and 22 of the Bill. Thirdly, the University Grants
Commission has been given powers to approve the statutes, ordinances and amendments
thereto, vide clauses 26(4), 27(3). 28(3) and 29(2) of the Bill. The needs and requirements of
special weightage to meritorious students in admission against free-seats has also been
ensured vide clause 4(2) (j) of the Bill. Thus, according to the-Government, there are
enough checks and safeguards to ensure maintenance of academic standards in the proposed
universities.

3.3.2. The Committee. however, feels that so far as the accreditation of the proposed
universities is concerned, these universities should be accredited and assessed regularly by
some national institutions of great academic repute like the National Assessment and
Accreditation Council. This Council should be informed of their activities right from the
beginning of the project so us to keep a watch over the standards and the quality of
education imparted by them. Further, the Committee also feels that rcpresentation of
academicians in the Board of Governors should be increased to at least three. Similarly,
their representation should also be suitably increased in the Board of Management as well.



(d) Non-Implementation of Reservation Policies

3.4. One of the important drawbacks observed in the Bill by the Committee is that it
doesn’t follow the national policy of providing reservation to the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes of the society which is a Constitutional
obligation on the part of the State. In the absence of such a provision in the Bill, there will
be two different policies followed in the State and Central universities and the private
universities. So far as the present Bill is concerned, only a small reference is given in clause
26(1) about admission policy, including regulation of reservation of seats, but this clause
doesn’t amply clarify the reservation policy to be adopted by the private universities.

3.4.1. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the national policy on reservation
for the weaker sections of the society should be meticulously followed even in the case of
private universities, both for admissions and employment. So as to ensure fair and just
representation to all segments of the society.

3.4.2. The Committee, however, feels that since these institutions will be financed by
private bodies which are not expected to take on the burden of providing subsidised
education for these communities, the Government should step in and fill the gap by
compensating these institutions in the form of financial grant to the extent subsidised
education is provided to these communities.

(e) Under representation in Rural Areas

3.5. One of the important apprehensions entertained by the Committee is that there may
be a rush for setting up private universities in metropolitian cities and urban areas with the
result the rural, backward and tribal areas will remain uncovered. As a matter of fact, the
metro towns already have good educational facilities and the need today is for expansion of
educational facilities, particularly at the level of higher education, in the rural areas.
Students from rural areas have to travel to the cities and urban areas or higher education
involving a lot of expenditure. There does not appear to be any provision in the Bill which
1895 down opening of private universities in the backward areas or uncovered areas.

3.5.1. The Government side, while agreeing with the Committee’s view, was of the view
that if we put too many conditions and checks, these may deter people from coming forward
to establish these universities. For example, the Government has offered certain incentives
for industrialisation in backward areas. In some places, it has worked well while in others it
has deterred the people from coming in. Since these would be a new experiment, it was
perhaps thought wiser not to put too many restrictions and adopt a cautious approach at this
stage. It is too early to predict the response of the people to this concept. The Committee
generally agrees with the explanation offered by the Government but, nontheless,
emphasises the fact that priority should be given to the applicants who come forward to
establish universities in the backward or un-represented areas.

(f) Over Centralisation and Bureaucratisation

3.6. Talking of privatisation in higher education, the first and the foremost idea that
comes to the mind is the autonomy of the educational institutions with greater emphasis on
flexibility. But the structure of the present Bill and the various provisions given therein, lead
one to the impression that there are too many safeguards and checks resulting in over-
centralisation and bureaucratisation which might lead to abnormal delays not only in setting
up of these universities but also in their day to day functioning. These institutions will not be
different in any way from the existing institutions. Any attempt to bureaucratise and over
regulate these institutions is totally unnecessary and counter-productive. The Committee feels



that the various procedures and the formalities laid in the Bill should be simplified 4
flexible for the smooth functioning of these universities. aye

(g) Neglect of Research and Extension Activities $ |

3.7. The new institutions, which are going to be established, will not perhaps focus their
attention on the basic research or extension activities for want of adequate returns on
commercial lines. It is likely that many private universities may come up as glorified
teaching-shops with limited objectives of helping ‘participants acquire degrees to become
eligible for jobs. But if research and scholarships are not going to be integral part of the
teaching programmes of private universities, they cannot be expected to become focal point
for innovations in the qualitative improvement of tertiary education or for research and
dissemination of technology. Therefore, the Committee feels that the courses offered by
these institutions should be evolved with an eye on employability and the holistic
development of participant's personalities.

(h) Entry of Multi-National Corporations in Education

3.8. There is an apprehension that Multi-National Corporations may enter the education
field and set up private universities. Even though it has been stipulated that the sponsoring
body should be an Indian citizen only, a trust could be floated by the MNCs with foreign
capital. Besides, there is no restriction in the Bill for accepting donations from foreign
countries. This may ultimately lead to cultural degeneration. The Secretary, Education,
clarifying the position in this regard, stated that “we have recognised it and we have
specifically provided it in the definition clause that no member of such society, author or
trustee of such trust or member of such company shall be a person other than a citizen of
India’. Chairperson, University Grants Commission further clarified that at the third and
fifth year stage, the University Grants Commission will get accredition reports about these
universities and thus would be able to know whether the foreign investors are causing some
problems to our system. The Committee, however, recommeds that all possible care and

precautions should be taken in this regard.
(i) Constitutional Validity of the Provisions

3.9. Eminent jurists and a few academicians have voiced their concern that privatisation of
higher education will be against the basic spirit of the Cunstitution as the State is under an
obligation to provide education to its masses. On this, the opinion of the Union Law
Ministry was sought by the Committee. The Law Secretary, who appeared before the
Committee, stated that the Bill is entirely in conformity with the provisions of the
Constitution.

3.9.1. The Supreme Court, in the Unnikrishnan case, observed: ‘The hard reality that
emerges is that private educational institutions are a necessity in the present-day context. It
is not possible to do without them, because the Governments are in no position to meet the
demand, particularly in the sector of medical and technical education, which call for
substantial outlays. While education is one of the most important functions of the Indian
State, it has no monopoly therein. Private educational institutions, including minority
educational institutions too, have role to play.”

3.9.2. Therefore, the question is not so much whether there could be education in the
private sector but whether the educational institutions follow all the safeguards laid down by
the Supreme Court. As long as the safeguards are incorported in the legislation, it would be
entirely in keeping with the provisions of the Constitutién. In the present Bill, the University
Grants Commission, which plays « crucial role in the educational sector of our country, has



कु

been given a key role, and the Government has been given a substantial say in the matter.
So, having regard to these two key factors, it appears that adequate safeguards have been
built into the Bill.

3.9.3. The Union Law Secretary was further asked by the Committee as to whether the
Supreme Court judgement, in the Unnikrishnan case, where the Supreme Court had laid
down the criteria of 50% ‘free-seats’ and 50% ‘paid-seats’, would be applicable in the
context of the Private Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill, 1995, and whether
such a provision is necessary to be made in the Bill.

3.9.4. The Law Secretary informed the Committee that the scheme laid down by the
Supreme Court in the Unnikrishnan case has not been followed in the present Bill nor would
it apply to a university of this nature. But the principles which necesitated the enunciation of
the scheme have been borne in mind, which is that the entire scheme was brought into
existence by the Supreme Court with a view to reducing abuse of power in the matter of
admissions as also in the matter of fee structure. Now, in both these matters, the Bill lays
down adequate safeguards. Apart from that, the Supreme Court has also clearly held that
“so far as unaided institutions are concerned, it is obvious that they cannot be compelled to
charge the same fee as is charged in Governmental institutions.” If they do so on their own,
it is perfectly welcome but they cannot be compelled to do so for the simple reason that they
have.to meet the cost of imparting education from their own resources, and the main source,
apart from donations and charities, if any, is only the fees collected from the students. It is
here that the concept of self-financing educational institutions and cost-based educational
institutions come in support of this observation. Therefore, the Bill follows the principles
laid down by the Supreme Court and is entirely within the framework of the Court's
judgement in the Unnikrishnan case, as also in keeping with the provisions of the

Constitution.
IV. Statement of Objects and Reasons

4. One of the important suggestions received by the Committee was that the Private
Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill, 1995 does not reflect the essential elements
of the National Policy on Education (NPE). The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
Bill talks of emerging areas of science and technology but not of values, moral and ethical,
cultural heritage, humanities and social sciences which are very much part of the Indian
ethos.

4.1. Another important suggestion received by the Committee was that the role of private
self-financing universities as trend setters in terms of maintenance of high standards of
academic excellence and introduction of innoyative methods of teaching and evaluation, and
their responsibility to provide for socially relevant and nationally significant, non-traditional
job-oriented and development-oriented courses, need to be highlighted and emphasised in
the Statement of Objects and Reasons.

4.2. The Committee, after having deliberated upon the Statement of Objects and Reasons
of the Bill, recommends that the areas as discussed in the preceeding paragraphs may be
included in the Statement of Objects and Reasons.

V. Clause-by-Clause analysis
(a) Short Title, Extent and Commencement

४ ities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill,
1995, gives the impression as if the Government is trying to pass on the control of education



10

to private hands which does not appear to be the intention. Many of the academicians, wij
appeared before the Committee as witnesses, were of the view that ‘Self-financin,
Universities Bill’ would perhaps be the most appropriate title of the Bill. Some of the
witnesses also suggested the title of the Bill as ‘Independent Universities.’ One of the
academicians suggested that instead of bringing a separate Bill for the purpose, we could add
one more clause to the University Grants Commission Act for the regulation and control of
the private universities and call them as ‘Independent Universities’ rather than ‘Self-
financing’ or ‘Private Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill’, thus obviating the
need for having a separate Bill altogether.

5.1.1 In addition to the above amendment, another suggestion received by the Committee
was with regard to slight modification in the title of the Bill i.e. in place of (‘Establishment
and Regulation’) it should be read as: (‘Establishment, Recognition and Regulation’) in
order to facilitate the recognition of certain already existing colleges and institutions of
higher learning, which are noted for their exceptional performance and track record and
their elevation to the status of universities. Apart from this, there are institutions of higher
learning such as the Prajapita Brahma Kumaris Ishwariya Vishwavidyalaya which are
imparting education is spiritual, moral and ethical values, for sufficiently long period. Even
though they may not be awarding Degrees/Diploma, they deserve to be recognised as
deemed universities or centres of excellence of national importance.

5.1.2. The Committee, after having detailed discussion on the subject, was of the view that
“The Self-financing Universities (Establishment, Recognition and Regulation) Bill, 1995”
would be the most appropriate title of the Bill.

(b) Definitions (Clause 2)

5.2. (i) In Clause 2, under the head ‘Definitions’, a suggestion was received by the
Committee to make provision for Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) also as many NRIs may like
to invest their money in ‘the establishment of private universities in the country.The
Committee agrees to the suggestion and recommends for suitable amendment in the proviso
below Clause 2 (iii) of the Bill.

(ii) Another suggestio. put forth before the Committee was for the inclusion (९ several
other bodies, like churches, religious orders etc., which do not fit into any of the categories
(viz. society or trust or company) mentioned in the Bill as they are running institutions of
higher education. In order to recognise these bodies as legal entities, it was proposed that a

, hew Section (iv) under Clause 2(d) may be added as under:

“any other bodies recognised by the Government for this purpose.”

The Committee, after deliberating on the point, recommends addition of this new
Clause.

(c) Proposal for Establishment of University (Clause 3)

5.3. In Clause 3 of the Bill, “‘an application containing a proposal for establishment of a
University shall be made to the Central Government by a sponsoring body in such manner
and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed by rules.” It is only after
approval of the proposal by the Central Government, in consultation with the University
Grants Commission, the detailed project report is required to be prepared by the sponsoring
body. Clause 4(2) of the Bill stipulates that “the Project report shall contain the following
details, namely:— (a) the objectives of the University alongwith the details of the sponsoring
body; (b) location of the University, extent and availability of land, and many other

ip af ak


11

important details in the following Sub-clauses. Some of the witnesses, who appeared before
the Committee, felt that these details should be made available to the Central Government
at the initial stage itself when the application is given by the sponspring body so that there is
no delay in carrying-out the initial checks by the Central Government and the University
Grants Commission. >

5.3.1. The Committee agrees to the suggestion and recommends that the important part of
the information should be provided by the sponsoring body in the first stage itself in order to
avoid delays. Suitable amendments in Clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill may be accordingly carried
out.

5.3.2. As regards Clause 3(3) of the Bill, there is a provision that “The Commission,
before furnishing its views to the Central Government, shall notify in the Official 'Gazette
and at least in one daily newspaper having circulation in the State in which the university is
proposed to be established the fact of receipt of the application seeking the views of the
general public on the proposal.” It has been suggested by a few witnesses that the
Commission (U.G.C.) should consult the National Assessment and Accrediation Council
(NAAC) on academic matters of the proposal, before furnishing its views to the Central
Government. The Cornmitiee feels that by stipulating such a condition on the U.G.C., we
would be unnecessarily interfering with the academic honesty, integrity and autonomy of the
Commission (U.G.C.). It would perhaps be sufficient if the Commission is allowed to
function independently and take its own course in the matter to its overaH satisfaction.
Further, by stipulating such a condition, we would be diluting the responsibility of the
Commission and undermining its role.

5.3.3. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Commission may be allowed to
function independently to its full satisfaction and there is no need for putting such a Clause
in the Bill.

(d) Fee Structure, Freeships and Scholarships [Clause 4(2)(j)]

5.4 Clause 4(2)(j) of the Bill talks of fee structure proposed with reference to the unit cost
and the costs of freeships and scholarships subject to the condition that the number of
scholarships and freeships be not less than 30% of the number of seats and different rates of
fee may be specified for non-resident Indians and fee paying foreign students. This is a very
vital Clause in the Bill which provides for scholarships and freeships. The Committee feels
that there must be some clarity in deciding which categories of students are eligible for
freeships and scholarships. Surely, privrity must be given to the poorest of the poor
irrespective of the community whether they are from the backward or forward classes.
Economic status should be the overriding priority. Eighty percent of the university students
in the country come from the upper 20% of economic strata. It is apparent that most college
students can contribute towards their college fees. It must be ensured that the poor students
receive the benefit of freeships and scholarships. The Clause does not specify that the
benefit of freeships and scholarships should go to the meritorious students from
disadvantaged sections of the society. There is ample scope for cornering of this facility of
freeships and scholarships by the well off sections of the society on the basis of their
academic merits who are otherwise in a better position to bear the cost of their education.

5.4.1. (i) The Committee, therefore, recommends that an economic criterion should be
laid down to avail of the benefit of freeships and scholarships by the economically poor
classes of the society.

(ii) Another suggestion received by the Committee was that the provision of 30% seats


12

for freeships and scholarships do not conform to the Supreme Court judgement given in the
Unnikrishnan case. The Supreme Court had decided that 50% of the seats shall be free for:
which charges shall be payable at the rate for similar courses in the Government-run.:
colleges. Other 50% shall be “payment seats” for which higher charges, for the same |
education in the same institution shall be payable. The basic logic of this classification is the ..
principle of egalitarianism, as enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution, which requires that :
a candidate who is stealing a march with his compatriot on account of his. economical power
“should be made to pay not only for himself but also for znother meritorious student. This is
the social justification criteria laid down by the Supreme Court making the 50% rule for
“free-seats”.

5.4.2. On a specific question by the Committee, it was clarified by the Law Secretary
that the criteria of 50% free-seats and 50% payment seats would not apply to the proposed
private universities as laid down by the Supreme Court in the Unnikrishnan case. In fact, the
principles which ‘necessitated the enunciation of the scheme have been borne in mind, which
is that the entire scheme was brought into existence by the Supreme Court for reducing
abuse of power in the matter of admissions as also in the matter of fee structure. Now, in
both these matters, the Bill lays down adequate safeguards.

5.4.3. Apart from that. the Supreme Court has aiso clearly held that “so far as unaided
institutions sre concerned, it is obvious that they cannot be compelled to charge the same
fee as is charged in governmental institutions.” If they do voluntarily, it is perfectly
welcome, but they cannot be compelled to do so fer the simple reason that they have to
meet the cost of imparting education from their cwn resources, and the main source, apart
from donations/charities, if any. is only the fees collected from the students. It is here that
the concepts of self-financing educational institutions and cost-based educational institutions
come in the support of this observatiorl. Thus, the Bill follows the principles laid down by
the Supreme Court. For these reasons, the Bill is within the framework of Unnikrishnan
case as also in keeping with the provisions of the Constitution. The structure will not apply
in relation to this in terms of the Supreme Court judgement. The only thing according 10:
Clause 4(2): The project report shall contain the following details, namely (a) the objectives
of the university alongwith the details of the sponsoring body; (b) location of the university,
extent and availability of land. and in Sub-clause (j) it mentions: “fee structure proposed
with reference to the unit cost and the costs of freeships and scholarships subject to the
condition that the number of scholarships and t.zeships to be not less than thirty per cent of
the number of seats and different rates of fee may be specified for non-resident Indians and
fee paying foreign students”. Therefore, this factor has been taken into account, and this will
also be looked into by the University Grants Commission from the All India point of view.

5.4.4. The Supreme Court. delivering its judgement on 4th February, 1993, ruled that
every Indian child, till the age of 14 years, has a fundamental right to primary education
which he can enforce through the courts. Further, every Indian citizen has a fundamental
right to higher education subject to the “limits of economic capacity and development” of
the Union and State Governments. Bott. these rights flow from fundamental right to life and
liberty enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution. The Supreme Court also held that
“Education” is a public duty which cannot be allowed to be made into commerce.
Therefore, even unaided private educational institutions seeking recognition or affiliation
must act fairly, justly and reasonably.

5.4.5. Many witnesses, who appeared before the Committee, were in favour of
increasing the percentage of freeship/scholarship seats. Members are also generally in


13

agreement with the suggestions given by various witnesses for increasing the percentage of
seats from the existing 30% as provided in the Bill The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the percentage of seats to be reserved for freeships/scholarships'may be increased from
30% to 50%.

5.4.6. Another important point relating to this Clause is about provision with regard to
reservation of seats in admissions and recruitments, etc. in the proposed universities. On a
specific question by the Chairman to the Secretary (Education) as to whether the National
Policy of providing reservation to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes would be followed in the proposed universities, it was replied that there is
no specific provision in this regard in the Bill.

5.4.7. The Committee feels that the Bill should have a provision for giving adequate
representation to the socially and educationally backward classes of society viz., SCs/STs,
etc. in the matters of admissions as per the Government of India policy applicable to Central
and State Universities. These reservations may be given within the 50% free seats
earmarked for freeships and scholarships as recommended above. The Committee also
recommends adopting the same criteria in the matters of employment/recruitment etc.

(e) Project Report [Clause 4(2) (f) and (g)]

5.5. Clause 4(2) (f) ofthe Bill provides that the Project Report shall, inter alia, contain
the details including ‘ten years perspective of campus development in terms of buildings,
equipments and infrastructural facilities’. Similarly, Clause 4(2)(g) provides for ‘phasing of
capital expenditure over a period of ten years and its source of finance’. The Committee

' feels that the time limit of ten years provided for campus development in terms of buildings,

equipments and infrastructural facilities, and phasing of capital expenditure for ten years, is:
an unduly long period, particularly in view of the fact that the university is required to get
accreditation within three years of its establishment, to be renewed at an interval of every
five years thereafter, as provided in Clause 11(3) of the Bill. The Committee, therefore’,
feels that the time limit of ten years in both the above Clauses viz. 4(2) (f) and (g), may be
reduced to two years so that the university becomes fully operational by the time it gets its

accreditation
(f) Submission of Project Report and Examination [Clauses 5 and 6 (3)]

5.6. The project report will be submitted by the sponsoring body through the concerned
State Government and the State Government shali furnish the same to the Central
Government with or without comments within a period of six months from the date of its
receipt from the sponsoring body. The Committee feels that the time limit of six months
given to the State Government is unduly long and it may cause delays and hamper the pace
of establishment of these universities. In case the proposals are not expeditiously processed
at every level, the sponsors may lose interest. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the time limit of six months given to the State Government for examination of the proposal
etc. may be reduced to three months and if no reply is received from the State Government
within the stipulated period, it may be assumed that the State Government has no objection.

5.6.1. Similarly, the University Grants Commission has been given the time limit of six
months for furnishing its recommendations on the project report to the Central Government,
as laid down in Clause 6(3) of the Bill. This Clause. also needs to be amended to reduce the
time limit for the University Grants Commission from six months to three months to
facilitate expeditious disposal of the proposals.


38587 73/54 SHE Fadi
NOC OF aPOE

ht 3:1060# 6b.
i 81832 lo fobiaviocs:
211 YO nosealip! sizing
ac: geibivor, jo yoiied
33 Liven ३उच्द 3 फल :8
di ni nolzivorg: १3552

SENOS OFT Tbe

AY OF 1 diittasesicor
8 3७ ले3116/7 Sry nv
oiiavinU. 31056 bre
#250 yt boiemis
gobs ebnomumnos

|

fs}

Pligieb 2४1
at Bas: agoinginpe
HSV: Sin TbASgRE 1555
९१ ॥७४ pent Sit 1871 ६?

Tabane

RESTS 25;

asiost १6 -Antatndas 4)

alt Os आर 3507 “hat insmaroveD
Jo. ota ath THO arg | ०3५3 है Odin no site 15
ailigonr xz lo dimit 3 :

etigases 10
eaGetOg: 511. total (1७२४ js
21798 <2 10 1077 smit 5003
91% 221810) hoduber od yan coin
bh Ht 90179 hsioiugive 54 iii

Xie Jo tits ‘sant ody
19ग्रा#370०31६ २७15)

गा eiutziroest % बताता
3 ht की 31879 ai nwob biel २5
ON यॉधाएका sub ot atinam deme noiainmgO “erniD Suieiovin ott to} list.

: ethéodorg att का + iditibegys Sty

ey Senne eed A



14

(g) Establishment of Permanent Endowment Fund (Clauses 7 and 8)

5.7. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Permanent Endowment Fund by
the sponsoring body. Clause 8 of the Bill lays down that the permanent endowment fund —
shall consist of a sum of Rs. 10 crores or a sum equivalent to the recurring expenses for
three years for the fully operational university, whichever is more. On these two important
issues, the Committee has received different viewpoints namely:

(a) The establishment of a permanent endowment with an investment of Rs. 10
crores would be possibly done either by an industrial house or an NRI, as such a
huge amount cannot be spared by the ordinary persons. If we permit one
individual industrialist or an NRI to pool this amount and establish a university,
such a person would probably operate the university with an eye on profit margins,
leading to commercialisation of education. Since the statement of objects of the
Bill clearly aims at preventing commercialisation of education by the proposed
universities, this objective could perhaps be achieved only if a genuine
philanthropist or a group of philanthropists, who are dedicated and committed to
the cause of education, join hands and pool their resources for the establishment
of such a university. Thus, there is a need for a system of checks and balances
within the endowment so that no industrial house or an individual can take undue
advantage of the educational system and gain full control. The underlying idea
being that the academic autonomy remains intact. Therefore, what is necessary is
that no one set of individual house is involved in the establishment and control of
the universities. Even many of the privately funded universities abroad like
Harvard University or the Princeton University are not controlled by an individual.
Therefore, what is needed is that the endowment money should be big enough to
provide sufficient autonomy to the universities and it should be such that no one
indlustrial house should be able to control it.

d before the Committee is that the endowment
fund of Rs. 10 crores. prescribed in the Bill, is on a very high side. Many
educational agencies or indu*trial and business houses may find it difficult to raise
this amount. Since many of the educational institutions already functioning in the
country may like. to be given the status of private university, such institutions may
be already having some permanent assets and would like to take advantage of the
possession of existing infrastructure available with them. They would like that for
the purpose of calculation of this amount of Rs. 10 crores, their existing assets may
be taken into account.

5.7.1. The members of the Committee, after deliberating on the point at length, were of
the considered opinion that the endowment fund of Rs. 10 crores should be exclusive of
capital and other related expenditures. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
following proviso be added after Sub-clause 2 of Clause 8:

(b) Another viewpoint express

‘Provided that this shall be over and above the requisite funds for capital
expenditure which will have to be brought by the promoters at the time when the
proposal is submitted’.
(h) Establishment and incorporation of Universities (Clauses 10 & 11)
5.8. Clause 11(2) of the Bill provides that a university established under Sub-section (1)
of Section 10 shall have no power to affiliate any college or other institution with it and shall
not have more than one campus.



आशिका॥196123:3910 07. eave
58016 ote: ६9१० १७ mney
- 10१8: daub: ०

apa! 78771 be
00 dapat (08
काल 60, 1६ 81 :/0«

9 5 ४1 Abnui
SHER 515१1) 1६ mono
७३.

(3) वर12५९-त॑ध8 soba"
Slade bas 1171७ 66117]

AGanone adit
४ 16 18693 1882 .
५ से 0४4९

3117 De
i 83798/2 79: od
५ 90491 dic. 009 1617
ee habbit sd cui ose

ert hsbivest*

vit fet Hit 30: HSL Sani _
3268 Merle. 1 1952-31
480 HE Hom 9४87 It



eee : ae

15

| 5.8.1. On the question of affiliation of colleges and institutions with the university, most

e of the witnesses who appeared before the Committee, opined that the proposed university
will not have any affiliated colleges or institutions since majority of them will be smaller in
size.and will have a limited area of their operation as they will confine their activities and
scope to some specific disciplines like science and technology, vocational studies etc. These
universities may not adopt multi-disciplinary approach at the initial stage. Some of the
members, however, did not agree with the idea of not having affiliation. According to them,
there cannot be a university without affiliation as technically a university is expected to have
a number of faculties to teach various disciplines. Since there will be single disciplinary
approach, these institutions may perhaps be more appropriately called as colleges or
institutes rather than full-fledged universities. A university means the conglomeration of
frontier areas of knowledge in one place. Since this will be an altogether new experiment in
the Indian context, the Committee feels that the sponsoring bodies will perhaps like to start
these universities with a single disciplinary approach and after a period of time, they may
perhaps like to expand with a few more disciplines depending upon the area of their
activities. There will, however, be no embargo on adopting multi-disciplinary approach by
the proposed universities.

5.8.2. Many of the witnesses. who appeared before the Committee, pleaded for a single
campus for these universities from the point of view of better management, control and
quality of education. However, there was another viewpoint expressed before the Committee
for having more than one campus keeping in view the future expansion and growth of the
university. In the olden days, the universities were established with fairly large campuses
having sufficient scope for expansion and growth. This may not happen in the case of new
universities for reasons of paucity of space. These universities may have to be perhaps
established in smaller plots of lands measuring about 20 to 30 acres which may not take care
of their future growth and expansion. The question which naturally aris¢és is whether the
activities of such universities should be confined within the same city or the same State for
reasons of efficiency and better management and control. It is also possible that a given
university may acquire additional land within the same city or in the adjoining city of the
same State to expand its activities. If we restrict its activities to a single place, then we are
indirectly putting an embargo on its future growth and expansion which doesn’t appear to be
the objective behind the establishment of private universities. These universi‘ies may even
like to establish their campuses abroad or in other parts of the country subject to the
approval of the Government. Already there are ‘Deemed Universities’ in India with multiple
campus in more than one State and many foreign universities are having off campuses

programmes in India.

5.8.3. The Committee, after having detailed: deliberations on the subject, recommends
that while the proposed universities will have no power to affiliate any college or institution
with it, they should be permitted to establish additional campuses after satisfying the
requirements of original campus. within the State or even outside the State with the

approval of the concerned State Government.

(i) Accreditation of Universities (Clause 11)

5.9. Clause 11(3) of the Bill provides for obtaining accreditation by the university from
a body nominated in this behalf by the University Grants Commisstion within three years of
its establishment. This accreditation will have to be further renewed at an interval of every
five years thereafter. In order to maintain the quality of education being imparted by the
proposed universities, it is necessary that these universities should have accreditation from


16

bodies like National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) which has been
established by the University Grants Commission. 3

5.9.1. The Committee, therefore, feels that the proposed universities should be
accredited and assessed regularly by some national institutions of great academic repute’ like
the National Assessment and Accreditation Council. These universities should also keep the
National Assessment and Accreditation Council informed of their activities right from the
beginning of the project so as to keep a watch over the standard and quality of education

given by them.
(j) Universities to be self financing (Clause 12)

5.10. Clause 12 of the Bill provides that a University shall not be entitled to receive
grant-in-aid or other financial assistance from the Central Government, any State
Government, the University Grants Commission or any other authority. Some of the
witnesses, who appeared before the Committee, were of the view that since the proposed
universities shall not be receiving any grant-in-aid from the Government, the State would be
abdicating its responsibility towards society in providing higher education. Consequently, the
entire operation and activities of these universities will go into the hands of private persons
who would exploit education on commercial lines. If the State is not going to pay for the
education then one who plays the piper will call the tune. This would'amount to retreat of
the State from one of the vital sectors of human resource development i.e. higher education.

5.10.1. The other view-point expressed before the Committee is that why should there
be any bar on these universities from receiving grants from State and Central Government
for purposes other than the development grants. These new universities should be free to
receive financial and other assistance from any source, including the Government, for
services rendered in the form of sponsored research and consultancy. However, they may
not be debarred from receiving donations and contribution from industry, business
philanthropists and alumni etc. Thus, if would be seen that Clause 12 of the Bill is too
restrictive in nature and precludes private universities from receiving research grants from
Government organisations such as the Indian Council for Medical Research, the Department
of Science & Technology, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, etc. whicl are
presently available to private colleges and Deemed Universities.

5.10.2. The Committee, after having detailed discussions on the matter, recommends
that while Central or State Governments will not provide any grant-in-aid or other financial
assistance for establishment or developmental purposes, there should be no embargo on the
private universities receiving grants from the Governmental agencies in return for the
research and consultancy services provided by them. This would be an independent and
mutually agreed contract between the two parties which has nothing to do with the grants-in-
aid of the Government. Further, there should be no bar on receiving donations and
contributions by these universities from industry, business philanthropists, alumni, NRIs, etc.

(k) Universities open to all Classes, Castes and Creeds (Clause 13)

5.11. Clause 13 of the Bill provides that every university shal be open to persons of
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class. Further, the university shall not adopt
or impose on any person any test, whatsoever, of religious belief or profession in order to
entitle him to be appointed as a teacher of the university or to hold any other office therein
or to be admitted as a student in the university or to graduate there at or to enjoy or
exercise any privilege thereof. The proviso of this Clause further lays down that nothing


17

shall prevent the university from making special provisions for the employment or admission
of women, physically handicapped or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the
society, and in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled ' Tribes.

5.11.1. Some of the eminent academicians, who appeared before the Committee, opined
that the Bill is devoid of social justice provisions of the National Policies of the Government
of India. There is a National Policy on affirmative action for admission and appointments for
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and for Other Backward Classes. The present
Bill is a departure from the National Policy as there is no affirmative provision in this regard
in the Bill. In other words, the private universities would give a setback to the ‘social justice
programmes’ of the Government of India which are Constitutionally mandatory. They may
not follow the National Policy on reservation. In the existing provisions of the Bill, the State
will have no check with regard to the implementation of these policies by the private
universities. The result will be that there would be two different policies followed by the
public sector and the private sector. Therefore, if the Bill is to be passed, this duty must be
made mandatory on the part of the private universities. In the absence of any affirmative
provision for following the national policy of reservation, the private sector may not 989
heed to the policy directives and opt to disregard the admission and recruitment policies
which will be the cause of social disparities in the society.

5.11.2. In view of the foregoing points, the Committee recommends that the Bill should
provide specific affirmative clause for following the National Policy of reservation for the
employment or admission of women, physically handicapped or persons belonging to the
weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled

Tribes.
(1) Officers of the University (Clause 14)

5.12. Clause 14 of the Bill mentions the officers of the university namely, (a) the
Chancellor; (b) the Vice-Chancellor; (०) the Registrar; (d) the Chief Finance and Accounts
Officer; and (e) such other officers as may be prescribed in the Statutes. In the existing
Government-run universities, the Chancellor is the Head of the University. Normally, the
President of India or the Prime Minister of Indie and Governors and Chief Ministers of the
respective States are traditionally appointed as tie Chancellors of the Central and State
Universities respectively. Therefore, the post of the Chancellor in the Government-run
universities is a highly accredited and prestigious one which cannot be equated with the
Chancellor of a private university who would most likely be one of the- persons from the
‘sponsoring organisations. He or she may be a person of the worth of millions or crores of
rupees or a big industrialist but he can not be equated with the office of the President or the
Prime Minister of India or the Governor or the Chief Minister of a State. Therefore, in
order to make a distinction between the two Chancellors of Central or State-run universities
and the-private universities, the nomenclature of a Chancellor of a private university will
have to be made different from the existing nomenclature. Even in many of the foreign
countries the Chancellors of these private universities are designated as the Chairperson or
President or Director of the university. Keeping in view the points discussed above, the
Committee feels that the Chancellor of a private university may be designated as ‘President’.
The Registrar of a private university may be called the ‘Secretary’. New nomenclatures of
these posts will make clear distinction between the officers of the Central and State-run

universities with those of the proposed private universities.

5.12.1. The Government was, however, of the view that we may retain the existing
nomenclature of the offices of the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, Registrar and others even in


18

the case of private universities for the purposes of convenience and easier understandi:

the functions of Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor are well known in the academic circle,;

Although there are several foreign models where universities have Presidents/Directors etc
the present concept of Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor have been retained in the Bil for th

sake of convenience and easier understanding. The Committee does not agree with this |

contention and upholds its view given in the previous: paragraph

(m) The Vice-Chancellor (Clause 16)

5.13. Clause 16 of the Bill provides for the appointment of Vice-Chancellor from a
panel of five names to be prepared by the Board of Governors. The proviso to this Clause
lays down that the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central Government from
a panel of five names proposed by the Chancellor. Further, it may be seen from Clause 21
of the Bill that the Board of Governors has five out of eight members nominated in one way
or the other by the sponsoring body. From the composition of the Board of Governors, the
Board of Management and the procedures specified for the appointment of the Chancellor in
the Bill, it is apparent that the conditions for appointment of a Vice-Chancellor as one of
the representatives of the sponsoring body, are quite conducive to make the university
virtually a private property of the sponsors for all practical purposes. In the existing
provisions of the Bill, there is ample scope for the appointment of Vice-Chancellor as one of
the ! sentatives of the sponsoring body which may not be in the overall interest of the
university and its efficient functioning from the academic and administrative angle. The
Vice-Chancellor should be an independent person, chosen on his merit as an academic and
administrative Head

5.13.1. In view of the apprehensions observed in the matter of appointment of Vice-

Chancellors, the Committee recommends that the Vice-Chancellor should be appointed from
a panel of five names prepared by a Search Committee consisting of:

(a) a nominee of the UGC,
(b) a nominee of the Ministry of Human Resource Development;
(c) a nominee of the Board of Governors.

S.13.2. The panel may be prepared strictly in the alphchetical order by the Search
Committee. The ChancellorPresident may appoint one of them as Vice-Chancellor of the
University.

(n) The Board of Governors (Clause 21)

5.14. The Board of Governors will be the supreme governing body of the university. The
Board of Governors wili comprise:

(a) the Chancellor;

(b) the Vice-Chancellor;

(c) three persons to be nominated by the sponsoring body;

(d) one representative of the Central Government;

(e) one representative of the State Government in which the university is situated;
(f) one academician to be nominated by the Commission.

5.14.1. Out of its total strength of 8 members, 5 are chosen by the sponsoring body (i.e.
the Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor and 3 representatives of the sponsoring body), there is
only one representative from the Central and the State Governments each and one nominee
from the University Grants Commission. There is no representation of the teachers of non-
teaching employees in the Board of Governors. It is quite possible that the university would

4

Re


19

be run totally by the majority dictates of the representatives of the sponsoring body. In
order to overcome this difficulty and ensure fair and just functioning of the Board of
Governors, it is necessary that the membership of the Board of Governors be raised to at
least 15 wherein the representation of the sponsoring body need not be more than one third
of the total number including the ChancelloyPresident and the Vice-Chancellor.

5.14.2. This may be done by having 2 representatives from the Central Government
instead of one; 2 representatives of the State Government instead of one; 3 academicians,
instead of one, out of which one would be elected from the university faculty and the
remaining two would be nominated by the University Grants Commission of which one
would be nominee of the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC); 5
instead of 3 persons to be nominated by the sponsoring body including the Chancellor/
President and the Vice-Chancellor; one representative from the teaching staff of the
university; one representative from students community and one representative from the

non-teaching staff.
(0) The Board of Management (Clause 22)

5.15. Clause 22 of the Bill provides for the Board of Management of the University
which will comprise of:

(a) the Vice-Chancellor;
(b) one representative to be nominated by the University Grants Commission;

(c) two representatives to be nominated by the sponsoring body;

(d) the senior-most professor of the University.

The Vice-Chancellor shall be the Chairman of the Board of Management and the powers
and functions of the Board of Management shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

5.15.1. One point of view which was placed before the Committee by some of the
academicians was that the composition, roles and the functions of the Board of Governors
and the Board of Management would be overlapping and thus, redundant. There is no need
for having both the Board of Governors and the Board of Management ana the two could
be merged together into a single body. The Board of Governors can constitute an Executive
Committee for the day to day administration of the university. Hence the clause relating to
the Board of Management could be deleted from the Bill. The Committee feels that the
Board of Governors will be the supreme governing body which will meet at least twice in a
calendar year and it may not practically devote time for the day to day affairs of the
university. The majority of the witnesses also felt that even in the existing universities, there
are two separate bodies viz. the Syndicate and the Senate, functioning with totally different
jurisdictions and there is no scope for overlapping of the activities if they are properly
defined. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the two-tier system proposed in the
Bill may be retained.

5.15.2. Again, as in the case of the Board of Governors, it has been seen that even in
the Board of Management also the representatives of the sponsoring body are in majority.
The academic circle has, again, been under-represented even in the Board of Management.
There is no representation of the elected member of the teaching staff, the student
community and the non-teaching employees. Since the Board of Management of the
university is a real administering body and much depends on the initiative and the. vision of
the members of the Board, it should necessarily have adequate number of academic and
educational administrators drawn from outside the sponsoring body. It is, theiefore,


recommended that the strength of the Board of Management should be raised from 5 10 8 1
as to include (a) the Vice-Chancellor; (b) two representatives to be nominated by the
University Grants Commission instead of one; (c) two representatives to be nominated 0५ *
the sponsoring body; (d) two academicians out of which one would be the Senior-most |
professor of the university and the second to be elected from the other categories of the
teaching staff and (e) an elected representative of the non-teaching staff. This would take
care of adequate representation from the academicians and also ensure ‘democratic
functioning of the Board of Management.

(p) The Academic Council (Clause 23)

5.16. The Academic Council shall consist of the Vice-Chancellor and such other
members as may be prescribed by the Statutes. One of the representatives of the students
community, who appeared before the Committee, suggested that there is no representation
of the students either in the Board of Governors or the Board of Management or the
Academic Council. He, therefore, suggested that at least two students representatives (out
of which one will be elected by the students through the procedure prescribed in the
Statutes) should be included in the Academic Council. !

5.16.1. The Committee feels that even in the existing universities, there is no
representation either from the students or the teachers in the Academic Council and as such,
there is no need for having such a representation in the private universities as well.
However, in order to voice the concern of the students community, the Committee has
already made a recommendation for having a representation of the students in the Board of
Governors which is the supreme governing body of the university to decide on the broad
policy matters of the university.

Some of the eminent academicians, who appeared before the Committee, however, felt
that there is no provision in the Bill.for a body to plan and execute the research activities in
the university. A, university is supposed to engage. itself not only in the dissemination of
knowledge but in the creation of knowledge, i.e. the research aspect must be sufficiently
emphasised in the university. The authorities mentioned in the Bill namely, the Board of
Governors, the Board of Managemer* and the Academic. Council have altogether different
functions. There should be a separate body, called Planning and Development Council, to
look after research aspects of the university. The existing authorities, such. as the Board ‘of
Governors, which is the overall governing body, the Board of Management, which is the
executive body, and the Academic Council, which would be coordinating the academic
policies and exercising general supervision over it, will not look after the research aspects of
the university, and, therefore, there is a need for a separate body in the name and style of
Planning and Development Council.

5.16.2. The Committee fully agrees with the suggestion and recommends that a
provision for the Planning and Development Council may be made in the Bill to look after
the research activities of the university.

(q) Powers of the Commission to Inspect the Universities (Clause 25)

5.17. Clause 25 of the Bill stipulates that the University Grants Commission shall have
powers to inspect the university at any time after giving prior notice of such inspection to the
university and the finding of the Commission shall be binding on the university. A few of the
witnesses, who appeared before the Committee, however, opined that there is no need for
having a separate clause other than the one given in the University Grants Commission Act
for carrying out the inspection of the existing universities by the Commission. The powers


neem

21

and functions of the Commission to carry out inspection of the universities have been laid in
Section 13 of the U.G.C. Act. Section 13 of the U.G.C. Act reads as under:

(1) For the purpose of ascertaining the financial needs of a university or its standards of
teaching, examination and research, the Commission may, after consultation with. the
university, cause an inspection of any department or departments thereof to be made in
such manner as may be prescribed and by such person or persons as it may direct.

(2) The Commission shall communicate to the university the date on which any
inspection under sub-section (1) is to be made and the university shall be entitled to be
associated with the inspection in such manner as may be prescribed.

(3) The Commission shall communicate to the university its views in regard to the results
of any such inspection and may, after ascertaining the opinion of the university,
recommend to the university the action to be taken as a result of such inspection.

(4) All communications to a university under this section shall be made to the executive
authority thereof and the executive authority of the university shall report to the
Commission the action, if any, which is proposed to be taken for the purpose of
implementing any such recommendation as is referred to in Sub-section (3).

5.17.1. Since the provisions contained in Section-13 of the University Grants Commission
Act are quite exhaustive, it was suggested that the same provisions could be adopted in the
present Bill and, thus, there is no need to treat the private universities on a different footing as
the objectives in both the cases are by and large the same.

+ 5.17.2. The Committee agrees with this view-point and, therefore, recommends that
Clause 25’ of the existing Bill may be wholly substituted by Section 13 of the University Grants

Commission Act.
() The First Statute, the Subsequent Statute and the Ordinance (Clauses 26, 27 and 28)

5.18. The first Statute of a University, inter alia, prescribes the procedure tegarding
transaction of business of the authorities constituted under this Act, terms and conditions of
appointment, the resolution of disputes, etc. The first Statute of the university shall be prepared
by its Board of Management and submitted to the University Grants Commission through its
Board of Governors for approval. A perusal of ti.> Statutes, however, reveals that many
important aspects relating to academic and other matters of the university have been left out.
For example, there is no mention of arrangements for the examination and the examiners.
There is no mention about the maintenance of discipline and the disciplinary authorities and
their powers, which is the crying need of the hour in the present day situation. In the existing
universities, the Vice-Chancellors feel very much handicapped for want of adequate disciplinary
powers to maintain discipline in the universities. In the case of
private universities this will become even more difficult unless the Vice-Chancellors are armed
with sufficient authority and disciplinary powers. There is no mention of provident fund,
pension, convocation, etc. Similarly, there is no mention about the accountability of teaching
and non-teaching staff. This is very essential for, in the past, salary and service conditions of
teaching and non-teaching staff have-been considerably improved but, unfortunately, the
accountability of teaching and non-teaching staff has not been enforced. Teaching is
fundamentally a moral enterprise and as such, much is expected of teachers. So this must be
reflected in the Statutes. Similarly, the composition of the Academic Council has also not been
specified in the first Statute. Also there is no mention of the procedure for the amendment of
the first Statute—all these need inclusion in the Statutes.

5.18.1. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the first Statute and the subsequent


Statutes and the Ordinances are very important and crucial for the smooth and efficien
functioning of the university and these have to be very exhaustively and clearly specified and
defined at the appropriate places so that there is no gap or vacuum left anywhere which may
post problems for the management and running the affairs of the university

5.18.2. The Committee does not find any provision in the Bill providing for pay-scale of

the teachers who may be appointed in these universities. Many members took note of the
fact that in many of the existing reputed private institutions the teachers are very low paid
and some witnesses also agreed with this view.

5.18.3. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Bill should also provide that
the pay scales of the teachers of these universities shall not be less than the U.G.C. pay
scales for Central and State universities.

(s) The Annual Report (Clause 30)

5.19. Clause 30 lays down that the annual report of a university shall be prepared by
the Board of Governors and a copy shall be submitted to the University Grants Commission,
The Committee feels that the annual reports of the universities are generally prepared in a
very casual manner. There is no definite format prescribed for the annual reports and each
university is following a different pattern. The Committee feels that the format of the annual
report of the university should be prescribed through a Statute. The annual report,
inter alia, should describe the mode and pace of academic growth, the direction in which the
university is growing and a detailed assessment of the progress and the state of health of the
university. This is particularly necessary for the private universities as, long before the
university reaches the stage of dissolution or winding up, the concerned authorities should go
into the details of the working, progress and the state of affairs of the university so that they
are not suddenly taken aback on the call of dissolution or winding up by the sponsors.

(t) The Annual Accounts (Clause 31)

5.20. The annual accounts and the balance sheet of a university shall be prepared under
the directions of its Board of Management every year and be audited by an auditor duly
appointed b:" the university. Since these private institutions will be cu'lecting huge money
from the public in the form of fees, contributions, receipts, etc. the Committee feels that
their accounts should be properly audited either by the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India, as in the case of Central Universities, or by some auditors approved by the
Government.

(u) Management of the university on dissolution and winding up (Clauses 35 & 36)

5.21. Clause 35 of the Bill provides that if the sponsoring body proposes its dissolution
it shall give notice of at least six months to the Central Government for dissolution of the
university. The Central Government, in consultation with the U.G.C., shall make
arrangements for the administration of the university from the date of dissolution of
sponsoring body until the last batch of the students in regular courses of the university
complete their courses. The expenditure for the administration of the university during the
taken over period of the management of the university by the Government, shall be met out
of the permanent endowment funds. Further, the Central Government has the powers under
Clause 36 to order winding up of the university if it fails to carry out the directions given to
it by the Government. The Government has also the powers for suspension of the Board of
Management and for administration and affairs of the university during investigation period.

5.21.1. A lot of apprehension has been raised about these clauses by the students,

4

i


23

teachers and academicians who appeared before the Committee, the first and the foremost
being that the sponsors of the university, under the existing provisions of the Bill, may, at
any time, decide to wind up the university by giving a simple notice of six months to the
Central Government. Thus, the sponsors may choose to play with the future of the students,
teachers and the employees working in the university if the university is not found profitable
or it doesn’t fulfil their needs and suit their interests. There is no clause in the Bill to
prevent or check this action on the part of the sponsor. The only safeguard available in the
Bill is that the Central Government will ensure that the university is administered until the
last batch of the students in regular courses complete their courses. Thus, there is no power
with the Government or with the University Grants Commission to prevent winding up of a
university.

5.21.2. The Committee appreciates the apprehension raised before it and recommends
that in such an eventuality, the Government should step in and make alternative
arrangements for running the affairs of the university, instead of allowing it to wind up. The
also notes that, after a few years, considerable infrastructural facilities, in terms
d equipments etc., would have been created and the university would have
व huge funds through tuition fees, donations and other means. But, the Bill
ide for the manner in which the property is to be handled in case the university
up. It may not be appropriate to say that it will revert back to the sponsoring
iis aspect has not been touched upon in the existing provisions of the Bill

The Committee reiterates that it may neither be desirable nor easy to close an
educational institution as it is not only the money, but the future of the students also rests
with these educational institutions. The winding up of university should be the rarest of the
rare and the most-extremeé step when all possible efforts for sustaining the university have
totally failed and there is no hope for its survival at any cost. Even in such a situation, the
Commitize feels that the land, assets and other properties of the university, raised through
fees, donations etc. including the permanent endowment fund, should be taken over by the
Government and not handed over to the sponsoring body.

(v) Powers of Central Government (Clause 37)
‘

5.22. The Central Government shall have the powers, namely, to approve the
appointment of a ‘ChancellorPresident, issue directions to the university, to do aything
required under the Bill, to adjudicate disputes and to order winding up of the university in
accordance with Clause-36, etc. The Central Government also has the power to issue such
orders as may be required to be followed under the present Bill or any other law for the
time being in force. Thus, the Central Government has very vast and extensive powers
under this Clause to issue directions and get anything done by the private universities. Some
of the eminent academicians, who appeared before the Committee, however, felt that these
powers will come in conflict with the autonomy of the universities and once this kind of
provision finds place in the Parliamentary legislation, the same could be replicated tomorrow
for Central and State universities and this would not be a very healthy sign for the autonomy
and growth of the university. Even in Clause-37(d), read with Clause-36, regarding winding
up of the university, the violation of any direction of the Central Government would also be
one of the grounds for winding up of a university. Therefore, the powers of the Central
Government to issue directions to private universities is not merely the directions to follow
the Act but also the subordinate legislation. Such overwhelming powers with the Central
Government, the Committee feels, need to be looked into afresh, particularly in view of the
independent functioning and autonomy of the university.


(w) Wider debate needed q

5.23. Some witnesses, who appeared before the Committee, were of the view that the |
present Bill has been brought forward by the Government in a very hasty manner. This is an _ 2
important piece of legislation which aims at bringing about a fundamental change in the field —
of management of higher education and hence it calls for a wider debate, both at the
regional as well as national levels. The Government has not made any serious efforts at
eliciting the opinions of the academicians, the student community, teachers, etc. in this
regard. Many of the students’ and teachers’ associations have called for a more wider
national debate on the subject so that the interests of all the segments of the society are
taken care of before the Bill is enacted by the Parliament.

5.23.1. “The Committee, therefore, feels that in view of the availability of time before
the next elections, the suggested process of consultation may be gone through by the
Ministry of Human Resource Development while, at the same time, considering the
suggestions made by the Committee in the earlier paragraphs. The Committee commends
the adoption of the Bill with the necessary changes”.


{
|
॥

SS SS ee

MINUTES OF DISSENT

The undersigned are basically in disagreement with the final recommendation of the
report that the Bill may be adopted with ‘the necessary changes’. If the Committee agrees
that the change in policy, signified by the Bill requires wider consultations—even a national
debate—how can the Committee propose the adoption of the Bill when such consultations
are yet to be held and elections are to be declared in a matter of days?

None denies the need for non-Government investment in education, paticularly higher
education; at the same time everyone is agreed that education must be protected from
commercialisation. The-safeguards in the Bill against this are totally inadequate. Moreover,
in the report, there is no indication why non-Government investment in higher education has
to take the form of setting up universities, without means being explored for increasing
private investment in the existing universities in the form of endowments, donations, chairs,
etc. Nor has it been pointed out that except for Annamalai University, which is a special
case, all other universities, initially set up with non-Government funding, had to be
eventually taken over either by the Central or the State Government.

The argument that private individuals or institutions, while investing in education, may
like to-have a greater say in the management is not acceptable because education is not an
area where a promoter or financier with money power should have the greatest say. Even
‘deemed universities’ have to demonstrate academic excellence over a number of years as
institutes of higher studies before they can achieve ‘deemed university’ status. The report
fails even to make any such stipulation in the case of new universities.

The provision of ‘winding up’ the universities is a dangerous one. The promoters may
raise money from the public, give degrees for a few years and then plead inability to run the
university so that the Government would be obliged to wind it up. Apart from students,
scholars engaged in reasearch projects, teachers and non-teaching staff would then be left on
the lurch. The Government may be able to impound the permanent endowment fund, but
this would not be enough to run the university.

Finally, there cannot be any compromise on the position that admission should be on
the basis of merit alone. The S.C. verdict on Unnikrishnan case is about private colleges and
institutes already established in spite of Government policy to the contrary and the verdict
only seeks to curb the evil effects of a fait accompli. But when Government is itself
proposing to sanction new private universities, they cannot start from the same assumption.
Admission on merit, followed by a graded fee structure based on the income of respective
guardians and a calculation of unit cost for the institution, is the only way out. Otherwise,
there is violation of Clauses 38(1) and 46 of the Constitution. Hence, we beg to submit this

note of dissent.

Sd/
(Smt. Malini Bhattacharya)

Sd/
(Shri Md. Salim)

Sd/
(Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy)


ae bied 38 of 4c
orto. खत

nei

nud (Bavk ०08,

wats iret ता

Abe
(९1:90 नौ 8 -iaitstA

be See
{anited ४ ele}

: He

Gultegin?, 3:52 ‘malt de)



|
|

ANNEXURES



ANNEXURE-I
Press Release
The Private Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill, 1995

The Private Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill, 1995, as introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on 25th August, 1995, has been referred to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development, headed by Shri P. Upendra, M.P., for
examination and report.

Education has hitherto been primarily the concern of the Central as well as State
Governments. Of late, considerable interest has been generated in the establishment of self-
financing universities not requiring any financial support from the Government. Such
universities can play a subsidiary but supportive role to the endeavours of the State run
universities in the tertiary education sector. In emerging areas of science and technology,
especially, these universities may provide useful! instructional inputs by making available
additional finances.

Establishment of universities rev sires either a specific or enabling legislation. As the
establishment of such universities would require 3 broadly uniform set of guidelines for
ensuring academic standards, prevention of commercialization and mismanagement, etc.,
enactment of an enabling legislation of genera! applicability is considered expedient. It has,
therefore, been decided to provide for establishment of self-financing private universities in
the country and to regulate their functioning by enacting an enabling law on the subject.

Since the proposed “THE PRIVATE UNIVERSITIES (ESTABLISHMENT AND
REGULATION) BILL. 19957 is of very vitai public importance, the Committee invites
views / suggestions from the individuals / organisations /institutions etc. on the subject.
Those interested, may send their views /suggestions to Shri S.C. Jarodia, Director, Rajya
Sabha Secretariat, Room No. 525. Sth floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 110001
latest by 30th September. 1995. The copy of the Bill can be obtained on requisition.

29


दशा herd ceca ch has inaindatdmned) ?
anita’ “sit 07 Har e001 gd
G कोट 46 -babsed anseigoisaeeG ord

rbirsqs

1goneo sty winurmnig, A
sini slider
ig anit

28 18४7») आए
#त625 Sell i Dot it?
ve) odf most fondue Teast

७ nugyepbia आग शे आफ 971

४1193

>पक्ाहं+1520७ 31795 ४ ३8119 ४७१४

anclinngihao®

13115 088|
garnet sg toast he 3१५ VA :
ynisans nie ginoan “7 quinonenad tyes



ANNEXURE-II

MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

aN
FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Monday, the 11th September, 1995 in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT

1, Shri P. Upendra — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli

4, Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

6. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

7, Shri Aslam Sher Khan

8. Shri Inder Jit

9. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

12. Shri Anna Joshi

13. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

14, Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

15. Shri Suraj Mandal

WITNESSES

1. Shri S.V. Giri, Secretary (Education)
2. Shri Y.N. Chaturvedi, Additional Secretary
3. Prof. (Ms.) Armaity S. Desai. Chairman, U.G.C.
4. Shri Inderjit Khanna, Secretary. U.G.C.
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia. Director

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary

*Minutes of I to XIV mectings of the Committce relate to matters not included in the Report.

30


Bil ‘

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2, *** ee ee one

3. The Chairman, then informed the members that the Private Universities (Establishment
and Regulation) Bill, 1995 has been referred to the Committee. It was decided that a Press
Note inviting suggestions from the public on the Bill may be issued.

4. *** +e +e oe
5, *** कक ee +e
6. #* ae see pred
7, tee fe tee +e
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.

***Relates to other matters.


“XXV
TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. and 2.30 p.m. on Monday, the 29th January, 1996 in

Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS

1

Shri P. Upendra — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

०9० :3 ०४ (५ + (०1

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
. Shri ५. Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. I. G. Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

10.
15
a2?

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

LOK SABHA

je
14.

Naty

16.

hs
18.
19.
20.
21
a
23:
24.
24

Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
Shri Inder Jit

Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

Shri Anna Joshi

Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
Shri Suraj Mandal

WITNESSES

A.

fone

B.

Dr.

Representatives of Prajapita Brahma Kumari Iswariya Viswavidyalaya

. Shri B.K. Brij Mohan
. Shri Jagdish Chander
. Ms. B.K. Sudha

. Ms. B.K. Chakradhary

Representative of Maithili University, Dharbhanga

Dinraj Shandilaya

*Minutes of XVI to XXIV mectings relate to matter not included in this Report.

32


2. Prof. V.C. Kulandaisamy
3. Prof. Upendra Baxi

C. Representatives of State Governments

1. Shri Lakhanpal, Secretary. (Education), Govt. of Maharshtra
2. Shri Rai Singh, Secretary. (Education), Govt. of Uttar Pradesh
3. Shri S. Raghunathan, Secretary, Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

2. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary

3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the witnesses on the Private Universities
(Establishment and Regulation) Bill, 1995.

2.1. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

3, tee ne +e +e

4. The Committee thereafter decided to meet on 13th and 14th February, 1996 to
further consider the Private Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill, “1995.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

*** Relates to other matters.


XXVII
TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 2.30 p.m. on Monday, the 13th February, 1996 in Committee
Room ‘E’ Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
. Shri Md. Salim

LOK SABHA

7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

8. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

9. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
10. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
11. Shri Inder Jit

12. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

13. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

15. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
16. Dr. G.L. Kanauajia

17. Shri Anna Joshi

18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
19. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

WITNESSES

Prof. D.K. Sinha, Vice-Chancellor, Viswa Bharati

. Dr. Karan Singh, Former Minister

. Shri Mrinal Pant, Spokesman, NSUI

. Shri K.K. Theckedath, President, All India Federation of University and College

Teachers Organisations.

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia. Director
2. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

DAnRwW

Pwnrye

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above witnesses on the Private
Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill, 1995.

2.1. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 p.m. to meet again at 10.30 a.m. on 14th
February, 1996.

36


sree हैं DOR east tidak et ait yee:

व:

जार 4

814 ५ nevi

overeat:

gist wo कमा: 3

: AHAA? ATLAR
shu

का 3

Tne Ad 7:

qv
8४ द THe

age
8९४४०: ts

tL ist

७00३ ne

emate ewel¥ aoiissanil soil

- orale, gare

: हे wen © maeyaoge

3 16 nahersbot nit A है? ०.2 अं “Bb SAS

हाइछ1 हयात

zoned
: parse
anid Ssniamal ain 0३ 8]
४

cabive fue. gs ४

iy xo 252३ svods #03 19 52४२६ wu
2eet tet [#908 093: on

#पृ५आ 2४४ soitsbive sat? te boost miedo’ ६

fon ast) 300५7 5

0६.01 16, 888 73220 oY ७-१ 9७9 380५



XXIX
TWENTY-NINTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 26th Februaty, 1996 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr.-M. Aram

3. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
4. Shri Md. Salim

5. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
6. Prof. I. G. Sanadi

7. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

8. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Vasant Pawar

10. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

11. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
12. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

13. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

14. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
5. Shri Anna Joshi

6. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

17. Shri Ramachandra Dome

18. Shri Braja Kishore. Tripathy
19. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
20. Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia. Director

. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary

. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu. Committee Officer

2. The Committee further considered the Private Universities (Establishment and

Zs

Regulation) Bill, 1995 and gave detailed guidelines to the Secretariat to draft the Report.

wn

3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to meet again on 7th March, 1996.

ay


: i ee ARS ES
OMiTsa Breve raAT

“yaitumanec) di करेश्श व्यंजन ape ait wekbapMl 20 23 QOL
: die Wea exon A” oouaHt Inomnitadl a

छाए

10% 190

insbemeds Bere

(7४33:

न्‍्‌ 30139 ऋंत

1 deh तंज no आध्यद toon oF ३५७६४ 4६ ध्रपंके65

हक
3 ile
|



XXXII
THIRTY-SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 19th March, 1996 in Committee Room
‘B’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Miss Saroj Khaparde

4. Shri O.P. Kohli

5. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
6. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

7. Prof I.G. Sanadi-

है. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

9. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
10. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

11. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
12. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

13. Shri Anna Joshi

14. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

15. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

16. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
17. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
18. Shri Suraj Mandal

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
2. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Forty-first report on the Private
Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill, 1995 with minor changes.

3. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya reserved her right for minutes of dissent and the Chairman
directed that the minutes of dissent be appended to the report.

4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to present the report to the Hon'ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha as per direction given by Hon’ble Chairman.

5, *** see ae pee
6. +++ see fees “ak
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m.

*** Relates to other matters.

41


ANNEXURE-III
List of Witnesses who appeared before the Committee in connection with the Private
Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill, 1995

A. Representatives of Prajapita Brahmakumari Iswariya Viswa Vidyalaya
1. Shri B. K Brij Mohan
2. Shri B. K. Jagdish Chander
3. Ms. B. K. Chakradhary
4. Ms. B. K. Sudha
B. Representative of Maithili University, Darbhanga

Dr. Dinraj Shandilaya
C. Representative of Centre for total Integration of Engineering Contracts, construction
Technologiés and Services for Development

Shri S. K. Agarwal
D. Representative of Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana
Col. 1. $. Kanwar, Chief Administrator
E. Representatives of the Indian Association for Christian Higher Education
1. Dr. Mani Jacob, General Secretary
2. Dr. M.V. Pylee, Ex. Vice-Chancellor, Cochin University
3. Prof. G. M. Ram, St. John’s College, Agra
F. Representative of' Manipal Academy of Higher Eductation
Dr. G. G. Christo, Director
G. Representatives of Students Associations
1. Shri Bratin Sengupta, General-Secretary, Students Federation of India
2. Shri V. Muralidharan, General Secretary, ABVP
3. Dr. Rajendra Parihar, General Secretray, Chhatra Janata Dal
4. Shri Anil Mathew, All India Students Federation
5. Shri Mrinal Pant, Spokesman, NSUI
H. Representatives of Teachers Associations and Association of Indian Universities
1. Dr. ५. Sharma, President, Delhi University Teachers Association
. Dr. A. K. Pasha, President, Jawaharlal Nehru University Teachers Association

2.

3. Dr. A. Gnanam, President, Association of Indian Universities

4. Prof. K. B. Power, Secretary-General, Assocation of Indian Universities
5

Prof. Saeedur Rehman Siddiqui, President, Federation of Central University
Teachers’ Association
6. Shri K. K. Theckedath, President, All India Federation of University and College

42 j


43

Teachers Organisations.

I. Vice-Chancellors
1. Prof. Mehmood-ur-Rehman, Vice-Chancellor Aligarh Muslim University
2. Dr. Muthukumaraswamy, Vice-Chancellor, Annamalai University
3. Prof. ५. R. Mehta, Vice-Chancellor, Delhi University
4. Prof. R. 0. Takewale, Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU
5. Prof. Yogendra K. Alag, Vice-Chancellor Jawaharlal Nehru University
6. Prof. D. K. Sinha, Vice-Chancellor Viswa Bharati

7. Dr. H. P. Gautam. Vice-Chancellor, Banaras Hindu University

J. Academicians
1. Dr. Amrik Singh
2. Prof. V. C. Kulandaisamy
3. Prof. Upendra Baxi
4. Dr. Karan Singh
K. Representatives of State Governments
1. Shri Lakhanpal, Secretary, Education, Government of Maharashtra
2. Shri Rai Singh, Secretary, Education, Government of Uttar Pradesh

3. Shri S. Raghunathan, Secretary, Education, Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi

L. Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Department of Legal
Affairs)
1. Dr. P. C. Rao, Law Secretary
2. R. L. Meena, Additional Secretary
3. D. P. Sharma, JS & LA
M. Representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of
Education)
Shri ‘P. R. Dasgupta, Secretary
Dr. R. V. V. Ayyar, Additional Secretary

Ne

. Shri Abhimanyu Singh, Joint Secretary

Pw

Shri Naved Masood, Director
5. Shri D.K. Paliwal, A.E.A.

N. Representatives of the University Grants Commission
1. Prof. (Miss) A.S. Desai, Chairperson
2. Prof. N. C. Mathur, Vice-Chairman


3. Dr. S. P. Gupta, Secretary
4. Dr. R. P. Gangurde, Additional Secretary
5. Dr. (Mrs.) Pankaj Mittal, Dy. Secretary


Table 6: Plan Expenditure on Different Sectors of Education (Percentage) (Rs. in lakhs)

ANNEXURE-IV

Sector Ist 2nd 3rd Plan 4th Sth 6th Tth 1990-92 8th
Plan Plan Plan Holiday Plan Plan Plan Plan Exptd. Plan

Exptd. Exptd. Exptd. Exptd. Exptd. Exptd. Exptd.  Exptd. Outlay

1951-56 1956-61 1961-66 1966-69 1969-74 1974-79 1980-85 1985-90 1992-97

Elementary Education 56 35 34 24 30 35 33 37 37 47
(850) (950) (2010) (750) (239). (370) (8360) (28490) (17290) (920)

Secondary Education 13 19 18 16 18 17 21 24 22 18
(200) (519) 0030) (530) (01400) (1560) (5300) (18320) (10590). (3498)

Adult Education - - =— — — = 09 06 09 -09
(2240) (4700) (460). (18७७)

Higher Education 09 18 15 24 25 22 22 16 12 08
(140) (480) (870) (770) (1950) (2050) (559) (12010) (5880) (1516)

Others 09 10 12 11 14 14 04 03 02 04
(140) (300) (730) (370) (1060 (00). (2730) (10890) (823). (2786)

Technical Education 13 18 21 25 13 12 11 14 17 14
(200) (490) (1250) (810) (1060) (1070). (2730) + (10830). (8230). (2786)

Total (100) 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100
(1530) (2730) (5890). (3230) (7860) (920) (25300) (76330) (47270) (1960)

45


qoimeubl vt

5४०23 igs
36 dima

ROEM