102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED  SECOND  REPORT
 
ON
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2001-2002 (DEMAND NO. 39) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF INDIAN SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE & HOMOEOPATHY
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  24TH  APRIL, 2001)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON  24TH APRIL, 2001)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2001/VAISAKHA, 1923 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
 
1.         COMPOSITION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE                                  
 
2.         PREFACE
                                                                                                         
 
3.         REPORT
                    
                                                                                                  
4.         OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  AT  A  GLANCE
                                                 
 
5.         MINUTES
                                                                                                                                                                  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2001-2002)
 
1.         Shri S.B. Chavan                      ¾¾                Chairman
 
MEMBERS
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Maurice Kujur
Shri Akhilesh Das
Shri Eduardo Faleiro
Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”
Shri Dina Nath Mistra

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
Prof. R. B. S. Varma
Shri Bratin Sengupta
Shrimati Kamala Sinha
Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav “Ravi”
Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
Shri Mrinal Sen
Dr. C. Narayana  Reddy
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shrimati Jaskaur Meena
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
Shri Ramakant Angle
Shri Kirti Jha Azad
Shri Baliram Kashyap
Shri Ramanand Singh
Shri Dileep Sanghani
Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
Shri G. S. Baswaraj
Shri V. M. Sudheeran
Shrimati Shyama Singh
Shri Sunil Dutt
Shri Ramesh Chennithala
Shri Kantilal Bhuriya
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Samik Lahiri
Dr. D.V.G. Shankar Rao
Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
Shrimati Renu Kumari
Shri Shivaji Mane
Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Dr. Baliram
Dr.  A.D.K. Jayaseelan
Dr. V. Saroja
Shri Trilochan Kanungo
Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
Shri Vanlal Zawma
Shrimati Kumudini Patnaik
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao
Dr. S. Venugopal
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer
Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer
PREFACE
 
            I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Hundred - Second Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand No.39) of the Department of Indian

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy,  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2001-2002.
2.         The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard the Secretary and other
Officials of that Department  on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 24th   March, 2001.
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 11th  April, 2001.
 
NEW DELHI;
April  11, 2001
Chaitra  21, 1923 (Saka)
 
 
S.B. CHAVAN
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development
REPORT
I           INTRODUCTION
1.1       The Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H)  was set up by the Government of
India as an independent Department in March, 1995 under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  The main
objective of the Department is to develop and promote Indian Systems of medicine, namely, Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani,
Homoeopathy, Yoga and Naturopathy in an organized and scientific manner in the country.
1.2       For the 9
th Five Year Plan, the Department identified the following six thrust areas for the development and
growth of systems.
Improvement and upgradation of standards of education in ISM&H
Standardisation of drugs and quality control
Research and Development
Ensuring sustained availability of raw materials, ie.. medicinal plants, metals, minerals and materials of animal origin
etc.
Participation of ISM&H in the National Health Programme and Family Welfare Programmes
Information, Education and Communication (Publicity)
 
II          BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
2.1       The total allocation, both Plan and Non-Plan taken together, provided to the Department for the year 2000-2001
was Rs. 143.50 crores which was reduced to Rs. 134.14 crores at the RE stage.  However, the Committee observes that
Plan allocation was reduced from Rs. 100 crores to Rs. 90 crores due to general cut of 10% by the Ministry of Finance. 
This year the Department has been allocated Rs. 120 crores under Plan and Rs. 45.56 crores under Non-Plan.
2.2       The Committee was informed that the Department was given almost 100 percent increase in the Budget
Provision of 2000-2001 as against Rs. 50 crores given in the previous year which put a strain on its absorption capacity. 
As a result, new schemes were to be planned and new ideas had to be generated and to see whether the State Govts.
were keen on those ideas.  The Department further informed that it was able to utilise an amount of Rs. 80 crores out of
Rs. 90 crores allocated.
2.3       The Department further stated that as far as the adequacy of funds for 2001-2002 is concerned, the Plan
allocation would suffice for meeting the requirements of existing activities.  The Department also informed the
Committee that the proposed increase of Rs. 20 crores has been earmarked mainly for Medicinal Plants and Quality
Control and the amount  will be utilised under different heads as under:-
(i)         Strengthening of Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for
Indian Medicine (PLIM)/ Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeial 
Laboratory (HPL)                                                       -           Rs. 3.00 crores
            (ii)        Setting up of National Board for Medicinal Plants          -           Rs.16.10 crores
Innovative scheme for development of Medicinal
Plants                                                                           -           Rs. 2.00 crores
            (iv)       Patent Cell for ISM intellectual property rights               -           Rs. 0.63 crores
            (v)        National Institute of Naturopathy,  Pune                                    -           Rs. 0.12 crores.
The Committee hopes that the funds as earmarked for the specific activities mentioned above would be fully utilised.
2.4       The Committee observes that during the last three to four years the Department has been projecting high figures
in the Budget Estimates for the schemes and subsequently it is drastically reduced at the RE stage and even that is not

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
being released/utilised.  The Committee would like to know the reasons for the same.  The Committee also observes that
funds for the schemes are sometimes released in the month of February or March to the regional Units/Institutes.  The
Committee wonders whether there is any special financial rule specifically for the Department which says that the funds
are not lapsable.  The Committee feels that either the allocations have to be utilized or they should be surrendered at the
close of the financial year.  The Committee would like to be enlightened on this aspect.
III        AYURVEDA
3.1       The provision for Ayurveda under plan in BE 2000-2001 was Rs. 13.20 crores which was reduced to Rs. 12.55
crores in RE and in BE 2001-2002 the same has been increased to Rs. 12.96 crores.  Justifying this trend of increase and
decrease in allocation,  the Department stated that the decrease was due to reduction in RE projection for Central
Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha (CCRAS) from Rs. 7.56 crores to Rs. 6.88 crores on account of unspent
balance of 1999-2000 available with CCRAS.  The balance amount of Rs. 68.00  lakhs was released to CCRAS in
March, 2000 for financial year 1999-2000 which could not be disbursed to the regional units in that financial year and
had to be adjusted by deduction at RE stage.
3.2       The Department further submitted that the details of expenditure in Ayurveda under plan for 2000-2001 is as
given below:-
                                                                                                (Rs. in crores)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Ayurveda                                 BE 2000-2001                         Actual release
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NIA, Jaipur                                          4.25                                         2.00
IPGTR, Jamnagar                                 0.75                                         0.75
CCRAS, New Delhi                             7.56                                         5.26
RAV, New Delhi                                  0.44                                         0.41
NIMHANS, Bangalore                                    0.20                             0.25
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        TOTAL:                       13.20                                       8.67
            -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
The above table clearly shows that even the allocated funds have not been released to the institutions.  The Committee
would like to be apprised of the reasons why the allocated amount could not be released especially in the case of NIA,
Jaipur and CCRAS, New Delhi.  
3.3       Asked about the details of teaching posts in the National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA) the Department informed
that the total number of sanctioned teaching posts in NIA is  79 and out of that 15 posts are lying vacant at present.  All
these vacancies were notified in the newspaper and applications were received by the Director,  NIA for 5 posts of
Lecturer which  were scrutinized and steps are being taken to conduct interviews for these posts. However, these posts,
lying vacant for more than a year, had lapsed as per DOPT orders and were required to be revived before being filled
up, action for which is underway.
3.4       Attention of the Committee was also drawn to the fact that Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) has
recently proposed reduced norms for teaching staff for an Ayurvedic college, which was also under consideration of the
Govt.   According to this, the present strength of NIA, Jaipur is sufficient to handle teaching job of the Institute.
3.5       The Committee finds the situation very ironical.  On the one hand, the Department says that more staff is
required for NIA, Jaipur and steps are being taken to fill up the vacant posts.  On the other hand,  the CCIM has
proposed reduced norms for teaching staff according to which  the existing staff at NIA is sufficient.  The Committee
feels that this issue needs to be sorted out quickly and necessary action should be taken without further loss of time. 
The Committee, at the same time, is constrained to express its displeasure that the posts were allowed to remain vacant
for such a long time as a result of which the posts lapsed.  Such a situation could have been avoided if timely action to
fill up the posts had been taken. 
3.6       On the question of misleading advertisements appearing in magazines/newspapers, on Ayurvedic medicines,  the
Department in its written reply submitted that Secretary (IM&H)  addressed all the Health Secretaries of State
Government to set up a cell and invoke the provisions of Drugs & Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act
in cases of objectionable advertisements.  The State Govts. were also requested to furnish information periodically,
about notices given, prosecutions launched, acquittal and conviction rates. 
3.7       The Department further submitted that the Office of the Drug Controller, Thiruvananthapuram, Govt. of Kerala
has taken action to prosecute manufacturing units for contravention of the Drug & Magic Remedies (Objectionable

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
Advertisement) Act & Rules 1954 and ten cases have been filed in the Court.  Licensing Authority of State Govt. of
Gujarat has sent a Nil report about action taken against the misleading advertisements.  Other State Govts. have been
reminded to take action against any misleading advertisements and send the periodical information in the prescribed
format.
3.8       The Committee while appreciating the steps taken in this regard cautions the Department that merely receiving
the prescribed Proforma from State Govts. would not suffice.  The Committee also suggests that a monitoring cell for
this purpose may be created under Advisor (Ayurveda) in the Department.  
IV        HOMOEOPATHY
4.1       For Homoeopathy the plan allocation was Rs. 8.20 crores in BE 2000-2001 which was raised to Rs. 8.49 crores
at the RE stage.  The allocation for 2001-2002 has been reduced to Rs. 8.27 crores.  Commenting on the reduced
allocation, the Department submitted that the increase at RE stage from Rs. 8.20 crores to Rs. 8.49 crores was mainly on
account of additional allocation to NIH, Calcutta for renovation of existing building and the allocation for 2001-2002
reflects its normal spending pattern.  The Committee observes that BE 2001-2002 has been kept almost at the same level
of BE 2000-2001 and there is no increase at all.
4.2       In the National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta there was a proposal for creation of additional posts for a 100
bed hospital as per the norms prescribed by the Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH).  The Department last year
stated that the matter would be taken up with the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for getting the posts
sanctioned as required .  Asked about the progress made in this regard,  the Department informed that as per the norms
prescribed for a 100 bed hospital by CCH, National Institute of Homoeopathy submitted a proposal for creation of posts.
However, on examination of the proposal it was found that it was different from the one suggested by the Cadre Review
Committee and as such NIH was asked to submit a revised proposal for NIH as a whole including the hospital.  The
clarifications are still awaited from NIH.
4.3       The Department further informed that separately CCH considered modifications of the norms for the Colleges to
make them more realistic.  One of the proposals pertained to the minimum number of beds, according to which a
hospital attached to a College must have at least 25 beds for indoor patients.  The Department considered this  proposal
to amend this regulation after taking into consideration the Central Council of Homoeopathy submissions that bed
requirement should be confined to 25 only with a rider that there should be one peripheral clinic for 10 admissions. 
Thus, a college having 50 admissions will be required to have a hospital of 25 beds and about 5 peripheral dispensaries
which the college has to set up for community service.
4.4       The Committee recommends that the CCH should amend the regulations without any further delay and NIH take
steps to establish the peripheral dispensaries at the earliest so that effective patient care can be provided.
V         UNANI
5.1       Allocation for Unani has been increased from Rs. 10.50 crores on the plan side in BE 2000-2001 to Rs. 12 crores
at RE stage.  However, the allocation for 2001-2002 has been reduced to Rs. 10.84 crores.  Commenting on this
variation, the Department stated that the increase in Unani at RE stage was mainly on account of additional allocation
for CCRUM for civil works in RRIUM, Hyderabad, RRIUM, Chennai and RRIUM, Jammu & Kashmir.  The
expenditure on Capital works is non-recurring and once the job is completed, additional funds are not required.  Hence,
the plan allocation for 2001-2002 has been kept at Rs. 10.84 crores.
5.2       The allocation for National Institute of Unani Medicine, Bangalore has been kept at Rs. 3.50 crores  in BE 2000-
2001, RE 2000-2001 and BE 2001-2002.  The Committee was informed that  a letter of award for construction of the 1
st
phase of the building of the Institute was issued in September 2000 and since then, the contractor has mobilized 
resources for construction work and has completed preliminary activities.  The medicinal plant garden is also coming up
and funds for this purpose have already been placed at the disposal of the Horticulture Department of the Govt. of
Karnataka.  The interim OPD alongwith allied facilities which will later form part of the main building has also been
completed and the Health Minister has already approved starting of the OPD at the Institute which is likely to start very
soon.
5.3       The Committee is happy to note that after several years of its conception the project has reached a conclusive
stage.  However, the Committee would like to emphasise that merely placing funds with the Department of
Horticulture,  Karnataka for medicinal plant garden will not suffice and feels that the Department should coordinate
with that department to complete the project at the earliest.  The Committee also hopes that the OPD in the Institute will
start functioning without any further delay.
VI        YOGA
6.1       The plan allocation for `Yoga and Naturopathy’ which was Rs. 6.20 crores in BE 2000-2001 got reduced to Rs.

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
3.60 crores  at  the RE stage.  The allocation has been increased to Rs.5.99 crores in BE 2001-2002.  Justifying the 
decrease at RE stage the Department stated that it is due to under utilization of funds allocated for the National Institute
of Morarji Desai in Yoga.
6.2       The Plan allocation of Rs.3.50 crores was made for the  Institute in 2000-2001 for meeting the cost towards
procurement of land and construction of the building.  The Department informed that  negotiations were  going on for
acquiring land with the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Poverty Alleviation which could be finalized with the Ministry
only in January, 2001  and a premium amount of Rs.41.00 lakhs has since been paid to them for transfer of two acres of
land in the name of the Department near Gol Dakkhana.  After the legal transfer is made construction of building would
start.  As this process takes time the construction could not start in 2000-2001 and  the plan allocation at RE  stage was
significantly reduced.
6.3       The BE allocation for 2001-2002 has been increased to Rs.5.99 crores, out of which, a provision of Rs.3.00
crores has been made for construction of building of MDNIY and necessary  clearances for the project will be obtained
in due course.  In the meanwhile, plan for establishing a Yoga Centre at the place which will start functioning within a
year or so has already been presented before the Health Minister and Urban Development Minister.  The Department
further informed that a small plot has been obtained at Ghaziabad and the Department plans to have a Yoga  Centre
which is now at a conceptual stage as it would be more relevant to public needs at a later date.
6.4       The Committee feels that all the clearances that are required for construction and starting the Yoga Centre at
MDNIY, should be obtained at the earliest.  
6.5       The Committee was informed that Ministry of HRD has approved setting up of  Yoga Departments in 11
universities and five universities are already conducting a five and a half year degree course in Yoga. The Committee
was further informed that yoga has been introduced in Delhi in the Central Schools and schools of the Delhi
Government.
6.6       Welcoming this measure,  the Committee feels that steps should be taken by the Department alongwith the
Ministry of HRD to include Yoga as a part of a regular curriculum in all the schools all over the country.
VII       SIDDHA
7.1       The Department has  informed that the State Govt. of Tamil Nadu has given 14 acres of land for the Institute and
an OSD has also been appointed to look after it. The drawings are ready and the concept has to be agreed upon.  The
Committee was also given to understand that financial clearance for it would be obtained soon.  A feeling has somehow
developed that the Central Government should not fund autonomous institutions anymore and  the States should take the
responsibility of meeting the recurring cost at least to the extent of 20 percent.
7.2       The Committee is of the view that as far as the National Institutes are concerned, it is the primary responsibility
of the Government of India and not that of State Government and the Committee strongly feels that the present approach
needs to be changed.
7.3       The Committee had in one of its recommendations recommended last year that the Department should take
necessary action to popularize the Siddha system in North India, as presently the system is concentrated in South India,
particularly Tamil Nadu only.  The Department has informed the Committee that the matter was taken up with the
Director-General, Health Services, who has informed that at present there is one Siddha unit each at Delhi and Chennai
and no proposal has been received from any of the CGHS unit to strengthen and popularize the existing Siddha unit in
North India.  The Committee expresses is dismay over the fact that Department has no policy regarding Siddha system
of medicine.  It does not also appear to have the will or initiative to popularize and strengthen the system in other parts
of the country.  The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the Department should have a clear policy on
Siddha whether to confine the system in a limited area/state or to popularize it in the whole country.  In case, it decides
to spread the system throughout the country, the Committee would like to be informed about the Department’s strategy
in this regard.
VIII      NEW SCHEMES
8.1       The Committee observes that during the entire Ninth Plan period no new schemes have been introduced by the
Department.  Almost all the new schemes are still in formulation stage.  No expenditure could be incurred on schemes
indicated below as they are yet to be launched:-
Health for All through Preventive and Promotive Programme of ISMH (Provision being made since 1997-98)
ISM Polyclinics with Regimental Therapy, Panchkarma, Yoga and Naturopathy (Provision being made since 1998-99)
Opening of Speciality Clinics in Govt. Hospitals (Provision being made since 1998-99)
Ayurveda Park/Panchkarma in Hotels (Provision made in 2000-2001)
 
8.2       The Committee also observes  that items are included in the Budget without any initial preparation and the

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
details of the schemes are worked out later.  The Committee is of the view that this process needs to be reversed. 
Budgetary allocation should be made only after a scheme is fully examined, finalised and approved.
IX        MEDICAL EDUCATION
9.1       At present, there are 311 Undergraduate and 47 Postgraduate ISM&H colleges in the country.  However,
standard of education in some of the institutions is far from satisfactory and they are nowhere near the norms fixed by
Statutory Bodies. The Committee was  informed that high priority was given to this area.  The number of colleges
assisted and budget provision made during the year has been increased.  About 55 colleges were assisted all over the
country particularly for teaching equipment, books, Journals and access to computers.  The Department further released
funds for teaching assistance, hospital services, patient services, and for the first time patient care in medical colleges
was also assisted.
9.2       Regarding the recognition part and mushrooming growth of  large number of colleges, the Department informed
that the power for recognition to increase the capacity lies with the Central Council of Indian Medicines, and there has
been a proliferation  in the intake of colleges. The problem is more acute in the States of Karnataka and Maharashtra. To
discuss this problem threadbare, the Department requested the CCIM to call a meeting of the  Vice-Chancellors of the
universities and representatives of State Govts. Even though the response was not overwhelming, the major States were
represented and deficiencies in mushrooming of colleges were pointed out to them.
9.3       The Department also informed that in order to check the mushroom growth of colleges legislative changes are
required and instead of establishing new colleges emphasis should be on  establishing new centres of excellence.
9.4       The Committee feels that  legislative changes, as required, may be made at the earliest to check the mushroom
growth of colleges coming up without adequate infrastructure.  The Committee also desires that whenever a centre of
excellence is opened, it may be opened in an area  where the level of acceptance of the system is high, so that
effectiveness of the system could be popularized in a standardized  manner.
9.5       The Committee was also informed that there is a growing feeling among the students that those who could not
get seats in Allopathic Medical Colleges get relegated into Ayurvedic, Unani and other Colleges in the Common
Entrance examination.   The Committee was further informed that  in view this scenario, the Department has plans to
have a separate entrance examination for admission into Ayurvedic and Unani Colleges so that students who are really
interested in this field could join.  This issue has been thoroughly debated in the Central Council and the decision on it is
likely to be taken soon.
9.6       The Committee wonders whether this could be achieved through the common entrance examination itself by
making compulsory a fixed number of questions for students who seek admission to Ayurveda/Unani Colleges instead
of having a separate entrance examination.  The Committee would like this to be examined.
X         QUALITY CONTROL OF DRUGS
10.1     Laying down the pharmacopoeial standards and quality control of ISM&H drugs is one of the priority areas of
the Department.  The Committee was informed that the Pharmacopicial Laboratories at Ghaziabad both for
Homoeopathy and for Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha are working at a very low ebb for the last so many years.  It was
also informed that the number of tests they were conducting was so low that it is really questionable whether there is a
need to have this kind of Institution, if at all any impact has to be made. 
10.2     The Department further informed that the proposal to strengthen the two Laboratories is under way. EFC
clearance for the project has since been obtained. The funds are available with the Department and the construction
work for the building of PLIM and HPL, Ghaziabad has been entrusted to Ghaziabad Development Authority (GDA). 
The Department also informed that it had consulted CSIR, the Department of Biotechnology and the ICMR on the
matter and the number of posts in laboratories is likely to go up.  The Committee hopes that the entire process would be
hastened up.
10.3     The Committee was informed that the Department plans to recognize Private laboratories for quality
certification.  Before any private lab is recognized, inspection  by the Central Government and State Government
officials will be made.  Testing in these labs would be accorded high priority and  a draft rule in this regard has already
been notified which will soon become  law for the privatelaboratories.  The Committee while appreciating the steps
taken by the Department feels that after the job of recognition of Private Laboratories is undertaken, some type of
monitoring mechanism on them should also be evolved.
10.4     A scheme for assisting State Drug Testing Laboratories of ISM&H has been announced by the Finance Minister
in his Budget speech for 2001-2002.  The scheme is meant primarily for renovation and modernization of state
laboratories  of Indian Systems of Medicines and Drugs which would enable them to fulfil the statutory responsibility
under the Drugs and Cosmetics, Act.  Under the scheme devised,  equipments  would be supplied and funds for
modernization of facilities would also be given apart from training for giving standard treatment to the patients. 

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
Welcoming this initiative, the Committee hopes that this scheme would be launched at the earliest.
XI        NON-AVAILABILITY OF HERBS AND MEDICINAL PLANTS
11.1     The efficacy of  most of the ISMH drugs is dependent upon the use of pure and genuine raw material obtained
from medicinal plants.  However, due to over exploitation, unscrupulous collection and denuding of forests, supplies
have been dwindling.   The Department informed the Committee that it has initiated various steps to enhance the supply
of medicinal plants.  A special scheme to provide assistance to research organisations for development of agro-
techniques has  been introduced and a  component of R&D has also been included under the scheme to achieve better
results.  The Department further informed that National Board on Medicinal Plants as a statutory body has been set up
under the Cabinet order on 2
nd  November, 2000.   The Board has been constituted by official members and has been
notified. Non-official members are in the process of being notified.   The Committee was also informed that based on
Cabinet order,  6 special committees for demand and supply of medicinal plants have been set up to look into the aspect
of intellectual property, cultivation and conservation of medicinal plants and the committees have started functioning.  
About 6 to 8 Deptts. including ICAR, CSIR have been roped in to have a co-ordinated plan.
11.2     The Committee appreciates the steps taken and desires that regular monitoring of the Committees constituted
should also be there to study their effectiveness.  The Committee also reiterates its recommendation made last year that
the study to conduct the collection of authentic data on the demand, consumption and availability of medicinal plants be
entrusted to the National Board of Medicinal Plants.
 
XII       PUBLICITY
12.1     Forthis purpose, the Department took several steps during the year both within the country and outside.  For
popularizing the systems abroad, the Department participated for five months at Hanouver in Exp-2000 by putting a
stall and the response was overwhelming.  Keen interest was shown in the areas of yoga and pulse diagnosis.  The
Department also informed that a conference of Ayurveda in  New York was inaugurated by PM and six areas where
ayurveda is extremely strong were presented before a mixed crowd of Americans and  non-resident Indians.  The
industries in the field were also encouraged to display their products.  The research publications, drug list and research
done on plants were also displayed.   The Department, however, informed that the difficulty there was that USA
recognizes Ayurvedic items as  food supplements only.   Apart from the above measures, the Department informed that
it presented its case before the House of Lords Sub-Committee on alternative and complementary systems of medicines
because the Sub-Committee earlier concluded that Ayurveda and Unani lacked scientific  evidence.
12.2     The Department also informed that it took several steps to popularise the Indian  systems within the country. 
Health Melas were  held at five places in the country, where medicines were given under the three systems and
presentations were made on Yoga and natural food and diet therapy through Naturopathy.  The basic idea of Health
Melas was that the public should be given  access to the highest quality of both primary health care as well as secondary
and tertiary level care.  The response to the health melas  was reported to be encouraging.
12.3     The Committee appreciates the holding of  Health Melas outside the country  for popularizing the Indian systems
of medicines as the people outside don’t know much about them.  But such melas in the country do not serve much
useful purpose . The Committee is of the view that positive achievements made in all the systems of Indian medicine
should be given wide publicity through print and electronic media so that people at large would come to know about
them.  The Committee observes that the Department has not taken any effective steps to remove the prejudices of the
system.  The Committee feels that this grey area should be included in the IEC component, which the Department
prepares in future.
XIII      NORTH EASTERN STATES
13.1     The Department informed that as per the guidelines conveyed by the Planning Commission, 10% of the plan
budget has been earmarked for the North Eastern States and Sikkim.  Accordingly, a  lump sum provision of Rs. 12.00
crores in 2001-2002 has been made for North Eastern States and Sikkim.   The expenditure will be incurred by the
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha, Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine and Central
Council for Research in Homoeopathy on their research and survey units in the North East and Sikkim and on going
schemes of the Department will be reckoned against this allocation.
13.2     The Committee was informed that there has been shortfall in the utilization of funds in the Northeast Region,
due to bio-diversity of the region.  Moreover, traditions of the people are different which  have to be respected.  The
Committee was given to understand that the Department was going to  request the Planning Commission to give funds
to have a special scheme for the ISM&H in North East, which would be institution based system and Indira Gandhi
National Institute at Shillong would be made the focal point for the purpose.

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
13.3     The Committee observes that against an allocation of Rs. 10.00 crores for NE region in  2000-2001 reduced to
Rs. 8.53 crores at the RE stage, no expenditure has been incurred upto February, 2001.  On the other hand, the
Department proposes to request the Planning Commission to allocate funds for a special scheme for the ISM&H in
North-east.  The Committee feels that the Department should make all endeavour to first utilise the funds which are
already available with it for this purpose instead of approaching the Planning Commission for more funds.
XIV     INTRA MURAL AND EXTRA MURAL RESEARCH
14.1     The Committee was informed that in the area of intra-mural research  the Council has been able to work in
coordination with the Indian Council of Medical Research.   An operational research study of using 11 ayurvedic
medicines and approaches dealing with women’s and children’s problems would  be started in the next three months. 
10 blocks are being taken in the country in five States to work on ayurvedic medicines in specific areas like anemia, etc.
and work   on unani and homoeopathy will also be taken in due course.   By  these measures, the Department stated,  the
Council would be able to test the efficacy  more than what has been done in the past in the case of Indian systems. 
14.2     The other measure which the Department proposes to take not through Budgetary support, but through the
support of World Health Organisation is identification of  five  areas in ayurveda like prostate, menopause,  preventive 
cardiology, arthritis  and Rasayan where ayurveda and  unani are very strong, and where it could be subjected to clinical
trials and testing the efficacy.   The Department stated that at least in two  areas the work will start soon.
14.3     The Committee was also informed that the  research councils have been given direction that they must look for
priority areas where ayurveda, unani, homoeopathy can work in tandem with allopathy.
14.4     As far as the extra-mural research was concerned, the Committee was informed that the scheme is being
reworked as people were applying in areas for  working in animals which   even the ICMR does not require it now.  
The need ofthe hour is  to identify some good institutions which could take up cases of ayurvedic, unani and
homoeopathic medicines through pre-determined ones.   A new scheme has been drawn up and applications  would be
invited by June, 2001.
14.5     The Committee hopes that the new scheme on extra-mural research work will start by June, 2001.  However, the
Committee feels that at the time of selection of institutions for research  purposes, institutions which are already
working in the area and well-established in Ayurveda may be identified and assisted so that better and fruitful results
could be achieved.
XV       PATENT CELL AND TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DIGITAL LIBRARY (TKDL)
15.1     Patent Cell (ISM)  was created in the Department on 22.4.97 to look after the work relating to :-
To keep track of patents being filed in India or other parts of the world with respect to Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani
Drugs and Patent proprietary medicines.
To extend professional assistance to organizations and scientists in the ISMH Sector in connection with the filing of
Patents by providing information contained in ancient texts.       
15.2     The Department has informed that after observing the work  of the Cell and after visiting the World  Intellectual
Property Organisation it was realized that there is not much scope  for such a Cell.  By establishing a Traditional
Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL), the need of a legal expert will not be there.  Whenever there is any controversy  it
can be effectively countered by effective use of knowledge and advanced technology.   The Director, NISCOM was also
of the  view that after establishment of TKDL, the patent cell would become redundant because patents are valid only
within a country and patents are generally published only after they are granted and not before.   Moreover, the Patent
Cell of the Department would not be able to access any information at the time of filing  patents, and the cell   would be
useful only for filing of patents by Research Councils working under the Department.
15.3     The Department further informed that with the help of TKDL, the accessibility of information would  become
easier and nobody can claim to have innovated or discovered on 14 items mentioned in the TKDL.  Ayurveda Experts
would also be recruited for giving expertise in regard to plants and other things and this would also find place side by
side in the 14  TKDL texts  which would be completed within eight to ten months.   Unani and Siddha experts would
also be encouraged  to do a similar exercise.
15.4     The Department also informed that the research councils have already documented 4,500 items of traditional
knowledge of which people have been taking help since a very long time.  One monograph of this knowledge has
already been published. 
The Committee observes that the Department has not been able to come to a conclusion whether a patent cell should
exist or not after the establishment of TKDL.   The Committee feels that the Department is dragging its feet on a very
sensitive  and important issue.   The Committee would like that the matter should be examined afresh in consultation
with the concerned Departments and an early decision may be taken in this regard. TKDL cannot be a substitute for
patent cell.  The Committee, therefore, feels that Patent Cell  should also co-exist with TKDL.

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
XVI    GENERAL
          The Committee notes that a CGHS Allopathic unit is functioning at the Parliament House Annexe for quite a long
time . Opening a unit in of ISMH alongside the CGHS Allopathic unit in was raised during last Parliament House
Annexe was raised during last year before the Secretary.   No action has been taken by the Department in this regard.  
The Committee, therefore, desires that the Department may explore that possibility of opening an  ISMH unit at  
Parliament House Annexe within its resources at the earliest.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee hopes that the funds as earmarked for the specific activities mentioned above would be fully utilised.
(Para 2.3)
            The Committee observes that during the last three to four years the Department has been projecting high figures
in the Budget Estimates for the schemes and subsequently it is drastically reduced at the RE stage and even that is not
being released/utilised.  The Committee would like to know the reasons for the same.  The Committee also observes that
funds for the schemes are sometimes released in the month of February or March to the regional Units/Institutes.  The
Committee wonders whether there is any special financial rule specifically for the Department which says that the funds
are not lapsable.  The Committee feels that either the allocations  have to be utilized or they  should be surrendered at
the close of the financial year.  The Committee would like to be enlightened on this aspect. (Para 2.4)
AYURVEDA
The above table clearly shows that even the allocated funds have not been  released to the institutions.  The Committee
would like to be apprised of the reasons why the allocated amount could not be released especially in the case of NIA,
Jaipur and CCRAS, New Delhi.   (Para 3.2)
            The Committee finds the situation very ironical.  On the one hand, the Department says that more staff is
required for NIA, Jaipur and steps are being taken to fill up the vacant posts.  On the other hand,  the CCIM has
proposed reduced norms for teaching staff according to which  the existing staff at NIA is sufficient.  The Committee
feels that this issue needs to be sorted out quickly and necessary action should be taken without further loss of time. 
The Committee, at the same time, is constrained to express its displeasure that the posts were allowed to remain vacant
for such a long time as a result of which the posts lapsed.  Such a situation could have been avoided if timely action to
fill up the posts had been taken.  (Para 3.5)
            The Committee while appreciating the steps taken in this regard cautions the Department that merely receiving
the prescribed Proforma from State Govts. would not suffice.  The Committee also suggests that a monitoring cell for
this purpose may be created under Advisor (Ayurveda) in the Department.   (Para 3.8)
HOMOEOPATHY
            The Committee recommends that the CCH should amend the regulations without any further delay and NIH take
steps to establish the peripheral dispensaries at the earliest so that effective patient care can be provided. (Para 4.4)
UNANI
            The Committee is happy to note that after several years of its conception the project has reached a conclusive
stage.  However, the Committee would like to emphasise that merely placing funds with the Department of
Horticulture,  Karnataka for medicinal plant garden will not suffice and feels that the Department should coordinate
with that department to complete the project at the earliest.  The Committee also hopes that the OPD in the Institute will
start functioning without any further delay. (Para 5.3)
YOGA
            The Committee feels that all the clearances that are required for construction and starting the Yoga Centre at
MDNIY, should be obtained at the earliest.(Para 6.4)
            Welcoming this measure,  the Committee feels that steps should be taken by the Department alongwith the
Ministry of HRD to include Yoga as a part of a regular curriculum in all the schools all over the country. (Para 6.6)
SIDDHA
            The Committee is of the view that as far as the National Institutes are concerned, it is the primary responsibility
of the Government of India and not that of State Government and the Committee strongly feels that the present approach
needs to be changed. (Para 7.2)
The Committee expresses is dismay over the fact that Department has no policy regarding Siddha system of medicine. 
It does not also appear to have the will or initiative to popularize and strengthen the system in other parts of the
country.  The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the Department should have a clear policy on Siddha
whether to confine the system in a limited area/state or to popularize it in the whole country.  In case, it decides to

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
spread the system throughout the country, the Committee would like to be informed about the Department’s strategy in
this regard. (Para 7.3)
NEW SCHEMES
            The Committee also observes  that items are included in the Budget without any initial preparation and the
details of the schemes are worked out later.  The Committee is of the view that this process needs to be reversed. 
Budgetary allocation should be made only after a scheme is fully examined, finalised and approved. (Para 8.2)
MEDICAL EDUCATION
            The Committee feels that  legislative changes, as required, may be made at the earliest to check the mushroom
growth of colleges coming up without adequate infrastructure.  The Committee also desires that whenever a centre of
excellence is opened, it may be opened in an area  where the level of acceptance of the system is high, so that
effectiveness of the system could be popularized in a standardized  manner. (Para 9.4)
            The Committee wonders whether this could be achieved through the common entrance examination itself by
making compulsory a fixed number of questions for students who seek admission to Ayurveda/Unani Colleges instead
of having a separate entrance examination.  The Committee would like this to be examined. (Para 9.6)
QUALITY CONTROL OF DRUGS
The Committee hopes that the entire process would be hastened up. (Para 10.2)
The Committee while appreciating the steps taken by the Department feels that after the job of recognition of Private
Laboratories is undertaken, some type of monitoring mechanism on them should also be evolved. (Para 10.3)
Welcoming this initiative, the Committee hopes that this scheme would be launched at the earliest. (Para 10.4)
NON-AVAILABILITY OF HERBS AND MEDICINAL PLANTS
            The Committee appreciates the steps taken and desires that regular monitoring of the Committees constituted
should also be there to study their effectiveness.  The Committee also reiterates its recommendation made last year that
the study to conduct the collection of authentic data on the demand, consumption and availability of medicinal plants be
entrusted to the National Board of Medicinal Plants. (Para 11.2)
 
PUBLICITY
            The Committee appreciates the holding of  Health Melas outside the country  for popularizing the Indian systems
of medicines as the people outside don’t know much about them.  But such melas in the country do not serve much
useful purpose . The Committee is of the view that positive achievements made in all the systems of Indian medicine
should be given wide publicity through print and electronic media so that people at large would come to know about
them.  The Committee observes that the Department has not taken any effective steps to remove the prejudices of the
system.  The Committee feels that this grey area should be included in the IEC component, which the Department
prepares in future. (Para12.3)
NORTH EASTERN STATES
            The Committee observes that against an allocation of Rs. 10.00 crores for NE region in  2000-2001 reduced to
Rs. 8.53 crores at the RE stage, no expenditure has been incurred upto February, 2001.  On the other hand, the
Department proposes to request the Planning Commission to allocate funds for a special scheme for the ISM&H in
North-east.  The Committee feels that the Department should make all endeavour to first utilise the funds which are
already available with it for this purpose instead of approaching the Planning Commission for more funds. (Para 13.3)
INTRA MURAL AND EXTRA MURAL RESEARCH
            The Committee hopes that the new scheme on extra-mural research work will start by June, 2001.  However, the
Committee feels that at the time of selection of institutions for research  purposes, institutions which are already
working in the area and well-established in Ayurveda may be identified and assisted so that better and fruitful results
could be achieved. (Para 14.5)
PATENT CELL AND TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DIGITAL LIBRARY (TKDL)
The Committee observes that the Department has not been able to come to a conclusion whether a patent cell should
exist or not after the establishment of TKDL.   The Committee feels that the Department is dragging its feet on a very
sensitive  and important issue.   The Committee would like that the matter should be examined afresh in consultation
with the concerned Departments and an early decision may be taken in this regard. TKDL cannot be a substitute for
patent cell.  The Committee, therefore, feels that Patent Cell  should also co-exist with TKDL. (Para15.6)
GENERAL
          The Committee notes that a CGHS Allopathic unit is functioning at the Parliament House Annexe for quite a long
time . Opening a unit in of ISMH alongside the CGHS Allopathic unit in was raised during last Parliament House
Annexe was raised during last year before the Secretary.   No action has been taken by the Department in this regard.  

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
The Committee, therefore, desires that the Department may explore that possibility of opening an  ISMH unit at  
Parliament House Annexe within its resources at the earliest.
M I N U T E S
II
SECOND MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Saturday,  the 24th  March, 2001 in Committee Room `A’,  Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
Shri S.B. Chavan          ¾¾                Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Mourice Kujur
Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”
Shri Dina Nath Mishra
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Shri Bratin Sengupta
Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
Shri Kirti Jha Azad
Shri Baliram Kashyap
Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
Shrimati Shyama Singh
Dr. D.V.G. Shankar Rao
Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
Shri Vanlal Zawma
Dr. S. Venugopal
 
WITNESSES
I           Representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  (Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy)
 
Smt. Shailaja Chandra,  Secretary
Shri L. Prasad,  Joint Secretary 
Shri Vijay Singh,  Joint  Secretary & F.A.
Dr. S.K. Sharma, Advisor (Ayurveda)
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer
Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer
 
The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary of the Department of  Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy,  in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2001-2002.  Members put
queries which the Secretary and other representatives replied.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee  adjourned at 12.10 P.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 26
th March, 2001

102nd Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/102ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:13:16]
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 11th April,  2001 in Committee Room No. 139,  First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.         Shri S.B. Chavan          ¾¾                Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”
Shri Dina Nath Mishra
Shri Bratin Sengupta
LOK SABHA
Shri Ramakant Angle
Shri Kirti Jha Azad
Shri Ramanand Singh
Shri Dileep Sanghani
Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
Shri G. S. Baswaraj
Shrimati Shyama Singh
Shri Kantilal Bhuriya
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Davendra Singh Yadav
Shri Shivaji Mane
Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Shri Trilochan Kanungo
Shri Mohammed Anwarul Haque
Dr. S. Venugopal
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt. Vandana Garg,  Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
 Shri Ratan Kumar Sahoo, Research Officer
 Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer
 
The Committee considered the Draft Reports on Demands for Grants for 2001-2002 of the Departments of X X X,
Health,  Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy and X X X.   The Committee,  after some discussion, adopted
the Reports with certain modifications.
The Committee adjourned at  12.20  P.M. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the  12
th April, 2001.
 
XXX Relate to other matters.
 