PARLIAMENT. OF INDIA
. RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF | :
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY, CALCUTTA

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19.12.1996)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19.12.1996)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 1996/Agrahayana, 1918 (Saka)



PARLIAMENT 07 INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
; COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

FIFTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY, CALCUTTA

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19.12.1996)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19.12.1996)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 1996/Agrahayana, 1918 (Saka)

2610/RS/F—1-A



CONTENTS

PAGES

1. Composition OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii)

2. PREFACE (iii)

3. Report 1

I. Introduction 1

Il. Aims and Objectives 1

Ill. Activities of the National Library 1-2

IV. Bhasa Bhawan 24

V. Maintenance of the existing buildings and Budgetary Constraints 4-5

4. ANNEXURE 7

5. Minutes 9—13
on नमन ie aoe ee



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1996-97

1. Shri S. B. Chavan — Chairman
LOK SABHA

. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Shri Sartaj Singh

. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
. Shri Jai Prakash

. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

. Shrimati Divya Singh

. Shri Mahant Abedyanath

. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

12. Dr. C. Silvera ;
13. Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda
14. Shri Dutta Meghe

15. Shri 1G. Sanadi

16. Shrimati Krishna Bose

17. Shri P.V. Rajeshwar Rao |
18. Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy
19. Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

20. Shri Pawan Diwan

21. Shri Krishna

22. Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
23. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
24. Shri Samik Lahiri

25. Shri S.K. Karvendhan

26. ‘Shri Mukhtar Anees

27. Dr. M. Jagannath

28. Dr. Bali Ram

29. Shri Ranen Barman

30. Shri Surender Singh

31. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

RAJYA SABHA

32. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
33. Dr. 8, B. Dutta

34. Dr. M. Aram

35. Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

36..Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
37. Shri Raj Nath Singh

38. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

4
PSC ANAUNAYWN

0)
2610/ RS/F—2-A


ii)

39. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
40. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

41, Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

42. Shri R. Margabandu

43. Shri Negendra Nath Ojha

44. Dr. Mohan Babu

45. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani -

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2610/RS/ F—2-B



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, haying been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty-second Report of the Committee on the
National Library, Calcutta under the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource
Development. :

2. A Study Group of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development visited the National Library, Calcutta on 9th October, 1996
to make an on the spot’Study and also to get first hand information about the functioning of
the National Library. A list of Members who visited the National Library, Calcutta is
enclosed as Annexure-I. ;

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the 17th
December 1996. + ! ४

New Deni, 5.8. CHAVAN,

December 17, 1996. Chairman,
Department-related Parlimentary

Standing Committee

on Human Resource Development.

(iii)


REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION

1.1. The origin of the National Library, Calcutta can be traced back to March, 1836
when the Calcutta Public Library was opened to the public at 30, Esplanade Row, Calcutta.
Subsequently the Calcutta Public Library was merged with the Imperial Library and offered
to the public in January, 1903. The National Library came into being in 1948 with the
passing of the Imperial Library (Change of Name) Act 1948.

1.2. The National Library, Calcutta is the biggest library in the country with the
collection of about 2.4 million volumes, besides journals, periodicals and palm-leafs etc. It
was declared as an Institution of National importance as enshrined in Article 62 of the 7th
Schedule of the Union List of the Constitution of India. At present the National Library is
housed in three separate buildings with a separate preservation laboratory, spread over 30
acres of land in the compound namely “Belvedere”, a French name meaning beautiful
garden within the heart of Calcutta City.

1.3. The National Library serves as the permanent repository of all reading and
information material produced in India as well as all printed material written by Indians and
concerning India written by foreigners, wherever published and in whichever language. The
National Library is the recipient of all material published in India, under the Delivery of
Books Act, 1954 as amended in 1956. The Library has an Exchange Programme with 225
institutions in 95 countries under the Cultural Exchange Programme of the Government of
India
II. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

The following are the basic aims and objectives of the National Library:

(i) Acquisition and conservation of all significant printed material produced in the
country to the exclusion of ephemera; ;

(ii) Collection of printed material concerning the country wherever it is published and
also acquisition of a photographic record of such material that is not available
within the country; ,

(iii) Acquisition and conservation of manuscripts of national importance;

(iv) Planned acquisition of foreign material required by the country;

(v) Rendering of bibliographical and documentation services of retrospective material,
both general and specialised;

(vi) Acting as a referral centre purveying full and accurate knowledge of all sources
and bibliographical information and participation in international bibliographical
activities;

(vii) Provision of photocopying and reprographic services; and

(viii) Acting as the centre for international book exchange and international loan.
गा, ACTIVITIES OF THE NATIONAL LIBRARY

(a) Collection .building and collection organisation programme: This is a major

programme which is looked after by the Acquisition and Processing: Divisions of the Library.

‘ In order to manage different activities, there are separate divisions like, Book Selection

Division for purchase and receipt of English books, English Serials Division, Indian
Language Division etc.

(b) Reader’s Service (including Bibliographic Services Programme: The National Library

2610/ RS/ F—3-A.



2

renders services to its readers from different parts of India and abroad on 362 days in a year.
It is closed on 3 national holidays (26th January, 15th August and 2nd October). Throughout
the year the service sections remain open from 9.00 a.m. to 8.00 p.m. on working days and
from 9.30 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. on holidays. On an average, 1000 readers are served everyday.
The Library acts as the main bibliographic centre of India. The Indian National Bibliography
is published on the basis of the receipts under the Delivery of Books Act. The Library also
shoulders responsibility of current and retrospective bibliography on Indology and other
subjects. The Committee observes that the referral centre which is a part of the bibliographic
services is not sufficiently equipped with the retrieval services such as subject index of
articles published in journals, subject search and bibliographic assistance etc. and necessary
steps are required to be taken in this regard

(c) Conservation of Library Materials Programme: In order to conserve library material,
a small repair unit was started in 1957 which has Preservation Division, Laboratory Division
and Reprography Division. The Committee is of the view that this is inadequate and needs
to be further strengthened.

(d) Modernisation: In order to implement the automation programme, the Library
introduced Anglo American Cataloging Rules, 2 (AACR 2) as the first step towards
modernisation of its operations. This rule is a cataloguing code which is a standardised
cataloguing format and is internationally accepted for automated systems. It has taken up
the standardisation of diagritical marks [special marks attached to alphabets (Roman script)
for transliteration from Indian Scripts] for romanisation of Perso-Arabic scripts through
automation system and has also developed a standardisation chart of diacritical marks for
automated bibliographic services in different languages. The Committee feels that the
Library should complete the computer.cataloguing of books and manuscripts without further
delay.

3.1. The Committee feels that in view of the latest developments in technology brought
out in the Library system all over the world, the National Library, Calcutta should also
adapt itself with the changing needs in order to perform its functions properly and
expeditiously. Hence it should acquire the modern software and communication technology
available in these fields and it should’ establish a site on INTERNET and it may be
connected through INTERNET service with all the leading libraries, educational centers and
research-oriented institutes of the world for a speedy and effective exchange programme.
The Committee is of the view that the Library may also examine a proposal to provide this
facility free to the schools and edcuational institutions which have received the Bibliographic
Data Base Project under MPLADS.

IV. BHASA BHAWAN

4.1. The present accommodation available in the National Library is not able to cope
with the various activities of the labrary including preservation of age old books, other
valuable articles and documentation of various new collections etc. The shortage of space
has adversely affected the functioning of the library. In. order to overcome this problem, a
Master Plan has been sanctioned which includes construction of a massive building called
“Bhasa Bhavan” with most modern facilities matching international standards. It would be
equipped with latest software and communication technology including Closed Circuit
Television (CCTV)

4.2. The foundation stone of ‘Bhasa Bhawan’ was laid on the 7th April, 1989 by late
Shri Rajiv Gandhi, the then Prime Minister of India. Originally the estimated cost of the
project in February 1989 was Rs. 35.34 crores. The Administrative approval and expenditure
sanction for Rs. 41.57 crores was issued by the Department of Culture only in January, 1993

2610/ RS /F—3-B

sti



3

after a gap of four years. The Department has taken unduly long to accord administrative
approval and sanction for the expenditure. This inordinate delay must have resulted in cost
escalation for which the Department of Culture owes an explanation. The Secretary and the
Joint Secretary, Department of Culture were summoned by the Chairman, HRD, on 16th
December, 1996 to clarify the reasons for delay in according the administrative approval for
this expenditure. Even’ they were not in a position to clarify the precise reasons for this
delay. The Committee takes a serious note of this delay and recommends that the
Department should look into the matter and fix responsibility not only for causing delays but
also for cost escalation. The Department should also look into as to whether the tender
documents contained a clause for providing escalation of the estimate which is very relevant
for fixing the responsibility on the previous contractor. The Committee feels that barring
some additional items in the second tender, if any, rest of the increase in the cost should be
borne by the previous contractor.

4.3. The Committee has been informed that the entire project is now expected to
complete by Decemeber 2000 A.D. at a revised cost of Rs. 60.46 crores.The tender for the
building could be invited by October, 1993 but due to stay order issued by thé Hon’ble High
Court, Calcutta in November, 1993 on a petition given by a Construction Agency, the
processing of the tender was further delayed, The stay order was got vacated in the month
of August, 1994. The tenders were re-invited in September, 1994 and the work of pile
foundation was started in February, 1995. The test pile was started in March, 1995 and
actual working piles were started after clearance from the Central Design Organisation with
effect from May, 1995 only. It is expected that the raft alongwith basement under the
present contract would be completed by June, 1997

4.4. The committee was informed that due to this inordinate delay in starting the
construction work, estimated escalation in the cost of the project may go upto 50% before
completion of the project. Till March, 1996, Rs. 6.12 crores have already been spent. The
details of the allocation made and expenditure incurred is as under

(Rs. Lakhs)

Year Allocations Made Actual Expenditure
1994-95 100.00 100.00
1995-96 500.00 512.00

Toran 600.00 612.00

*

4.5. The requirement of funds made by CPWD for 1996-97 is Rs. 7.00 Lakhs. The
CPWD has already spent Rs. 212 lakhs out of which only Rs.100 lakhs has been released by
the Department. The remaining amount.of Rs. 112 lakhs have been spent by CPWD by



4

diverting the funds from other sources. The Committee was also informed that the CPWD
has made demand for the remaining amount i.e. Rs. 488 lakhs. The Committee desires that
the Department may approach the Planning Commission for release of this amount
expeditiously. कु

4.6. The funds requirement, as made out by the CPWD, for completion of the project
form next year onwards is as under :

(Rs. in lakhs)

Year Requirement of funds
1997-98 1200.00
1998-99 1800.00
1999-2000 1200.00
2000-2001 534.00
Tora : 4734.00

4.7. The Committee feels that the inadequacy of funds may further delay the pace of
construction which is already very slow. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department of Culture may work out their requirement properly and project the same
before the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance form next financial year onwards
and arrange for providing adequate funds well in time to ensure that the construction work
does not suffer any more and its schedule is regularly maintained to ensure timely
completion of the building.

Vv. MAINTENANCE OF THE EXISTING BUILDINGS & BUDGETARY
CONSTRAINTS हि

5.1, The Committee noticed that the existing buildings of the library are in a very bad
shape. There are complaints of water seepage and leakage of roofs. In view of its historical
importance, the buildings require special repairs and civil maintenance. The Committee was
also informed that proper maintenance of electric installations, pumps, lifts, etc. could not
be done for the last three years due to paucity of funds. The Committee is constrained to
note that the C.P.W.D has failed to discharge its responsibilities of proper upkeep and
maintenance of the buildings and thus owe an explanation in this regard. The Committee,
therefore, feels that the Department of Culture should impress upon the Ministry of Urban
Affairs and Employment to direct the C.P.W.D to carry out the necessary repairs and
other maintenance works at regular intervals to avoid further decay of this historical
building. :

ee &22७0/%6:८# ४



5
5.2. The budgetary provision for the Library during the last three years are as under :

(Rs. in lakhs)

1994-95 1995-96 1995-96 1996-97
RE BE RE BE
Plan 120.00 150.00 150.00 150.00
Non-Plan 310.00 328.00 386.00 392.00

5.3. The Committee feels that the funds made available to the National Library on the
plan side are inadequate which need to be sufficiently enhanced keeping in view the
problems confronted by the. Library. |

5.4. The Committee also found that most of the work charged employees are being paid
their wages form the non-plan budgetary allocation meant for National Library and that too
without performing any job. The Committee further learnt that this practice has been going
on for the last twenty years without any check form the Department of Culture. This
appears to be irregular. The payment of wages to the work charged employees should have
been made from the budgetary alloction of C.P.W.D given by the Ministry of Urban Affairs
and Employment. The Secretary and the Joint Secretary, Department of Culture informed
the Chairman, HRD on 16th December, 1996 that this practice has been going on for the
last twenty years. The Committee takes a serious note of this lapse and recommends that the
responsibility should be fixed on the lapse of such an irregular practice. Since this
irregulaity was discovered by the Committee, the Department of Culture may apprise the
Committee within two monts about the action taken thereon. (

5.5. The Committee, therefore, feels that the budgetary, alloction meant for National
Libarary should not be used for the payment of wages to the work charged employees
engaged by C.P.W.D. This is particularly so as the library is already starved of funds. The
Committee, also recommends that the dues.of CPWD should be settled immediately. Since
the Libarary is badly in need of maintenance and special repairs in view of its historical and
architectural design, the Department should properly work out its requirement of funds and
project it before the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission.so as to ensure adequate
and timely availability of funds. The Committee observes with concern that, at present there
is a mismatch between Plan and Non-plan expenditure which needs to be rectified. The
Committee also observes that apparently there is a lack of total perspective planning and the
planning appears to be piecemeal. The Committee, therefore recommends that a
comprehensive plan may be prepared with project work alongwith the detailed budgetary
needs for meeting the requirements of National Library. The Committee also desires that
the C.P.W.D. may examine the problems of absorption of the work charged employees and
consider their demands sympathetically.



ANNEXURE 1

NAME OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE WHO VISITED THE NATIONAL
LIBRARY CALCUTTA ON 9TH OCTOBER, 1996

Shri $.B. Chavan — Chariman
Dr. M. Aram

Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Shri LG. Sanadi

10. Shrimati Krishna Bose

11. Shri Samik Lahiri

12. Dr. Bali Ram

eer avayne


MINUTES


VII

SEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 11th September 1996 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S. 8, Chavan——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo é
Dr. 8.8. Dutta ‘ ५४
. Dr. M. Aram

. Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

LOK SABHA

11. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

12. Shri Sartaj Singh

13. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

14. Dr. C. Silvera

15. Shri 1G. Sanadi

16. Dr. (Shrimati) Krishna Bose
17, Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy .
18. Shri Krishna

19. Shri Shivanand H. Koujaigi
20. Shri Samik Lahiri

21. Dr. M. Jagannath

22. Dr. Bali Ram

23. Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

SECRETARIAT
Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary

8 ४० 9० :3 9 ७ + ५० [७

~

2. The Committee at the first instance discussed about its future programme. After
some discussion, the Committee identified the following items, which, the Committee feels,
require detailed examination:—

MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

3. Maintenance of Libraries

(i) National Library, Calcutta
600: * . | *

4. The Committee further decided to visit Indian Museum, National Library and Netaji

Memorial Museum at Calcutta and to visit the project sites of Lok Jumbish and Sikhsakarmi

***Retales to other matters.

11



12

Projects at Jaipur and also to hold discussions with them. The Committee formed two Study
Groups, one for visiting Calcutta and the other for Jaipur and Mount Abu. The Chairman of
the Committee directed that the consent of the Members may be taken for finalising the
Study Groups.

5. The Committee decided that the Study Group visiting Calcutta should undertake the
visit from the 8th to 11th October, 1996 and the Study Group visiting Jaipur and Mount Abu
should visit there from 4th to 8th November, 1996. The Committee authorised its Chairman
to finalise the details of the tour programmes and to approach Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha, for his permission for the visits of the Study Groups to Calcutta, Jaipur and Mount
Abu.

6. The. Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.



IX
a NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 17th December, 1996 in Committee
Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S. 8. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri V. Kishore Chandra S$. Deo
Dr. B.B. Dutta

Dr. M. Aram

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

. Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray

. Shri R. Margabandu

. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

LOK SABHA

11. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
12. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

13. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

14. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh i हे i
15. Chaudhary Paragi Lal

16. Shri Ishwarbhai K. ‘Chavda
17. Shri 1.0. Sanadi

18. Shri.A. Venkatarama Reddy
19. Shri Shiyanand H. Koujalgi
20. Dr. M. Jagannath

21. Dr. Bali, Ram

22. Shri Ranen Barman

SECRETARIAT

Shri S.C. Jarodia, Director

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J.G. Negi, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Fifty-second Report on the Functioning of the
National Library, Calcutta. The Committee, after some discussions, adopted the report with
some minor modifications.

Seernavawn

e

3. The Committee then authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof. (Smt.) Bharati

Ray and Dr. M. Aram to present the report in Rajya Sabha and Shri I.G. Sanadi and in his

absence Shri Samik Lahiri.to lay the report in Lok Sabha. The Committee, also decided that
‘the report mray be presented/laid on 19th December, 1996.

4 * * *

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

*Relates to other. matters.

210[RS-1 000. B