RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Ninteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development]

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12.3.96)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12.3.96)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 1996/Phalguna, 1917 (Saka)


1. Composrrion OF tHE COMMITTEE

2. INrRODUCTION
Cuarrer 1
Cuarrer IL
Cuarrer UL
Cuarrer 1V
CHarrer V

3. Minutes

CONTENTS

Report. ae
Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government pester hasten ener cee fer

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies

Recommendations/Observations in respect of which rey
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee .....
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Govern-
ment has not given any reply

PaGEs
(i)-Gii)
(iii)
1—8
9-14
15S—19

20

21
22.


IP satan

tt अपर

Wo aoiilje करा Tage int 2 a ptt yates ४1 mana
- ha sghinunbD od yc eigezon 71 ce ovid कआग0197७0 : -
) sittavoD (आज 10 19% ४ लो Deathly fabaaaviios3A = ४ MarIAHD
ant ae ; : fin wal Feige

40010 ES



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(1995-96)

1. Shri P. Upendra — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

ree
ARON

a
FSP ANANAWN

. Dr. M. Aram

. Smt. Renuka, Chowdhury

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri O.P. Kohli

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
. Shri Ranjan Prasad» Yadav,

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

16
17
18
19.
20.
21
22.
23.
24,
25
26.
27.
28
29
30.
34
32.
33.
34.
35

. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri: Lakshmanan
. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

. Dr. Vasant Pawar

. Vacant

. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
. Shri K.T. Vandayar

. Vacant

. Shri Inder Jit

. Shri Anna Joshi

. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

6)


36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

i)

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

Shri Rambadan

Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

Shri Ramchandra Dome

Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
Shri Suraj Mandal

Shri Kanshi Ram

SECRETARIAT

ne
2
oF
4.

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri Subhash C. Jarodia, Director

Shri Om Datta Sharma, Under Secretary

Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu. Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised bythe Committee to submit the Report on
its behalf, present this Thirty-eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in its Ninteenth Report on “Demands for
Grants” (1995-96) of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health).

2. The Ninteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 250 April, 1995 and
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th April, 1995. Action Taken Note on the
recommendations contained in the report, received from the Department of Health, was
considered by the Committee and this report was adopted at its sitting held on 11th March,
1996.

New Detni; P. UPENDRA

Chairman,
Committee on Human
Resource Development.



“ cs oat
09४पंछ gee

Aparmgotesth Shion!

een te



CHAPTER-I

REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Ninteenth Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, (Department of Health) for the year 1995-96 which was
presented to Rajya Sabha on 25.4.95 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25.4.95.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorised as follows :

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 3.1,
4.1,,5, 5.1. 0.2, 7, /,1, %o4hOSy 11:25 122, 12S o8i29:20.25001 at

(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies : 2.3, 2.4, 8, 11.3, 14.3, 14.4, 15.4, 15.6, 15.7, 16.2, 16.3.

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee : 3.2, 6.3, 6.4, 7.2, 7.3, 9.4, 9.5, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4,
13.1, 15, 15.1, 15.3, 47.1 19.3. 19.4, 19.5,,.1916, 20:3.

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been received: 6, 9, 9.1, 11.1.

3. The Committee will now deal with some of its recommendations on which the Action
Taken Note of the Government has not been accepted by the Committee.

Medical Education and Training
Recommendation (Para No. 3.2)

In the context of growing number of privaté medical colleges, the Committee
recommends creation of proper monitoring machinery to supervise their function. It also
empha: the need for strengthening the MCI.

Ministry’s Reply

In order to check mushroom growth of sub-standard medical colleges, the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956, was amended vide the Indian Medical Council (Amendment)
Act, 1993,

According to amended Act, no person shall establish a medical college or no medical
college shall open new or higher courses of study (including a postgraduate course of study
or training) and no medical college shall increase its admission capacity without the previous
permission of the Central Government. Under this Act, a proposal is required to be
submitted in the prescribed format to the Central Government for opening of a new medical
college/opening of new or higher courses and for increasing the intake capacity in the
existing médical colleges. There is no report of private medical colleges being established
without the Central Government permission after the amendment of Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956. The Medical Council of India has been authorised to create necessary posts as
per their requirements to strengthen the Council.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee notes that the Department has not responded to the specific
recommendations for creation of a monitoring machinery and to strengthen the Medical
Council of India. The Committee, therefore, reiterating its earlier recommendations, desires
that a monitoring cell be created in the Medical Council of India to oversee ‘the functioning
of private medical colleges. +


2

Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM & H)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 6.3 & 6.4)

In response to the Committee’s suggestion in para 57 of its Report, given last year, to
get the Excise Duty on Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Medicines removed, the Department
stated that it had requested the Ministry of Finance on 16.1.1995 regarding removal of 10%
Excise Duty on patent proprietary Ayurvedic medicines in the current Budget and that there
has not been any response from the Finance Ministry so far, to which the Committee takes
serious exception.

The Committee feels that the matter needs urgent attention as it would be an important
step in popularising the Indian Systems of Medicine. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the new Department of ISM & H should take up this matter with the
Ministry of Finance for an early decision.

Ministry’s Reply

The ISM & H Deptt. have already follow up the matter of removal of 10%. Excise
Duty on proprietary Ayurvedic medicines with the Finance Ministry.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee takes u very serious view of the inordinate delay in getting the excise
duty removed on proprietary Ayurvedic medicines. Since the matter is reported to be
pending with the Ministry of Finance for long, the Committee desires that the case be taken
up at the Minister’s level to avoid delays.

National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur
Recommendation (Para Nos. 7.2. & 7.3)

National Institute of Ayurveda. it is said, is facing problems on several counts. There is
no Director at present; many posts in different categories are lying vacant, and no research
activity is being carried out. Lot of construction activities are going on and a major portion

of money provided is being spent on building construction. The Institute thus appears to be
in complete shambles.

The Committee, therefore, suggests that a Senior Officer of the Department be deputed
immediately to take stock of the situation und review the progress of the Institute and
prepare a report so that steps may be initiated to clear the augean stables at the earlier. The
Committee also recommends that a suitable enhancement be made in the allocation for this
Institute at the RE stage.

Ministry’s Reply

It is submitted that the post of Director has already been filled up. Action is being
taken separately to fill up other vacant posts.

Comments of the Commitee

The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the lukewarm approach of the
Department in this respect. No action has been initiated in pursuance of the Committee’s
suggestion to depute a Senior Officer to look into the functioning of the Institute. The
Committee has been given to understand that the Institute’s affiliation with the Rajasthan
University, leading to delayed commencement of Session, examination etc. are the main
factors due to which the Institute has not been functioning well. The Committee was,
however, informed that a proposal to delink it from the Rajasthan University has been
initiated. However, the Committee, while reaffirming its earlier recommendation, calls upon
the Department to make all possible efforts to set right the sorry state of affairs prevailing in
the Institute.


Mental Health
Recommendation (Para Nos. 9.4 and 9.5)

1 The Committee expresses its concern over the unsatisfactory conditions prevailing in
the Institutes/Hospitals meant for mental health care and research. The training
programme evolved by the Centre has also not picked up. The response from the State
Governments is neither forthcoming nor adequate.

The Committee feels that the need for improving the services and facilities for
treatment and training and extending them upto the district and primary health care level
can hardly be ignored. There is an imperative need for having a comprehensive plan for
tackling the mental health problems in this country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that a programme be evolved with broad thrust on improving the status of
mental health care services in our country, by involving mental hospitals, departments of
psychiatry in medical colleges. training of medical and para-medical staff and creating
awareness among the people.

Ministry’s Reply

The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. It is again submitted that a
number of Mental Institutions have been conferred autonomous status which would
definitely lead to improvement of services. Assistance to the tune of Rs. 10.00 lakhs has
been provided to the National Institute of Mental Health & Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore for
conducting training to Primary Health Physicians. The Institute has been advised to
forward the Programme of Training to all State Governments requesting them to nominate
suitable personnel for the training.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Departmént which is
conspicuously silent on the key recommendation of the Committee to. evolve a
comprehensive Plan for tackling the mental health problems in the country. Hence,
reasserting its earlier recommendation, the Committee under lines the need to seriously
consider the matter and take all possible steps to ameliorate the situation.

Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi
Recommendation (Para Nos. 10.2, 10.3 and 10.4)

The Committee is not convinced by the argument advanced by the Department for
giving much less than what was asked for by the Institute. It feels that the Department
should have ensured that the funds provided to the Institute were utilized properly. The
Committee is aware of the poor conditions obtaining in the Institute and, in fact, last year
also, in its Ninth Report, it had drawn the attention of the Department to this issue and
had recommended that a review of the functioning of Institute be conducted soon.

When asked about the action taken in this regard, the Committee was informed that
in pursuance of its recommendation, a work study of the Institute had been proposed and
the Ministry of Finance had been requested to nominate a core member from the Staff
Inspection Unit in the Study Group. As soon as the core member was nominated, the
Committee was assured, the work study would be carried out.

The Committee recommends that the Department should review thé financial
requirements of the Institute at the appropriate stage and enhance thei outlay based on its
actual needs. It also likes the Department to ensure that the Institute does utilise the fund
fully and properly. The Committee also recommends that the formalities regarding
constituting the proposed study group should be completed early and the work be started.


4

The Study group should be asked, the Committee suggests, to make concrete and positive
suggestions for bringing about radical improvements in the functioning of the Institute.
Ministry's Reply

Among other things, it is proposed to frame rules for the Management of Central
Institute of Psychiatry, for facilitating more latitude in administrative and financial matters
which will lead to further improvement in services, Director, CIP, Ranchi, is also being
asked to project requirements for its developmental needs.

This Ministry had already requested the Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Expenditure, to
nominate a core-member from SIU Work Study Group for assessing staff requirements of
the CIP, Ranchi. The Institute has been included in their Programme for Work Study during
1995-96.

Comments of the Committee

Despite the Committee’s recommendation in its two previous reports, a review of the
functioning has not been undertaken for the reason that the Ministry of Finance had been
requested to nominate a core member from the SIU. Now since a member has been
appointed by the Ministry of Finance as revealed by the Secretary, Health. during the course
of discussion, the review should be completed as early as possible.

Drug Control
Recommendation (Para No. 13.1)

The Committee welcomes the proposal of levying and collecting cess on drugs and
recommends that necessary legal and other formalities should be completed at the earliest,
with a viewed to paving the way for setting up a Central Drug Authority in the year 1995-96.
Ministry’s Reply

The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is in the process of formulating draft
legislation for setting up of a National Drug Authority and for levying Cess on drugs and
pharmaceuticals to ensure quality control of drugs and to encourage Research and
Development in the drug sector.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not happy with the slow progress in this regard. It, therefore,
recommends that the draft legislation may be brought before the Parliament at the earliest.
National Malaria Eradication Programme
Recommendation (Para Nos. 15, 15.1 and 15.5)

This programme is a Centrally sponsored scheme on 50:50 sharing basis with the States.
The Committee notes with concern that the Malaria situation in the country had not
improyed even after the adoption of Modified Plan of Operation (MPO) strategy from 1977.
The Committee observed from the following statistics supplied by the Department that
except in the years 1991 and 1992, the total number of cases of Malaria had gone-up over
the previous years. Similarly, deaths due to Malaria had also increased consistently, except
in the years 1984 and 1992.

Year Malaria cases (Million) Deaths
1976 6.47 59
1984 2.18 247
1987 1.66 188
1989 2.05 268

1990 2.02 353



Year Malaria Cases: Deaths
(Million)

1991 2:14 421

1992 2.13 422

1993 2.20 345

1994 2.20 1069

The Committee does not agree with the Department’s contention that containing
malaria cases to around 2 million per year. from 1984 onwards, was in itself an indication of
the success of the programme. The aim of the programme, the Committee points out, is not
merely containment but its eradication. Even the containment theory does not hold good, as
the incidence of malaria has increased all these years. The Committee is not satisfied with
the explanation given for the outbreak of malaria in Rajasthan last year. which led to an
unsurge in deaths due to malaria in 1994.

The Committee, therefore, recommends that more funds should be provided for this
programme. It also emphasis the need for activating the administrative machinery from the
top to bottom and recommends that all out efforts be made for tackling the menace of
malaria on the level it was done during the 60s.

Ministry’s Reply
After the implementation of the Modified Plan of Operation (MPO), incidence of

Malaria came down from 6.47 million cases in 1976 to 2.18 million cases in 1989. Since then,
Malaria incidence has been contained around 2 million cases annually.

Provision for additional funds. if required, would be projected in the R.E. 1995-96. As
the programme is being impicmented through the State Governments. The State
Governments have already been asked to establish a High Powered Board on Malaria
Control under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary of the concerned State to coordinate
the Malaria Control Activities. address problems relating to enforcing model bye-laws in
urban area etc.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee notes with concern that no significant progress in arresting the cases of
Malaria has been made even after the implementation of the Modified Plan of operation way
back in 1977. Even the fact that it has, ever since 1989, been contained to around two
million cases, is not very encouraging. Intermittent upsurge of malaria incidence in several
parts of the country is yet another instance of failure on this front. Incidence of Malaria is
concentrated in tribal areas particularly. The Committee, therefore, desires that all out
efforts be made not only to contain but also to eradicate malaria, particularly in tribal areas.

National’ Aids Control Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 17.1)

The Committee is happy that blood bank services are being improved. The Committee
emphasises the urgent need of improving blood transfusion services and making them
foolproof so that no HIV-infected blood was given to anyone as more and more such cases
are being reported now-a-days. Disposable needles, it has been observed, are not being used
in all the hospitals/dispensaries. The Committee recommends that the usé of such disposable
syringes should be encouraged and adequate emphasis be given on surveillance and clinical
management. Increased stress should be given for voluntary blood donation.



Ministry’s Reply

The observations of the Committee have been noted and also brought to the attention
of all the State/UT Goveriments for compliance.

The Drugs and Cosmetics Act/Rules provide for compulsory testing of blood/blood
products used for transfusion purposes to be free from blood transmissible, infection, such as
Hepatitis, Syphillis and HIV, Government of India is providing ELISA Readers, HIV ‘Test
Kits and RAPID Test Kits to ull the Blood Banks in the Public Sector. Financial assistance
for laboratory technicians in each Blood Bank and for consumables is also released to State
Government every yeur. Both single use disposable needles and syringes and autoclaved
needles und syringes ure equally safe. However, there is the possibility of disposable needles
and syringes getting recycled. In view of this, guidelines on Hospital Acquired Infection
Control which inter-alia, contain instructions on proper sterlisation, autoclaving and also
destruction/disposal of heedles and syringes have been developed and circulated to all State/
UT Governments. These guidelines have been circulated once again for strict compliance.

In addition to regular surveillance, Sentinal Surveillance, atleast in two sites, is being
organised by each State Government among STH patients, ante-natal mothers and
Intravenous Drug Users. More than 2000 Doctors have been trained on clinical
management, diagnosis and infection control of HIV/AIDS. All the States have trained
Doctors.

Information, Education and Communication activities under the National AIDS Control
Programme also give emphasis on augmentation of voluntary blood donation.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee, reiterating its earlier recommendation, stresses on the need to start the
use of disposable syringes in view of the growing menace of AIDS. Simultaneously, the
Department should ensure that all the mitteriuV/equipments are provided for sterilizing the
used syringes in the dispensaries/hospnals and ensure the sterilization of syringes where
disposable syringes are not provided.

Reply

jon/observations

National T.B Control Programme
19.3 The Committee found that the The

recommendation of the

progress in regarding to increasing the
DTCs, TB Clinics etc. very slow. It
also notes that though the programme
is being implemented since 1962. so far
only 85% districts of the country could
be covered and the rest ure expected
to be covered by 2000 A.D. Mortality
rate due to TB, which bas come down
from 80 per lakh of population in 1968
to 50 per lakh of population, is also
not satisfactory.

Committee with regurd to extension of
DTP (over and above present 85%
level) is being implemented in a
phased manner to cover all the
districts by 2000 A.D. In 20 more
districts the programme is proposed to
be implemented in the first: phase in
consultation with == State Health ©
Authorities in the current year,
Priority is being accorded to quality
spurtum microscopy by way of setting
target for new spurtum _ positive
through provision of binocular
microscope and appropriate Training
to the microscopist and maintenance of
quality by system cross checking and



19.4

19.5

19.6

P|

Despite all these efforts and
achievements, the Committee
observes, with deep concern, that the
incidence of TB does not appear to
have come down drastically; it
remains, more or less, constant. TB is
no more a killer disease and it can be
cured completely if a proper regimn of
medicines and life style are adhered
to.

The Committee recommends that the
matter of setting up DTCs in the
remaining distrigts should be taken up
with the respective State Governments
and more and more TB Clinics should
be provided in the rural areas. The
Committee also suggests that for the
detection of TB. the Department
should rely more on microscopy
method than on radiology because
quite often diagnosis based on the
latter technique, were found to be
wrong, particularly in the case of
pulmonary T.B.

The Committee also recommends
increase in the allocation for the
National T.B. Control Programme
through preventive measures from
early childhood.

Comments of the Committee

Allocation in TB has been
substantially increased during the
recent years.‘ However, it is not
enough and needs increase in
allocation. The budget allocations
made for National T.B. Control
programme for the last three years are
given below:

(Rs. in Crores)

Year Allocation
1993-94 35.50
1994-95 46.00
1995-96 50.00

Inspite of the fact that allocation has increased, the coverage under the programme has

not increased. The Committee is of the view that multidrug therapy requires a much greater
financial allocation. The Department should, therefore. ensure required allocation for this
programme. हु

De-addiction Centres

Recommendation (Para No. 20.3)

The Committee reiterates its recommendation to open more sub-centres in various parts

of the country. The efforts should be to provide one such centre in every district having the
facilities for detoxification and psychological counselling. The Committee feels that the
number of beds for this purpose is also inadequate and it should be increased. The
Committee, therefore, recommends, suitable increase in the outlay for the Drug-De-

addiction centres at the RE level.



Ministry's Reply

During 1994-95, 8 additional centres have been provided assistance thus the total
number of centres have increased from 37 to 45. Additional allocations for new centres will
be considered during 1995-96 at the R.E. stage.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee reiterates its recommendation to provide one de-addiction centre in
each district of the country.
General
Serologist and Chemical Examiner

The Committee in its Ninth Report recommended that the assessment of the work done
by the Department of serologist and chemical examiner should be undertaken to see whether
a massive curtailment of posts would not hamper the work. As the Ministry's reply was not

satisfactory, the Committee in its Twenty-fourth report observed that the reply did not meet
the Committee’s objection.

The Committee is given to understand that the Government proposes to go ahead with
the abolition of posts without asse: nt. The Committee suggests that the Department
should ensure that proper assessment is done at the earliest.



CHAPTER-II
Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government

Para Recommendation/Observations Reply
No.
r Rec 3

Medical Education and Training

3.1

The Committees notes that the
allocation for the Medical Education
Research and Training included
outlays mainly for premier institutions
like AILMS, PGIMER, Chandigarh,
MCI and ICMR, etc. which are the
back-bone of medical research and
training in our country. In view of the
shortage of trained medical and para-
medical specialist. manpower in the
country and the urgent need for
strengthening the base of medical
research, the allocation for this
purpose, the Committee feels, is not
adequate and it should. therefore, be
suitably increased.

Cancer Research

4.1

In view of the cancer treatment
becoming expensive, there is an
imperative need to provide
facilities for this, The Committee,
therefore, recommends an increase in
allocation for this purpase from the
next year and regional cancer centres
given more funds.

Nursing Schools
5 & 5.1 It appears to the Committee that the

Department did not make serious
efforts for achieving the target in this
regard. The Committee feels that the
matter should have been taken up with
the States/institutions to get sufficient
number of proposals for opening these
schools. In view of severe shortage of
nursing staff throughout the country,
the Committee recommends that the
Department should see to it that the
remaining schools are set up in
1995-96.

The observations of the Committee
relating to increasing the allocation for
medical research in AIIMS, New Delhi
and PGIMER, Chandigarh and ICMR,
New’ Delhi, will be kept in mind at RE
stage.

The Committee’s recommendation has
been noted. During the year 1995-96,
provision of Rs. 19.00 crores has been,
made under National Cancer Control
Programme on Plan side. Possibility of
increasing budget for cancer centres at
R.E. stage would be explored and
increased outlay for 1996-97
considered.
+

State Government were requested to
send the proposals for opening of
nursing schools ~=where SC/ST
population are concentrated by 15th
July, 1995. Proposals have been
received to open 9 schools during
1995-96. Out of 9 schools, proposals to
open 7 schools of nursing have been
sent/forwarded by State Government
of Maharashtra, Assam, Gujarat,
Karnataka and Himachal Pradesh.
P.I.C. has approved for opening of 10
schools during the VII Plan of which
6 schools had been sanctioned during
the year 1994-95. The remaining 4
schools will be sanctioned during
current year to the States of
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Gujarat and
Assam.



10

i)

Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy

6.2

The Committee welcomes the decision
of the Government, albeit late, to set
up a separate Department of ISM&H

‘and feels that it would go a long way

in providing the required impetus to
the promotion of research and
treatment on scientific lines in the
traditional systems of medicine. The
Committee feels that the Government
should provide =the _ necessary
infrastructure, including office and
manpower, and see to it that the
newly-created Department starts
functioning immediately. The
Committee recommends that adequate
allocation should be made for this
Departinent.

National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur

13. 7-1

The Committee is not at all satisified
with the progress of expenditure in the
Institute. It has noted that the amount
provided in the BE 1994-95 had to be
brought down at the RE stage for
reasons not known to the Committee.
The Committee is perturbed over the
fact that the Institute was not able to
utilise the funds last year and the
allocation has been reduced in
1995-96.

The new Department of Indian
Systems of Medicines and
Homoeopathy would be utilising the
entire funds allocated to it. The budget
allocation for the remaining part of the
VIlth Plan has been increased by Rs.
20.00 crores. The total Plan Outlay
after the increase is Rs. 108.00 crores
for the शायर Plan. 106 posts for the
new Department have been created
and the posts are being filled. The
ISM&H Deptt. would be functioning
from a new building. The Annexe of
the Red Cross Building is being
renovated for this purpose. The
ISM&H Deptt. have taken up the
matter of removal of 10%

An amount of Rs. 390.00 lakhs
(Rs. 190.00 lakhs under Plan and Rs.
200.00 lakhs under Non-Plan) were
provided in BE during 1993-94. A
provision of Rs. 172.00 lakhs under
Non-Plan and Rs. 190.00 lakhs under
Plan was made due to their
incompetency for utilisation. An
additional amount of Rs. 48.00 lakhs
was reappropriated under Non-Plan,
thus making the total Rs. 410.00 lakhs
out of which the institute could only
utilise Rs. 309.50 lakhs during the said
year. Keeping in view the trend of
expenditure, a sum of Rs. 370.00 lakhs
was provided in the year 1994-95. As
regards grants in 1995-96, it is pointed
out that s Rs. 222.00 lakhs under Non-
Plan and Rs. 200.00 lakhs under Plan
making a total of Rs. 422.00 lakhs has
been provided.



i

3

7.4

Yoga
10.5

The Committee is happy to learn that
on the initiative of the Deptt. the pay
seales of teachers have recently been
upgraded and hopes that the posts
lying vacant in various categories,
including that of the Director, would
be filled up soon.

The Committee is of the view that the
Department has not made desired
efforts to provide faci Tor Yoga
therapy/training for treatment — of
various diseases and maintenance of
health in our country. There is a
greater need to provide Yogic
treatment in di like Diabetes,
Asthama, Hypertension,
etc., in context, The
Committee, therefore. recommends
that the new Department of ISM&H
should take concerted steps in this
regard. Popularising of Yoga therapy.
Committee feels, nceds immediate
attention.

It is submitted that the post of
Director has already been filled up.
Action is being taken separately to fill
up other vacant posts.

For promoting clinical, fundamental
and literary research two autonomous
bodies, viz. Central Reserach Institute
for Yoga (CRIY) and Central Council
for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy
(CCRYN) have been established under
Minsitry of Health and Family
Welfare.

During 1994-95 the CRIY has got
published/communicated 6 research
papers on various subjects of Yoga.
The collaborative research work with
Maulana Azad Medical College, New
Delhi, on diabetes mellitus, bronchial
asthma and essential hypertension and
with Defence Institute of Physiology
and Allied Sciences on (i) Effect of
and integrated mass of Yoga practices
on lung diffusion capacity in adult
education on childrens’ — manifest
anxiety scale, personality waits and
social and emotional
behaviour—evaluation through
computer is expected to yield good
results.

Study on the — multidimensional
evaluation of the effectiveness of an
integrated set of Yogic technology on
quantitatively measured — subjective
symptomatology of asthmatics was
completed and the findings revealed
that yoga practices besides reducing
the degree of broncho-construction,
hyperventilation and hypereania also
influenced the psychological aspects as
manifested by significant reduction in
statistically evaluated factors of panic-
fear irritability and fatigue derived by
employing the use of statistically five
delineated = ‘Normative — Regression

h


12

Equation.’

During April to September, 1994 in
the CRLY Hospital 27 indoor patients
were treated for 30 days (hospital with
10 bedded capacity) and out of them
12 patients have shown remarkable
improvement. Over 619 outdoor
patients suffering from diabetes,
hypertension, spondylitis, arthiritis and
various disorders had attended OPD
and were given Yoga treatment. Total
number of Sadhaks who attended
Yogas classes was 2299 and total
attendance was 21616.

The Institute also provided Yoga
training outside the institute at Lodhi
Garden, New Delhi (continuous) and
at Jaipur. Yoga training to 148 LAS
probationers at Mussoorie was given in
two batches of oe month each.
Central Council for Research in Yoga
and Naturopathy has been evaluating
the Health Care Efficacy of Yoga and
Naturopathy by sanctioning different
time bound Clinical Research Projects
to various voluntary organisations and
providing them financial assistance tq
carry them out  scieatifically. The
Council has also founded institutions
for conducting one year Diploma
Course in Yoga and Naturopathy and
for organising Seminar/workship etc.
in Yoga.

A provision of Rs. 40 lakhs under Plan
for the CCRYN was made during
1994-95 and 1995-96 and budget
provision for the (1२1४ during 1995-96
has been increased to Rs. 35 lakhs
from Rs. 20 lakhs in 1994-95 under
Plan for the development and
propogation of Yoga.

Since a new department of ISM & H
has been created, a proposal for
establishment of National Institute of
Yoga is under active consideration of
the Government for popularisation



13

Hospitals and Dispensaries

11.2

The Committee is of the opinion that
mismanagement of both men and
materials is the major cause for all the
ills bedevelling our hospitals and
dispensaries. With this level of
allocation to the hospitals and
dispensaries, the Committee feels, it
would not be possible to maintain even
the existing services, what to think of
expanding or improving them. It,
therefore, recommends that a realistic
assessment of the requirement of all
the hospitals and dispensaries be made
and suitable amount be provided at
the RE level.

Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute

12.2

The Committee feels that even the
increased amount provided for the
Institute will not be sufficient. to carry
out its obligations.

The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Department
should prepare, after a careful study, a
comprehensive plan to develop and
modernise the Institute’s laboratories
with a view to reviving the research
activities and resorting its previous
glory. The Department should assess
the financial requirements _ for
implementing that Plan and make
suitable provision in the Institute’s
Budget at the appropriate state.

of Yoga therapy.

The Ministry has been periodically
reviewing the functioning of the
Central Government Hospitals. HFM
also reviewed and issued certain
directions which were circulated to
Medical Superintendents of Dr. RML
Hospitals and Safdarjung Hospital.
Emphasis was given by HFM on better
utilisation of Plan/Non-Plan
expenditure and its scrutiny every
month at higher level. The Ministry
may provide sufficient funds at revised
estimates stage if the Head of the
Hospitals gives justification.

With a view to modernising and its
infrastructural facilities for providing
better clinical and research facilities,
the Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute
(VPCI) has submitted a developmental
plan consisting of 13 sub-schemes for
implementation in a phased manner. A
total of the order of Rs. 338,57 lakhs
was proposed for the current Plan
period. However, as there was no
approved Plan Scheme for VPCI
during the current five year Plan, it
was decided to provide Rs. 30.00 lakhs
to the Institute under Plan during
1994-95 by making internal
adjustments so that priority activities
could be taken up immediately.

An allocation of Rs. 30.00 lakhs has
been made under Plan during 1995-96
also in addition to Rs. 242.16 lakhs
under Non-Plan, A sum of Rs. 120.08
lakhs under Non-Plan has already been
released to the Institute during the
current year. Provisions under Plan
will be suitably augmented as soon as
the Plan Scheme is cleared by their
Standing Finance Committee.



14

Plague Control

18.2

The Committee notes that the Medical
Colleges selected for the development
of lab facilities fall in the endemic area
in which Plague cases were reported
first. Possibility of it occurring in other
parts of the country cannot be ruled
out. The Committee, therefore,
sts that such assistance be
led to all regional laboratories in
different parts of the country so that
cases could be detected promptly and
remedial and preventive measures
taken without wastage of time.

De-addiction Centres

20.2

National

21.1

The Committee feels that neither the
number of De-addiction centres nor
the infrastructure provided to them is
adequate. It also feels that the outlay
for this purpose should not have been
reduced.

Iodine Deficiency Programme

The Committee finds the
simplementation of the universualisation
of iodised salt tardy. The Committee is
not aware as to why some of the States
were not taking interest in the
programme. it recommends that the
Department should intervene in a
more positive and effective manner for
persuading the States to implement the
scheme in the current year. A
sustained publicity campaign should be
conducted to create awareness among
the people.

The recommendations of 06
Committee have been noted.
However, it is submitted — that

necessary funds have been placed at
the disposal of National Institute of
Communicable Diseases, New Delhi,
under National Disease Surveillance
Programme. Funds — under this
Programme have been provided to the
All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, for upgrading laboratory
facilities. | Another proposal — for
development of lab facilities at Indira
Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences,
Bihar, has been received and is undér
process for meeting the expenditure
from  NICD’s National — Disease

Surveillance Programme.

The recommendations of the
Committee have been noted. The
Ministry is encouraged with — the
recommendations to augment the Drug
De-addiction Centres and for increase
in the allocations for the same.

The recommendations of the
Committee have been noted. Efforts
are being made to persuade the

remaining States/Union Territories to
issue Notification, banning the sale of

Non-iodised edible salt. Rs. 95.00
lakhs have already been paid to
Doordarshan as part of our publicity
campaign on National —_lodine
Deficiency Disorders Control
Programme.



CHAPTER-III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT

DESIRE TO PURSUE

Para Recommendations/ Reply

No. Observations

1 3 2

25 The Committee is deeply concerned As per the Human Development
over such a meagre allocation (i.e. Report, 1994 of the United Nations
0.06% of the total Budget) for Health, Develupment Programme, the public
which forms an important ingredient of expenditure on health in India is 1.3
human development. The Committee per cent of the Gross Domestic
hopes that the Government would Product (1990) whereas the total
make efforts for spending 5% of the expenditure on health (public and
GDP on Health sector by the year private) is 6 per cent of the Gross
2000 AD. Domestic Product.

2.4 The Committee feels that the

allocation for the) Department of
Health, though shows an increase this
year over the previous year, does not
appear to be adequate in view of
India’s commitment to attain ‘Health
for All’ by 2000 A.D. With the present
rate of increase, the Committee
apprehends, that Health for All
would remain a distant goal. the
Committee, therefore, feels that if at
all the Government is serious about
this, it should try to find out ways and
means for providing a suitable share to
the Health sector from the GDP every
year.

National Institute of Siddha

8.

The Committee has been informed
that a proposal for setting up of the
National Institute of Siddha has been
received from the State Government
of Tamil Nadu. The Committee is not
aware whether the Department has
initiated any action and recommends
that the proposal of Tamil Nadu
Government be examined
expeditiously and funds provided for
this should be utilised in the financial
year 1995-96.

15

The proposal received from the
Government of Tamil Nadu for the
establishment of National Institute of
Siddha in Tamil Nadu is being
examined for the feasibility of
establishment of NIS, Tamil Nadu.


16

113

14.3

Hospitals and Dispensaries

There is much to be desired in the
functioning of the prestigious medical
institutions under Central Government
control, like AIIMS, Safdarjung
Hospital, Lady Hardinge Hospital and
PGIMER. Frequent strikes and work
stoppages, both by doctors, para-
medical staff and others are the order
of the day. Indifferent management
and indiscipline = aggravate tthe
problem. This is highly deplorable.

Public Health

The Committee is happy to learn that
the Department is acting on a proposal
to promote health and hygiene
awareness among the people for which
consultations are already underway.
The Committee feels that the need for
having such a plan in this country is
overdue. In the wake of recent
outbreak of killer diseases like Plague
and Malaria, the country can ill-afford
to delay it any more.

Government have always made all out
efforts 10 exai the genuine

demands of various unions and
associations through the available
mechanism established णि_ this

The hospitals have
constituted office Councils under JCM
Scheme for the harmonious relations
with the employees. The demands of
the employees of local importance are
considered in the office council. The
matters which are not within the
jurisdiction of Medical Superintendents
are taken up with DGHS for further
necessary action. As per the directions
of this Ministry, AIIMS have
constituted a Grievance Redressal
Committee to address the grievances
of the residents and faculty members.

An Expert Committee to
comprehensively review the Public
Health System in the country has been
constituted under the chairmanship of
Prof. J.S. Bajaj, Member, Planning
Commission. Another Group to
formulate a comprehensive National
Programme on Sanitation and
Environmental Hygiene on the lines of
a Technology Mission has also been
constituted under the Chairmanship of
Union Health Secretary. Bajaj
Committee would be submitting its
report by 30th September, 1995 and
the Group chaired by the Union
Health Secretary will also submit its
recommendations by 31st July, 1995.



17

1 2 3
14.4 The Committee, therefore, suggests
that this plan should be prepared and
brought into action immediately so
that the country is not caught
unawares, as it was last year.
National Malaria Eradication
Programme
15.4 The Committee is of the opinion that Considering the trend of expenditure
the outlay for NMEP, though of the programme during the previous
increased in 1995-96 is not adequate. years, the provision of Rs. 139 crores
; in BE 1995-96 appears to be adequate.
Additional requirements, if any, after
assessment of the progress of the
expenditure during the current
financial year would be projected for
providing in the R.E. 1995-96.
15.6 When enquired about the progress The Director of NMEP has been

regarding the project far 100%
assistance from World Bank for
control of malaria in the tribal areas of
seven States, Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, M.P., Bihar, Rajasthan,
Maharashtra and = Orissa, _ the
Committee was informed that
necessary information, as required by
World Bank, are being collected for
finalising the proposal the Committee
finds that this proposal is pending for a
long time. The Committee, therefore,
suggests that the Department should
collect the required information and
get the proposal finalised without any
further delay.

organising Preparatory Workshop. in
various States for the purposes of
formulation of the Malaria Control
Project for World Bank. assistance.’
The suggestion to have pilot projects
to tests the strategies» has been
abanded with a view to ensuring early
preparation of the Plan.



18

15.7

16.2

nN

The Committee advises the
Department to take the help of elected
Panchayats and local volunteers, and
involve teachers, particularly in tribal
and remote areas, for making NMEP
as success. All the PHCs, the
Committee recommends, be provided
trained manpower for preparing slides,
microscopes, enough drugs and
insecticides. If malaria can almost be
eradicate during the 60s, when the
country did not have enough
infrastructure, it can be done with
much ease today.

National Leprosy Eradication

Programme

The Committee — expresses _ its
satisfaction over the performance of
the National Leprosy Eradication

Programme and is happy to learn that

the registered leprosy caseload had
come down from 11.6 lakhs cases at
the end of March, 1994 to less than
8 lakh cases now> The Committee also
notes that with the application of
Multi-Drug Therapy (MDT), which
makes the patient non-infestive very
soon, has reduced the duration of the
whole treatment. There is more
voluntary reporting now and the causes
are being reported at' carly stages.

To increase the awareness about
malaria, the community is being
involved in Malaria Control activities
through Health ‘Education and
Publicity. Drug Distribution Centres
and Fever Treatment Depots are being
established by involving community
Health Volunteers and making
available adequate quantity of anti-
malaria drugs. Slides examination in
laboratories has been decentralised to
the PHCs levels with — trained
technicians, availability of adequate
number = of ~—_smicroscopists/proper
microscopes and drugs are being
ensured at all the levels. Insecticides
have already been provided to the
States as per their technical
requirements. Training Programmes
are being checked out by the Dte. of
NMEP to train the staff at all the
levels.

NLEP is 100% centrally sponsored
scheme. It aims at elimination of
leprosy by the year 2000 AD.

The action plan drawn up for
elimination of leprosy by 2000 AD not
only takes due care for sustaining the
ongoing anti-leprosy activities, but has
also made provision for accelerating
the programme by extending MDT to
uncovered areas in the country. There
is also provision in’ the action plan for
elimination of leprosy, for periodic
review for effective promotion of the
programme and mid course correction.
Thus there is no scope for contentment
or complacency in the programme.



19

2

3

16.3

The Committee emphasises the need
for maintaining the pace of success in
this regard dand  avises the
Department to guard against the
feeling of contentment as was notices
in the case of NMEP. The Committee
recommends that adequate emphasis
be provided to the rehabilitative aspect
also in which voluntary organisations
should be involved in a big way.

Medical Rehabilitation of leprosy
patients is the responsibility of the
Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. Whereas nodal Ministry for
economic rehabilitation of cured
leprosy patients is the Ministry of
Social Welfare.

Seventy five (75) reconstructive
surgery units and fifty (50) Leprosy
Rehabilitation Promotion Units
(LRPU) are functioning under NLEP
to cater to the medical needs of the
disabled patients. LRPU aims at
providing vocational —_réhabilitation
besides facilities for surgical correction
of deformed/disabled patients.

Provision has also been made under
the World Bank assisted National
Leprosy, Elimination Project — for
support for disabilityt and ulcer care to
leprosy patients and rehabilitation
services. Project contemplates to
provide following services:

(i) Disability management and ulcer
care services;

(ii) Reconstructive Surgery services;

(iii) Vocational training so as to
make deformed patients economically
viable;

There is provision for. participation
of voluntary organisations in the
National Leprosy Eradication
Programme.



CHAPTER-IV
Recommendations/Observations Replies to Which have not been accepted by the Committee

Please see Chapter I.



CHAPTER-V

Recommendations/Observations in Respect of Which Replies of the Government have not
been Received

Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM & H)

6. The outlay of Rs. -42.38 crores, provided in the BE 1994-95 for the ISM & H was
reduced to Rs. 39.09 crores in the RE. The Department thus was not able to utilize the
entire amount provided for this purpose last year. This year also, the amount provided for
other systems of medicines is less than what was provided in the B.E. of the last year. The
Committee expresses its displeasure on the reduction of allocation both in RE 1994-95 and
BE 1995-96.

Mental Health

9. The institutions/hospitals working in the field of mental health are in a pathetic
condition: These are not being given adequate financial and 002 support. Even the meagre
amount given for mental health was not being utilised properly. The Committee notes that
the allocation for this purpose has remained more or less stagnant for the last two years.

9.1 The Committee, in its 9th Report submitted in 1994-95, had expressed its concern
over the poor state of affairs in the field of mental health care and had recommended (para
35) to ensure a minimum standard of treatment to the mental patients.

Hospitals & Dispensaries

11.1 The Committee is fully aware of the appalling conditions prevailing in the Central
Government Hospitals. Facilities and services being provided are both inadequate and sub-
standard. Modern and sophisticated equipments are either not there or are not working.
Problems like lack of staff and basic amenities to the patients are known to everyone. About
the dispensaries, the less said the better.


MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT

*XXXI
THIRTY-FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Monday, the 11th March, 1996 in Committee
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra:
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

Miss Saroj Khaparde

Shri O.P. Kohli

Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
Shri ५. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Md. Salim

Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.G. Sanadi

10. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

11. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
12. Dr. ५. Rajeshwaran
13. Dr. Vasant Pawar
14, Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
15. Shri Ramachandra Dome
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Subhash C. Jarodia. Director
2. Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu. Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Thirty-seventh, Thirty-eighth,
Thirty-ninth and Fortieth Reports on the Action Taken by Government on the Recommen-
dations/Observations contained in its ‘Twenty-second, Ninteenth, Twentieth and Seventeenth
reports respectively with minor changes.

3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram and
Prof. 1.G. Sanadi to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Prof. Malini Bhattacharya and
in her absence Dr. V. Rajeshwaran to lay them on the Table of Lok Sabha.

4. The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on the 19th March,
1996 to consider and adopt the draft report on the Private Universities (Establishment and
Regulation) Bill, 1995.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M.

Chairman

० ००००० ७ के ५२ ७

“Minutes of Ist to 30th meeting relates to matters not included in this Report.

22