 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July/ Ashadha, 1939 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
293 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
THE TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FIRST REPORT ON 
 PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND AND 
RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION OF SPORTSPERSONS (PART-III) 
. 
 (Presented To The Rajya Sabha On 20th June, 2017) 
(Laid On The Table Of Lok Sabha On 20th June, 2017) 
 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available.  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July/ Ashadha, 1939 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
THE TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FIRST REPORT ON 
 PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND AND 
RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION OF SPORTSPERSONS (PART-III) 
 
 (Presented To The Rajya Sabha On 20th June, 2017) 
(Laid On The Table Of Lok Sabha On 20th June, 2017) 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
                           
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................   (i) –(ii) 
2. PREFACE ........................................................................................................................   (iii) 
3. REPORT ..........................................................................................................................  1- 14 
 
CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations which have been    
 accepted by the Government ................................................... 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not              
 desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply .................. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the         
 Government have not been accepted by the Committee ............   
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are still awaited…………………………… 
 
4. *OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE.....   
5. *MINUTES .............................................................................................................................  
6. *ANNEXURES .....................................................................................................................  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*Will be appended at printing stage. 

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2016) 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Shri V.P Sahasrabuddhe 
 
LOK SABHA 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13. Shri Nihal Chand 
14.      Shrimati Bhawana Gawali Patil 
15.      Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16.      Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.      Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.      Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.      Shri Chand Nath 
20.      Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.      Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.      Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.      Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.      Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.      Shri Sumedanand Sarswati 
26.      Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.      Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.      Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.      Shri P.R. Sundaram 
30.      Smt Neelam Sonkar 
31.      Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher 
 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
Shr K.P Singh,  Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary 
Shri R.K Mecolt Singh, , Under Secretary 
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Human Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety Third Report on Action 
Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Two 
Hundred Eighty First Report on “Performance of National Sports Development Fund and  
Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons (Part-III)..   
 
2. The Two Hundred Eighty First Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha  on 
9th August, 2016 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 9 th August, 2016.  Replies of 
the Government to the recommendations/observations contained in the Report, were 
considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 30th June, 2017. 
 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting 
held on the 30th June, 2017. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     SATYANARAYAN JATIYA 
June 30, 2017                                               Chairman,                  
Ashadha 9, 1939 (Saka)    Department-related Parliamentary 
                            Standing Committee on 
                           Human Resource Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

REPORT 
 
 The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Human Resource Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in its Two hundred eighty-first Report on the subject 
"Performance of National Sports Development Fund and Recruitment and Promotion of 
Sportspersons (Part III)" pertaining to the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, 
Department of Sports. The 281st Report was presented to both the Houses of Parliament 
on 9th August, 2016.  The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (Department of Sports) 
vide its communication dated 15th December, 2016 furnished its Action Taken replies to 
the Committee.  
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the 281st Report have been categorized as follows: 
(i)  Chapter-I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
    Paras -46, 104, 128, 140, 226, 229 and 235  
 
Total – 7 
 
(ii) Chapter-II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply –  
Paras - 105, 144, 147, 148, 149, 150, 182, 183, 216, 218, 225, 228, 231, 232 and 
234 
   
Total – 15 
 
(iii) Chapter-III:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee –  
Paras - 75, 227, 230 and 233 
 
Total – 4 
 
(iv) Chapter-IV:  Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of the 
Government is still awaited. 
 Paras -  
  
Total - Nil 

CHAPTER - I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY 
GOVERNMENT 
 
I. VISIT TO THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, MUMBAI AND UDAIPUR 
MUMBAI  
  
(B) MUMBAI 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1.0  During interaction with the Committee, it was informed that the Bank is 
willing to support/sponsor talented/promising sportspersons. However, no proposal was 
received by them from SAI. In response, SAI Officials informed that the Ministry of 
Youth Affairs & Sports has already written to Department of Financial Services. The 
Committee, therefore, directed SAI to give specific proposal to the Bank and not just a 
general routine communication, which would lose its importance.  (Para 46) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.1  The Department of Youth Affairs and Sports has sent specific proposals to 
the organizations which attended meeting of Standing Committee on HRD at 
Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai & Udaipur from 13 th to 20 th February, 2016, at Delhi on 
14.6.16 and at Chennai, Vishakhapatnam, Bhopal, Ujjain and Indore from 27 th June to 5th 
July, 2016 to support sports.  
1.2  Further, the Government has been regularly interacting with corporate 
entities both in public sector and private sector for adopting one specific discipline for 
taking the overall responsibility including talent scouting, training and competitive 
exposure of the sports persons. It has been decided that the Regional Heads of SAI will 
be coordinating with PSUs/Banks. A CSR Brochure on SAI activities giving details of 
various SAI Centres under various SAI Sports Promotional Schemes, 10 Regional & 02 
Academic Institutions has been prepared giving various options for potential CSR 
partners to come up with proposals as per their convenience and availability of funds.  

1.3  A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of State  
(Independent Charge)   on 24 th November, 2016 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi with 46 
Central Public Sector Undertakings and Public Sector Banks on issues related to 
promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF.   There was good response and it emerged 
that there should be synergy of efforts being made by various organizations for 
development of sports. Department of sports will work towards bringing in the said 
synergy.  
 
(C) UDAIPUR 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1.4  The Committee lauded the effort of IIFCL, Bank of Baroda and Oriental 
Bank of Commerce for their contribution extended for promotion of sports and these 
Organizations will set a very big example for the benefit of the Sports in the Country as a 
whole. The Committee urges the other organizations to start looking into this aspect and 
go for contributing to this noble cause, which will ultimately contribute to making India a 
strong and confident Sporting Nation. The Committee also endorses the idea of 
sponsoring of deserving Sportspersons by Banks and PSUs or the adoption of a Sporting 
Centre, preferably in a rural or backward region of the Country, from where the 
unpolished raw talents would definitely arise.                                            (Para 104) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.5  A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of State  
(Independent Charge) on 24 th November, 2016 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi with 46 
Central Public Sector Undertakings and Public Sector Banks on issues related to 
promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF.  There was good response and it emerged 
that there should be synergy of efforts being made by various organizations for 
development of sports. Department of sports will work towards bringing in the said 
synergy.  
1.6  Sports Authority of India (SAI) also approaches CPSUs and other entities 
from time to time for financial support in implementing its schemes. In a new initiative 

SAI has identified over 36 centres to attract CSR funding.  Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports has already taken up the issue with the PSUs and PSBs urging them to contribute 
generously for promotion of sports and games in the country. 
II. LOCAL VISIT TO JAWAHAR LAL NEHRU STADIUM 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
  
1.7  The Committee appreciates the effort put in by Indian Railways for 
promotion of sports in India and the initiatives taken by it at various levels starting from 
Zonal level to National and International levels. The Committee suggests that since 
Indian Railways has a vast Network across the Country, it should consider setting up of 
Sports Centres in rural areas also, which will also improve their outreach as well as 
increase their pool of Sportspersons. The Committee also recommends that SAI should 
co-ordinate with Indian Railways in setting up these rural centres and also provide 
expertise.          (Para 128) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.8  The Ministry of Railways have informed that at present Sports Academies 
being run by the Ministry of Railways  are (1) Hockey Academy at Kapurthala, (2) 
Throw Academy at Jaipur and (3) Wrestling Academy in Kishanganj, Delhi. Young 
sportspersons of adjoining areas including rural areas practice at these academies. 
Recommendations of the Hon ’ble Committee regarding setting up such more centres in 
rural areas and taking SAI expertise shall be considered while setting up such more 
academies in future. 
1.9  Sports Authority of India have informed that they will provide available 
expertise as per need / requirement of Railways. However, most of the SAI Centers under 
its various Sports Promotional Schemes are in rural / semi-urban areas. The number of 
Centre under its various schemes are as under: 
1. National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC) – 63 Centres 
2. Army Boys Sports Company (ABSC) –  23 Centres 
3. SAI Training Centre (STC) –            59 Centres 

4. Special Area Games (SAG) –            19 Centres 
5. Extension Centre of STC/SAG –         89 Centres 
6. Centre of Excellence (COE) –           15 Centres 
7. SAI National Sports Academy (NSA) –   05 Academy 
With respect to opening of additional projects by SAI, the technical expertise / guidance 
will be provided and sincere efforts will be made to attract CSR partners to complete the 
ongoing / new projects. SAI is making all out efforts to consolidate and bring the existing 
centres up to the mark.  
 
Recommendations/Observation 
 
1.10  The Committee notes that there is still some confusion among the PSUs 
regarding NSDF and CSR. The Committee observes that CSR comes under the 
Companies Act, while NSDF comes under Society Endowment Act. Hence, contribution 
under CSR cannot be equated to NSDF. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department of Sports, in coordination with Department of Public Enterprises and 
Department of Corporate Affairs, should immediately undertake with right earnest, to 
educate the PSUs/PSBs about the functioning of NSDF as well as the process of making 
contributions thereto.        (Para 140) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.11  A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of State  
(Independent Charge) on 24 th November, 2016 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi with 46 
Central Public Sector Undertakings and Public Sector Banks on issues related to 
promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF.   A booklet on NSDF was also distributed 
among PSUs and PSBs. There was good response and it emerged that there should be 
synergy of efforts being made by various organizations for development of sports. 
Department of sports will work towards bringing in the said synergy.  
 

III. VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE TO CHENNAI, VISHAKHAPATNAM, 
BHOPAL, UJJAIN AND INDORE 
 
Recommendations/Observation 
 
1.12 The Committee also notes with happiness the assurance of SAI that more 
publicity will be given to the Corporate/Banks, who contribute to SAI Centres, or sponsor 
adopt talented/promising young sportspersons. It would be accomplished by Banners in 
Tournaments/logo on Players T-shirts etc. so that their efforts are also given due 
recognition.        (Para 226) 
Action Taken 
1.13 The aspect related to publicity to corporate / banks who contribute towards 
adopting SAI Centres / sponsors / adopt promising young sports persons, due publicity 
will be given to recognize their contribution.   Rashtriya Khel Protsahan Puruskar was 
awarded by Hon`ble President of India on 29.8.2016 to 7 organizations this year for their 
contribution to sports including M/s IIFCL. 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.14 The Committee notes that some of the Banks are not seriously promoting Sports 
as they have no specific Sports policy nor they are recruiting/promoting sportspersons. 
They are simply financing occasional sports events/tournament, or providing some in-
house Sports activities, which is not the need of the hour. The Committee feels that 
Banks are the financial nerves of the Nation and Indian sports cannot go the extra mile 
without their assistance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Banks/Financial 
Institutes should make Sports policy an integral part of the overall Banking policy and 
SAI should play a major role in making these a success.           (Para 229) 
Action Taken 
1.15 A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of State 
(Independent Charge) on 24 th November, 2016 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi with 46 
Central Public Sector Undertakings and Public Sector Banks on issues related to 
promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF. There was good response and it emerged 
that there should be synergy of efforts being made by various organizations for 

development of sports. Department of sports will work towards bringing in the said 
synergy.  
Recommendations/Observations 
1.16 The sports related authorities must rationally utilize the resources, which are 
already not adequate. Archery, shooting, wrestling, boxing, track and field and badminton 
are good sports areas since there are more medals at stake in these disciplines, and India 
is proud of having a promising pool of talents. The Committee, therefore, endorses the 
view of the Department of Sports/SAI for according top priority to these Sporting 
disciplines.            (Para 235) 
Action Taken 
1.17 SAI accepts and welcomes the recommendation of the Committee. SAI is already 
following the policy of high priority sports having high medal prospects which includes 
Athletics, Archery, Boxing, Shooting, Hockey, Wrestling, Weightlifting, and Lawn 
Tennis. In addition, we are also giving due importance to Swimming and Gymnastics, as 
there are large medal events in these disciplines. 

CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
I. VISIT TO THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, MUMBAI AND UDAIPUR  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
2.0  The Committee, however, also noted the negligible contribution to Sports 
by some of the PSUs/PSBs, be it contribution to NSDF, recruitment of Sportspersons or 
even the existence of Sports policy in their organization. Many of the organizations have 
simply cited their internal sports activities or support given to their own employees for 
some sporting events. Recruitment of Sportspersons is negligible compared to the overall 
strength of their employees. The Committee hopes that with organizations such as IIFCL, 
Bank of Baroda, Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. etc. coming forward and setting good 
examples, others would follows suit and makes this venture a grand success and the goals 
of the Indian Sports achievable in the next few years.      (Para 105) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.1  The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) have intimated that there is 
no central public sector enterprise (CPSE) under the direct administrative control of the 
said Department. However, DPE being a nodal Department for CPSEs has requested all 
administrative Ministries / Departments of CPSEs to advise CPSEs under their 
administrative control that while formulating their Human Resource (HR) policies in 
respect of recruitment of sportspersons in CPSEs, due consideration may be given to the 
guidelines of DOP&T regarding recruitment of sportspersons.  
2.2  As per the information provided by Banks, they have their own 
recruitment policy.  The Department of sports have written to various Banks and Public 
Sector undertakings, inter-alia,  to recruit sports persons and give them incentives and 
promotions in case of their success in Asian Games / Commonwealth Games / Olympics.  
2.3  Further, Sports persons, who have represented India in Olympics / 
Paralympics, are offered employment as coaches in Sports Authority of India (SAI) 

subject to their application, available vacancies and other applicable terms and 
conditions. SAI has recruited 19 Olympians / Paralympians as coach / Assistant coaches 
during recent years.    
2.4  For augmenting the contributions to NSDF, the Government is regularly 
interacting with CPSUs/PSBs for contribution to the NSDF. Request for meeting with 
FICCI, CII, ASSOCHAM and PHD Chamber of Commerce have been requested at Delhi 
/ Kolkata / Mumbai for seeking support for Sports.  
2.5  A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of State  
(Independent Charge)   on 24 th November, 2016 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi with 46 
Central Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and Public Sector Banks (PSBs) on issues 
related to promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF.   A booklet on NSDF was also 
distributed among PSUs and PSBs. Copy of the same is enclosed as Annexure V. There 
was good response and it emerged that there should be synergy of efforts being made by 
various organizations for development of sports. Department of sports will work towards 
bringing in the said synergy.  
2.6  As regards recruitment of sportspersons, it is stated that instructions have 
been issued by the Department of Personnel & Training (DOP&T) on recruitment and 
promotion of sportspersons in Government of India. As per the said instructions, 
recruitment of sportspersons can be done upto 5% subject to stipulated conditions. There 
is no minimum ceiling on recruitment of sports persons. DOP&T instructions are 
implemented by the Administrative Ministries / Departments concerned.  Department has 
requested DOP&T to review and improve the said guidelines by, inter-alia, changing the 
quota for sportspersons for jobs from upto 5% to minimum 3% and upto 5%.   
Comments of Committee 
2.7  The Committee is happy to note that the Minister of State, himself, 
presided over the meeting called for promotion of Sports and contribution to the 
NSDF. The Committee, however, wishes to know the outcome of such an interaction 
and what further action was taken by the Ministry/SAI/ PSUs/PSBs thereon. 
 

II. LOCAL VISIT TO JAWAHAR LAL NEHRU STADIUM  
Recommendations/observations 
2.8  The Committee was informed that a draft sport policy for promotion of 
sports in the Company as well as in the country and weightage for recruitment of 
sportspersons has been prepared and is under consideration. The representatives 
submitted that no guidelines from the Government/Ministry have been received by it. 
NBCC also does not have a Sports Promotion Board presently. The Committee is happy 
to note the representative of NBCC committed for making a contribution of 10 lakhs for 
NSDF and encourage other PSUs to take similar steps to improve the status of sports in 
the country and infrastructure facilities of games.                    (Para 144) 
Action Taken 
2.9  The Matter regarding improvement in policy for recruitment, out of turn 
promotions, etc.  is under review in DOP&T. Guidelines for DOP&T and Railways have 
been sent to all the organisations which attended the meeting with Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD at Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai & Udaipur from 13 th to 
20th February, 2016, at Delhi on 14 th June, 2016 and at Chennai, Vishakhapatnam, 
Bhopal, Ujjain and Indore from 27th June to 5th July, 2016.   
2.10 The Department of Public Enterprise, being the nodal Department for CPSEs, has 
requested all administrative Ministries/Departments of CPSEs to advise CPSEs under 
their administrative control that while formulating their HR policies in respect of 
recruitment of meritorious sportspersons in CPSEs due consideration may be given to 
instructions issued by the DOP&T on incentives for sportspersons.   
The National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited (NBCC) has contributed Rs. 
10 Lakhs to NSDF during the Financial Year 16-17.  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
2.11  The Committee visited the Athletic Track inside the main stadium of 
Jawaharlal Nehru Sports Complex to assess the available track and field facilities as well 
as interaction with coaches and budding athletes practicing there. Track and field 
facilities are usually designed as multi-purpose facilities, and generally used for daily 

training as well as staging National, regional or local competitions. The staging of 
competitions at higher levels, of course, entails more extensive requirements for sports 
facilities, particularly concerning the infrastructure and regular maintenance. The 
Committee was dismayed to find the worn-out status of track and field facilities. The 
upkeep seemed to be disastrous and grass field surround inside this oval running track 
was also in pitiable condition. The track had caved in at several places and was dangerous 
for anybody as it was covered at several places. It was told that there was a tunnel 
underneath the track and was prone to collapse. There were several potholes which were 
several feet deep and were death traps for the athletes.   (Para 147) 
Action Taken 
2.12 The Synthetic Track has been repaired by Central Public Works Department in 
Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium. 
Recommendations/observations 
2.13 The Committee observes that the prevailing condition demanded fresh 
replacement and laying of eight lane international sized synthetic athletic track so as to 
tide over the disarray of track and field facilities. The grass field imposed inside the oval 
track also required immediate soil/sand filling accompanied with proper leveling and 
fresh laying of grass so as to give a world class look. This area is very vital since other 
sports events like throws and jumping events are organized here.             (Para 148) 
Action Taken 
 
2.14 The Grass, Football Pitch inside the Synthetic Athletic Track has been repaired 
with proper leveling / filling of Soil etc.  The Synthetic track in the main arena of J.N. 
Stadium has been repaired and is fit for holding International competitions.  Regarding 
football pitch in the main arena action has been taken and the same has been upgraded to 
International standards.   
 

Recommendations/observations 
2.15 The Committee observes that the prevailing conditions have led to a sore point for 
players. It was felt that this football ground needs a thorough upliftment befitting the 
International standard since Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium sports complex is well known 
multipurpose sports arena where several sports events like Asian Games in 1982, Asian 
Championship Athletics in 1989 and Commonwealth Games in 2010 were organized. 
                                (Para 149) 
Action Taken 
2.16 The pitch has been upgraded to International standards. 
Comments of Committee 
 
2.17 The Committee takes note of the replies given by the Department regarding 
the repairing of the synthetic tracks and the Football pitch in the J.N. Stadium. The 
Committee is, however, concerned about the maintenance and upkeep of such a vital 
Sports infrastructure. The Committee still wants to know the dates when such 
repairs were accomplished and efforts made by SAI for its upkeep at the d esired 
level and whether the damage caused to the synthetic tracks and the football pitch 
was due to Administrative laxity or lack of resources and if so, how it has now been 
taken care of.  
II. LOCAL VISIT TO JAWAHAR LAL NEHRU STADIUM  
Recommendations/observations 
2.18  The Committee further visited the football ground beside the main 
stadium, where selected budding players come for the practice session for football. The 
Committee was anguished to find that the football ground is in unplayable condition as 
the maintenance was almost at the lowest ebb. It was also told that the field had not been 
maintained for the last one and half years. The CPWD Engineer present at the site told 
that they have not been given money for carrying out maintenance works. This ground 
was prepared at a cost of 2.50 crores and International pitch was laid. Since no 
maintenance was carried out for so long, it was dusty and full of potholes and looked like 
drought affected agricultural field. Members were very anguished to see the sad state of 
affairs. The Committee impressed upon the Ministry to setup a high level inquiry and fix 

responsibility for omission and commission and send the report to the Committee within 
one month from the presentation of this report to the House. The Committee also directs 
that upkeep, maintenance and administration must be handed over to responsible persons 
with professional experience.       (Para 150) 
Action Taken 
 
2.19 The existing warm up pitch is being replaced with a new International standard 
pitch. The contract has been awarded by CPWD and the replacement of the football Pitch 
has commenced.
 
 
Comments of Committee 
2.20 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department in respect 
with the pitiable condition of Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium including football ground 
and athletic track. The Committee further points out that the Department should 
ensure that such negligence, do not occur in future and aspects of maintenance  and 
upkeep of the Stadium are given due priority.  
 
III. VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE TO CHENNAI, VISHAKHAPATNAM, 
BHOPAL, UJJAIN AND INDORE 
(D) CHENNAI & (E) VISHAKAPATNAM  
Recommendations/observations 
2.21 The Committee is disheartened to note that PSUs/PSBs are not taking the issue 
seriously as negligible improvement is seen in the performance of NSDF and other pro-
Sports initiatives espoused by the Committee. The Committee, therefore, urges to various 
Departments of the Government of India like Department of Defence Production, under 
whom many of the major PSUs of the Country operate, to consider supporting Sports 
either in the form of Contribution to NSDF or adopting some SAI Centre as well as 
recruitment of Sportspersons in such organizations, which would go a long way in 
sending the right message to the Corporate world.       (Para 182) 

Action Taken 
 
2.22 The Department of Youth Affairs and Sports has sent specific proposals to the 
organizations which attended meeting of Standing Committee on HRD at 
Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai & Udaipur from 13 th to 20 th February, 2016, at Delhi on 
14th June, 2016 and at Chennai, Vishakhapatnam, Bhopal, Ujjain and Indore from 27 th 
June to 5th July, 2016 to support sports.  
2.23 As stated earlier, a CSR Brochure on SAI activities giving details of various SAI 
Centre under various SAI Sports Promotional Schemes, 10 Regional & 02 Academic 
Institutions has been prepared giving various options for potential CSR partners to come 
up with proposals as per their convenience and availability of funds. The Secretary 
(Sports) has written to Secretaries of 32 Departments of Government of India to 
encourage PSUs under their Departments for contribution to NSDF.    
Recommendations/Observations 
2.24 The Committee also recommends that Banks should step out and provide the last 
mile connection to the raw talents in the rural and Tribal areas as they have the local 
presence through their Branches. Thus, Banks can, in co-ordination with SAI, identify 
such young talents and they could be nurtured further as this is where the real Indian 
Sports reside.       (Para 183) 
Action Taken 
2.25  The Government of India has started “Khelo India ” Scheme in which talen t 
identification is a major component. SAI will be involved in this programme, which will 
give all the stake holders an opportunity to identify a sports talent for grooming for 
excellence.  
2.26 SAI is also launching an online talent hunt portal which is likely to be operational 
by February 2017, which will give opportunity to all gifted and talented athletes to apply 
to SAI for inclusion under various Sports Promotional Schemes. 
2.27 Modalities can be worked out once specific proposal are received from banks to 
identify young talents form the rural/tribal area. However, Sports Authority of India is 

already implementing Special Area Games/Sports Training Centre Scheme which caters 
the need of rural/tribal and coastal area in the country. 
2.28 A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of State  
(Independent Charge)   on 24 th November, 2016 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi with 46 
Central Public Sector Undertakings and Public Sector Banks on issues related to 
promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF.   A booklet on NSDF was also distributed 
among PSUs and PSBs. A copy of the same is enclosed as Annexure V . There was good 
response and it emerged that there should be synergy of efforts being made by various 
organizations for development of sports. Department of sports will work towards 
bringing in the said synergy.  
(F) BHOPAL 
Recommendations/observations 
2.29 The Committee is disappointed to note that senior-most Officer of the Regional 
Centre was not present himself before the Committee during its interaction which 
deprived the Committee from seeking clarifications on the spot. The Committee, 
accordingly, advised the Department of Sports and SAI that they should note of this and 
they should ensure that, in future, the senior-most Officer is present in such interactions. 
            
  (Para 216) 
Action Taken 
 
2.30  The matter was enquired from the Regional Director, Bhopal and she has 
confirmed that she was present during the visit of PSC to Bhopal, Indore and Ujjain. Due 
importance to the Committ ee’s visit and the matters raised by the Committee during 
inspection will always be ensured. 
 
Comments of Committee 
 
2.31 The Committee notes the replies of the Ministry and it further observes that 
the Regional Director was present during the visit to the Committee to the SAI 
Centre. However, the Committee wanted her presence during its meeting so that she 

could respond to the concerns of the participants that emerged during the course of 
the meeting. 
(G) UJJAIN 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.32 The Committee after its visit strongly recommends that SAI should involve any 
PSU/SPB/Corporate to adopt the centre and provide sponsorship to the sportspersons. 
The wrestling was done in sandpit and SAI should take steps to modernize the Akhara 
and use new equipments and latest facilities, if the Centre is to rise to a higher level. 
       (Para 218) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.33 A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of State  
(Independent Charge)  on 24 th November, 2016 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi with 46 
Central Public Sector Undertakings and Public Sector Banks on issues related to 
promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF. A booklet on NSDF was also distributed 
among PSUs and PSBs. A copy of the same is enclosed as Annexure V. There was good 
response and it emerged that there should be synergy of efforts being made by various 
organizations for development of sports. Department of sports will work towards 
bringing in the said synergy.  
2.34 Further, the Government has been regularly interacting with corporate entities 
both in public sector and private sector for adopting one specific discipline for taking the 
overall responsibility including talent scouting, training and competitive exposure of the 
sports persons. It has been decided the Regional Heads of SAI will be coordinating with 
PSUs/Banks. A CSR Brochure on SAI activities giving details of various SAI Centres 
under various SAI Sports Promotional Schemes, 10 Regional & 02 Academic Institutions 
has been prepared giving various options for potential CSR partners to come up with 
proposals as per their convenience and availability of funds. Also instructions have been 
issued to all concerned to provide/replace the Wrestling mats after five years of its use so 
that the Wrestlers of the adopted Akharas can practice with modern equipments and 
performance of the Wrestlers could be enhanced. 

Comments of Committee 
2.35 After considering the replies of the Department, the Committee feels that it 
should also have been informed about the details of the instructions issued. The 
Committee, however, wishes that a copy of the same should be provided to the 
Committee for its consideration.  
Recommendations/observation 
2.36 The Committee notes that many of the Banks/PSUs have their in-house Sports 
activities, which are well appreciated. However, the purpose of the NSDF is not met by 
such activities and they should work towards ensuring that contributions are made by 
them for such a noble cause, which would propel the youth of the Country towards 
pinnacle of the sporting world, which is lacking at present. The Committee also observes 
that most of the Banks/PSUs are either not aware of the NSDF or contributions thereto 
has been stopped for some time and some a linking NSDF with CSR. Hence, the 
Committee recommends that Sports Authority of India (SAI) should make serious 
concerted efforts to make all PSUs/Banks including the private Banks aware of the fund 
so that more funds can be mobilized for the promotion and development of Sports in the 
Country. The Committee also directs all the Banks and the PSUs to contribute towards 
NSDF liberally every year and should also make efforts to adopt one of the SAI centres 
and budding players who may be able to compete/participate in international events. The 
contribution towards NSDF is not linked with CSR activities. The contribution to NSDF 
should be made by the banks over and above their CSR activities.  (Para 225) 
Action Taken 
2.37 The Department of Youth Affairs and Sports has sent specific proposals to the 
organizations which attended meeting of Standing Committee on HRD at 
Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai & Udaipur from 13 th to 20 th February, 2016, at Delhi on 
14th June, 2016 and at Chennai, Vishakhapatnam, Bhopal, Ujjain and Indore from 27 th 
June to 5th July, 2016 to support sports.  
2.38 Further, the Government has been regularly interacting with corporate entities 
both in public sector and private sector for adopting one specific discipline for taking the 
overall responsibility including talent scouting, training and competitive exposure of the 
sports persons. It has been decided the Regional Heads of SAI will be coordinating with 

PSUs/Banks. A CSR Brochure on SAI activities giving details of various SAI Centres 
under various SAI Sports Promotional Schemes, 10 Regional & 2 Academic Institutions 
has been prepared giving various options for potential CSR partners to come up with 
proposals as per their convenience and availability of funds.  
2.39 A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of State  
(Independent Charge)   on 24th November, 2016 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi with 46 
Central Public Sector Undertakings and Public Sector Banks on issues related to 
promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF.   There was good response and it emerged 
that there should be synergy of efforts being made by various organizations for 
development of sports. Department of sports will work towards bringing in the said 
synergy.  
2.40 Although NSDF is not specifically mentioned in Schedule VII of the Companies 
ACT regarding CSR, the activities covered under CSR are also covered under objectives 
of NSDF. The donor can define specific activities for which the contribution of the donor 
organisation is to be used by NSDF as such CSR contribution can be made to NSDF. It is 
for CPSEs to take decision in the matter of contribution to NSDF over and above their 
CSR activities.  
Recommendations/Observations 
2.41 The Committee recommends that SAI must give a status note of the recruitment 
of sportspersons in Banks and the contributions made by Banks to the NSDF in the last 
10 years so as to have a realistic assessment of the support that is at present available to 
the sportspersons of the Country.      (Para 228) 
Action Taken 
 
2.42 There is no reporting mechanism by which SAI is informed of sports persons 
recruited by the banks and CPSUs. In the absence of mandatory provisions it will be 
difficult for SAI compile data on recruitment of sports persons in banks.  
2.43 With reference to NSDF, details of the contributions made to the NSDF from its 
inception till date, are given in the statement at Annexure I. 

2.44 A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of State 
(Independent Charge) on 24 th November, 2016 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi with 46 
Central Public Sector Undertakings and Public Sector Banks on issues related to 
promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF. There was good response and it emerged 
that there should be synergy of efforts being made by various organizations for 
development of sports. The Department of sports will work towards bringing in the said 
synergy.  
 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.45 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Railways and other PSB/PSUs 
for recruitment of sportspersons in their organizations. The Committee however, points 
out that the PSBs/PSUs have recruited iconic players. The Committee recommends that 
there should be a definite percentage and horizontal recruitment should be done.  
           (Para 231) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.46 The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) have intimated that there is no 
central public sector enterprise (CPSE) under the direct administrative control of the said 
Department. However, DPE being a nodal Department for CPSEs has requested all 
administrative Ministries / Departments of CPSEs to advise CPSEs under their 
administrative control that while formulating their Human Resource (HR) policies in 
respect of recruitment of sportspersons in CPSEs, due consideration may be given to the 
guidelines of DOP&T regarding recruitment of sportspersons.  
2.47 As per the information provided by Banks they have their own recruitment 
policy.  The Department of sports have written to various Banks and Public Sector 
undertakings, inter-alia,   to recruit sports persons and give them incentives and 
promotions in case of their success in Asian Games / Commonwealth Games / Olympics.  
2.48 Matter regarding improvement in policy for recruitment, out of turn promotions, 
etc. is under review in DOP&T. Guidelines for DOP&T and Railways have been sent to 
all the organizations, which attended the meeting with Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on HRD at Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai & Udaipur from 13 th to 20 th 

February, 2016, at Delhi on 14 th June, 2016 and at Chennai, Vishakhapatnam, Bhopal, 
Ujjain and Indore from 27th June to 5th July, 2016.   
 
Recommendation/Observations 
 
2.49 The Committee recommends that there should be uniform guidelines for 
Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons in PSBs/PSUs. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that SAI in-coordination with DoPT should take up this issue with 
Department of Financial Services and Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs as well as administrative Ministries/Departments of the concerned 
PSUs for issuing guidelines to the respective PSBs/PSUs coming under their jurisdiction 
in respect with Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons in their organizations. 
          (Para 232) 
Action Taken 
 
2.50 The DOP&T has issued instructions for recruitment and promotion of meritorious 
sportspersons from time to time and these are applicable only to Central Government 
Civilian employees and posts. These are not suo-moto applicable to autonomous bodies, 
statutory organizations, public sector enterprises, trusts, banks etc. as they are governed 
by their respective regulations/instructions issued by the concerned Administrative 
Ministry/Department under Statute/Act of the Parliament by which they are created or 
came into existence.  
2.51 The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) have intimated that there is no 
central public sector enterprise (CPSE) under the direct administrative control of the said 
Department. However, DPE being a nodal department for CPSEs has requested all 
administrative Ministries / Departments of CPSEs to advise CPSEs under their 
administrative control that while formulating their Human Resource (HR) policies in 
respect of recruitment of sportspersons in CPSEs, due consideration may be given to the 
guidelines of DOP&T regarding recruitment of sportspersons.  
2.52 As per the information provided by Banks, they have their own recruitment 
policy.  The Department of sports have written to various Banks and Public Sector 
undertakings, inter-alia,   to recruit sports persons and give them incentives and 
promotions in case of their success in Asian Games / Commonwealth Games / Olympics.  

2.53 Further, the matter regarding improvement in policy for recruitment, out of turn 
promotions, etc.  is under review in DOP&T. Guidelines for DOP&T and Railways have 
been sent to all the organizations, which attended the meeting with Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD at Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai & Udaipur from 13 th to 
20th February, 2016, at Delhi on 14 th June, 2016 and at Chennai, Vishakhapatnam, 
Bhopal, Ujjain and Indore from 27th June to 5th July, 2016.   
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.54 The Committee recommends that, NSDF has to be supported by Government/ 
Public Enterprises/ PSUs/PSBs/Corporates/Private Bodies as well, and transparency has 
to be maintained not only for channeling money to short-term programs such as training 
and competitions, but also for investing in long-term development projects such as 
building stadiums and training facilities and purchasing equipments. Besides, the 
Committee strongly advocates the Council of NSDF, which manages this Fund, should 
have a big say from members drawn from a variety of different backgrounds, including, 
of course, sportspersons, administrators and the business world as well, so that the 
experiences and good practices from all quarters can be gainfully utilized, so that India 
rise to the level of the major Sporting Countries in the world.  (Para 234) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.55 Any investment for long-term development projects such as construction of 
Stadiums, training facilities and purchase of equipments, etc. out of CPSE fund by public 
sector enterprise, has to be considered by the Boards of CPSEs and to take necessary 
decision in this regard. The Department and SAI are mobilizing CSR partners and efforts 
to rise to the level of major sports country in the world. 
2.56 A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of State 
(Independent Charge) on 24 th November, 2016 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi with 46 
Central Public Sector Undertakings and Public Sector Banks on issues related to 
promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF. There was good response and it emerged 
that there should be synergy of efforts being made by various organizations for 

development of sports. The Department of sports will work towards bringing in the said 
synergy.  
2.57 NSDF has been providing assistance to sports academies for infrastructure and 
equipment as per list given in Annexure – II.  A list of members of Council of NSDF is 
enclosed as Annexure VI. It may be seen from the same that it includes representative 
from the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Federation of Indian Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and Associated Chambers of Commerce & Industry of 
India (ASSOCHAM) and 2 representatives by rotation from Services Sports Control 
Board, Petroleum Sports Control Board, Railway Sports Promotion Board, All India 
Police Sports Control Board and Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) Sports control 
Board.  
2.58 Further, there is already provision in the NSDF Gazette Notification that the 
Executive Committee shall have the authority to call upon experts to assist in its 
deliberations. As and when need is felt, Executive Committee of NSDF can invite 
representatives of PSUs/Banks/Private bodies/Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Department 
of Financial Services and Department of Public Enterprises to attend its meetings. 
Further, as per provisions of NSDF Scheme, it is permissible for a donor to indicate a 
project alongwith any specific location/aspect for funding and also an agency for the 
execution of the project while making donations to the Fund.  

CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
I. VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE TO THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, 
MUMBAI AND UDAIPUR  
(C) UDAIPUR 
Recommendations/observations 
 
3.0  The Committee directs that an updated accounts of the expenditure made 
from this fund should be provided to the Committee along with the performance and 
achievement of the beneficiaries to whom this expenditure was incurred. The Committee 
also strongly suggests that the Department of Sports should keep a record of the 
contributions made to the NSDF and also pursue with other PSBs/PSUs on keeping a 
database of their contributions.        (Para 75) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.1  Details of contributions to NSDF is attached as Annexure I . Details of 
assistance provided from NSDF is attached as Annexure II . A copy of Balance sheet and 
Income and expenditure account for the period ending 31.3.16 of NSDF are enclosed as 
Annexure III. (The said accounts have been internally audited by Charte red accountant of 
NSDF and CAG has been requested for conducting its audit.) A statement giving details 
of NSDF assistance provided to sportspersons and organisations till date is summarised 
as under:- 
Direct assistance to sportspersons for training and purchase of equipment 
(This includes assistance released direct to the athletes under Target 
Olympic Podium (TOP) Scheme, which is intended specifically for 
preparation of Olympics 2016 & 2020) 
 
Rs. 46.52 crore 
Assistance to institutes / organisations for development of sports 
infrastructure, training camp, sports events etc. 
 
Rs. 52.28 crore 
Cash Award and other incentives / welfare 
 
Rs. 4.49 crore 
Total Rs. 103.29 crore 
 

3.2  In addition, the NSDF had released Rs. 20.00 crore to the Sports Authority 
of India (SAI) under Target Olympic (TOP) Scheme for further release to the athletes for 
their training, purchase of equipment etc.  Annexure IV gives major 
performance/achievements of NSDF beneficiaries.  
Comments of Committee 
 
3.3  The Committee appreciates the assistance rendered to the 
Sportspersons of the Country through the NSDF.  The Committee notes that these 
assistance varied from Rs. 14, 101/- (for Ms. Arpita M, Athletics and Ms. Sarjubala 
Devi, Boxer) to Rs. 635,02,982/- (Shri Manavjit Singh Sandhu, Shooter) and Rs. 
615,86,657/- (Shri Abhinav Bindra, Shooter). The Committee also notes that a major 
chunk of the fund has been spent on the shooting team while an Olympics Discipli ne 
like Gymnastics got Rs. 63,48, 787/- for the whole team.  The Committee does not 
wish to question the wisdom of the Department for such an allocation of funds. 
However, the Committee feels that type of Sports Discipline should not be the only 
criteria for fixing the quantum of assistance provided to a Sportsperson.  There 
should be some criteria  to link the  quantum of  assistance to the performance of  
the Sportsperson. The Committee wishes that any discipline where having medal 
winning prospects should also be given same level of assistance.   
3.4  The Committee further noticed that the names of young and budding 
Sportspersons are missing from the list of beneficiaries and most of the names in the 
achievers list seem to be the seniors/retiring/retired Sportspersons.  The Committee, 
therefore, feels that more names of budding Sportspersons should appear on the list 
of beneficiaries enabling them to excel in their performances. 
3.5   The Committee further notes that a total amount of Rs. 98,75,34,945/- has 
been received as donations under NSDF, while the matching contribution by the 
Government of India is Rs. 76,45,01,675/- only.  The Committee notes with concern 
that Department of Sports has failed to provide the matching grant in NSDF vis-a-
vis the contribution received to fund.  As is evident the Department of Sports is yet 
in contribute more than Rs 22 crores in to order is match the contribution.  The 

Committee impresses upon the Department to provide the matching grant at the 
earliest so that the very objective of NSDF is fulfilled. 
 
III. VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE TO CHENNAI, VISHAKHAPATNAM, 
BHOPAL, UJJAIN AND INDORE 
 
Recommendations/Observation 
 
3.6 The Committee further notes that many of the Banks are willing to sponsor the 
talented young sportspersons but there is a hiatus in the communication between SAI and 
the Banks. The Committee, therefore, recommends that SAI needs to give specific 
proposals to the concerned Banks and not a general routine communication in this regard, 
as the importance of the objective gets vitiated. The Committee also recommends the SAI 
to have a regular platform with the representatives PSUs/PSBs as well as Department of 
P.E. and DFS to give effect to this fund so that Indian Sports /Sportspersons do not suffer 
due to the lack of funds/support and by 2020 Olympics, we will be in a better position to 
be among the top ten Sporting Nations in the world.                               (Para 227) 
Action Taken 
3.7  The Department of Youth Affairs and Sports has sent specific proposals to 
the organizations which attended meeting of Standing Committee on HRD at 
Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai and Udaipur from 13 th to 20th February, 2016, at Delhi on 
14th June, 2016; and at Chennai, Vishakhapatnam, Bhopal, Ujjain and Indore from 27 th 
June to 5th July, 2016 to support sports.  
3.8  Further, the Government has been regularly interacting with corporate 
entities both in public sector and private sector for adopting one specific discipline for 
taking the overall responsibility including talent scouting, training and competitive 
exposure of the sports persons. It has been decided that the Regional Heads of SAI will 
be coordinating with PSUs/Banks. A CSR Brochure on SAI activities giving details of 
various SAI Centres under various SAI Sports Promotional Schemes, 10 Regional and 2 
Academic Institutions has been prepared giving various options for potential CSR 
partners to come up with proposals as per their convenience and availability of funds.  

3.9  A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of State 
(Independent Charge) on 24 th November, 2016 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi with 46 
Central Public Sector Undertakings and Public Sector Banks on issues related to 
promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF.   There was good response and it emerged 
that there should be synergy of efforts being made by various organizations for 
development of sports. Department of sports will work towards bringing in the said 
synergy. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
3.10  The Committee finds that the reply of the Department gives a vague 
reference to the specific proposals which, according to the recommendation of the 
Committee, should have been given to the organizations/PSUs/PSBs, which were 
present in the Committee’s meeting in Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai and Udaipur 
from 13 th to 20 th February, 2016, at Delhi on 14 th June, 2016; and at Chennai, 
Vishakhapatnam, Bhopal, Ujjain and Indore from 27 th June to 5 th July, 2016. The 
Department should have given the details of the proposals along with the dates on 
which such proposals were sent and what has been the response of those 
organizations. The Committee, accordingly, desires that all these details be made 
available to the Committee for its consideration.  
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3.11  The Committee recommends that SAI should take pro-active steps to 
improve infrastructures/coaching facilities in the rural areas, where there is no dearth of 
talents. The Committee, therefore, recommends that SAI should involve Banks in talent 
hunt at the grassroot level like at District Level throughout the Country.   
      (Para 230) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.12   The Government of India has started Khelo India Scheme in which talent 
identification is major component. SAI will be involved in the programme and it will 
give all stake holders an opportunity to identify a sports talent for grooming for 

excellence. SAI is also launching an online talent hunt portal which is likely to be 
operational by February 2017, which will give opportunity to all gifted and talented 
athletes to apply to SAI for inclusion under various Sports Promotional Schemes. 
Modalities will be worked out once specific proposal are received from banks to identify 
young talents form the rural/tribal area. However, Sports Authority of India is already 
implementing Special Area Games/Sports Training Centre Scheme which caters the need 
of rural/tribal and coastal area in the Country. 
3.13  With respect to improvement of coaching system SAI has entered into a MOU 
with International Council for Coaching Excellence (ICCE) to improve standards of 
coaching & coach improvement. Efforts are already under way to integrate international 
federation recognized certificate courses with our ongoing Diploma Courses. In some 
sports disciplines e.g. Football, we have already implemented this scheme. Other 
disciplines will also be gradually covered. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
3.14 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department/SAI to 
improve the infrastructures/coaching facilities in rural areas as well as the creation 
of online talent hunt portal likely to be launched soon.  These steps would de finitely 
help the rural talents to have easy access to the facilities and take part in 
competitions easily.  The Committee further recommends that the Department/SAI 
should now take steps to give wider publicity of all these schemes/competition/talent 
hunt programmes not only through online applications but also through posters, 
radio announcements, TV ads etc., in local languages/dialects, which are more 
connected to the rural youths. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.15 The Committee finds that the majority of the appointment has been done in the 
non-officer category. The Committee recommends that player who has played at the 
National level should be inducted at the Officer Cadre (Group A). The Committee further 
recommends that sportspersons who played at the State and District level should be 
recruited in Group B or C.  (Para 233) 

 
Action Taken 
 
3.16  As per existing guidelines on the subject of recruitment and promotion of 
meritorious sportspersons, the existing policy provide recruitment at Group “C” level 
only.  The policy is under review. A committee comprising representatives of Department 
of Sports and Sports Authority of India has deliberated on the issue.  The recruitment of 
Olympic/Para Olympic  medal winners to higher level posts is one among the issues 
which is being examined.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
3.17  The Committee wishes that the Department/SAI should pursue the matter 
with the Committee constituted by the Department of Sports/SAI to deliberate on 
the matter and the views of the Committee on HRD should also be communicated to 
them.  This Committee feels that in order to attract talents in sports, it is imperative 
that the Government should provide a source of livelihood to the Sportspersons as 
their active lifespan in very limited unlike other professions.  Contrarily, youngsters 
would not opt for Sports as a career, if there is no secured future for them to fall 
back on, after their active Sports career is over.  
 
***** 
 
 