 
 
  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022 /Agrahayana, 1944, (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
Report No 
344 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three 
Hundred Thirty Ninth Report on Demands for Grants 2022-23 of 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the  
Three Hundred Thirty Ninth Report on Demands for Grants 2022-23  
of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944(Saka) 
 
 
  


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.....................................................................................................        (iii)-(iv) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................ 1-22  
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ............................................................... .....   2-8 
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...........  9-14 
Chapter-III -  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee....   15-21 
 Chapter-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited…..     22 
   
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE.. ...................    23-25 
6. MINUTES ................................................................................................................     26-27 
7. ANNEXURES..........................................................................................................    28-34 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13thSeptember, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. *Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
7. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. **Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Sangam Lal Kadedin Gupta 
16. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
17. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
28. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
29.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
31. Shri S. Venkatesan 
*Nominated w.e.f. 11.10.2022 
**Nominated w.e.f. 16.11.2022 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
 (i) 

 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Forty Fourth Report of the Committee on the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred and 
Thirty Ninth Report on “ Demands for Grants 2022 -23 of the Ministry of Sports and Youth Affairs 
which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16th March, 2022. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations /Observations contained in above 
mentioned Report were received from the Ministry of Sports and Youth Affairs  vide their 
communications dated 29th June, 2022 and 26th May, 2022 respectively.  
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on  15th 
December, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
15th December, 2022                                                                                                                 
Agrahayana 24, 1944 (Saka)
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Shri Vivek Thakur  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
BE Budget Estimate  
BOG Board of Governors 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DFG Demands for Grants 
DoNER Department of North East Region 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
FY Financial Year 
GoI Government of India 
HEI Higher Education Institution 
IBBF Indian Body Building Federation 
IBPS Institute of Banking and Personnel Service  
IC International Cooperation 
ICCR Indian Council for Cultural Relations  
ILO International Labour Organisation 
IOA Indian Olympic Association 
IOCL Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
IPC International Paralympic Committee 
IYEP International Youth Exchange Programme 
JWG Joint Working Group 
KIC Khelo India Centre 
MEA Ministry of External Affairs  
MoA Memorandum of Agreement 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MoYAS Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing & Calibration 
Laboratories 
NADA National Anti-Doping Agency 
NCOE National Centre of Excellence 
(iii) 

 
 
 
NCSC National Centre for Sports Coaching 
NCSSR National Centre of Sports Science and Research 
NDTL National Dope Testing Laboratory 
NIP National Infrastructure Pipeline  
NPDS National Programme for Development of Sports 
NPYAD     National Programme for Youth and Adolescent  
    Development 
NSDF National Sports Development Fund 
NSEB National Sports Education Board 
NSF National Sports Federation 
NSS National Service Scheme 
NSU National Sports University 
NYC National Youth Corps 
NYF National Youth Festival 
NYK Nehru Yuva Kendra 
NYKS Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
NYLP National Young Leadership Programme 
NYV National Youth Volunteers 
PCI Paralympic Committee of India 
PIB Public Investment Board 
PMDP Prime Minister's Development Package  
PMO Prime Minister's Office 
RE Revised Estimates 
REC Rural Electrification Corporation 
RGNIYD Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development 
SLKIC State Level Khelo India Centres 
SAI Sports Authority of India 
SFC Standing Financial Committee 
SKIC Small Khelo India Centre 
STC SAI Training Centre 
TCS Tata Consultancy Services 
(iv) 

1 
 
  REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations /Observations contained in its 33 9th Report on 
“Demands for Grants 2022 -23 of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports”, which was 
presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16th March, 2022. 
 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations /Observations contained 
in above mentioned Report were received from the Department of Sports and 
Department of Youth Affairs  (Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports) vide their 
communication dated 29th June, 2022 and 26th May, 2022 respectively. These have been 
categorized as follows.  
 
Chapter I: Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras –  2.5, 2.8, 3.1.12, 3.6.4,  3.8.3, 3.9.4, 4.2.8,  4.4.3. 4.4.4, 4.5.2, 
  4.9.4, 4.10.5   
Total - 12 
 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of Government's replies:- 
Paras – 2.6, 3.1.6, 3.3.3, 3.4.6, 3.4.8, 3.5.3, 3.5.5, 3.7.6, 3.9.5,  
 3.14.7, 4.2.5, 4.2.6 
Total - 12 
 
Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee:- 
Paras-   2.7, 2.10, 3.1.11, 3.2.5, 3.4.5, 3.7.5, 3.14.5, 3.14.6, 3.14.8  
Total-  9 
 
Chapter-IV:  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are 
still awaited:- 
Paras – 4.2.4 
Total - 1 
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022 -23) OF 
THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS  
 
 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee notes that the year 2022 is the year of b oth the Asian and 
Commonwealth G ames and the Budgetary allocations for the Ministry is Rs.3062.60 
crore which is an increase of Rs.305.58  crore as compared to RE 2021 -22. It is also 
observed that the major share of the total budgetary allocation in BE 2022 -23 for the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports is for the Department of Sports, i.e.,  73.6%, 
whereas it is 26.4% for the Department of Youth Affairs. It is also noted that as 
compared to the projections made, the allocation has been less by 30.07 % in respect of  
Department of Youth Affairs and 20.75 % in respect of Department of Sports. The 
Committee welcomes the enhancement in the Budget to the Ministry; however, the 
Committee is of the view that such drastic gap between the projections made and the 
actual allocations call for a review by both the Departments in respect of assessing the 
reasons for the reduced allocation and the manner it will affect the various Schemes of 
the Departments in this crucial year. The Committee recommends that such a review be 
undertaken and based on it, enhanced allocations, if required, be sought at RE stage.  
(para 2.5) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry in its reply has informed that they had proposed an amount of 
₹4000.37 crore (₹1156.38 crore under Department of Youth Affairs and ₹2843.99 crore 
under Department of Sports) for FY 2022-23. However, the Ministry of Finance 
allocated a budget of ₹3 062.60 crore in BE for FY 2022-23, which was an 
enhancement of  ₹305.58 crore over RE 2021 -22 of ₹2757.02  crore. The budget 
allocated to the Department of Youth Affairs is ₹808.60 crore (26.4% of total BE 2022- 
23) and Department of Sports ₹2254.00 crore (73.60% of total BE 2022-23). The 
Department-wise budget allocation for FY 2022-23 has been made on the basis of the 
previous year’s budget allocation percentage and the actual expenditure which was 
impacted due to reduction in the number of  planned activities because of the  Covid-19 
pandemic during the last two financial years. It has been submitted that t he suggestion 
by the Committee  has been taken note of by the Ministry. In case of  requirement of 
additional budget allocation during the FY 2022 -23, the same will be submitted to the  
Ministry of Finance for Supplementary Demand for Grants /RE stage. 
 
 
 

3 
 
Recommendation  
2. The Committee observed that the actual expendit ure as on 31 st January, 2022 in 
respect of Department of Youth Affairs in Table -IV* was only 62.56%. The Department 
has informed that the lesser expenditure, than anticipated, was largely due to Covid -19 
pandemic. The Commi ttee observes that with easing of restrictions, the trend of 
expenditure should increase on various schemes and recommends that as the normalcy 
returns and the activities resume, the Department and bodies under it should closely 
monitor the same so as to n ot lag behind in using of allocated funds and are able to 
resolve expeditiously any bottlenecks that may arise. 
(para 2.8) 
Action Taken 
The Department of Youth Affairs has mentioned that the Recommendation has been 
noted for compliance. 
 
KHELO INDIA SCHEME 
 
Recommendation  
3. The Committee, therefore, recommends that better management and optimum 
utilization of funds allocated to the Department may be undertaken so that no scheme 
or projects lag  behind moreover that Covid related restrictions  have now been eased 
considerably. It further  recommends that the expansion of Khelo India  Centres (KIC) 
and National Centres of Excellence (NCOEs) may be done appropriately for wider  and 
easier access by the players in each corner of the country. 
(para 3.1.12)   
Action Taken 
The Ministry has submitted that the Recommendations of the Committee ha ve 
been noted for compliance. The Ministry has further informed that so  far, the Ministry 
has given approval for establishment of 478  Khelo India Centres  (KIC) in 29 States/  
UTs in the country. The target is  to establish 1000 KICs across the  country for which 
the States/UTs  are being requested to send the requisite proposals and also make  the 
approved Centres operational  expeditiously. Further,  there are 23 NCOEs functional 
across the country and  under the Khelo India Scheme, 29 Khelo India State Centres of  
Excellence (KISCEs) have been   approved in 28 States/UTs. 
 
NATIONAL CENTRE OF SPORTS SCIENCES AND RESEARCH (NCSSR)  
Recommendation  
4. The Committee, therefore, recommends that more conducive environment may be 
created for better research in the field of sports science and medicine and such facilities 
may also be extended to smaller towns and cities in addition to the proposed Hub and 
Spokes. 
(para 3.6.4)  
...................... 
 *Annexure I  

4 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry informed that t he National Centre of Sports Sciences and Research 
(NCSSR) has been establis hed with an Administrative Unit,  Human Performance Lab, 
Sports Psychology Lab, Anthropometry Lab, Sports Medicine and Sports 
Physiotherapy Unit at Sports Authority of India ( SAI) IG Stadium Complex, New 
Delhi. Mobilization of resources is under process for equipment and human resources. 
Key appo intments like Director, D eputy Director and Ass istant Director have already 
been done and efforts are being made to improve the research infrastructure in order to 
create conducive environment for Sports Science in SAI National Centre of Excellences 
(NCOEs) and SAI STCs located across the country by dedicated Sports Science Staff 
and Equipment given at NCOEs.   
 
NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND (NSDF)  
 
Recommendation  
5. The Committee notes that the budget of the National Sports Development Fund 
(NSDF) has been substantially reduced as compared to the BE 2021 -22 and then 
projection made for 2022 -23.  The Committee notes that since the government provides 
an amount equivalent to CSR contribution or donations, this indicates that NSDF did 
not attract adequate CSR contributions or donations from public sector undertakings or 
private companies.  Noting that NSDF was set up with the main aim and objective of 
providing financial assistance to sportspersons to excel in their fields at the national 
and international level through specialized training and this also provides assistance to 
elite athletes under Target Olympic Podium Scheme (TOPS), both core and 
development, it is recommended that the factors bogging the initiative be evaluated and 
corrective action be taken by the Department to realize the aims of NSDF. 
(para 3.8.3) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that u nder the National Sports Development Fund 
(NDSF), the budget provision of ₹ 5.00 crore was made as matching contribution by the 
Ministry of Youth Aff airs & Sports, for the year 2021 -22.  Due to Covid situation, the 
Department of Sports could not get adequate CSR contribution in the NSDF, in the year 
2021-22. However, in the last quarter of 2021 -22, a CSR of ₹ 15.00 crore was received 
from Rural Electrification Corporation ( REC) Foundation. Further, the Department of 
Sports have signed a MoU with the REC Foundation to get contribution of ₹ 100.00 
crore for the next 3 yea rs. Furthermore, a MoU is in final stage with Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited ( IOCL) to get CSR fund of ₹6.88 crore. New India Insurance has 
also provided ₹ 4.00 crore in the current financial year in April, 2022. These CSR 
contributions could be ensured through sustained efforts by the Ministry  of Youth 
Affairs & Sports as well  as SAI. For the financial year 2022 -23, a  Standing Financial 
Committee (SFC) meeting was held to get the scheme approved for next 5  years (15 th 

5 
 
Financial Commission Cycle). In the SFC, it was decided that there would not be  any 
matching grant/contribution by GoI here onwards. However,  Government of India will 
provide financial grant of ₹ 113.50 crore to the NSDF in next five years.  
The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has been regularly interacting with the 
Corporate and Public Sector Undertakings requesting them to contribute to  the NSDF 
and become active partners for promotion of sports  and games in the country. Further, 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports is in the process  of strengthening the NSDF 
Secretariat and has developed a new website to garner maximum  popularity for the 
scheme. 
 
NATIONAL SPORTS UNIVERSITY, MANIPUR  
 
Recommendation  
6. The Committee while lauding the initiative of  starting the National Sports 
University, suggested that it should be known to one and  all. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the work and progress of the University  may be advertised and 
publicised and be brought to the notice of people at large especially with regards to 
Sports Science. 
(para 3.9.4) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that the w ork and progress of the University is being 
shared on National Infrastructure Pipeline  (NIP) portal, PMO Portal and with 
Department of North East Region ( DoNER) & Cabinet Secretariat on monthly basis. 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, in collaboration with the National Sports  
University (NSU), will explore the ways and means to advertise and publish and bring 
to the notice of   people at large, especially on subject of Sports Science. 
 
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)  
 
Recommendation  
7. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs 
should aggressively advertise/publicise its various schemes on social media platforms to 
effectively interact with the youth and sensitize them about its importance.  
(para 4.2.8) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that NYKS HQ advertises  its programs by youth 
and their National/District/State/Block levels which are always shared on Twitter, 
Instagram, Facebook, etc. social media platforms and their District social media 
platforms. It also  takes care to regularly tag respected personalities to their personal 
social media platforms. NYKS also creates and publishes human stories, motivational 
videos and graphics so as to ensure the widespread reach of NYKS to grassroots level.  

6 
 
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT 
DEVELOPMENT (NPYAD) 
 
Recommendation  
8. The Committee, therefore, recommends that volunteers involved in National 
Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development should be trained in counseling 
about family values and conc ern for each other and especially about management of 
mental health to ensure that youth are not left rudderless at the time of crisis.  
(para 4.4.3) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS), which 
receives financial assistance under National Programme for Youth and Adolescent 
Development (NPYAD) Scheme for organizing Life Skill Education Camps will be 
asked to train the volunteers in counseling about family values and concern for each 
other and especially about manage ment of mental health to ensure that youth are not left 
rudderless at the time of crisis while organizing camps under NPYAD Scheme.  
 
Recommendation  
9. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that role and scope of Organ 
Donation in serving the socie ty may be taken up seriously and prominently by the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and may be included as an item for generating 
awareness among youth especially during Youth festivals.  
(para 4.4.4) 
 
Action Taken 
The host State of upcoming National Youth Festivals and NYKS will be 
requested by this Department to create awareness on the importance of role of Organ 
Donation as a means and ways of serving the society during the upcoming National 
Youth Festivals. 
 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION  
 
Recommendation  
10. The Committee while appreciating the youth exchange programme of the 
Department of Youth Affairs with other countries, recommends that instead of working 
in silos, it should venture into collaborative efforts with the  Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) which in a way does parallel work and other similar organizations.  
(para 4.5.2) 
Action Taken 
The Department has submitted that the International Youth Exchange Programme s 
(IYEP) with partnering countries are being carried out by IC Cell of Department of 

7 
 
Youth Affairs in consultation with MEA only. Further, IC Cell of Department of Youth 
Affairs also works in close coordination with ICCR, a division of MEA. Various 
activities undertaken with ICCR are: 
i) Joint Working Group (JWG)  meeting on cultural and social cooperation 
between India and Saudi Arabia. 
ii) Cooperation with Buddhist majority countries viz. Vietnam, S. Korea, China, 
Sri Lanka etc. F or instance , the then Hon’ble Minister of Sports (IC) Y outh 
Affairs & Sports, Secretary  (YA) and Joint Secretary  (YA) addressed the 
inaugural program of the 3 -days virtual conference on Buddhist Philosophy 
and its Role in Inculcating Values among Youth from 17-19 February, 2021. 
iii) Participation of c ultural artists from ICCR had also been done in various 
IYEPs/International events of Department Youth Affairs.  
IC Cell of Department of Youth Affairs will strive for collaborative  efforts with 
ICCR and other similar organizations during various IYEPs as per need basis. 
 
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS) 
 
Recommendation  
11. The Committee has gone into the details of the National Service Scheme (NSS) 
and its contribution towards the society at large. Based on the inputs made available by 
the Department, and the challenges posed by the Covid -19 pandemic, the Committee 
recommends for increasing the number of volunteers within the ambit of the scheme. The 
Committee further recommends that the rates for activities of regular nature and spec ial 
camping may be suitably revised to attract more and more volunteers especially youth. 
The Committee also recommends that the certificates issued to the volunteers should be 
duly accredited by standard norm across the country to attract more numbers of 
employers i.e. to make the scheme more employability friendly.  
(para 4.9.4) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that the existing rate for Regular Activities and Special 
Camping are Rs.250 per volunteer per year and Rs.450 per volunteer per year (50% of  
the volunteer strength) respectively which was last revised in the year 2010. Further, the 
Ministry in the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) proposal of National Service 
Scheme has proposed to revise the rate of Regular Activities and Special Camping to  
Rs.950 per volunteer per year and Rs.1120 per volunteer per year (50% of volunteer 
strength) respectively and also creation of 4062 new NSS Units (1 unit -100 volunteers). 
An Expenditure Finance Committee ( EFC) meeting on NSS was held on 11.08.2021 
under t he Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure) in which the Committee 
recommended to increase the rate of Regular Activities and Special Camping to Rs.400 
per volunteer per year and Rs.700 per volunteer per year (50% of volunteer strength) 
respectively for the  next five years i.e. 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 and also approved the  

8 
 
proposal for creation of 3000 n ew NSS units i.e. 3,00,000 volunteers. Further, the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure vide their O.M. No. 01(01)/PFC -I/2022 
dated 1 st February, 2022 had conveyed the approval of the Cabinet Secretariat for 
continuation of National Service Scheme , a Central Sector Scheme with an outlay of 
Rs.1627 Crore over the 15 th Finance Commission Cycle from the period 2021 -22 to 
2025-26. Further, a D.O. letter dated 30.09.2019 and subsequent reminder 12.12.2019 
from Secretary (Youth Affairs) was sent to the Secretary, Department of Higher 
Education, Ministry of Education to put in place an accreditation system for NSS 
volunteers for recognizing the work towards nation development with a detailed concept 
note on the accreditation system for NSS volunteers. In reference to the D.O. letters of 
Secretary (Youth Affairs), Secretary, D epartment of Higher Education vide D.O. letter 
dated 17.12.2019 had informed that the National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
(NAAC) accords accreditation to the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) only and the 
National Board of Accreditation (NBA) accredits technical programmes and courses 
only. No accreditation is accorded for any of the certificates being issued by any 
organization. 
 
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT  
(RGNIYD) 
Recommendation 
12. The Committee recommends that the  allocation of funds may be utilized optimally 
in order to achieve the main objective of the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth 
Development i.e. in-depth research and training by diversifying into youth related issues 
as well as handholding of States  in carrying out several specific socioeconomic 
activities. 
(para 4.10.5) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has submitted that proper planning to conduct training relating to 
Youth Development Programmes will be made at RGNIYD by using the funds allocated 
in General Plan. The Research activities will be carried out with new subjects and also 
with the existing Internal Research Programmes by utilizing the funds allocated under 
General Plan. Feasibility to collaborate with State Government in carrying out socio -
economic activities has already been taken up. It is assured that the Funds allocated in 
other Heads will also be utilized optimally during the Financial Year 2022 -23. 
 

9 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
REVENUE AND CAPITAL WISE ALLOCATIONS  
 
Recommendation  
13. The Committee observes from the table  that out of the total outlay of ₹3062.60 
Crore in BE 2022-23, ₹3057.28Crore, i.e., 99 .83% is under Revenue and only ₹5.32 
Crore, i.e., 0.17% is under Capital Head. It is also observed that the  outlay provided 
for the Ministry under Demand  No.102 for the upcoming financial year was higher than 
the outlay provided in BE 2020 -21 as well the RE 2020-21 by approximately 18% which 
was however, 23.44% lesser than the projections made to the Ministry of Finance.  The 
Committee is of the view that as the year  2022 is going to be a crucial  year in  which 
Indian sporting prowess will be showcased at  the world stage through the Asian and 
Commonwealth ga mes, funds should not prove  any hindrance in the training of and 
making  available the best of facilities to our sportspersons. 
(para 2.6) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry in its reply has submitted that the Ministry of Finance has allocated a 
budget of ₹3062.60 crore in BE 2022- 23, ₹3057.28 crore, i.e. 99.83% is  under 
Revenue and ₹5.32 crore, i.e. 0.17% is under Capital  Head. During the FY 2021-22, an 
amount of ₹43.72 crore for National Sports University (NSU)  had been allocated under 
Capital Head/Section. Now, the NSU has  been fully established and therefore in FY 
2022-23, the budget relating to infrastructure projects has been shifted from Capital 
Section (Major Works head) to Revenue Section (Creation of Capital Assets head),  and 
an amount of ₹78.00 crore has been allocated in FY 2022-23. It has been further 
submitted that t he Ministry is committed to  providing all out support to Indian 
sportspersons to enable them to participate and excel in forthcoming national as well as 
international events. In case of requirement of additional budget  allocation during the 
FY 2022-23, the same will be submitted to the Ministry of Finance for Supplementary 
Demand for Grants/RE stage. 
 
Recommendation  
14. The Committee noted the cut in the allocations  of funds in the BE 2022-2023 and 
enquired about the same. The Department of Sports has  informed that one of the reasons 
for the reduced allocations of budget in respect of Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
was due to lesser allocation by the Ministry of Finance  on account of Covid. The 
Secretary further informed that many infrastructure projects and  big sporting events 
                                                             
 Annexure II   

10 
 
could not be organized because of restrictions imposed due to Covid.  The Committee, 
however, expressed the hope  that with the easing of restrictions the Department of 
Sports would be able to utilize the funds optimally in coming months. 
(para 3.1.6) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has stated that the observation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
PRIME MINISTER'S DEVELOPMENT PACKAGE (PMDP) -  ENHANCEMENT 
OF SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES IN J&K  
 
Recommendation  
15. The Committee therefore strongly recommends  that Sports Authority of 
India (SAI)  must identify the possible reasons for such  gross underutilization of 
allocated funds and  be more careful in studying the gaps in generating  
requirements for the UT of J&K and ensure  that sports and related activities are not 
neglected or relegated to the background. 
(para 3.3.3.) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that a n amount of ₹ 50.00 crore was allocated by the 
Ministry of Finance under the Prime Minister's Development Package (PMDP) for FY 
2021-22, in response to the demand raised by this Ministry, keeping in view the sports 
infrastructure projects sanctioned in the UT of J&K.  However, due to slow progress of 
work owing to COVID -19 restrictions, the demand was later revised to ₹ 15.00 crore at 
the Revised Estimate stage and the entire ₹ 15.00 crore was utilized under the PMDP 
during FY 2021-22. 
 
SCHEME OF ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERA TION 
 
Recommendation 
16. On the issues of recognition or certification of quality  which is of national 
level or Olympic standard,  the Committee recommends that in case  national level 
certification is required, the Department of Sports must provide the same after taking 
suitable fee. 
(para 3.4.6) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that the  Department does not provide any  
Certification of quality, but grants  recognition to the National Sports  Federations 
(NSF) for specific sports  in terms of the provisions of the National Sports 
Development Code, 2011 and can renew  the recognition of existing NSFs on Annual 
basis on examination of requisite documents. 
 

11 
 
Recommendation  
17. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a  realistic assessment of projected 
expenditure may be made and ensure that funds are utilized  to the optimum for better 
results and achievement of targets. The Committee further  recommends that with Covid -
19 on decline and  easing of the restrictions on several activities  including sports, efforts 
may be made to cover the lost ground expeditiously.  
(para 3.4.8) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that the v ariation in the projected expenditure and 
actual expenditure under Scheme of Assistance to NSFs was due to the COVID-19 
pandemic as many training and competitions were cancelled or  re-scheduled. As the 
situation is returning to normal, the training and competitive exposures have been  
approved keeping in view the requirements projected by NSFs. 
 
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR SPORTS COACHING 
 
Recommendation  
18. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the issue of para -athlete 
classification should not be neglected and a proper system may be evolved for 
identification, education & training and database of classifiers to instill among the 
para-athletes a sense of dignity and pride. This will also ensure transparency about the 
whole process of identification and selection of para-athletes.  
(para 3.5.3) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry in response to the Recommendation has informed that the 
responsibility for classification of para athletes is that of Paralympic Committee of India 
(PCI). The Ministry has, in a meeting, taken up the matter with PCI on 27.12.2021  and 
impressed upon the PCI to take steps for increasing the number of classifi ers in India by 
taking up the matter with the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) regarding the 
requirement of classification slots for para athletes from the country and certification 
courses for classifiers. 
[ 
Recommendation  
19. The Committee noted that immediately after the closing of an Olympic games, the 
Olympic games for para -athletes are organized which has international significance.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that sincere efforts may be made to submit 
viable proposals and identify suitable coaches/classifiers to ensure that young talents 
are not left behind for want of better guidance.  The participation and medal prospects 
among para -athletes may be given equal importance and encouragement by way of 
better classifiers.  
(para 3.5.5) 
 

12 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that the responsibility for identification of suitable 
coaches/classifiers for Para -Athletes is that of the Paralympic Committee of India 
(PCI). It has been further informed that the Ministry supplements the efforts of PCI 
relating to coach development etc. and the proposals including coach development, are 
considered and approved as part of the Annual Calendar of Training & Competitions.  
The Ministry also mentioned that the Government has placed para -sports in ‘Priority’ 
category, so as to provide maximum admissible assistance under the Scheme of 
Assistance to NSFs. 
 
Recommendation  
20. The Committee recommends that since sports is an interdisciplinary subject, the 
setting up of National Sports Education Board as envisaged by the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs and Sports may be got expedited for better co -ordination between sports and 
education and other related fields and overall co -ordination with several stakeholders 
may be established for synchronization of efforts. 
(para 3.7.6) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that an Expert Committee comprising relevant 
stakeholders was constituted on 3 rd January, 2020 to carry out a detailed study which 
will serve the purpose of deciding of the modalities for implem entation of the Budget 
Announcement i.e. setting up of National Sports Education Board (NSEB) for 
development of sportspersons. After detailed deliberations, the Committee submitted 
the final report along with recommendations/observations to the Department  on 26 th 
April, 2022. The recommendations/ observations are currently under examination.  
 
NATIONAL SPORTS UNIVERSITY 
 
Recommendation  
21. The Committee is of the view that this University has the potential to emerge as the  
sporting powerhouse of not only the State but of the country. The Committee 
recommends that it is prudent that all necessary efforts be  made towards defining and 
implementing effectively its programmes, policies and infrastructure as the success of the 
University will create the "right e cosystem" for sports and  games and will be an 
example to emulate by  other State and other Universities and Colleges  so that sports 
and sporting culture thrives all across the country.  
(para 3.9.5) 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that it will , in collaboration with the NSU, make 
necessary efforts to define and implement its programmes, policies and infrastructure to 
create the ‘right ecosystem’ for sports. 

13 
 
Recommendation  
22. The Committee, overall, strongly recommends  the Department of  Sports on two 
aspects: 
(i) the schemes, projects and bodies of the Department may be extensively and 
aggressively advertised through all channels including social media so that people 
across the country are well aware  about its schemes and are suitably benefited; 
and 
(ii) there should be an integral and pivotal role  of people’s representatives at Centre 
and State level as well as local representatives  in identifying and encouraging the 
sportspersons. 
(para 3.14.7) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that as far as the spreading awareness about the 
schemes of Department of Sports is concerned, it is stated that they are uploaded on the 
website of the Ministry. Further, to ensure that the benefits of the schemes of Cash 
Award, Meritorious Pension, Welfare Fund and NSDF reach to the beneficiaries at the 
lowest level in the country, initiatives have been taken to make these schemes online. 
Efforts are being undertaken to interact with people’s representatives at the Centre and 
the State level, as well as with the local representatives for encouraging the 
beneficiaries/sportspersons to avail the benefits of schemes to the maximum.  
 
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)  
 
Recommendation  
23. The Committee appreciated the efforts of the Department of Youth affairs and 
involvement of huge number of volunteers which was reflected in the data presented 
before the Committee. However, the Committee observed that these volunteers were not 
to be seen around or their presence was not felt in the field which led to speculate about 
the veracity of data provided. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should 
be a robust mechanism for collection and verification of data regarding the volunteers 
working in the field/grass-root level for said development work. 
(para 4.2.5) 
 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that NYKS has put in place mechanism for 
verification of data of Youth Volunteers/Members of Youth Clubs. The data of these 
volunteers are available on NYKS portal. The District Youth Officers and National 
Youth Volunteers of NYKS upload data only after check and due verification. Besides, 
NYKS has a core programme namely Youth Club Development Programme whereby 
NYKS update/collect data of Youth Volunteers/Members of Youth Clubs through  
village outreach initiative. 

14 
 
Recommendation  
24. The Committee also felt that there was a lack of transparency in the selection of 
Nehru Yuva Kendra and the appointment process within it. The Committee recommends 
that the Department of Youth Affairs must examine this perception and make efforts to 
either take corrective action or dispel the same. The Committee also felt that there is a 
need to keep public representatives aware of the activities and the initiatives being taken 
by the Department and recommen ds that sensitization programmes in this respect be 
held from time to time.  
(para 4.2.6) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that c onsequent to the approval of Board of 
Governors (BOG), the Online Exam for Recruitment / Selection of Personnel’s in Nehru 
Yuva Kendra Sangathan has been carried out by Institute of Banking and Personnel 
Services (IBPS), an autonomous body under RBI, for all categories of posts. Posts for 
which the candidate s appeared for Skill Test (Group B and C Posts) was carried out by 
Tata Consultancy Service s (TCS)/Interviews (Group A Posts) were carried out by 
NYKS. NYKS has already issued directions to its field functionaries through its Annual 
Action Plan that Public  Representatives such as Hon’ble Members of Parliament who 
are the Members of Parliamentary Standing Committee on EWCY&S, Local Public 
Representatives (Hon’ble  MPs, MLAs, MLCs) and other key Stakeholders should be 
apprised of the on -going activities of NYK S and also invited to functions etc. Further, 
during Covid-19 pandemic situation, the role of NYVs and about 36.79 lakh volunteers 
of NYKS has been a matter of appreciation at every level. Almost all the Governors and 
Chief Ministers and Ministers of Diffe rent States have placed their appreciation on 
record about the role played by them. Hon’ble Prime Minister has also praised these 
volunteers in his Mann Ki Baat and other forums. 
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation  
25. A perusal of the allocation of funds in terms of  Revenue and Capital Scheme-wise 
of the Department of Sports in Table -III indicates that there is very little variation in the 
Non-Scheme under Revenue BE for the FY 2021-22 & 2022- 23 and between RE 2021-22 
& BE 2022 -23. However, there is marked fluctuations in the  Capital Scheme and Non -
Scheme between BE 2021-22 & BE 2022-23 and RE 2021-22 & BE 2022-23. Moreover, 
the actual expenditure as on 31st January,2022 was approximately 55% which was quite 
less. The Committee recommends the Department to undertake an analysis   of   the   
same   and   factor   in   the parameters which are leading to low utilization. 
(para 2.7) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that during  the FY 2021-22, actual expenditure was 
₹2376.99 crore,  which is 86.22% of RE 2021 -22 allocation of ₹2757.02 crore. The 
Ministry further informed that due  to technical error/problems in Public Financial 
Management System  (PFMS), an amount of ₹194.33 crore was surrendered/remained 
unutilized in the Treasury Single Account (TSA) System. 
 
Recommendation  
26. The Committee after going through the Tables IX & X * observed that the actual 
expenditure for Department of Sports was approx imately 55.09 % as on 31st January, 
2022. The Department of Sports informed that lesser expenditure was due to Covid 
related restrictions and cancellation of sporting events at both national and 
international level. Department of Youth Affairs also cited s imilar reasons for under 
utilization of its funds which stood at 62.56% as on 31st January, 2022. The Committee 
recognizes the reason for under utilization of allocated funds and recommends that 
efforts may be made to streamline the projects/schemes/sporti ng events stalled so that 
there is optimum utilization of funds. 
(para 2.10) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry informed that during the Financial year 2021 -22, the actual 
expenditure for Department of Sports was Rs.1748.76 crore which was 87.75% of RE 
2021-22 of Rs.1993.00 crore and the Department of Youth Affairs utilized Rs.627.13 
crore which was 82. 08% of RE 2021 -22 of Rs.764.02 crore. Due to technical 
                                                             
• Annexure III    
*Annexure IV      
*Annexure V       

16 
 
error/problem in PFMS, an amount of Rs.194.33 crore (Rs.55.62 crore under 
Department of Youth Affairs and Rs.138.71 crore under Department of Sports) 
surrendered/unutilized in Treasury Single Account ( TSA) System. The recommendation 
of the Committee is duly noted. All efforts will be made by the Ministry to streamline 
the projects/schemes/ sporting events  stalled so that there is optimum  utilization of 
funds. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
The Committee notes the submissions made by the Department and stresses 
that timely intervention and assistance of technical team may be sought at 
appropriate intervals to sort out any such technical issues which reflect on the 
budgetary provisions. The Committee also h opes that the inadequate fund 
utilization as reflected in figures upto January, 2022 would be examined for system 
glitches and proper analysis of the same would be undertaken by the Department. 
The Committee recommends that wherever required, a better coor dination 
mechanism with states be developed for monitoring/ matching of transactions 
under the TSA System.   
 
Recommendation  
27. Stressing the need for better management of injuries at sports centres or during 
sports activities, the Committee strongly recommends that Sports Authority of India 
(SAI) should tie up with specialized hospitals across the country to ensure that proper 
and advance treatment is provided to sportspersons without any loss of  time besides 
providing preventive and awareness measures towards better management of injuries. 
The Committee also  recommends for exploring feasibility of tying  up with hospitals at 
smaller towns and at grassroots level so as to reduce time towards  access to better 
health services. The Committee  further recommends that there should be more  such 
centres where medical colleges should have the facilities of sports medicine. 
(para 3.1.11) 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has stated that the Recommendations of the Committee have been 
noted for compliance.  
 
Comments of the Committee  
The Ministry has stated that the Recommendations of the Committee have 
been noted for compliance . However, no further status or action taken in respect 
of the Recommendation has been mentioned. The Committee desires that suitable 
follow up action on its recommendation be undertaken by the Sports Authority of 

17 
 
India/Department of Sports and the same be in formed to the Committee. The 
Committee further stresses upon the Ministry to come up with a status/feasibility 
report on the issue of collaboration with hospitals for better management of sports 
related injuries with minimum loss of time.    
 
Recommendation  
28. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that efforts may be made to 
settle past liabilities on priority basis so that it does  not get repeatedly reflected in 
coming financial  years. Once these committed liabilities are offset, the budgetary 
allocations would be able  to reflect the trend of allocation and expenditure more 
realistically. The Committee  further recommends that all other activities under the 
umbrella of Khelo India Scheme may  be suitably complied with and all the sporting  
activities may be undertaken in the wake of substantial fund allocation. The Committee 
also recommends that the timeline for proposed construction  of new projects at 
Varanasi and Naranpura may be adhered to stringently, removing all possible 
bottlenecks in the process. 
(para 3.2.5)   
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that the Recommendation has been n oted for 
compliance. Some  States and UTs are in arrears for submitting Utilization Certificate 
for the funds released to them under various schemes on time and regular follow-up is 
being undertaken with such States & UTs. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 The Committee taking note of delay in submission of Utilization Certificates 
by some of the States/UTs stresses upon the Department to evolve a robust 
mechanism for speedy settlement of funds for its optimum utilization within the 
time frame. The Committee also directs that a Status note detailing the timelines, 
progress made till now and bottlenecks being faced, if any,  towards the 
construction of new projects at Varanasi and Naranpura may be submitted. 
Also expeditious completion of the mentioned Projects be also ensured.  
 
SCHEME OF ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATION  
 
Recommendation  
29.  The Committee in the light of submission made, accordingly recommends that the 
Department should come out with a proper plan  of action for bodybuilders through 
Federation of Bodybuilding and a proper forum be evolved  where these sportspersons 
can get sponsors and   scope for a dignified livelihood may be explored. 
(para 3.4.5) 
Action Taken 

18 
 
The Department has informed that the  Indian Body Building Federation (IBBF) 
was recognized by this Ministry as a  National Sports Federation till 31st December, 
2021 to promote  the sport of Body Building in India. The matter of renewal of  
recognition of IBBF is under consideration. As  regards fitness, the athletes attending 
National Coaching Camps are given adequate support for diet, which has been  further 
enhanced as per the latest  norms finalized in February, 2022, under the Scheme of 
Assistance to NSFs. 
Comments of the Committee  
 The Committee notes that the Department has partially touched upon its 
recommendation. However, a more clear response is required for the evolution of 
a forum which will provide a dignified livelihood to the B ody Builders . The 
Committee, therefore, further recommends that the Department should 
empathetically address this issue in all earnestness and sensitivity and a plan of 
action to this effect may be provided. Status report in respect of renewal of 
recognition of the IBBF may also be presented before the Committee.     
 
SCHEME OF HUMAN RESORUCE DEVELOPMENT IN SPORTS (HRDS)  
 
Recommendation 
30. The Committee recommends that the Scheme of Human Resource Development in 
Sports may be advertised/publicized more with suitably enhanced fund allocation so as 
to build a sporting environment and culture in the country and also allow this scheme to 
blossom into an alternate source of livelihood.  
(para 3.7.5) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that the Scheme of Human Resource  Development in 
Sports, a Central  Sector Scheme, was launched by  the Department of Sports  in the 
financial year 2013-14 after thorough revision of the “Scheme of Talent  Search and 
Training”. The main  focus of the Scheme is to give emphasis on the academic and 
intellectual side of Sports Management. The Department invites applications under the 
Scheme for Fellowship, Exchange of knowledge/research/ideas, Assistance to Match 
Officials, Coaches and Supporting Personnel, Research and Publication in Sports. The 
advertisement gets published in National and Regional Newspapers from time to time to 
spread awareness of the scheme. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 The Committee notes the submissions  made by the Ministry . However, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Scheme needs to be more 
publicized to reach the intended beneficiaries in all parts of the country , especially 
remote/rural areas. The Commi ttee further recommends that social media 
platform be suitably utilized in promotion of scheme. Also, the Department may 

19 
 
collaborate with various Universities so that the efforts and aim under the Scheme 
get adequate thrust. The Committee also directs that  consultation on promoting 
Sports Management be also undertaken with the National Sports University, 
Imphal to gain insights from their research and experience. The Committee is also 
of the view that, keeping in view the large sporting personnel who are in  need of    
proper Coaching, the feasibility of setting up of more ‘Centres of Excellence’ like 
NIS , Patiala,  to cater to sportsmen from various parts of the country, in the four 
zones Northern, Western, Southern and Eastern,  be explored and efforts be made 
for requisite budgetary provisions in the Budget for the Financial year 2023-24.   
 
NATIONAL DOPE TESTING LABORATORY (NDTL)  
 
Recommendation  
31. The Committee recommends that allocation of  funds should not be a constraint  in 
expansion of  the National Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL)  and more funds may be 
sought if need be. Also  aggressive awareness programme coupled with  education and 
training should be started to ensure that budding athletes, sportspersons as  well as 
coaches become more and more aware  and educated towards doping substances as 
well as its procedures.  
(para 3.14.5) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that funds are provided to NDTL as  and when 
required. Regarding the awareness programmes coupled with education and training for 
athletes/sportspersons as well as  coaches, the National Anti- Doping Agency (NADA) 
is the nodal authority. The  National Anti-Doping Agency is carrying out several 
awareness and educational activities to sensitize our budding  athletes, as also the elite 
athletes. 
 
Recommendation 
32. The Committee noted that at present  there is  just one such laboratory of 
international standards in the country and recommends that  feasibility of opening of 
more such laboratory  be explored so that gradually NDTL and its branches caters to 
grassroots level sportspersons especially in such areas where there is abundance of raw 
talents of athletes including tribal areas.  
(para 3.14.6) 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that the Department of Sports  has already favoured 
establishment of more state-of-the-art Dope Testing Laboratories in the country, with  
reference to the recommendations  contained in the 325 th Report of  the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and 
Sports. In addition to the above, it  is also pertinent to mention  that in the draft National 

20 
 
Anti-Doping Bill,  2021, there is provision for establishment of more Anti- Doping 
laboratories in the country. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee notes the reply and expresses it s satisfaction that most of the 
recommendations given by the Committee were incorporated in the recently passed 
"The National Anti -Doping Bill, 2021 ". The Committee , however, further 
recommends that provisions of the recently passed Bill may be implemented in a 
time bound manner . So far as awareness programmes are concerned, the 
Department should specify the activities undertaken under the aegis of NADA. As 
far as ope ning up of more branches of NDTL, the Committee recommends that 
such branches may initially be opened up within reputed Sports Universities / 
Institutes and gradually spread to small centres under SAI.     
 
Recommendation 
33. The Committee is also of the view that there is a need for major reforms to be 
examined and  undertaken to provide a thrust to the way sports  is managed in the 
country. The Committee therefore recommends that the following aspects may be 
considered, in consultation with  States, to help transform the sporting scenario of 
Indian Sports: 
 as Sports in the country have been historically viewed from the angle of 
entertainment and recreational activity,  rather than as a fulfilling profession, 
there is a need to make sustained efforts  to break that perception. Towards this  
aim the proposal to transfer Sports to the Concurrent List of the Constitution  
needs a thorough examination in    consultation with the States; 
 need for an independent  regulator for Sports as a “Sports Regulatory 
Authority” can also bring numerous benefits towards streamlining the 
working of Sports Federations and in improving coordination and cooperation 
between the Department of  Sports, National Sports Federation (NSF), Indian 
Olympic Association and    the Sports Authority of India; 
 constitution of Sports Tribunals as a first level of resolution mechanism to  
expeditiously resolve Sports related disputes; 
 putting in place a strict Anti-Doping Legislation to check doping in Sports  and 
also to provide a regulatory framework to bring awareness about the issue; and 
 incentivize Sports funding and participation through public private partnerships. 
(para 3.14.8) 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that w ith regard to the need for independent regulator 

21 
 
for Sports as a ‘Sports Regulatory Authority’ for streamlining of the  working of NSFs 
etc, it is stated  that at present the governance and  management of NSFs is regulated  as 
per the provisions of the National Sports Development Code, 2011 and subsequent 
executive instruction. The Anti-doping legislation in the  form of the National Anti -
Doping Bill, 2021 was introduced in Lok  Sabha on December 17, 2021. The Bill seeks 
to prohibit doping  in sports and establish a National  Board for Anti -Doping in Sports  
and strengthen the framework for  carrying out anti -doping programmes. Enactment  of 
the legislation is awaited. The  Ministry has initiated measures for funding sports and  
participation through public private partnerships in the form of CSR contribution in the 
National Sports Development Funds, asset monetization by involving private partners, 
inclusion of partnership      provisions in the revised Khelo   India Scheme, etc.                  
 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee taking note of the fact that the National Anti -Doping 
Bill,2021 has since been passed by the Parliament  recommends that speedy action 
may be initiated for implementing the provisions of the Act especially with regard 
to framing of the Rules thereunder. Aggressive initiatives related to pu blic private 
partnership for sports funding and participation may be pursued. The Committee 
further recommends that National Sports Development Code, 2011 may be suitably 
revisited as more than a decade has since elapsed and m any developments have 
since occurred in the field of sports and its related technology , besides the passage 
of the National Anti -Doping Bill, 2021 . The Committee also reiterates the other 
recommendations regarding transfer of Sports to the Concurrent List of the 
Constitution and settin g up of Sports Tribunals for dispute resolution and would 
like the Department to submit its views on the same.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
NEHRU  YUVA  KENDRA  SANGATHAN  (NYKS)  
 
Recommendation  
34. However, the Committee feels that there should  be culmination of some of the 
schemes into one  and, therefore, recommends that steps may be  taken for integrating of 
schemes for optimum utilization of resources and weeding out any duplication of work. 
(para 4.2.4) 
  
    

23 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE 
 
The Committee notes the submissions made by the Department and stresses 
that timely intervention and assistance of technical team may be sought at 
appropriate intervals to sort out any such technical issues which reflect on the 
budgetary provisions. The Committee also h opes that the inadequate fund 
utilization as reflected in figures upto January, 2022 would be examined for system 
glitches and proper analysis of the same would be undertaken by the Department. 
The Committee recommends that wherever required, a better coor dination 
mechanism with states be developed for monitoring/ matching of transactions 
under the TSA System.   
 (para 2.7 and para 2.10) 
 
The Ministry has stated that the Recommendations of the Committee have 
been noted for compliance . However, no further status or action taken in respect 
of the Recommendation has been mentioned. The Committee desires that suitable 
follow up action on its recommendation be undertaken by the Sports Authority of 
India/Department of Sports and the same be in formed to the Committee. The 
Committee further stresses upon the Ministry to come up with a status/feasibility 
report on the issue of collaboration with hospitals for better management of 
sports related injuries with minimum loss of time.    
 (para 3.1.11) 
 
The Committee taking note of delay in submission of Utilization Certificates 
by some of the States/UTs stresses upon the Department to evolve a robust 
mechanism for speedy settlement of funds for its optimum utilization within the 
time frame. The Committee also directs that a Status note detailing the timelines, 
progress made till now and bottlenecks being faced, if any,  towards the 
construction of new projects at Varanasi and Naranpura may be submitted. 
Also expeditious completion of the mentioned Projects be also ensured.  
 (para 3.2.5) 
 
The Committee notes that the Department has partially touched upon its 
recommendation. However, a more clear response is required for the evolution of 
a forum which will provide a dignified livelihood to the B ody Builders. The 
Committee, therefore, further recommends that the Department should 
empathetically address this issue in all earnestness and sensitivity and a plan of 
action to this effect may be provided. Status report in respect of renewal of  
 

24 
 
recognition of the IBBF may also be presented before the Committee.     
(para 3.4.5) 
 
The Committee notes the submissions made by the Ministry. However, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Scheme needs to be more 
publicized to reach the intended benef iciaries in all parts of the country, especially 
remote/rural areas. The Committee further recommends that social media 
platform be suitably utilized in promotion of scheme. Also, the Department may 
collaborate with various Universities so that the efforts  and aim under the Scheme 
get adequate thrust. The Committee also directs that consultation on promoting 
Sports Management be also undertaken with the National Sports University, 
Imphal to gain insights from their research and experience. The Committee is also 
of the view that, keeping in view the large sporting personnel who are in need of    
proper Coaching, the feasibility of setting up of more ‘Centres of Excellence’ like 
NIS , Patiala,  to cater to sportsmen from various parts of the country, in the four 
zones Northern, Western, Southern and Eastern,  be explored and efforts be made 
for requisite budgetary provisions in the Budget for the Financial year 2023 -24.          
                 (para 3.7.5) 
 
The Committee notes the reply and expresses it s satisfaction that most of the 
recommendations given by the Committee were incorporated in the recently passed 
"The National Anti -Doping Bill, 2021 ". The Committee , however, further 
recommends that provisions of the recently passed Bill may be implemented in a 
time bound manner . So far as awareness programmes are concerned, the 
Department should specify the activities undertaken under the aegis of NADA. As 
far as opening up of more branches of NDTL, the Committee recommends that 
such branches may initially be opened up within reputed Sports Universities / 
Institutes and gradually spread to small centres under SAI.     
      (paras 3.14.5 and 3.14.6) 
 
The Committee taking note of the fact that the National Anti -Doping 
Bill,2021 has since been passed by the Parliament recommends that speedy action 
may be initiated for implementing the provisions of the Act especially with regard 
to framing of the Rules thereunder. Aggressive initiatives related to public private 
partnership for sports funding and participatio n may be pursued. The Committee 
further recommends that National Sports Development Code, 2011 may be suitably 
revisited as more than a decade has since elapsed and m any developments have 
since occurred in the field of sports and its related technology , besides the passage 

25 
 
of the National Anti -Doping Bill, 2021 . The Committee also reiterates the other 
recommendations regarding transfer of Sports to the Concurrent List of the 
Constitution and setting up of Sports Tribunals for dispute resolution and would 
like the Department to submit its views on the same. 
 (para 3.14.8) 
 

26 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(EWCY&S)  
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 10:30 A.M. 
on Thursday, 15th December, 2022 in Committee Room No.4, A-Block, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
3. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
4. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
8.  Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
9.  Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
10. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
11. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13. Shri Balak Nath 
14. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
15. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
16. Shri Dharambir Singh 
17. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
18. Shri S. Venkatesan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
7. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 

27 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He 
then informed that the agenda for the meeting was to deliberate upon and adoption of the following 
six draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee: 
a) * * * 
b) * * * 
c) 344th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Thirty Ninth Report 
on Demands for Grants 2022-23 of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports; 
d) * * * 
e) * * * 
f) * * * 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid six draft Action Taken Reports one by 
one and after a brief discussion, adopted the same with minor changes in * and *  Reports. 
4. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament during the 
upcoming Session of the Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri Vivek 
Thakur, Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari, M.P. to 
present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi, M.P. were authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on the 
Table of Lok Sabha. 
5. * * * 
   6.   The meeting adjourned at 11:01 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       A.K. Mallick  
15th December, 2022                                                                                               Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 

28
Annexure-I 
TABLE-IV 
 
 
  
BUDGET ALLOCATION AND UTILISATION OF FUNDS IN RESPECT OF DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH 
AFFAIRS SCHEMES (Rs. in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the Scheme BE  
2021-22 
 RE  
2021-22 
Actuals  
as on 31.01.2022 
A. Secretariat Social Service 35.00 34.02 25.29 
B. Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakaram (RYSK) 
1 Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangthan 326.50 365.00 245.00 
2 National Youth Corps 75.00 57.50 41.56 
3 Youth Hostel 6.00 4.00 0.37 
4 NPYAD 21.00 24.00 10.43 
5 Scouting and Guiding  1.50 1.50 0.38 
6 International Co-operation 14.00 14.00 5.59 
7 Young Leaders Programme 14.00 8.00 7.03 
  Total (B) 458.00 474.00 310.36 
C. National Service Scheme 165.00 231.00 126.44 
D. RGNIYD 32.00 25.00 15.90 
  Total (A+B+C+D) 690.00 764.02 477.99 

29
Annexure II 
TABLE II 
 
  
Department-wise Projection, Allocation, Utilization and Variations (Demand no. 102) 
                        (Figure 
in crore) 
S. 
No
. 
Name 
of the 
Depar
tment 
Actu
als 
2020-
21 
BE 2021-22 RE 2021-22 Projec
tions 
made 
to 
MoF 
for 
2022-
23 
BE 2022-23 % 
chang
e BE 
2021-
22 to 
BE 
2022-
23 
Variatio
n 
between 
projecti
ons and 
BE 
2022-23 
(%) 
Revenu
e  
Capi
tal 
Reven
ue  
Capi
tal 
Revenue  Capit
al 
Total 
  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11=(1
0-
(3+4))
/(3+4) 
12=(10-
7)/7 
1 Depart
-ment 
of 
Youth 
Affairs 
483.71 687.00 3.00 761.52 2.5
0 
1156.3
8 
803.28 5.32 808.60 17.19
% 
-30.07% 
2 Depart
-ment 
of 
Sports 
1304.121862.4
1 
43.7
3 
1993.0
0 
0.0
0 
2843.9
9 
2254.0
0 
0.00 2254.00 18.25
% 
-20.75% 
 Total 1787.832549.4
1 
46.7
3 
2754.5
2 
2.5
0 
4000.3
7 
3057.28 5.32 3062.60 17.97
% 
-23.44% 
 Grand 
Total 
1787.832549.4
1 
46.7
3 
2754.5
2 
2.5
0 
4000.3
7 
3057.28 5.32 3062.60 17.97
% 
-23.44% 

30
 
Annexure III 
TABLE-III 
BUDGET ALLOCATION AND UTILISATION OF FUNDS IN RESPECT OF DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS 
SCHEMES 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
  
S.No Name of the Scheme BE  2021-22 RE 2021-22 Actual as on 
31.01.2022 
A. Development in sports Institutions       
1 Sports Authority of India 660.41 599.00 490.07 
2 Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical 
Education 
55.00 52.00 41.22 
3 National Dope Test Laboratory 12.00 19.00 8.85 
4 National Anti-Doping Agency 10.00 15.00 8.34 
5 National Center for Sports Science and 
Research 
      
  Revenue 9.99 7.00 5.53 
  Capital 0.01 0.00 0.00 
  Total 10.00 7.00 5.53 
6 National Center for Sports Coaching 2.00 2.00 0.00 
7 Sports University in North East       
  Revenue 8.00 66.00 2.40 
  Capital 43.72 0.00 0.00 
  Total 51.72 66.00 2.40 
8 World Anti-Doping Agency 2.50 3.00 0.21 
  Total (A) 803.63 763.00 556.62 
B. Encouragement and Awards to 
Sportsperson 
      
1 Incentive to Sports Persons 38.00 42.00 29.54 
2 Pension to Meritorious Sports Persons 15.00 13.00 4.92 
3 Assistance to NSF 280.00 181.00 85.47 
4 Human Resource Development in Sports 3.80 2.00 0.18 
5 National Sports Development Fund 25.00 5.00 0.00 
6 National Sports Welfare Fund for Sports 
Persons 
2.00 2.00 0.00 
  Total (B) 363.80 245.00 120.11 
C. Khelo India: National Programme for 
Development of Sports 
      
1 Khelo India 657.71 869.00 390.80 
2 Commonwealth Games 30.00 100.00 30.00 
3 Enhancement of Sports Facility in J&K 50.00 15.00 0.00 
4 Seminar, Committee etc. 1.00 1.00 0.32 
  Total (C)  738.71 985.00 421.12 
  Total (A+B+C) 1906.14 1993.00 1097.85 

31
Annexure IV 
TABLE-IX 
DEPARTMENT 
OF SPORTS 
          
Sl. 
N
o. 
Scheme 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
BE RE Exp. % of 
exp. 
w.r.t. 
RE 
BE  RE Exp. % of 
exp. 
w.r.t. 
RE 
BE RE Exp.*  % of 
exp. 
w.r.t. 
RE 
A Developmen
t in Sports 
Institutions 
(An 
Umbrell 
Scheme) 
            
1 Sports 
Authority of 
India 
450.0
0 
615.0
0 
615.0
0 
100.00
% 
500.0
0 
612.2
1 
607.7
9 
99.28
% 
660.4
1 
599.0
0 
490.0
7 
81.81
% 
2 Laxmibai 
National 
Institute of 
Physical 
Education 
50.00 50.00 50.00 100.00
% 
55.00 45.00 45.00 100.00
% 
55.00 52.00 41.22 79.27
% 
3 National 
Dope 
Testing 
Laboratory 
7.50 4.50 4.50 100.00
% 
2.50 13.47 13.47 100.00
% 
12.00 19.00 8.85 46.58
% 
4 National 
Anti-Doping 
Agency 
8.50 8.50 5.54 65.21
% 
12.50 9.00 7.88 87.56
% 
10.00 15.00 8.34 55.60
% 
5 National 
Centre of 
Sports 
Science and 
Research 
25.00 45.00 44.49 98.87
% 
75.00 6.00 4.69 78.17
% 
10.00 7.00 5.53 79.00
% 
6 National 
Centre for 
Sports 
Coaching 
5.00 5.00 4.98 99.60
% 
5.00 2.00 0.00 0.00% 2.00 2.00 0 0.00
% 
7 Sports 
University in 
North  East 
40.00 50.00 47.82 95.64
% 
60.00 6.72 3.25 48.36
% 
51.72 66.00 2.4 3.64
% 
8 World Anti-
Doping 
Agency 
1.00 1.00 1.00 100.00
% 
2.00 10.00 8.91 89.10
% 
2.50 3.00 0.21 7.00
% 
Total - A 587.0
0 
779.0
0 
773.3
3 
99.27
% 
712.0
0 
704.4
0 
690.9
9 
98.10
% 
803.6
3 
763.0
0 
556.6
2 
72.95
% 
B Encourage
ment and 
Awards to 
Sportsperso
n (An 
Umbrella 
Scheme) 
                
1 Special Cash 
Awards 
50.00 62.00 61.54 99.26
% 
38.00 16.00 15.99 99.94
% 
 
38.00 
 
42.00 
 
29.54 
 
70.33
% 2 Awards 2.00 2.00 1.65 82.50
% 
2.00 7.50 7.25 96.67
% 
3 Pension to 
Meritorious 
Sportsperson 
37.00 47.00 46.99 99.98
% 
30.00 14.00 13.22 94.43
% 
15.00 13.00 4.92 37.85
% 
4 Assistance to 
National 
Sports 
Federation 
245.0
0 
300.8
5 
300.8
5 
100.00
% 
245.0
0 
132.0
0 
128.6
2 
97.44
% 
280.0
0 
181.0
0 
85.47 47.22
% 

32
5 Human 
Resource 
Developmen
t in Sports 
5.00 5.00 4.75 95.00
% 
5.00 1.00 0.45 45.00
% 
3.80 2.00 0.18 9.00
% 
6 National 
Sports 
Developmen
t Fund 
70.00 77.15 77.15 100.00
% 
50.00 7.23 7.23 100.00
% 
25.00 5.00 0.00 0.00
% 
7 National 
Sports 
Welfare 
Fund 
2.00 2.00 1.00 50.00
% 
2.00 2.00 2.00 100.00
% 
2.00 2.00 0.00 0.00
% 
Total - B 411.0
0 
496.0
0 
493.9
3 
99.58
% 
372.0
0 
179.7
3 
174.7
6 
97.23
% 
363.8
0 
245.0
0 
120.1
1 
49.02
% 
C Khelo 
India: 
National 
Programme 
for 
Developmen
t of Sports 
(An 
Umbrella 
Scheme) 
            
1 Khelo India 500.0
0 
578.0
0 
575.5
2 
99.57
% 
890.4
2 
328.7
7 
338.0
6 
102.83
% 
657.7
1 
869.0
0 
390.8
0 
44.97
% 
2 Commonwea
lth Games 
70.00 96.00 96.00 100.00
% 
75.00 75.00 75.00 100.00
% 
30.00 100.0
0 
30.00 30.00
% 
3 Enhancemen
t of Sports 
Facility in 
J&K 
30.00 50.00 50.00 100.00
% 
50.00 25.00 25.00 100.00
% 
50.00 15.00 0.00 0.00
% 
4 Himalayan 
Region 
Sports 
Festival 
1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00% 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00% 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
% 
5 Seminar, 
Committee 
etc. 
1.00 1.00 0.60 60.00
% 
1.00 0.50 0.31 62.00
% 
1.00 1.00 0.32 32.00
% 
Total - C 602.0
0 
725.0
0 
722.1
2 
99.60
% 
1016.
42 
429.2
7 
438.3
7 
102.12
% 
738.7
1 
985.0
0 
421.1
2 
42.75
% 
Grand Total 1600.
00 
2000.
00 
1989.
38 
99.47
% 
2100.
42 
1313.
40 
1304.
12 
99.29
% 
1906.
14 
1993.
00 
1097.
85 
55.09
% 
 * as on 31.01.2022 as 
per e-lekha  
           
 
  

33
Annexure V 
TABLE-X 
DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS          
Sl. 
No. 
Scheme 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
BE RE Exp. % of 
exp. 
w.r.t. 
RE 
BE  RE Exp. % of 
exp. 
w.r.t. 
RE 
BE RE Exp.*  % of 
exp. 
w.r.t. 
RE 
A Secretariat 
Social Service 
Expenditure 
32.0
0 
32.0
0 
29.10 90.93
% 
33.0
0 
30.00 29.35 97.83% 35.00 34.02 25.29 74.34% 
  Total - A 32.0
0 
32.0
0 
29.10 90.93
% 
33.0
0 
30.00 29.35 97.83% 35.00 34.02 25.29 74.34% 
B. Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK An Umbrella Scheme) 
1 Nehru Yuva 
Kendra 
Sangathan 
256.
92 
363.
18 
363.1
8 
100.0
0% 
300.
00 
267.75 267.75 100.00% 326.50 365.00 245.0
0 
67.12% 
2 National Youth 
Corps 
80.0
0 
75.0
0 
75.00 100.0
0% 
90.0
0 
60.00 57.55 95.92% 75.00 57.50 41.56 72.28% 
3 National 
Programme for 
Youth and 
Adolscent 
Development 
21.0
0 
21.0
0 
20.28 96.57
% 
23.0
0 
20.00 12.79 63.95% 21.00 24.00 10.43 43.46% 
4 International 
Co-operation 
21.0
0 
21.0
0 
19.21 91.48
% 
30.0
0 
6.92 6.39 92.34% 14.00 14.00 5.59 39.93% 
 
 
5 Youth Hostel 
 
2.50 22.5
0 
1.27 5.64% 20.0
0 
3.00 1.89 63.00% 6.00 4.00 0.37 9.25% 
6 Scouting and 
Guiding 
1.50 1.50 0.75 50.00
% 
1.50 0.75 0.00 0.00% 1.50 1.50 0.38 25.33% 
7 Young Leaders 
Programme 
12.0
0 
27.9
5 
10.61 37.96
% 
22.0
0 
4.35 2.70 62.07% 14.00 8.00 7.03 87.88% 
Total - B 394.
92 
532.
13 
490.3
0 
92.14
% 
486.
50 
362.77 349.07 96.22% 458.00 474.00 310.3
6 
65.48% 
C National Service 
Scheme 
160.
00 
166.
55 
151.6
1 
91.03
% 
172.
00 
72.98 84.29 115.50% 165.00 231.00 126.4
4 
54.74% 
D Rajiv Gandhi 
National 
Institute of 
Youth 
Development 
30.0
0 
46.2
4 
46.24 100.0
0% 
35.0
0 
21.00 21 100.00% 32.00 25.00 15.90 63.60% 

34
  Grand Total 616.
92 
776.
92 
717.2
5 
92.32
% 
726.
50 
486.75 483.71 99.38% 690.00 764.02 477.9
9 
62.56% 
 