RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SEVENTEENTH REPORT
0

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1995-96 (DEMAND NO. 47) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25.4.95)
(Laid on the Table of Sabha on 25.4.95)

समममेव गदते

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April 1995/Chaitra 1917 (Saka)


CONTENTS

Pace No.
1, Composrrion oF THE COMMITTEE - (iii)
2, PREFACE (vy)
3 REPoRT 1—11

4, Minutes 12—13


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shsi P. Upendra——Chairman >. .
RAJYA SABHA
Dr. M. Aram
Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
Miss Saroj Khaparde
Shri O.P. Kohli
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
. Shri Md. Salim
. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
10. Prof. 1.0. Sanadi
11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
13. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA
16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi
17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran
18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
20. Dr. Vasant Pawar
21. Prof. P.J. Kurien
22. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
23. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
24. Shri Z.M. Kahandole
25. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe
26. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
27. Shri K.T. Vandayar
28. Shri Aslam Sher Khan
29. Shri Inder Jit
30. Shri Anna Joshi
31. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
32. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
33. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi
34. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda
35. Dr. K. D. Jeswani
36. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
37. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia
38. Shri Rambadan
39. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
40. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya
41. Shri Ramchandra Dome
42. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh
43. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy
44. Shri Suraj Mandal
45. Shri Kanshi Ram
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh, Deputy Director
4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

.०9००:१७७ # 9९४७

Gii)


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventeenth Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Youth Affairs & Sports,
Ministry of Human Resource Development for the Year 1995-96.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Deptt. of Youth Affairs & Sports Ministry of Human Resource Development and also
heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Deptt. on the said Demands for Grants in its
meeting held on 29th March, 1995.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 17th April,
1995.

New Devut; P. UPENDRA,
April 17, 1995 Chairman,
Ss Department-related Parliamentary
27, Chaitra, 1917 (Saka) Standing Committee on

Human Resource Development.


REPORT

The Department of Youth Affairs and Sports is one of the four constituent Departments
of the Ministry of Human Resource Development. The Department has taken a number of
new initiatives and programmes in the field of youth development and sports, as well as
physical education. The Programme undertaken by the Department can be broadly classified
under (I) Youth Programmes and (II) Sports and Games.

Youth Programmes

2. The Department finances various youth welfare programmes, which range from
personality development to vocational training. Most of these programmes are itnplemented
by reputed institutions. NGOs, as well as State Governments for which financial assistance is
provided by this Department as per stipulated norms. The major schemes for youth
development are: National Service Scheme, Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan, National
Integration Programmes, National Discipline Scheme, Youth Hostels and National Service
Volunteers Scheme, etc.

2.1 Many new initiatives have aiso been taken with a view to provide a new thrust to
the youth programmes. The Department has decided to set up Youth Development Centres
for a group of 10 villages each in order to give a fillip to participation of rural youth in
developmental activities. These centres will have facilities for information, sports, training
and youth programmes for rural youth. The land for the centre will be donated by the
Panchayats. This scheme will be implemented through Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan, an
autonomous Body under this Department.

2.2 The Department has also decided to add a few more important areas of national
priorities in the Action Plan of Nehru Yuva Kendras from the year 1994-95. These areas are:
Panchayati Raj Awareness, Health & Population Awareness, Vriksh Mitra Scheme for
environment promotion, SEWAK (Self Employed Workers Association Kendra), Youth
Festivals at block, district and national level, etc. Besides this, emphasis is being given this
year on making youth economically self-reliant.

Games & Sports

3. Sports is a State subject and as such development of sports is primarily the
responsibility of State Governments. The Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, however,
undertakes a number of programmes which aim at promoting sports activities, in the
country. It finances a number of such programmes including creation of sports infrastructure
various parts of the country, grants for laying of synthetic surfaces, spotting and nurturing of
excellence through various schemes of the Sports Authority of India (SAI), grants to
National Sports Federations for coaching camps, national championships, international
exposure and equipment purchase, grant of incentives in the shape of scholarships, cash
awards to eminent sportspersons, encouraging sports in the Universities by grants for
creation of infrastructure and holding of inter-University championships, organising
tournaments for rural youth, women and in the north eastern region. The Department has
launched a new scheme “Sports Fund for Pension to Meritorious Sportspersons” under

“ which Olympic Medalists and Gold Medalists of Asian Games are eligible for Life Pension
from the age of 30. The scheme is being operated through the Life Insurance Corporation of
India.

Youth Affairs
National Service Scheme (NSS)

4. The Committee is deeply concerned about the misutilisation and persistent failure of
the Department to appropriate resources allocated for the scheme during the last four years

1


and is constrained to observe that this is not a healthy phenomenon and should not be
allowed to continue any more.

4.1 The Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs & Sports, stated that the funds given
to the States were not being passed on to the Universities and also most of the Universities,
instead of giving money to Colleges, were utilising the money for purposes for which it was
not intended. It was further stated that the Department did not even get the required
feedback from the States about the money released to them.

4.2 The Committee is thus given to understand that, notwithstanding its earlier
recommendation to secure better cooperation from the States in operating this scheme, the
situation appears to have gone from bad to worse. The Committee is fully aware of the
practical problems involved in the entire process, yet it feels that the Department has failed
té make adequate efforts in this regard. Blaming the States and the Universities does not
solve the problem. It is also deplorable that the Department did not get any feed-back from
the States. The Committee is not satisfied with the performance of the Department in this
regard and recommends that it should make all-out efforts to prevail upon the States to
ensure not only proper utilisation of the grants but also to pass on sufficient feedback about
the progress of the scheme every year.

4.3 The Committee finds that the State Liaison Cells, which are basically meant for
maintaining coordination with various agencies involved in the scheme, in matters of timely
release of grants and proper implementation of the programme, were not doing their job at
all. The Committee emphasises the need to activate them.

4.4 The Committee is of the opinion that there is a need to recognise the NSS as a third
dimension of the academic activities and to provide incentives to NSS functionaries in
Universities and Colleges. The Committee feels that the recommendation of the expert
Committee, set up by the UGC on integration of NSS activities in Universities’ curriculum,
should be pursued effectively and vigorously.

4.5 The Committee also feels that the amount of Rs. 120 and Rs. 200, being provided
per volunteer per year for regular activities and special camps, needs to be substantially
increased to make the scheme attractive and their work specified.

Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan(NYKS)

5. Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan is one of the largest youth welfare schemes, run by
the Department which alone accounts for over one third of the total allocation for youth
welfare schemes. Several programmes of vital importance for non-student rural youth are
undertaken under this scheme.

5.1 The Committee finds, from the comparative statement on annual targets and
achievements during the last three years, that the targets of most of the programmes could
not be achieved during the years 1992-93, 1993-94 and 1994-95. The main reasons for the
shortfall ascribed by the Department were the uneven flow of funds to the NYKS and
vacancies of Youth Coordinators, particularly in the North Eastern States.

5.2 The Committee, after considering the matter, arrives at the conclusion that there
seems to be some slackness on the part of the Department and that it did not act as
responsibly as it ought to have been in this regard. The Committee desires that immediate
action should be taken to ensure an even and smooth flow of funds to the Kendras and
proper utilisation thereof.

5.3 In response to the Committee’s recommendation made last year for providing
adequate representation to the peoples’ representatives in the functioning of NYKs, the


Department informed the Committee that all the youth coordinators have been instructed to
involve peoples representatives in the programme. The Committee feels that simply
instructing the youth coordinators in such an important aspect, would not serve any purpose.
The Committee recommends that a proposal should be prepared with a view to associating
peoples’ representatives at different levels in the working of the NYKs. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation to make the functioning of NYKs more democratic and
transparent by introducing element of accountability in it.

5.4 The Committee feels that, in view of some new programmes (as mentioned in para
2.1) introduced under this scheme, the decrease in the allocation, both plan and non-plan,
this year would adversely affect the progress of the on-going as well as new programmes.
Therefore, the Committee recommends enhancement of the allocation for the scheme
adequately.

5.5 The Committee also recommends that the network of Programmes of Training in
Self Employment Project, Vocational Training and Youth Awareness drives should be
considerably expanded and strengthened so as to cover more and more youth of the country,
particularly in the rural and semi-urban areas, with the association of Panchayats and
Nagarpalikas.

5.6 The Committee is also of the view that the aims of the programmes of yocational
training and Training in Self-employment Projects overlap each other. Similar is the case
with schemes like Sports (Block level & District level) & Equipment Purchase and
Vocational Training and Sports Equipment Purchase. The Committee, therefore, suggests
that vocational Training and Training in Self-employment Project be merged, as well as
schemes like Sports (Block and District level) & Equipment Purhase and Sports Equipment
Purchase, with a view to avoiding duplication of activities in this regard.

5.7 The Committee is not aware if the Department is also assisting the youth trained
under the schemes of Vocational training and Training in Self-employment Project in setting
up income generating projects. If no such action is undertaken by the Department, the
Committee suggests that suitable action may be initiated to help them in this regard.

National Integration Programme

6. The Committee asked the Department to explain the reasons for reducing the
allocation for this programme, which aims at promoting national integration, from Rs. 525
lakhs in 1994-95 to Rs. 326 lakhs in 1995-96. The Department informed that the allocation
for this programme has been reduced this year because the provision for the NGOs has been
reduced from Rs. 265. Lakhs to Rs. 250 lakhs and that for the State Governments from Rs.
360 lakhs to Rs. 76 lakhs. This had to be done in view of the past experience where some
amount had to be surrendered due to lack of enough viable proposals from the States. Even
for a new component of Sadbhavana Shivirs, introduced in this programme, very few States
came up with viable proposals. As a result, the EFC, while approving the new component,
granted it for only one year on an experimental basis.

6.1 The Committee notes that while the reason attributed for bringing down the
allocation for the States was lack of enough viable proposals from them, no reason,
however, had been assigned for reducing the allocation in the case of NGOs. Whether it was
done due to resource crunch or their unsatisfactory performance is not clear.

6.2 The Committee feels that suitable programmes of interest to the youth be devised
with a view to promoting community living and sharing of common experiences.


Exhibitions for Youth

“7. When the Committee sought to know the reason for reducing the outlay for this
scheme from Rs. 30 lakhs last year to Rs. 15 lakhs in 1995-96, the Department gave the
usual reply that the allocation had to be reduced because not enough “viable proposals”
were received by the Department. It was further explained that many of the exhibitions,
related to the theme of National Integration, were held as a part of National Integration
Camps which were funded from the National Integration Scheme. In the Annual Action
Plan 1995-96 of the Department, the target had been brought down to 25 exhibitions only.
The Committee is not impressed by the reasons of viability given by the Department.
Besides, the term ‘viability’ does not appear to be appropriate.

7.1 The Committee is not convinced about the necessity for running such a programme
separately when the National Integration Scheme is taking care of funds for organising such
exhibitions. The Department does not appear to be very serious about continuing this
scheme, as it has brought down the target to just 25 exhibitions this year.

7.2 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should examine the
matter with a view to merging this scheme with that of National Integration Scheme so as to
avoid unnecessary duplication which creates confusion and wastage of resources.

Scouting & Guiding

8. The Committee expresses its deep concern over the utilisation of only Rs. 60 lakhs
out of an amount of Rs. 92 lakhs allocated last year under this scheme. No plausible reason
was given for it except that the main beneficiaries of the scheme viz. Bharat Scouts &
Guides and All India Boys Scouts failed to utilize the full amount and expand their activities
despite all encouragement from the Department. The Committee feels that the scheme is not
functioning well and, therefore, recommends that the Department itself should make efforts
to pinpoint the factors responsible for the under-utilization and take corrective measures.
Evaluation of this scheme, undertaken by the Indian Institute of Management, be completed
early and followup action taken thereon.

‘Youth Clubs

9, The Committee expresses its unhappiness over the poor progress of this scheme, the
glaring example of which lies in the fact that out of the target of assisting 2,160 ‘Youth
Clubs, only 17 could be assisted till 7th December, 1994, as per the Performance Budget
1995-96 of the Department. However, in reply to a question, this figure was stated to be
950. The Committee fails to understand as to how the Department was able 10 cover 933
He ore clubs within a short span of three months. The Committee is constrained to observe
at the Dapartment is not serious about the progress of the scheme and recommends that it
should try to achieve the target set for this year and the allocated amount be utilised
properly.

9.1 The Committee was informed that the Youth Clubs in many States were facing
difficulties in getting themselves registered, being denied thereby any assistance under this
scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take up the
matter with the State Governments and help the Youth Clubs in getting the required
registration.

Training of Youth

10. This scheme is no exception to the general malady of under utilization of available
resources and failure in achieving the targets. The Committee observes that a large number
of youth in the country are sitting idle craving for proper training in self-employment
schemes whereas the Department absolves itself of all responsibility by saying that the target


could not be met since enough “viable proposals” were not received from NGOs and State
Governments. Release of only half of the amount (Rs.51.46 lakhs out of Rs.100 lakhs) and the
coverage of only one fifth Youth (1190 out of 5000 Youth) last year cannot be justified by any
means.

10.1 The Committee takes a serious view of the laxity and disinterestedness shown by the
Department in running this programme, in particular, and youth welfare schemes, in general,
and recommends that this state of affairs should not be allowed to persist uny more.

Youth Hostels

11. The main aim of this scheme is to promote youth travel with a view to promote national
integration. The Committee finds it to be a very good scheme and apreciates the decision on
retaining this scheme in the Central Sector. Financially, the scheme seems to have been affected
adversely in the process of its proposed transfer to the State Sector. The Committee was
informed that the Department had demanded Rs.100. lakhs more in addition to Rs.152 lakhs
provided in the BE last year, which it did not get. Only Rs.211. lakhs has been given this year.

11.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should make all-out
efforts to make up this shortfall at the RE level, keeping in view the fact that 28 Youth Hostels
are under construction.

11.2 Keeping the objective of this scheme in view, the Committee had recommended last
year to locate these hostels mostly in places of cultural and historical importance. The
Committee reiterates that new hostels should be provided at places from where youths get a
glimpse of our religious and cultural diversities and glory of the past, and also get inspiration for
adventurist activities and also where infrastructure is not available at the moment. The
Committee feels that there is not much awereness about the existence of such hostels.and
procedure for getting the reservation etc. As a result, youths are not benefitting by the scheme
to the desired extent. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Government should take
necessary steps to publicise this scheme widely, utilising the mass media.

National Youth Awards and Awards to Outstanding Youth Clubs

12, The Committee finds the basic objectives of the two schemes laudable. The Department
had to slash down the allocation from Rs. 12.00 lakhs to Rs. 8.00 lakhs for the former and from
Rs. 40.00 lakhs to Rs. 30.00 lakhs for the latter this year. The Department stated that it was
done in keeping with the progress 0 expenditure last year.

12.1 The Committee feels that the progress of these schemes has not been satisfactory. It
appears that either the Department was not able to identify sufficient number of deserving
youths and youth clubs for giving awards or they were not able to fulfil the standard laid down
by the Department to qualify for these awards.

12.2 The Committee is of the opinion that motivation, which these awards aim at, is the
sine-qua-non of good performance. It, therefore, recommends that the Department should see
to it that selection of sufficient number of youths and Youth Clubs was down and awards given
to them every year.

Assistance to Voluntary Organisations Working in the Field of Youth

13. In response to a query regarding department not being able to achieve the target for
covering the stipulated number of youth in 1994-95 under this scheme, the Committee was
informed that this scheme was entirely NGO dependent and that the target for 1994-95 of
covering 20,000 youths had to be brought down based on the past experience in thls regard and
also due to more emphasis now on long-term training programmes with lesset number of
beneficiaries.


13.1 The Committee was informed that this scheme is very popular among the NGO
as a result of which allocation for this scheme was enhanced from Rs. 55 lakhs in 1994-6
to Rs. 72 lakhs in 1995-96. The Committee notes that the Department has increas
allocation for this scheme without any major increase in its total allocation and also th
funds were fully utilised in the previous year. The Committee is satisfied with the progre
of the scheme. It however, recommends that the Department should try to strengthen the
scheme and ensure that the funds were not misutilised possibilities of which connot b
ruled out.

National Discipline Scheme

14. The Committee is surprised to find that Rs. 9.66 crores have again been provided
for this scheme in the year 1995-96. The Department pleaded that it had to be done
because it was committed to meet the expenditure on pay and allowances etc., of the
Instructors so long as they remained in services. The Committee fails to understand the
need for spending more than nine crores every year for a scheme which is non-existent and —
the Instructors of which have been absorbed in the respective State services. Last year also
the Committee had recommended to take this scheme out of the Department’s purview.
The Committee , therefore, reiterates that the Department should take up this matter wil
bai Ministry of Finance and the States with a view to shifting this scheme to the Stat

‘or.

Games And Sports

15. The Committee notes that the total outlay (Rs. 132.74 crores), provided in th
Department’s BE for the year 1995-96, is less than that (Rs. 135.11 crores) in the outgoing
financial year. हि

15.1 The Committee was informed that it was firstly on account of the Finan
Ministry’s refusal to provide an amount of Rs. 3.00 crores which was projected as dues to
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, and secondly, the Ministry of Finance was of the vi
that the Department should generate its own resources for the purpose. There is now son
kind of a mandate with the Planning Commission that while the total outlay, under th
Rlan, of smaller Departments (like the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports) should be
fixed at a certain level, increase should be allowed only for major Departments. The
general feeling is that any organisation which is capable of generating its own reven
does its job better.

15.2. The Sports Authority of India, under the Department of Sports, ‘is today
generating a certain level of revenue by adopting what is called “pay and play” policy in
differant stadia. Stadia are also rented out for benefit matches and for cultural activities.
Another method is renting out buildings not required on day-to-day basis. For example,
the Delhi Stock Exchange and the Al). India Council of Technical Education are
functioning from SAI buildings. Nehru Yuvak Kendra is also housed in one of SAI
building’. Receipt from all these sources during 1993-94 and 1994-95 was Rs, 2.05 cro:
and Rs. 6.00 crores respectively, The Department expects to earn Rs. 8 crores in 1995-!

15.3. The Department runs a number of important and useful schemes which aim
inter- alia at developing in the youth qualities of discipline, self-reliance, justice and fair
play, besides imparting appropriate professional and vocational training with a view to.
enabling them to avail of.a suitablé employment. The Committee feels that irivestment in
youth development, in fact, is a very vital and long term investment. The Committee doe:
not know the basis on which the Planning Commission had decided that the Department ०|



Youth Affairs and Sports is a small Department and hence no increase is necessary in its
outlay. The Planning Commission appears to have failed to appreciate the need for
increasing the allocation for the Department. Such inadequate outlay would certainly affect
sports activities adversely when there is so much criticism of India’s performance in
international events.

15.4. The Committee feels that there is greater need to lay more emphasis on sports
activities for which the funds provided for the year 1995-96 are inadequate. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should take up the matter at the appropriate
level and try to convince the Ministry of Finance to increase the allocation suitably at the
R.E. level, so that atleast the important and major schemes/programmes of Department do
not suffer due to.lack of funds.

15.5. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department for raising its revenue
by renting out its stadia and buildings. It, nevertheless, feels that such practice should not
affect the sports activities adversely. The Department may frame certain rules and
regulations in this regard which should be observed strictly. A Marketing Cell may also be
created in the SAI which will be responsible for not only the commercial exploitation of
stadia but also of exploring other avenues for raising more revenue.

Sports Project Development Area (SPDA)

16. This scheme aims at providing basic facilities at its various centres for a
comprehensive and integrated system of coaching and training to talented young sports
persons in the age-group of 9-14 years. The Committee notes that out of 78 centres
sanctioned, only 34 centres had been set up so far. The Committee had pointed out this fact
in its Sixth Report on the Demands for Grants of the year 1994-95 also.

16.1. The Department informed the Committee that the successs of this scheme
depended Jargely upon the participation of the States and that its working had been
evaluated by the Tata Consultancy Services. The Department is now considering to replace
SPD centres with 78 Sports sub-centres by dovetailing this scheme with Sports Hostel and
Special Area Games (SAG) Schemes.

16.2. The Committee agrees with the proposal of amalgamating the above three
schemes as it would not only provide all the facilities at one place to children and youth for
developing their talent, it would also avoid duplication of work and facilities. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that, in view of the importance of the scheme, the
proposal should be approved and implemented at the earliest.

16.3. The Committee also suggests that atleast one such centre should be set up in
every State, in the first instance, and rest of them may be set up in stages depending upon
the requirement of the States.

Rural Sports Programme

17. Out of Rs. 100 lakhs provided for this scheme in 1994-95, only Rs. 10.3 lakhs could
be utilized by 31st December, 1994. Rs. 100 lakhs has been provided again for this scheme
in 1995-96. When the Committee enquired about the reason for this gross underutilisation of
funds and the justification for demanding Rs. 100 lakhs again, it was explained that the
underutilization under this scheme was due to unspent balance from the previous years
available with the SAI under Rural Sports Tournaments and also due to paucity of “viable
proposals” for assistance to rural sports clubs. The Department hoped, however, that the
position would improve this year, as more States were expected to take the bénefit under
the component of Rural Clubs and there would not be any unspent balance available with
SAI for organising the tournaments in 1995-96


17.1 The Committee expresses its unhappiness over the money remaining unspent at
ultimately surrendered, particularly when the Department wants more money, whereas
remain unutilized q

17.2 The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons given by the Department for
underutilisation of funds and feels that it was either due to inadequate publicity of the
scheme in the rural.areas or because of delays caused due to stiff conditions imposed in
processing the proposals

17.3 The Committee fails to understand the basis for the optimism expresséd by th
Department that there would be enough proposals next year and that it would be able to
utilise the entire amount provided for this purpose in the year 1995-96,

17.4 In view of this, the Committee strongly recommends launching of a massive
publicity campaign about this scheme in rural areas through suitable means and feels that
involving Panchayats in this regard should also be considered हे

17.5 The Committee is of the opinion that indigenous sports do not mean a kho-kho
and kabaddi. Every State has different kinds of local games, gymnastic skills and martial arts”
which have survived through the ages among the village people who have a very high degree
of excellence in them. The Committee is distressed to find that these indigenous rural sports
which do not require a great deal of investment, are not being encouraged by th
Department adequately. Sufficient money should be earmarked for creating sports
infrastructure in rural areas.

17.6 The Committee further notes that the Department does not have any scheme ६
providing sports facilities in the urban slum areas. Youth and children, due to lack of spa
in slums, do not have any physical activities at all. The Department informed the Committ
that there was no proposal at the moment for this.

17.7 The Committee recommends that the Department should take immediate steps i
this regard as the lack of sports activities in slums gives rise to many undesirable
consequences and problems. There is an urgent need to channelise the energy of youth livin
in urban slums for constructive purposes.

Accountability

18. In its Sixth Report on Demand for Grants for 1994-95, the Committee had
mentioned about the lack of accountability and coordination among. the various sports
bodies. The Department in its reply, has stated that in a scenario where the performance
depended upon the joint effort of the National Sports Federations, Sports Authority of India
Coaches, Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, it has became difficult to bring about —
accountability for poor performance: ॥

18.1 The Secretary agreed with the Committee that somebody had to be made
accountable for the poor performance. Unfortunately, the way the system is working, it is
not really possible to do that. It is the National Federations, however, that are responsible
for bringing up the teams to a certain level. The Sports Authority of India, in fact, is mainly _
responsible for bringing out talents at the young age, and provide them the basic facilities
and inputs. Boys and girls having good potential are given exposure and training at th
centres of excellence. Thereafter, it is really for the Federations to select teams (one
nominee is there in the selection committee) and hold the caoching camps. The SAI gives a
necessary assistance and facilities for holding the national or international championsh
also. But when there is a failure, nobody could really be found accountable, as
there are many interconnecting factors. 7


18.2 The Committee inferms from the above that the Department also admits that there
is no accountability in the system. The Committee feels that any system without the element
of accountability is bound to prove disastrous and this is what is happening in the
Department. The Committee does not agree with the contention of the Department that due
to many agencies/bodies involved in promotion of sports it is not possible to identify and fix
responsibility on any one of them.

18.3 The Committee deplores the manner in which the entire system is being run where
not only there is no accountability but there is no coordination among the various agencies
responsible for promotion and development of sports in the country. There appears to be a
slinging match between various sports federations and the SAI. One generally blames the
other for encroaching upon each other’s spheres.

18.4 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the possibilities of having a
coordinating body at the national level be explored and suggests that an expert committee be
set up to look into the reports submitted by the coaches/managers and sports administrators
after each international tournament with a view to fix responsibility for poor performance
and to pin-point reasons therefor so that effective remedial measures could be taken.

18.5 The Committee is separately examining the issue of India’s poor performance in
international sports. Eminent sportsmen and administrators are being invited by the
Committee to give their views in this regard. The Committee proposes to deal, in that
report, with various aspects of sports organisation and management in the country, including
the role of SAI and sports federations, Ministers and Secretaries heading sports bodies,
talent search, training, infrastructure, excessive exposure to certain games to the detriment
of others, incentives to sportsmen to adopt sports as a career, introduction of sports as a
compulsory subject in school and college curricula, role of private sector in sports
promotion, etc. Hence the Committee is not spelling out is views on these aspects in the,
present report. :

Exchange of Sports and Physical Education Team

19. This scheme has been described by the Department to be a ‘big leap forward’ in
providing the much needed opportunities for foreign exposure to our teams and obtaining
services of competent coaches/experts. It is also said to have been proved to be very
beneficial to our sportspersons.

19.1 The Committee asked as to how can the reduction in allocation for stich a useful
scheme from Rs. 173 lakhs (BE) to Rs. 125 lakhs at the RE level in 1994-95 be justified. It
also wondered as to why had only Rs. 55 lakhs been spent till November, 1994 and asked if
the Department would be able to spend the rest of the money in the remaining four months
of the financial year 1994-95.

19.2 The Department explained that the outlay was reduced in the RE keeping in view
the.progress of expenditure in the previous year. It was not clear to the Committee as to
why the expenditure in this regard was slow and what had the Department done with a view
to speeding it up.

19.3 The Committee recommends that the Department should make all out efforts to
see to it that the funds are fully utilised and the good schemes like this should have targets
fixed every year. a
Promotion of Sports and Physica! Education Among Women & National Sports Championship
for Women

20. The Committee notes that while National Sports Championship for Women is given


Rs. 56 lakhs per year, only Rs. 3 lakhs are given to the scheme for Promotion of :
and Physical Education among Women.

20.1 The Committee wished to know as to why have the financial outlays for th
schemes for the year 1995-96 remained the same as they were in the outgoing fin
year. The outlays for these schemes according to the Department, were based on a
pattern of assistance and as such there were no changes in the outlays. The sche
envisaged providing scholarships etc. and the conduct of championship at district, state
and national level for each of which a fixed amount is released.

20.2 The Committee fails to appreciate the logic behind adopting fixed pattern of
assistance to these schemes. The Committee is of the opinion that with the present level
of allocation, the Department would not be able to attract more and more women to the
field of sports. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the fixed pattern of
assistance should not be applied to these schemes which are meant specifically for
women.

20.3 The Committee gathers the impression, from the reply submitted by the
Department, that both of these schemes were being pursued in a half-hearted. and
mechanical manner. The need of the hour, the Committee feels, is to inculcate a sense
of confidence and leadership qualities among women for empowering them in an effective
manner. Promoting sports and physical activities among them is the best way to achieve
this. The Committee feels that these schemes need to be strengthened, both by providing
more funds and also by extending them to the lower level. 7

NCC Junior Division Troops

21. The NCC organisation aims at imparting training to the youth in public
residential central schools and colleges so as to make them disciplined citizens. |

21.1 The Committee was informed that the maintenance of these troops was funde¢
by the Ministry of Defence and Department of Youth Affairs & Sports. As regards
criteria for selecting the schools, the Department stated that they were placing the cual
at the disposal of DG, NCC and the Ministry of Defence was fixing the criteria. |

21.2 The Committee was given to understand that the Department was not aware 0
the criteria for selecting schools for this purpose. If it was so, the Committee expresse
its unhappiness as the Department bears 60% of expenditure on this scheme. It is als
not known to the Committee whether the Ministry of Defence was consulting ०
associating DYA & S while fixing the criteria for selecting schools/colleges. Th
Committee, therefor, feels that there is a need to have greater interaction an
coordination between both the Ministeries in this regard.

National Federations

22. The Committee pointed out that there had been a shortfall in utilising Rs. 90
lakhs under plan and Rs. 85 lakhs under non-plan, provided in the year 1994-95, fo
giving grants to various National Federations and asked the Department the reasons fo
the reduction in the outlay for this purpose in the year 1995-96.

22.1 The Committee was informed that Rs. 900 lakhs provided for this 7
under plan would be fully utilised by the end of year 1994-95. However, under non-pl
there was likelihood of Rs. 30 lakhs remaining unspent on account of receipt
insufficient proposals from the Federations. ५

22.2 The reduced outlay for this scheme in 1995-96 is due to the refusal of |
Planning Commission to increase the total outlay of the Department. It is also’



possible to reduce the allocation under the heads like SAI, STCS and Incentives for
Promotion of Sports activities and so there is no scope for diversion either.

22.3 The Committee is fully aware of the overall resource crunch in the Government of
India and that the Department had to allocate the amount to different schemes/programmes
whatever it had got from the Planning Commission. The Committee, however, is baffled to
learn that an amount of Rs. 30 lakhs remained unspent last year on the plan side because
sufficient proposals were not received from the Federations, particularly when they complain
that they were not getting adequate fund for their activities. Whatever might have been the
reasons for this, the Committee considers it as a serious lapse on the part of both the SAI
and the Federations. The Committee is of the opinion that both of them should have seen
that the fund was fully utilised.

General Observations/Recommendations

23. When asked if the Department had any proposal for involving elected Nagar Palikas
and Panchayats in implementing various schemes/programmes, the Committee was apprised
that at present, under the Scheme of Grants for Creation of Sports Infrastructure, proposals
of local bodies and voluntary organisations were being considered. Besides, under the
scheme of Rural Sports Programme, rural clubs at the Panchayat level were also being
assisted. However, the Department pleaded that it would not be possible to release funds
directly to the Panchayats, as it would be difficult to monitor the utilisation of funds by these
bodies from the Central Government.

23.1 The Committee feels that these local level elected bodies could be very effective
and useful in getting the various schemes of the Department implemented, particularly in
tural and semi-urban areas.

23.2 The Committee, therefore, suggests that the Department should examine this
aspect and come out with a comprehensive proposal outlining the manner in which the
services of these bodies could be utilised by the Department, of course, under proper
supervision and control.

24. The Committee notes with great concern that there has been underutilisation of
funds provided to the Youth Affairs and Games and Sports. It also notes that the reason
cited for this has invariably been the non-receipt of so called viable proposals / response
from the States. Such a state of affairs, the Committee realises, is causing considerable
damage to the implementation of the schemes and_lot of funds are being either not utilised
or misused. The Committee is of the view that the responsibility for this falls squarely on the
Department and it cannot get away simply by saying that States are not cooperating. The
Committee therefore, recommends, that the Department should act more responsibly and
the States should be more responsive in this regard.

25. The Committee has observed that in view of a plethora of schemes / programmes,
both under Youth Affairs and Sports, sometimes the activities of some of them overlap with
one another, which leads to unnecessary complication and confusion adversely affecting the
implementation thereof. This also results in wastage of scarce resources. In view of this, the
Committee suggests that the Department should undertake a general review of all the
schemes in whose case there is a duplication of activities and merge them to the extent
possible:


MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPART LAY
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN |
DEVELOPMENT

XXX
*THIRTIETH MEETING

The Committee met at 9.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 29th March, 1995 in Commit :
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri ए, Upendra — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Shri O.P. Kohli
4. Shri Pravat Kumiar Samantaray
5. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen
6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri
7. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani

LOK SABHA

8. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

9. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

10. Dr. Vasant Pawar

11. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
12. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

13. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami
14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

15. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

16. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

17. Shri Anna Joshi

18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
19. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya «5
20. Shri Ramchandra Dome

21. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

WITNESSES

1. Shri R. Narayanan, Secretary Deptt. of Youth Affairs & Sports
2. Smt. Asha Swarup, Joint Secretary

3. Shri S.K. Sharma, Director

4. Shri Gautam Guha, Deputy Secretary

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

eae

12


av

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary and other officials of the
Deptt. of Youth Affairs & Sports in connection with the examination of Demands for
Grants 1995-96.

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.00 a.m. to meet again at 9.00 a.m. on 30th
March, 1995.


FIRST MEETING

The Comimittee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 17th April, 1995 in Committee
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House New Delhi .

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra —— — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Miss Saroj Khaparde

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Verma

. Shri Md. Salim

LOK SABHA

9. Dr. Vasant Pawar

10. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
11. Shri Aslam Sher Khan

12. Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

13. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

14. Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
15. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

16. Shri Anna Joshi

17. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

18. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
3. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Seventeenth and Eighteenth Reports of
Departments of Youth Affairs & Sports (Demand No. 47) and Culture (Demand No. 48)
Demands for Grants 1995-96 and adopted the same with some modifications

PA 9 (७ + ०० [७

3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 p.m. to met again at 10.00 a.m. on 18th 49
1995