PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY SECOND REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1995-96
(DEMAND NO. 46)
OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28.4.95)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28.4.95)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 1995/Vaisakha, 1917 (Saka)



On
On

On

On
On
On
On
On

On

On

On

Errata to the Twenty-Second Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants 1995-96 (Demand Ne. 46) of the Depart-

page
page
page
page
page
page
Page
page
page
page
page

page

ext of Education, Ministry cf Humn Resource Development

1 para 1.4 line 4 for Anthing read'Anything!

1 para 2,1 line 2 for‘indicator'read ‘indicators*.
2 para 2.3 line 4 for ‘fined read ‘find’,

2 para 2.6 line 1 for ‘drop-out' read ‘drep-outs'
4 para 2.17 line 6 for 'tack' read ‘Jack’.

1 pare 3/10 line 1 for 'Navodya' read ‘Navodaya'.
7 para 3.15 line 11 for ‘woke’ read ‘mie',

11 para 4,2 line 3 for ‘take’ read 'taken',

12 para 4,10 line 1 ‘for ‘as’ read 'a',

12 fara 5.1 line 6 for ‘has’ read 'was',

15 para 8,1 line 2 fo@ ‘somes’ read ‘some’,

16 at Serial No. 16 read the name of the Mezber as -
Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya,


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

TWENTY SECOND REPORT

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1995-96
(DEMAND NO. 46)
OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT)

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28.4.95)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28.4.95)

aT

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 1995/Vaisakha, 1917 (Saka)



C:0:N. TENTS

Pace No.
1. 3 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMUTER ss. siscsedecsrecosssysestacrocesnssedtse नष्ट ०७३६५ ३०३३१५०९४०३००००२३०६ (iii)
Da sR RRRACE मकर बी जप कब जम कफ किक पक कीज जनक न अदअ de नजर 18131 aut tauae (v)
5 ORERORT Sein जद शत दर eet rsibige mentale amen eee aes at 1-15
hos! MINUITES as cncsvs cocadsuagansveiisttnsasnavageesessnestesintoaseaveds ३०5 १०१4३ ४०४३ कक न हर०० ३३००३ २३९५ २९००३ the 16—18



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

Smt. Renuka Chowdhury

Miss Saroj Khaparde

Shri O.P. Kohli

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani

Shri V. Hanumantha Rao

Shri Md. Salim

. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray

. Prof. 1.6, Sanadi

Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
LOK SABHA

16. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

17. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran

18. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan

19. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar

. Dr. Vasant Pawar

. Prof. P.J. Kurien

. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak

+ Shri Bapu Hari Chaure

. Shri Z.M. Kahandole

. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda

Shri K.T. Vandayar

Shri Aslam Sher Khan

Shri Inder Jit

Shri Anna Joshi

Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar

Shri Chinmaya Nand Swami

Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda

Dr. K.D. Jeswani

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya

Dr. G.L. Kanaujia

Shri Rambadan

. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

. Shri Ramchandra Dome

. Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh

Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

: . Shri Suraj Mandal

45. Shri Kanshi Ram
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Nagendra Kumar Singh, Deputy Director

4. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

Gi)

BRESemranaun

ESSPESBIRASSSESBRSRRERNRB



PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, do hereby present this Twenty Second Report of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (Demand No. 46) of the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development for the year 1995-96.

2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from
the Deptt. of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development and also heard the
Secretary and other Officials of that Deptt. on thé said Demands for Grants in its meeting
held on 7th April, 1995.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on 25th April,
1995.

New Dewy; | P. UPENDRA,
April 25, 1995 Chairman,
Vai Department-related Parliamentary

5 Vaisakha, 1917 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human

Resource Development.

)



‘ont bevigosy
2 91891 -ode bas आओ
gaiisott gr mb eieiy &

lng A tf no omee silt

ANOMAT उप्र
apace. न
susie १७५४ ४०४०४७६
santa ne setter

20७1३१0० ४५७९६ sonieest ४


REPORT

1.1 The main function of the Department of Education is to evolve educational policy
and also to coordinate and determine standards in higher education,: including research,
The Department also looks after the expansion and development of technical education to
improve the quality of text books, administrative scholarships and various other schemes/
programmes. The Department coordinates the programmes of assistance and other
activities with UNESCO. The Department mainly undertakes the Programmes relating to
elementary education, school and physical education, university and higher education, adult
education and technical education.

General Budget Allocations

1.2 The overall allocation made to the Department during 1994-95 was Rs. 1549 crores,
which was increased to Rs. 1574 crores in the revised estimates on plan side. The total
budgetary allocation for the Department for 1995-96 is Rs. 2704.07 crores, which comes to
around 1.57% of the total central budget. The Committee is distressed to note that our
country, which is having more than 90 crore population (1991 census), 47.8 percent of
which are illiterate, is sounding only such meagre portion of Central Budget on Education.
Another disturbing factor is that whereas the States contribute nearly 91% of the total
expenditure on education in the country, the Centre spends just 9%. Similarly, while the
States spend about 20% of their budget on education, on an average, the Centre spends
just 1.57%.

1.3 The Committee, while welcoming the commitment made by the Prime Minister about
achieving the norm of 6% of GDP as public expenditure on education, feels that it should
not remain a distant dream. Unless the objective is reflected in budgetary allocations, the
target is unlikely to be achieved. The Department's constant endeavour should be to reach
the goal. Towards this end, the Committee suggests that the Department should prepare a
projection paper to indicate the phased increase in allocations to achieve the set target.

1.4 The Committee notes with concern that 94% of the budget on education is spent on
salaries and only 6% is left for teaching, learning, equipment, text books, teacher training,
etc. The Secretary, Education, conceding this fact, stated that while nothing could be done
to alter the salary component. Anthing that could be added to the other components
would improve the quality of education. The Committee, however, feels that no sincere
efforts have been made in this regard. Radical steps are required to alter the scenario.

ELEMENTARY EDUCATION

2.1 Education, as a qualitative attribute of the population, is one of the most important
indicator of the socio-economic development of the country. It is a major component of
the human resource development and is thus basic to any programme of social and
economic development. There is a close relationship between literacy and other indicators
of the quality of life. The Committee notes that while the percentage of illiteracy has
declined in the country, the number of illiterates continues to grow. The Committee feels
that the root cause for illiteracy in our country is the lack of universal elementary
education, which has not been achieved, and also a very high drop out rate at the primary
stage. The Committee is happy that, on its recommendation made last year, a substantial
increase has been made in the allocation for elementary education this year. However,
there should not be any scope for complacency. The Directive Principle of State Policy
providing free and compulsory education until the age of 14 years is yet to be achieved.
Looking at the scenario of elementary education and the efforts required to be made for

1

|



2

improving the situation, the Committee feels that the allocation needs to be further
increased. *

2.2 The percentage of expenditure by the Centre on Elementary Education has varied
from 18.66 percent in 1951- % to 0.00 percent in 1971-72 and 20.76 percent in 1993-94. This
downward trend during the sixties seventies and early eighties has severely affected
elementary education: The Committee feels that priority to elementary education needs to
be ensured. :

2.3 The Committee notes, from the information supplied by the Department, that while
the over all rate of progress in Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) for the country as a whole has
been improving, the regional imbalances are a cause for concern. The Committee is grieved
to fined that in 9 States i.e. Bihar, Meghalaya, J&K, U.P., Goa, Manipur, Orissa, Punjab
and Rajasthan and 3 UTs, i.e. Chandigarh, Delhi, Andaman & Nicobar Islands the ratio is
considerably lower. The gross enrolment ratio at the primary stage in 1993-94 was less than
100 in many States. The position at upper primary stage is still worse. The national average
is 67.7. Except’‘Kerala, Mizoram, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Lakshadweep and
Pondicherry, all’other States and UTs have gross enrolment ratio of less than 100.

2.4 The Committee notes that on one side we have States such as Kerala which have
achieved universal literacy as. well as Universal Elementary Education (UEE) in terms of
school participation and on the other side, we have States like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa
and Madhya Pradesh where the situation is highly unsatisfactory. The Committee feels that
the efforts made so far are not sufficient to bring about the required change and to achieve
targets of universal enrolment, incorporated in the 8th Five Year Plan. The Committee
desires that steps need to be taken to increase enrolment.

Drop-outs

2.5 Drop out is one of the factors which contributes to the derailment of the Education
Policy. The Committee expresses its deep concern over the statistics relating to drop-out
rate, which was 36.32% in Classes I-V and 52.8% in Classes I-VIII in 1993-94. While
Manipur had the highest drop-out rate at primary stage (68.26%); Sikkim had the highest
rate at the upper primary stage (82.65%). Drop-out rate in Classes I-VIII was more than
70% in the States of Bihar, Manipur and Sikkim. It was between 60 to 70% in 7 States,
namely Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Karnataka, Orissa, Rajasthan and
Tripura.

2.6 The Committee feels that the issue of drop-out is a very serious problem. The
Committee observes with disappointment that the efforts made so far, particularly after the
announcement of the New Education Policy, have not yielded the desired results. In this
regard, the Committee suggests that a multi-pronged strategy be adopted and efforts should
be made for integration of various schemes with those under implementation by the
Department of Women and Child Development and the Ministry of Rural Development.

Resources

2.7 The Committee feels that mobilisation of alternative resources in the elementary
education sector needs to be further strengthened. This would not only reduce the burden
on Government resources but also create an environment of responsibility and accountability
within the educational system.

Gender Disparities

2.8 The gender disparities are also conspicuous in respect of enrolment and retention. The
girls’ enrolment has grown at the primary stage from 5.4 million in 1950-51 to 46.4 million



3

in 1993-94 and at the upper primary stage from 0.5 million to 15.7 million. The Committee is
however, constrained to note that girls still account for only 42.9 per cent of the enrolment
at the primary stage. The drop-out rates of girls at the primary, as well as the upper primary
stage are higher than those of boys. The Committee feels that the programmes implemented
so far have not yielded satisfactory results and desires that effective steps be taken in this
tegard. The Committee feels that voluntary organisations would be able ६८० play a better role
and the Department should very well explore this potential.

Operation Black Board

2.9 The Department has stated that in order to operationalise the revised policy of the
Government regarding schools facilities, the scheme of Operation Black Board has been
expanded to provide third room/third teacher to primary schools, where enrolment exceeds
100. and to extend it to upper primary schools from March, 1994.

2.10 When the Department was asked to explain the steps taken for improving the
monitoring mechanism the Committee was informed that from 1995-96, a system of
concurrent evaluation, with the help of external agencies, would be, introduced. The
Department further stated that around 40 agencies in the country were addressed to submit -
the evaluation design. The Committee feels that evaluation by external agencies should be
used as an additional source of information on the working of the Operation Black Board
and that the monitoring, presently being done through field officers, needs to be further
strengthened.

2.11 The Committee, in its Fifth Report, recommended steps to lessen the weight of
school bags at the primary level. The Department, while explaining the action taken on the
recommendation, stated that wide-ranging discussions had taken place with Governments of
States/Union Territories on the recommendations of the Yashpa! Committee. The
Department also stated that a consensus had already been reached. The Committee desires
that suitable steps be taken for an early implementation of the recommendations of the {
Yashpal Committee.

2.12 The Committee is also unhappy to note that only 55 percent of the school rooms
targeted to be built have been completed with major backlog in Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Assam,
Gujarat, Orissa, Meghalaya and Maharashtra. The Committee recommends that the
Department should take up the matter with the States concerned for early completion of the ‘
target.

2.13 The Committee is of the opinion that the problem of poor enrolment and high drop-
out rates in schools can be overcome by improving the calibre of teachérs and the quality of
their teaching. Universalisation of primary education is a process which calls for right
planning, with right priorities, with special inputs to attract children. The school atmosphere |
should be made more interesting and stimulating by introducing new and innovative}
methods, both for children and teachers. Operation Black board, to be truely successful, /
should address to these issues also.

Non-Formal Education

2.14 The Committee regrets to observe that the funds released for the scheme during

1992-93 and 1993-94 were not fully utilised. The Committee, however, finds that there is a
0% increase in allocation for this year, as compared to 1994-95. The Committee desires
that the full utilisation of funds needs to be ensured.

2.15 The Committee, in its Fifth Report, recommended review of the scheme so as to
increase the access of students from the non-formal to the formal stream. The Department
informed the Committee that a National Workshop was organised in NCERT to review the
Position of implementation of the Non-Formal Education (NFE) Programme. The



4

‘Committee is of the view that organising workshops would not be of any us¢ unless these are
translated into action. The Committee desires that an action plan may be prepared on the
basis of the observations made in the workshop.

2.16 The Committee also desires that an assessment of the scheme should be made as to
whether the child’s quality of life is improving as a result of the scheme whether access to
the formal system, through multipoint entry is ensured and whether vocational openings are
being facilitated. The Committee also desires that closer connection and coordination
between the formal and the non-formal systems should be established.

Strengthening of Teacher Training Institutes

2.17 This is one of the schemes suffering from the malady of under-utilisation of funds.
During 1992-93 out of the total allocation of Rs. 64.5 crores on plan side, only Rs. 1.16
crores could be utilised. Similarly, during 1994-95 out of Rs. 90 crores allocated, Rs. 83.75
crores was utilised. The Committee feels that this trend needs to be arrested. Explaining the
shortfall in the sanction of District Institutes of Education and Training (DIETs) during
1994-95, the Department informed the Committee that the shortfall was due to tack of
sufficient response from the State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Maharashtra and
West Bengal, which were the only major States yet to be fully covered under DIETs. The
Committee, in this regard recomménds that the Department should pursue the matter
vigorously with these three State Governments.

2.18 The Committee feels that the allocation made for the expansion of the scheme would
not be sufficient and needs to be further increased.

District Primary Education Programme

2.19 The District Primary Education Programme (DPEP) is a new Centrally Sponsored
Scheme which the Government of India provides 85% of the approved outlay of the District
and State Plans to the State DPEP Societies. The allocation made for 1995-96 is Rs. 25
crores, as compared to Rs. 40 crores in 1994-95. Explaining the reasons for such a steep fall
in the allocation, the Department informed that the requirement of plan funds for DPEP in
1995-96 was estimated at Rs. 230.94 crores, out of which Rs. 25 crores, representing
domestic sources, had been provided in the Department’s Plan outlay and the rest of
Rs. 205.94 crores was expected to flow from external sources and as such it was to be
provided as additionality to the Department’s plan outlay. The Committee, however, desires
that in the event of non-availability of external funds, alternative sources of funding should
be explored by the Department.

t
2.20 The Committee has noted that DPEP 19125 8 holistic view of elementary education
It is a major and multi-faceted programme seeking to overhaul the primary education
system. The Committee, therefore, desires ea it‘should be provided with adequate funds.

Externally aided projects

2.21 Six externally aided projects are presently being implemented in selected districts of
certain States. The Committee feels that some evaluation machinery should be set up
through which the results of these projects could be communicated to other States and
districts for their benefit.

2.22 The Committee is also of,the opinion that so far as the externally aided projects are
concerned, the agreements should provide flexibility in utilising the funds and a scope for
decentralised planning. The Committee desires that the structure should be worked out
through coordination responsive to local needs. There should also be a provision for
maintaining the infrastructure and continuing the programme even after external aid is

stopped.

a



e401

Mahila Samakhya

2.23 While appreciating the efforts being made under the project, the Committee is of the
view that non-fixing of targets would not give real assessment of the performance of the
project. The Committee recommends that the department should consider fixing targets.

2.24 The Committee has also noted that in the evaluation report on the
M. Venkatarangaiya Foundation, Secunderabad, Andhra Pradesh; it has been observed
“Although collectives were formed around issues of common concern, efforts need to be
made to sustain the Sanghas.” The Committee feels that suitable action needs to be taken in
this regard.

Lok Jumbish

2.25 The Committee agrees that it is an innovative project with the objective of achieving
education for all by 2000 A.D. through people’s participation and mobilisation. The first
phase was completed in June, 1994 and the second phase has been started. The Committee
is however, constrained to note that out of the total allocation of Rs. 9.33 crores in RE in
1993-94 only Rs. 6.26 crores was utilised. The Committee desires that full utilisation of the
allocated amount should be ensured.

Rajasthan Shiksha Karmi Project

2.26 The allocation for the project has been increased to Rs. 8 crores for this year from
Rs. 5 crores last year. The Committee has been informed that the proposal for second phase
of the project has been processed and was awaiting approval of the Cabinet. It was further
stated that Swedish International Agency has agreed to provide Rs. 24 crores 107 the years
1994—97. The Committee is unhappy to note that out of the target of 2506 Prehar
Pathashalas, only 2115 have been set up. The Committee desires that the targets fixed under
the increased allocation for 1995-96 should bé achieved

Panchayati Raj Institutions and Elementary Education

2.27 The Committee has noted that some of the State Acts provide for selection and
appointment of elementary school teachers, instructors, etc. by the village panchayats.
However, many States do not provide for this. The Committee feels that atleast at the
elementary education level, the role of Panchayats needs to be increased. Explaining the
steps taken in this direction, the Secretary informed the Committee that the Central
Advisory Board of Education had constituted a Sub-Committee to suggest to the States to
develop possible models at village and taluk levels, and its report was forwarded to the

|
|

States, The Department should make all-out efforts, including extending fiscal support, to |
{

persuade the States to see that necessary changes are incorporated.
2.28 The Committee feels that education needs to be more and more decentralised. The

steps taken so far are not sufficient. The system of Village Education Committees needs to!

be further strengthened and sources and funds are required to be directly channelled to
them.

2.29 The Committee has also noted that the 10th Finance Commission has worked sal
certain allocation for Panchayati Raj Institutions which would be given to them through
State Governments. The Committee desires that 50% of that allocation may be earmarked
to elementary education.

Mid-Day Meals

2.30 When the Committee drew the attention of the Secretary Education, to the Mid-Day
Meals Scheme, the Secretary informed the Committee that in pursuance of the



announcement made by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech a Committee was
proposed to be set up. He further stated that modalities would be worked out in
consultation with various agencies for early operationalisation. The Committee takes note of
the fact that Tamil Nadu has successfully implemented this scheme. Earlier, in some other
states this scheme used to be handled by teachers with the result that education suffered.
The Committee feels that the scheme would better be handed over to Voluntary
Organisations/Local Mahila Mandals and Parent Teacher Associations for successful
implementation.

SECONDARY EDUCATION

Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan:

3.1 The Committee, ,in its Fifth Report, took a serious note of the non-evaluation of the
| functioning of Kendriya Vidyalayas. The Department, informing the Committee of the steps
| taken, stated that the had set up a Committee under the chairmanship of the Deputy
| Minister (Education & Culture) to undertake an in-depth and exhaustive review of the

Kendriya Vidyalayas and their management.

3.2 The Committee, in this regard, recommends that an Action Plan may be prepared for
implementation of the- recommendations to be made by the Committee.

3.3 The Committee expresses its serious concern that out of the total 818 KVs. only 293
| schools are presently in their permanent buildings.
3.4 The Committee desires that the construction of pucca buildings for the schools for
which land has been allotted may be started expeditiously. For those schools, for which land
| has not yet been allotted by the sponsoring agencies, the Department should make vigorous
and sincere efforts for early transfer of land, The Committee also suggests that
infrastructure, including playgrounds should be provided commensurate with the number of
students.
3.5 The Committee is happy to note that the Planning Commission has approved
‘allocation of Rs. 10.50 crores for the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan under plan budget for
1995-96 to meet the expenditure towards teacher training and creation of additional facilities
| in Kendriya Vidyalayas. This amount is meagre as compared to the number of schools, and,
1 therefore, needs to be suitably increased.

Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti:

3.6 As on 1.3.1995, 373 schools have been sanctioned and about 71 districts in the country
are yet to be covered (excluding Tamil Nadu and West Bengal which have not yet opted for
the scheme).

3.7 The Department informed the Committee that it was planned to open 250 Vidyalayas
in the country during the first three years of 8th Plan period to cover the remaining districts.
The Committee is unhappy to note that this target, however, could not be achieved due to
\non-receipt of suitable proposals from the concerned State Governments and also because of
‘financial constraints. The Committee is of the view that-putting onus on State Governments
jwould not solve the problem. The Committee finds some slackness on the part of the
Deparment and desires that the Department should vigorously pursue the matter with the
|State Governments. As regards the financial constraint the Committee recommends that the
मल may be increased suitably at RE stage.

| 3.8 As far as migration is concerned the Committee was informed that there was some
।

reluctance among the students as well as their parents for migration to the schools in some
States having law and order problems. Another problem had arisen due to the domiciliary

A


5 Seg oo Mee

7

requirement stipulated for admission in professional institutions, mainly in some Southern
States. The Committee was informed that a Committee had been set up to review the present
scheme of migration. The Committee desires that the Review Committee should complete its
deliberations at the earliest and give its findings.

3.9 The pass percentage of students of Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti at the CBSE examination
for the last two years is as given below:

Year Class X Class XII
1993 93.70% 66.80%
1994 93.80% 78.37%

3.10 The Committee notes that even though the Navodya Vidyalayas were set up with much
fanfare and high ideals, the pass percentage in class XII has not yet crossed even 80% while
ordinary schools are registering 90% to 95% results. The Committee feels that effective steps
need to be taken to improve the performance in this regard.

3.11 The Committee has also been informed that of the 373 Vidyalayas sanctioned so far, 202
Vidyalayas are now functioning in permanent buildings and the others are running in temporary
buildings provided by the State Governments. The Department should initiate action
expeditiously for construction of permanent buildings for the remaining schools. The
Committee recommends that the construction works, which are in progress, should be
completed early.

3.12 The Committee has also noted that the States of Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have not
yet accepted the scheme. The Committee desires that since it is a good scheme, the Department
should pursue the matter with the concerned States with some flexibility and open mind.

3.13 The Committee is not convinced by the reasons given for the savings made in the funds
for the years 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94. The Committee desires that this trend should not
repeat in future.

3.14 The Committee is also disturbed to note that there is consistent shortfall in admission in
certain Navodaya Vidyalayas, particularly those located in the North-Eastern Region, as the
candidates are not qualifying upto the minimum cut-off level set by the NCERT. The
Committee desires that some remedial measures need to be taken in this regard.

National Open School:

3.15 This is another scheme suffering from under-utilisation of funds. The Committee is
constrained to note that during 1994-95, out of Rs. 306 lakhs, only Rs. 251.46 lakhs could be
spent and during 1993-94 out of Rs. 230 lakhs allocated, only about 50% could be utilised.
Notwithstanding this, the Plan allocation for 1995-96 has been increased to Rs. 5 crores from
Rs. 3.06 crores in 1994-95. The Department supporting the increase in the funds, stated that
although, an increase of Rs. 194 lakhs above the previous year budget would appear to be
significant, this was totally inadequate for the charter before National Open School. It was also
stated that the Finance Committee of the National Open School approved the budget of
Rs. 933.82 lakhs on the basis of the recommendations of the Expert Committee. The Ministry of
Human Resource Development proposed Rs. 700 lakhs of which only Rs. 500 lakhs have been
approved. The Committee feels ite NOs appears to woke tall claims and ultimately is not in
a position to utilise the fund fully7The Committee, thus, concludes that the Department is
making allocations without looking at the past performance. The Committee desires that the
amount allocated should be fully utilised.



8

3.16 The Committee has also noted that the National Open.School charges fees from the
students. The Committee feels that the coaching from NOS needs to be made free of charge
to encourage more students. 4;

3.17 The Committee agrees that in order to reach out to the remote corners of the
country, it would be necessary to set up State Open Schools. The Department informed that
during 1994-95 financial support of Rs. 40 lakhs has been provided to two State Open
Schools, and provision has been made to provide a token support of Rs. 80 lakhs to four
more State Open Schools to be set up during 1995-96. The Committee, however, feels that
in the process of setting up State Open Schools, the NOS should not lose its identity.

Educational Technology

| 3,18 The Committee is of the view that the growing number of scientific advancements are
| not being utilised sufficiently in the educational arena. The educational programmes made
and telecastbroadcast are not reaching out to schools and children, particularly in the
; remote and rural areas. All the States are also not covered under the satellite programmes.

| The Committee feels that television is not being sufficiently utilised for educational

, Purposes. When the country is having/going to have a plethora of channels on TV,
| provision of a separate channel for education should not be a problem. This step would go a
| long way in taking technology to the children/schools with more innovative programmes.

' The Committee recommends that the Department should take up the matter with the

Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
3.19 The Committee is happy to note that the production of school TV programmes has

| been taken over by the Central Institute of Educational Technology (CIET) and States

Institutes of Educational Technology (SIET), SIETs are there only in six States and the
Committee feels that they should be set up in each and every State.

3.20 The Committee feels that the schools could be supplied TVs, VCPs and Video
Cassettes with quality programmes on education. Such schemes may be implemented in
other parts of the country on the pattern of the one implemented by Andhra Pradesh. The
Committee agrees that provision of TVs, VCPs and VCRs would involve additional
-expenditure. The Committee recommends that the Department may work out the scheme
and seek suitable additional funds at RE stage.

3.21 The Committee is distressed to note that States/UTs are not able to utilise the grants
‘in time due to procedural difficulties. This is a very serious problem. The Department
| should try to find a solution to this and simplify the procedures.
| National Awards to Teachers

3.22 The Committee is happy to note that the award amount has been increased from
Rs. 5,000 to Rs. 10,000. However, the number of awards has been increased only by 6 and

| needs to be further increased.
| Scheme of Assistance for Strengthening culture and values in Education

3.23 The Committee is of the view that there has been a steady and serious deterioration
in the value system in our society during the last few decades. Several of the ethical
principles of yesteryears, such as adherence to truth and non-violence, temperance in speech
and conduct, tolerance and a spirit of charity are losing their importance.

3.24 Value or moral education in schools will certainly do much to tone up the system but
it has to be imparted with a sense of mission by dedicated people with a clear vision. In this
connection the Committee desires that the recommendations of the Sriprakash Committee
on moral education should be considered afresh and action taken thereon.



9

3.25 The Committee is surprised to find that eventhough it is such a vital subject, the
Department has allocated just rupees one crore. The Committee desires that the allocation
needs to be suitably increased.

3.26 Since the question of cultural education is a sensitive one and does not consist simply
in imparting information or a didactic approach, the scheme has to be worked out much
more concretely and with a great deal of imagination to make it a success. The Department
should take up the scheme with great vigour.

Scheme for Strengthening of Boarding/Hostel Facilities for Girl Students of Secondary/
Higher Secondary Schools

3.27 The Committee desires that an evaluation of the functioning of the voluntary
organisations being assisted under this scheme, needs to be undertaken.
National Council of Educational Research & Training (NCERT)

3.28 This institute also falls under the category of institutions who have not made full use
of allocated funds. The allocation made for 1994-95 was Rs. 8.12 crores, whereas the actual
amount spent was Rs. 7.4 crores. The Committee feels that the Department should ensure
full utilisation of the money allocated to them.

3.29 The Committee also desires that the final report of the Sixth All India Educational
Survey should be completed at the earliest.

Computer Education in Schools

3.30 The Committee noted that a number of schools have not been provided with
computer facilities. When the Department was asked to explain the reasons, it was stated
that the State Governments had to provide pucca rooms with electricity connections. The
Committee is of the opinion that the computer education is one of the areas which needs to
be given a major thrust. The Committee recommends that the Centre should assist the State
Governments in providing the necessary infrastructure in this regard.

Vocationalisation of Secondary Education

3.31 Explaining the funding procedure, the Department stated that under the centrally
sponsored scheme of vocational education, funds are released to States/UTs on the basis of
proposals received from them, alongwith details of utilisation of funds released in the earlier
years.

3.32 However, the Committee regrets that several States/UTs have large sums of unspent
balance with them. Many of the posts sanctioned at different levels have not been filled up.
The Committee desires that suitable measures be taken to ensure full utilisation of money
allocated and filling up of vacant posts at the earliest.

3.33 The Committee feels that for making the scheme more effective it needs to be linked
up with the industries/factories in a suitable manner. This is also necessary because this
linkage would solve, to some extent, the employment problem of the students who come out
of these schools. Linkage between school stage and university stage is also required to be
strengthened.

3.34 The Committee is also of the opinion that while selecting schemes, attention should
be paid to the needs of the region and the predominance of any specific occupation of the
area. The students trained in a particular stream of vocational education may be provided
with opportunities for work in projects entrusted to panchayati raj institutions.

3.35 The Committee is also of the view that availability of syllabus and other material in
the regional languages would help students understand the subjects well in their own mother-

SO ae Pee Sees eS



10

tongue. The Committee, therefore, desires that these materials should be provided in the
regional languages as early as possible.

Integrated Education for the Disabled Children

3.36 This is one of the schemes suffering from resource crunch. The Committee is
dismayed that the plau outlay allocated for 1994-95 was Rs. 470.00 lakhs as against
| Rs. 550.00 lakhs requested for. The Committee also noted that an additional coverage of
5000 disabled children over the previous year was expected during 1994-95. Again,
a 470.00 lakhs has been approved for 1995-96 against Rs. 600:00 lakhs requested for.
Considering the fact that the number of children to be covered is 40,000, the Committee
| feels that the amount is wholly inadequate and needs to be suitably increased

| 3.37 The Committee is also of the view that this scheme has not made much headway and
| it needs to be further expanded and popularised.

Physical Education

3.38 The Committee deeply regrets that not much is being done in the field of physical
education in the schools. In fact, the Committee is surprised to learn that many States are
considering as to whether physical education should be made compulsory component of
Secondary Education or not. The Committee has noted that the Central Advisory Board of
Education appointed a sub-committee, presided over by Shri K.P. Singh Deo, Minister of
Information & Broadcasting, and its report has been accepted by the CABE. The important
recommendations of the Sub-Committee are:

“Every student and teacher should be subjected to a nationally determined physical fitness
test and it should be a compulsory requirement that every student / teacher does indeed pass
the fitness test every year; physical education and sports should be assigned atleast 40
minutes every day preferably, as the first period daily, under supervision of a trained
teacher; every school should have facilities for a number of sports so that students can
participate regularly in one or the other; and yoga practice should be given a great deal of
emphasis in pre-service and in-service teacher training courses.”

The Committee desires that these recommendations of the Sub-Committee be conveyed to
the States for early implementation.

3.39 The Committee feels that many schools do not have the basic facilities for physical
education at all and this is the main reason for the failure of the scheme. The Committee
recommends that the Department should make all-out efforts to provide the necessary
facilities. The Committee also feels that the allocation of Rs. 60 Lakhs would in no way be
sufficient for the purpose and needs to be suitably increased.

3.40 The Committee, is also of the view that yoga is a system, which promotes an
integrated development of body and mind, and should be made a compulsory subject in the
schools.

University and Higher Education

4.1 The Committee. in its Fifth Report, recommended developing ways and means to
make higher education self-reliant, as far as possible. The Committee has noted that the
UGC appointed a high-power Committee, under the Chairmanship of justice Punnayya, to
recommend suitable norms for determining maintenance grants to Central Universities
Deemed Universities and Colleges, as well as to suggest ways and means for augmenting
ae a
| 4.2 When the Department was asked to explain the measures taken on the
recommendations of Punnayya Committee, the Committee was informed that in pursuance
j



ll

of the recommendations thereof, the UGC had constituted another Gommittee to develop a |

specific formula in this regard. The Committee is of the opinion that there should be a wider

discussion on Punnayya Committee’s recommendations and an early decision be take on the
~ norms to be adopted. .

4.3 The Committee desires that Universities and Colleges should find ways of generating
funds through financing of research projects by industry and opening of more vocational
courses. The Committee agrees with the view expressed by the Department of Education
that higher education cannot be totally self-reliant. However, any effort made in the |
direction of raising resources by mobilising donations, etc. would not only reduce the burden
on the resources of the States but also create a greater sense of responsibility within the
educational system. But, Government must continue to assist institutions of higher education
adequately so that they fulfil their primary purpose i.e. generation and dissemination of
knowledge. The Committee, however, strongly feels that private investors should be firmly

be discouraged from running educational institutions with a purely profit motive. The
Committee suggests that UGC should evolve norms for regulating, fee structure and to
prevent exploitation.

\
\
|
।
|

Rural University

4.4 When the Department was asked about the progress of the implementation of the
scheme of Rural Universities / Institutes, the Committee was informed that the goverhment
has taken the decision to implement the scheme and Rs. 3 crores has been provided in the
Budget for 1995-96. The Committee welcomes the decision and expresses the hope that this
long pending programme will become operational without any further delay.

University Grants .Commission

4.5 The Committee finds that there is a vast difference between the grants allocated and
grants utilised during the year 1994-95. In the Plan, the amount allocated was Rs. 169.5
crores whereas the grants released totalled Rs. 216.00 crores.

4.6 In the case of non-Plan the allocated amount was Rs. 232.00 crores and the grant,
released was 345.59 crores. Explaining this variation, the Committee was informed that
because of essential requirements, which had not been provided in the Budget Estimates,
including the requirements of New Central Universities the grants had to be increased. As
regards non-plan, it was stated that even Rs. 345.00 crores was not sufficient to meet the

4 actual requirement. The Committee is of the view that the resource crunch has assumed
alarming proportions and additional grants are mostly allotted to New Central Universities,
as a result of which State Universities and Colleges are starved of funds.

4.7 The Chairman, UGC, when asked to comment as to whether the allocation was
sufficient, informed the Committee that the grants released were short of requirement. It
was also stated that as against the projection of Rs. 403.50 crores for the year 1995-96, the
Ministry of Finance approved only Rs. 341.82 crores under non-Plan, in view of the ever- — |
increasing responsibilities of the UGC, particularly in the context of opening New Central
Universities, the Committee feels that the amount allocated is not sufficient and needs to be
suitably increased. oF {

4.8 The Committee has noted that on its recommendations made in its Fifth Report, the |
UGC had engaged the services of Educational Consultants India Limited to verify the civil |
works undertaken: by non-grant colleges during the Seventh Plan period. The Committee | \
desires that the study be completed expeditiously and after receiving the observation thereof, |

“suitable action should be taken against such colleges as may have violated the norms.
Indian Institute of Advanced Study

4.9 The Plan allocation for this institute has been increased from Rs. 35 lakhs to Rs. 93



12

lakhs in RE in 1994-95. The Plan allocation for BE for 1995-96 is Rs. 4 cror hen asked
to explain this quantum jump in the allocation, the Department stated that the Institute was
housed in the erstwhile Viceregal Lodge (now Rashtrapati Niwas) at Shimla and the building
developed cracks and was generally in need of special repairs. A programme for such repairs
has been drawn up in consultation with the Intech and the CPWD, and an amount of Rs. 3
crores was likely to be spent for the purpose during 1995-96, the Department added. The
renovation work should be completed as early as possible to prevent further damage to the
historic building.

4.10 The Committee has noted that on its recommendation made last year; as
performance Audit Committee, under the Chairmanship of Prof. V.C. Anantha Murthy, has
been appointed for proper evaluation of the Institute. The Committee desires that the
evaluation may be completed expeditiously.

Indian Council of Social Science Research

4.11 The Committee in its Sth report, recommended increase in the. allocation. The
Committee has noted that in the revised estimates, even though it was increased to Rs. 3.25
crores from the BE of Rs. 2.5 crores, finally the amount released was only Rs. 2.5 crores.
The Committee is obliged to observe that the Department is not making a rational
allocation. The Committee does not consider the Ministry’s explanation that the total
amount could not be released due to resource crunch, as plausible. The Committee is also
given to understand that the actual requirement of the Council for 1995-96 is estimated to be
around Rs. 6 crores. The Committee is of the opinion that the ICSSR was set up for the
purposes of promoting and coordinating social sciences research in the ‘country. The
Secretary, Education and the Chairman, ICSSR admitted during the evidence that the
fuctioning of the Council left much to be desired. They pleaded for more funds to revamp
and streamline the activities of the ICSSR and its regional centres. The Committee,
therefore, recommends a suitable increase in the grants to achieve the desired results.
Dravidian University

4.12 When the Secretary was asked to explain the latest position regarding the proposal
for setting up of a Dravidian University, he informed the Committee that it was a joint
proposal of all the four Southern States. As there was no consensus, there had been no
progress in the matter, he added. The Committee feels that the Department should bring the
concerned States together and put forward some solution acceptable to them. The
Committee suggests that the Department may put a condition that the University should be
located in that State which provides land and other infrastructure free of cost and other
States could have Sub-centres.

TECHNICAL EDUCATION
Indian Institutes of Technology

5.1 The Plan allocation for the IITs has been reduced to Rs. 26 crores for 1995-96 from
Rs. 31.88 crores in 1994-95. The non-Plan allocation has also been reduced to Rs. 120.16
crores for 1995-96 from Rs. 134 crores in 1994-95. On being asked to comment on reduction
in allocations, the Department informed the Committee that the plan allocation was reduced
due to the financial crunch. As regards the non-Plan allocation, the Committee was
| informed that from the year 1993-94, a revised pattern of funding has introduced. The
Committee feels that the institutes should not be starved of funds as it would ultimately
affect the standards of the institutes and recommends that suitable increase may be made in
the allocation at the RE stage.

Indian Institutes of Management
5.2 The Committee has noted that there is not much increase in Plan allocation for 1995-96



13

which is Rs. 12 crores, as compared to Rs. 11.87 crores for 1994-95. When the Department was
asked to explain this, the Committee was informed that from the Financial year 1993-94 the
revised pattern of funding scheme was introduced in the IIMs. Under this scheme, the Institutes
were given functional autonomy and financial flexibility. At RE 1995-96 stage their matching
grant requirement, force majure etc. would be considered and appropriate RE will be fixed.

5.3 The Department has also informed that the proposals for establishing two more
IIMs—one at Calicut and the other at Indore—were under consideration. The Committee feels
that there is an urgent need_to open more such institutions in view of the buoyancy in the
economy and also to counter the proliferation of substandard private institutions. The
Committee recommends that an early decision be taken to establish new IIMs. Location,
selection and other related works may be done expeditiously.
Regional Engineering Colleges

5.4 The Committee was informed that during the last three years, emphasis for development
had been laid on the expansion and diversification of academic programmes and modernisation
of laboratories. When the Department was asked about the. steps taken to bring RECs at par
with IITs, the Committee was informed that a decision had been taken to convert RECs into
centres of excellence on par with IITs. The Committee feels that serious efforts should be made
in this direction. The Committee recommends that the allocation may be suitably increased for
achieving the target. - -

5.5. The Committee also desires that UGC may consider granting the Status of deerfefl
University, to such colleges that have become centres of excellance.
Scheme of Community Polytechnics

5.6 The Plan allocation has been increased to Rs. 30 crores for 1995-96 from Rs. 10.65 crores
in 1994-95. When the Department was asked to explain, the Committee was informed that the
increase in the plan outlay for 1995-96 was mainly due to the revision of the financial norms with
modification in the scope and extended coverage. The Committee feels that full and proper
utilisation of the funds needs to be ensured. ~~

5.7 When the Department was asked about the steps taken to strengthen the scheme, it was
stated that a National Appraisal Committee had been constituted to review the implementation
of the scheme and to suggest for strengthening it. The Committee was also informed that the
Appraisal Committee would look into the various aspects of strengthening the scheme,

. including extension to other areas, as well as for development of linkages with schemes of other

departments having identical objectives. The Committee desires that NAC may complete its
work and submit the report without much delay. The Committee is of the view that this is a
sensitive area where planning requires a special kind of expertise and grass-root experience
which is quite different from what is needed in IITs. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Appraisal Committee should include experts in indjgenous technology, social activists,
especially women, teachers and acadamicians with the desired orientation. There should also be
similarly equipped mechanism for monitoring the achievements and difficulties. The
Department should prepare a programme of action for the extension of the scheme to more
areas and for developing linkages with schemes of other departments.
ADULT EDUCATION . 7

National Literacy Mission

6.1 The National Literacy Mission (NLM) was launched in 1988 and the Total Literacy
Campaign in 1990. In the Committee’s opinion, the NLM needs to be given a further impetus.
Even as the government is seized of the Arun Ghosh Committee Report on NLM, the
Committee feels it desirable to undertake a mid-decade appraisal through National Sample
Survey,.so as to assess the impact of NLM on literacy rate.

Pa

re gat


14

Special Projects for Eradication or Illiteracy

6.2 The allocation made for the scheme has been reduced to Rs. 120 crores for 1995-96, as
compared to Rs. 155.75 crores spent last year. The Committee is not happy with the pace of
the coverage of the Total Literacy Campaigns (TLC) in the States which have low literacy
rates. The Committee has noted that in Rajasthan TLCs have been extended to 18 out of 30
districts and in UP 45 out of 65, and there is not much progress in regard to the coverage in
Bihar. The Committee is happy to note that all the districts in MP have been covered. The
Committee, however, feels that vigorous efforts are required to be made to bring all the
districts in the country, and particularly low-literacy States, under the TLC campaigns.

6.3 The Committee feels that the grants allocated may not be sufficient to increase the .
pace of the literacy campaign and hence require to be increased suitably. In those States
where the Post Literacy Campaigns have been started, sufficient allocations should be made
for the campaigns.

6.4 The Committee also desires that TLC and PLC should be implemented through a
multi-pronged strategy. The PLC could be linked up with teaching of skills for self-
employment such as the one at Community Polytechnics and special allocations be made for
the same.

6.5 The Committee feels that the programme should be linked to income-oriented
programmes and greater stress should be laid on the role of media in creating a demand for
literacy.

Scheme of Assistance to Voluntary Organisations

6.6 The Committee is surprised to find that allocation under this head for this year has
been reduced to Rs. 10 crores from Rs. 11.5 crores in RE last year, inspite of concern
expressed by the Committee in its fifth report over the reduction in allocation. The
Committee reiterates its recommendation made earlier for further increase in the allocation.

6.7 The Committee, in its fifth report, had also recommended evaluation of the working
of the Voluntary Agencies. Explaining the action taken, the Department informed the
Committee that it had been getting the external evaluation of the projects of Voluntary
Associations done in various states. The Committee has also noted that the Centre for
Media Studies has submitted its evaluation report on the Voluntary Organisations in UP.
The Committee observes that suitable action may be taken on the findings of the CMS and
the evaluation being undertaken in the other places may be expedited.

Directorate of Adult Education

6.8 Plan allocation for the Directorate of Adult Education for 1995-96 has been increased
from Rs. 4.93 crores for 1994-95 to Rs. 10.37 crores. The bulk of the amount is allocated for
media promotion activities. In the BE for 1994-95 an amount of Rs. 4.18 crores was alloted
for this purpose. The Committee has been informed that this was expected to go upto Rs.
9.42 crores due to spurt in media efforts to build up environment but as sufficient funds
were not available, this liability has to be met from the budget provision of 1995-96. The
Committee also notes that the increase in the allocation is due to the fact the agencies do
not carry the advertisements free of cost. Whereas the Doordarshan charges 1/4th the
normal tariff for National Network Programmes, it charges full rates for the Metro Channel.

6.9 The Committee in this regard, feels that the matter needs to be discussed between the
Department of Education and the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and desires that
all advertisements of National Literacy Mission be broadcast/telecast free of charge.


15

LANGUAGES
Modern Indian Languages

7.1 The Committee is anguished to note that allocations for various schemes under the
Modern Indian Languages Division are not being fully utilised. Tarique-e-Board could not
utilise the plan allocation fully during the last three years. Sindhi Vikas Board is languishing
under gross under-utilisation. During last year out of Rs. 60 lakhs allocated on plan side
only Rs. 5 lakhs were spent. The schemes for grants to Voluntary Organisation for
development of regional languages and that for appointment of teachers are also no
exception to this malady. The Department does not appear to make a rational allocation on
the basis of assessment of the requirement of each scheme. The Committee suggests that the
Department should undertake a review of each scheme.

7.2 The Committee regrets that there is no plan allocation for the scheme of production of
University level books and recommends that such allocation may be restored in consultation
with State Book Boards.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS & RECOMMENDATIONS

8.1 The Committee has noted from the information supplied by the Department that
somes of its wings have not been able to fully utilise the funds allocated. The Department is
still making higher allocations without a rational basis. There must be either something
wrong with the system or there is some slackness in implementing the schemes. The
Department should strengthen its monitoring mechanism to ensure proper and full utilisation
of funds.

8.2 On the other hand, there are certain wings which are facing resource crunch and are
starved of funds. These include UGC, a premier agency for promoting higher education,
NLM and AICTE. The Department should take steps to increase the allocations suitably for
all those wings which are in need of funds. The Department would be in a stronger wicket in
this respect if the disease of under-utilisation of funds in some schemes is arrested.

8.3 The Village Panchayats and Nagarpalikas are coming into existence everywhere. With
this, their role and responsibility are being increasingly felt in every field and education is a
precious. area. Particularly in elementary education, local bodies should be encouraged to
play a major role. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation, made in its
Fifth Report, for greater utilisation of village panchayats and nagarpalikas in spreading
literacy and promoting education.

8.4 The Committee feels that the importance of private funding/investment in education
at various levels is being felt more and more. Inadequacy of resources is a main drawback in
our endeavour for removing illiteracy. The Committee notes with concern that more and
more organisations are entering the field of education with a profit motive. The Committee
recommends that such commercialisation of education must be curbed. On the other hand,
private initiative, as a social service on a ngn-profit basis, should be encouraged at all levels
to supplement Governmental efforts.


MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
XXXV
“THIRTY FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Friday, the 7th April, 1995 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri O.P. Kohli 6)
4. Shri ५. Hanumantha Rao

5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray *

6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

7, Maulana Habibur Raliman Nomani

LOK SABHA

8. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi

9. Dr. ५. Rajeshwaran

10. Dr. Vasant Pawar

11. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak
12. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda
13. Shri Rambadan

14. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar
15. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

16. Shri Maadeepak Singh Shakya
17. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy
18. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

WITNESSES

. Shri S.V. Giri, Secretary, Dept. of Education

Dr. Y.N. Chaturvedi, Addl. Secretary

Dr. R.V. Vaidyanatha Ayyar, Joint Secretary

. Shri P. Thakur, Joint Secretary

Shri D.S. Mukhyopadhyaya, Joint Secretary

Shri K.J.S. Chatrath, Joint Secretary

Shri $.D. Awale, Jt. Education Advisor

Shri D.P. Agarwal, Jt. Education Advisor :

. Smt. Lizzy Jacob, Commissioner, Kendriya Vidyalaya.Sanghatan
10. Smt. Neeru Nanda, Director, Navodaya Vidyalaya

11. Smt. Sujata Chauhan, Finance Advisor

12. Prof. Amrita Desai, Chairperson, UGC

13. Prof. G. Ram Reddy, Chairman, ICSSR

14. Prof. J.P. Gupta, Secretary, All India Institute of Technical Education.

Per avaene

‘Minutes of I to XXXIV meetings relate to matters not included in this Report.

16


17

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary and other officials of the
Department of Education in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants
1995-96.

3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.00 p.m.



v
“FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met ४ 9.00 a.m. and again at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 25th April, 1995
in Committee Room No. 67, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri P. Upendra—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Shri O.P. Kohli

. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani
. Prof. 1.0, Sanadi

. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen

7. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma

LOK SABHA

8. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan
9. Shri Datta Raghobaji Meghe

10. Shri Inder Jit

11. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi

12. Dr. K.D. Jeswani

13. Prof. Malini Bhattacharya

14. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy

15. Shri Venkateswarlu Ummareddy

SECRETARIAT

Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Committee Officer

2. The Committee considered the Draft Twenty-Second Report on the Demands for
Grants, 1995-96, of the Department of Education and adopted the same with some
modifications.

AnPwn

3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman and in his absence Dr. M. Aram and
Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Inder Jit
and in his absence Prof. Malini Bhattacharya to lay the Report in Lok Sabha on 28th April,
1995.

4. * * *

5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m.

*Minutes of I to [Vth meetings relate to matters not included in this Report.
***Relate to other matters,

18

XE