PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                224 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TEACHER EDUCATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 28TH JUNE, 2010) 
(PRESENTED TO HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 28TH JUNE, 2010) 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 30TH JULY, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 30TH JULY, 2010) 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
JULY, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
                                              E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TEACHER EDUCATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
((PRESENTED TO HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 28TH JUNE, 2010) 
(PRESENTED TO HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 28TH JUNE, 2010) 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 30TH JULY, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 30TH JULY, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
                                        JULY, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
   
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. P REFACE ......................................................................................................................... (iii)  
3. R EPORT ........................................................................................................................... 1-7  
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE   ––   AT A 
GLANCE.................................. 
8-9 
5. A NNEXURES ..................................................................................................................... 11-18 
6. M INUTES ......................................................................................................................... 19-28  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE 
(2009-10) 
 ^1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ----  Chairman  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 &2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  
 $3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai   
 @4. Shri Vijaykumar Rupani    
 5. Shri M. Rama Jois    
 
%6. Shri Penumalli Madhu    
 *7. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari   
 #8. Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran    
 9. Shri N.K. Singh    
 10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 +11. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 **12. Shri N. Balaganga   
  LOK SABHA    
 13. Shri Suresh Angadi    
 14. Shri Kirti Azad    
 15. Shri P.K. Biju    
 16. Shri Jitendrasingh Bundela   
 17. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson   
 18. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar    
 19. Shri Rahul Gandhi    
 20. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda   
 21. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav  
 22. Shri Suresh Kalmadi    
 23. Shri P. Kumar    
 24. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 25. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 26. Shri Sis Ram Ola    
 27. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey   
 28. Shri Tapas Paul    
 29. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 30. Shri Ashok Tanwar    
 31. Shri Joseph Toppo    
 32. Shri P. Viswanathan    
 33. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
  Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
  Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 

  Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
  Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
  Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
 
 
^ Re-nominated as a member and Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 2.7.2010 
& Re-nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 22.7.2010 
$ Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 29.6.2010 
@ Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 26.5.2010 
% Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 2l.6.2010 
* Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 4.7.2010 
# Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 29.6.2010 
+ Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 4.6.2010 
** Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 16.07.2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PREFACE 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and 
Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee on the National Council for Teacher Education (Amendment) 
Bill, 2010.*  
2.  The National Council for Teacher Education (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introduced in the 
Rajya Sabha on the 16th April, 2010. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Bill to the Committee 
on the 16th April, 2010 for examination and report within two months. 
3.   The Committee considered the Bill in three sittings held on the 5th May and 18th May, 2010 
and 4th June, 2010. 
4.   On the 5th May, 2010, the Committee heard th e Secretary, Department of School Education and 
Literacy on various provisions of the Bill. The Committee also interacted with the Chairman of the 
National Council for Teacher Education, the former Vice-Chairperson of the National Council for 
Teacher Education and Secretary, Legislative Department. 
5.  The Committee, while drafting the report, relied on the following: 
(i) The National Council for Teacher Education (Amendment) Bill, 2010; 
(ii) The National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993; 
(iii) Background Note on the Bill; 
(iv) Detailed clause by clause note on provisions of the Bill; 
(v) Supreme Court judgement in Basic Education Board, U.P. vs Upendra Rai and others; and 
(vi) Details of consultations including views of  State Governments, State-wise on the Bill. 
6.  The Committee considered the Draft Report on th e Bill and adopted the same in its meeting held 
on the 15th June, 2010. 
7.   For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters at the end of the Report. 
 
OSCAR FERNANDES
 
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
June 15, 2010 Department-related Parliamentary 
Jyaistha 25, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
  Human Resource Development 
 
 
 
 
*Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2 dated the 16th April, 2010. 
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 47152 dated the 19th April, 2010. 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
1.1  The National Council for Teacher Educatio n (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introduced in the 
Rajya Sabha on the 16th April, 2010 and referred to  the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development on the 22nd April, 2010 for examination and report 
thereon. 
1.2   The National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993 was enacted to provide for the 
establishment of a National Council for Teacher E ducation with a view to achieving planned and co-
ordinated development of teacher education system  in the country and the regulation and proper 
maintenance of norms and standards in the said system. The Act empowers the Council to lay down 
guidelines in respect of minimum qualifications for a person to be employed as a teacher in schools or 
in recognized institutions so as to ensure quality of teachers, and thereby, teaching in schools 
uniformly across the country. Regulations have, accordingly, been framed by the Council which are 
binding on all State Governments in the matter of appointment of school teachers. 
1.3  The Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy, during the course of her 
deposition before the Committee, informed that recently it had come to their notice that the Supreme 
Court in the case of Basic Education Board, U.P. vs Upendra Rai and others had held that the National 
Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993 did not de al with educational institutions like primary 
schools etc. Hence the qualifications for appointment as teacher in ordinary educational institutions 
could not be prescribed under the aforesaid Act and the State Legislation / Rules on the subject would 
prevail. Pursuant to the Supreme Court judgment, the minimum qualifications for appointment of 
school teachers laid down by the Act had become redundant. 
1.4  The Committee was informed that neither the Central Government nor NCTE was made party to 
the case nor therefore, there was no occasion to defend the NCTE Act and Regulations. It was also 
emphasized that impact of Supreme Court judgem ent would be far-reaching as it would lead to 
dilution in the quality of teaching in the elementa ry schools. Therefore, in  order to remove this 
ambiguity regarding the applicability of the NCTE Act on schools, school teachers, and minimum 
qualifications for appointment of school teachers, it was considered necessary to amend the NCTE 
Act. The Committee was given to understand that  this would preclude the possibility of State 
Governments, taking advantage of the Supreme Cour t judgement to recruit as school teachers such 
persons who did not possess the minimum qualifications prescribed by NCTE. 
II.  CLAUSE  3  
2.1  Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert sub-section (4) in section 1 of the Act relating to the 'Short 
Title, Extent and Commencement' as reproduced below: 
“(4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall apply to 
(a) institutions; 
(b) students and teachers of the institutions; 
(c) schools ‘imparting pre-primary, primary, upper primary, secondary or senior secondary 
education and colleges providing senior secondary or intermediate education irrespective 
of the fact, by whatever names they may be called; and 

(d) teachers for schools and colleges referred to in clause (c)”,  
2.2  As pointed out by the Department, rationale for the proposed amendment was to overcome the 
difficulties posed by the Supreme Court in the case of Basic Education Board, UP vs Upendra Rai and 
others [Appeal (Civil) 8034 of 2001]. With the incl usion of sub-section (4), besides teacher education 
institutions and their students and teachers, the Act would become applicable to all categories of 
schools and their teachers. It was emphasized that this specific provision, being clarificatory in nature, 
was necessitated to remove the ambiguity about th e mandate of NCTE arising due to the Supreme 
Court judgement. The Committee had the occasion to interact with the Chairman of the National 
Council for Teacher Education who also expressed similar views. 
2.3  On a specific query in this regard, the Legislative Department pointed out that the scope of the 
NCTE Act as considered by the Department of School Education and Literacy and as interpreted by 
the Supreme Court varied. In order to make it clear and to widen the scope of the Act, the proposed 
amendment making the Act applicable to all categories of schools and their teachers was in order. This 
would make the intention of the Government clear. 
2.4  The Committee feels that strictly speaking, the proposed amendment of section 1 of the 
Act cannot be considered simply clarificatory in nature. The very fact that ‘qualifications of 
school teachers’ have been specifically included in the long title of the Act with resultant 
insertion of sub-section (4) clearly indicates that scope of the Act has been somewhat widened to 
cover all categories of schools and their teachers. However, in the light of the Supreme Court 
judgement and resultant ambiguity with chances of further complications in future, the 
Department does not seem to have other option but to go for such an amendment. The 
Committee is also aware about the urgent need fo r maintenance of quality education in schools 
across the country, specially in view of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
Act, 2009 coming into force. The Committee believes that by bringing all categories of schools 
and their teachers within the ambit of the Act, the ambiguity appears to have been removed and 
the mandate of the Council clarified in unequivocal terms. 
2.5  The Committee observes that nowhere in the Act, the term ‘school’ has been defined. The 
Committee takes note of the opinion of the Legislative Department that the term ‘school’ will be 
construed in its generic sense. The Committee, however, is of the view that in the light of 
different categories of schools - Government, aided, unaided, minority, there needs to be a 
specific definition of the term ‘school’ in the Act. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that 
the same may be included under Section 2 relating to ‘Definitions’ of the Act. 
III.  CLAUSE 4  
3.1  Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section, i.e., section 12A relating to ‘Power of Council 
to determine minimum standards of education of sc hool teachers’ after section 12 of the Act, as 
follows: 
“12A - For the purpose of maintaining standards of education in schools, the Council may, by 
regulations, determine the qualifications of persons for being recruited as teachers in any pre-
primary, primary, upper primary, secondary, senior secondary or intermediate school or 
college, by whatever name called, established, run, aided or recognised by the Central 
Government or a State Government or a local or other authority: 

Provided that nothing in this section shall adversely affect the continuance of any person 
recruited in any pre-primary, primary, upper primary, secondary, senior secondary or 
intermediate schools or colleges, under any rule, regulation or order made by the Central 
Government, a State Government, a local or  other authority, immediately before the 
commencement of National Council for Teacher Education (Amendment) Act, 2010 solely on 
the ground of non-fulfillment of such educational qualifications as may be specified by the 
Council." 
3.2  The proposed section 12A empowers the Counci l to determine the minimum qualifications for 
appointment as teachers of schools by framing regulations. The proviso 10 this section to clearly 
safeguards the interest of the serving teachers by providing that it shall not adversely affect the 
continuance of such teachers. 
3.3   Committee’s attention was drawn to sec tion 23 of the Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2009 which provides th at the Central Government shall authorize an 
academic authority to lay down the minimum qualific ations for a person to be appointed as a teacher 
in school. This provision also stipulates that a teacher at the commencement of the RTE Act not 
possessing the minimum qualifications shall acquire the same within 5 years. However, the proviso 
under the proposed section, 12A of the Act does not lay down any such condition and permits the 
continuance of teachers not fulfilling the minimum educational qualifications. 
3.4  On a specific query in this  regard, the Department clarified that section 23 of the RTE Act 
empowers the Central Government fo authorize an academic authority to lay down the minimum 
qualifications for a person to be employed as a teacher in elementary school. These minimum 
qualifications to be laid down by the academic authority may be different from those presently 
prescribed by the NCTE Regulations. Accordingly, it was considered necessary to provide a time 
period of five years within which the existing teache rs could acquire the new qualifications prescribed 
by the academic authority. 
3.5   The stand taken by the Council was that the provision of RTE Act and proposed provision 
(12A) of NCTE Act were complimentary to each other. While RTE Act related to teachers at 
elementary stage of education, NCTE Act addressed to  all levels of teachers. The proviso to proposed 
section 12 A intended to protect the interest of all those who were already in employment. It was 
pointed out that the spirit of RTE Act which was based on field reality would be accommodated in 
NCTE Regulations to be framed afresh. 
3.6  The Legislative Department clarified that the Central Government has been empowered under 
section 23 of the RTE Act to authorize an ‘academic authority’ to lay down the minimum 
qualifications for a person to be appointed as a teacher in school. Harmony was required to be there 
between the qualifications prescribed under se ction 12A of the NCTE Act and qualifications 
prescribed by the academic authority under section 23 of the RTE Act. This purpose could be 
achieved by authorizing the NCTE as the ‘academic authority’ by the Central Government. 
3.7  The Committee appreciates the stand taken by the Department to safeguard the interest of 
those serving teachers who do no have the required qualifications as prescribed by the 
amending legislation, specially in view of acute shortage of school teachers in the country. The 
Committee is, however, of the view that such consideration cannot continue indefinitely as it 
would amount to compromising the standard of education with untrained and less qualified 
teachers. One must not forget that both quality and uniformity of education being imparted in 

schools across the country can only be ensured by having qualified and trained teachers. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly feels that an effective mechanism needs to be evolved for 
provision of adequate training to those teachers who need it. 
IV.  CLAUSE 5  
4.1  Clause 5 seeks to add a new clause (dd) after clause (d) of section 32(2) which relates to 
regulation making powers of the Council, whereby regulations on qualifications of teachers under 
section 12A are to be made. It was clarified by the Department that since the proposed section 12A 
related to minimum qualifications of teachers, it wa s considered appropriate to provide that such 
standards be specified by way of regulations. 
4.2   The Committee notes that under section 12 of the Act relating to ‘Functions of the Council’, one 
of the functions entrusted to the Council is la ying down guidelines in respect of minimum 
qualifications for a person to be employed as a teacher in schools or in recognised institutions (teacher 
education institutions). Under the regulation-making power in section 32(2) (d) (i), the Council has the 
power to make regulations relating to norms, guidelines and standards in respect of the minimum 
qualifications for teachers in schools as well as teacher education institutions. The Committee 
observes that whereas separate Regulations pr escribing minimum qualifications for teacher 
recruitment at school level, i.e., the NCTE (Determination of  Minimum Qualifications for 
Recruitment of Teachers in Schools) Regulations, 2001 (amended in 2003 and 2005) exist, for 
appointment of teacher educators in teacher training institutions, qualifications have been 
comprehensively prescribed from time to time through NCTE Regulations notified from 1995 
onwards to Regulations, 2009. 
4.3  On being asked about the need for continuing with regulations providing norms, guidelines and 
standards for minimum qualifications for school teac hers under section 32(2) (d) (i) read with section 
12(d), it was categorically admitted by the Council that after introduction of section 12A and insertion 
of corresponding regulation-making provision under section 31(2) (dd), the ‘need for continuation of 
section 12(d) and section 32(d) (i) would not be there which may, accordingly, be got deleted. 
4.4  When views of Legislative Department were sought on the apparent ambiguity in the existing 
provisions of the Act vis-a-vis the proposed amendment, it was clarified that section 12(d) read with 
section 32(2) (d) (i) empowers the Council to lay down the guidelines in respect of minimum 
qualifications for school teachers, whereas the prop osed section 12A read with section 32(2) (dd) 
seeks to empower the Council to lay down by regula tions the qualifications of school teachers. In 
other words, the regulation-making power proposed to be given to the Council is in respect of laying 
down specific qualifications of teachers as distinct from laying down guidelines for minimum 
qualifications. 
4.5   While agreeing with the contention of the Legislative Department, the Committee would like to 
point out that the NCTE (Determination of Minimum Qualifications for Recruitment of Teachers in 
Schools) Regulations, 2001, applicable for recruitmen t of teachers in all form al schools established, 
run or aided or recognised by Central or State Gove rnments and other authorities, lay down specific 
qualifications for school teachers, although both  functions of the Council as well as relevant 
regulation-making provision of the Act only refer to  norms, guidelines and standards in respect of 
minimum qualifications for teachers in schools and recognised institu tions. This clearly indicates that 
under the existing provisions of the Act, the Counci l did not have the power to specifically lay down 
minimum qualifications for school teachers. This was the basis of Supreme Court judgement given in 

the case of Basic Education Board, UP. vs Upendra Rai and others. And the main purpose of bringing 
the proposed amendments in the Act is to remove this ambiguity only. 
4.6   In the light of the above and also with the insertion of section 12A and section 32(2)  (dd), the 
Committee can only conclude that section 12(d) and section 32(2) (d) (i) need to be suitably reviewed 
so as to restrict to qualifications for teacher education institutions only. The Committee also strongly 
feels that a view needs to be taken to suitably modify section 12(d) and section 32(2) (d) (i) so as to 
make it amply clear that minimum qualification for t eachers of teacher education institutions can be 
specifically provided under the Act. 
V.  CONSULTATION WITH THE STATE GOVERNMENTS  
5.1  ‘Education’ being in the Concurrent List, the issue of consultation with the State Governrnents 
on the proposed amendments in the Act was deliberated at length by the Committee. The Committee 
was given to understand that consultation with the State Governments was not considered necessary as 
the proposed amendment only sought to overcome the difficulty posed by the Supreme Court 
judgement regarding the existing mandate of NCTE under the Act relating to schools, teachers and 
their minimum qualifications. 
5.2  On a specific query with regard to the need for seeking the views of State Governments, 
specially because of education being in the Concurre nt List and also in view of prevailing ground 
realities, NCTE took the stand that no useful purpose would be served in initiating the process of 
consultation with State Governments as most of Stat es were coming to term with the requirement of 
standards in teacher education. Committee’s atte ntion was also drawn to the fact that since 
consultation with the State Governments for implem entation of Right to Education Act, 2009 had 
already been undertaken and this proposed amendment was in tune with the RTE Act, any 
consultation with the State Governments at this stage would unnecessarily delay the matter. 
5.3   The Legislative Department was of the view that usually when legislation was undertaken by the 
Central Government for Concurrent subjects, consultations with State Governments was to be 
undertaken. However, it was a matter of policy a nd was within the domain of the administrative 
Ministry to take a view in the matter. 
5.4   The Committee has strong reservations about non-adherence to well-established norms of 
consultation with State Governments in respect of Concurrent subjects. The very fact that NCTE has 
not conducted any study to identify the States which are yet to adopt the NCTE regulations indicates 
that ground realities are not very encouraging. The Committee finds that information in this regard is 
being collected from different States and the Gove rnment Orders and Recruitment Rules for teachers 
in States are being analyzed to identify the States not adhering to the NCTE Regulations. On the basis 
of available information, North-Eastern States and We st Bengal, U.P. etc. were not conforming to the 
NCTE Regulations. The Committee was given to understa nd that majority of the States were in the 
process of amending the Recruitment Rules for teachers so as to bring them in conformity with NCTE 
Regulations. It has also been pointed out by the Co uncil that it would be necessary that Regulations 
for teacher appointment are made more flexible to be able to cope with the new challenge thrown by 
the fundamental right given through the RTE Act. 
5.5   The Committee was also specifically informed by the Council that in case of West Bengal, the 
matter was taken with the State Government a nd the Department was al so informed about the 

violation. The State Government took the plea that changes in the Recruitment Rules and its 
notification was a time-consuming process and sinc e requirement of school teachers was immediate, 
Rules were framed by them which would be amended in due course to make it in conformity with the 
NCTE Regulations. The Committee was given to unders tand that other State Governments were also 
reported to have initiated the process of amendment of their Recruitment Rules. 
5.6  The Committee being conscious of the fact th at the States were not consulted on the amendment 
Bill considered it appropriate to take up this ma tter with States/UTs. However, communications sent 
by it failed to elicit feedback from the States. Only 3-4 States came forward with their views. Due to 
time-constraint, the Committee could not pursue the matter further. 
5.7  The Committee takes note of the detailed re sponse received from the State Government of West 
Bengal on this crucial issue. It has been pointed out by the State Government that upon the 73rd 
Constitutional amendment coming into force w.e.f.24th April, 1993, education, including primary and 
secondary schools became a field on which legisl ature of a State could only legislate as far as 
Panchayat areas were concerned. In addition, exclusive legislative field of the State in this regard was 
also guided by Schedule VII, List III (Concurrent List), Entry 25 in so far as non-panchayat areas were 
concerned. Attention of the Committee was also dr awn to the recruitment rules framed by the State 
Government for school teachers. Citing Supreme Cour t judgement, it was also contented by the State 
Government that NCTE Act was embarking in an area which was beyond its source of legislation and 
also in conflict with the legislation made under the State List. Strong opposition to the proposed 
amendment of the NCTE Act was, accordingly, expressed by the State Government of West Bengal. 
The Committee apprehends that chances are there th at similar stand could be taken by many of the 
State Governments. 
5.8  The Committee appreciates the spirit of the proposed legislation to maintain quality of the 
education in schools uniformly throughout the country. But, education, being a concurrent 
subject, any change including policy formation should be as far as possible corrobotated and 
substantiated by the State Governments. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department should convene a meeting of Education Secretaries of all States/UTs at the earliest 
so as to have the exact assessment of all the problem areas in the field of education. 
5.9  The Committee also recommends that while framing the regulations for prescribing 
minimum qualifications for appointment of school teachers, NCTE should undertake a 
consultation process with all the State Government to ensure that a consolidated set of 
guidelines uniformly applicable throughout the country could be framed with an element of 
flexibility in the light of state-specific ground realities. 
VI.  General Observations  
6.1  Committee’s attention has been drawn to twin problems of acute shortage of teachers and large 
number of untrained teachers in the country. From the feedback made available to the Committee, 
percentage of untrained teachers is alarmingly high in some of the very crucial states. State-wise 
figures of regular and para-teachers and level of th eir training indicates a very discouraging scenario. 
This position is likely to aggravate further with demand for increasing number of teachers arising with 
the RTE Act coming into force. As pointed out by the Secretary, School Education and Literacy, in 
States like Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, U.P., West Bengal and Jammu & Kashmir, 
teacher education capacity is grossly inadequate. 

6.2  The Committee observes that initiatives like increasing intake capacity of DIETs in States, 
special arrangements for conducting in-service traini ng through distance learning by IGNOU and also 
setting up of teacher education institutions in St ates lacking the same have been taken by NCTE. 
However, in some of the States, particularly in North-East States, acute shortage of trained teachers 
was primarily due to inadequate number of teacher education institutions. 
6.3  The Committee is of the view that while mushrooming of sub-standard teacher education 
institutions needs to be curbed, setting up of teacher education institutions in uncovered areas is 
also required to be taken at priority. As inform ed by NCTE, in 24 Stat es/UTs which include all 
the North-East States, Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, U.P., Goa, 
Uttarakhand, Chandigarh, Delhi, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep and Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 
requisite number of teacher education institutions do not exist. 
6.4  The Committee strongly feels that a coordinated exercise by the Department and NCTE 
needs to be initiated for filling the very visibl e gaps in the availability of teacher education 
institutions in such a large number of States. If need be, special support may be provided by the 
Central Government in this regard. At the same time, situation prevailing in States having 
surplus teacher training institut ions also needs to be looked into. Viability of utilizing the 
services of trained teachers coming out from these States in all other States facing shortage of 
trained teachers can be looked into. Nobody would deny the fact that only qualified and trained 
school teachers have a significant role in the im parting of quality education to children, future 
of our country. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that a mechanism of assessment and 
accreditation of teacher education institutions needs to be evolved on an urgent basis. Besides 
that, remedial steps need to be taken for strengthening all categories of teacher training 
institutions, so that component of pre-service and in service training becomes an essential part 
of service of school teachers and the element of their accountability could be realised. 
6.5  The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes. 
6.6  The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating the 
amendments/suggestions offered by it. 
6.7  The Committee would like the Department to submit a note to it with reasons with 
Recommendations/suggestions made by it which could not be incorporated with Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS –– AT A GLANCE 
CLAUSE 3 
  The Committee feels that strictly speaking, the proposed amendment of section 1 of the 
Act cannot be considered simply clarificatory in nature. The very fact that ‘qualifications of 
school teachers’ have been specifically included in the long title of the Act with resultant 
insertion of sub-section (4) clearly indicates that scope of the Act has been somewhat widened to 
cover all categories of schools and their teachers. However, in the light of the Supreme Court 
judgement and resultant ambiguity with chances of further complications in future, the 
Department does not seem to have other option but to go for such an amendment. The 
Committee is also aware about the urgent need fo r maintenance of quality education in schools 
across the country, specially in view of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
Act, 2009 coming into force. The Committee believes that by bringing all categories of schools 
and their teachers within the ambit of the Act, the ambiguity appears to have been removed and 
the mandate of the Council clarified in unequivocal terms. 
(Para 2.4) 
  The Committee observes that nowhere in the Act, the term ‘school’ has been defined. The 
Committee takes note of the opinion of the Legislative Department that the term ‘school’ will be 
construed in its generic sense. The Committee, however, is of the view that in the light of 
different categories of schools - Government, aided, unaided, minority, there needs to be a 
specific definition of the term ‘school’ in the Act. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that 
the same may be included under Section 2 relating to ‘Definitions’ of the Act.                 (Para 2.5) 
CLAUSE 4 
  The Committee appreciates the stand taken by the Department to safeguard the interest of 
those serving teachers who do no have the required qualifications as prescribed by the 
amending legislation, specially in view of acute shortage of school teachers in the country. The 
Committee is, however, of the view that such consideration cannot continue indefinitely as it 
would amount to compromising the standard of education with untrained and less qualified 
teachers. One must not forget that both quality and uniformity of education being imparted in 
schools across the country can only be ensured by having qualified and trained teachers. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly feels that an effective mechanism needs to be evolved for 
provision of adequate training to those teachers who need it.                                              (Para 3.7) 
CONSULTATION WITH THE STATE GOVERNMENTS 
  The Committee appreciates the spirit of the proposed legislation to maintain quality of the 
education in schools uniformly throughout the country. But, education, being a concurrent 
subject, any change including policy formation should be as far as possible corroborated and 
substantiated by the State Governments. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department should convene a meeting of Education Secretaries of all States/UTs at the earliest 
so as to have the exact assessment of all the problem areas in the field of education.       (Para 5.8) 
  The Committee also recommends that while framing the regulations for prescribing 
minimum qualifications for appointment of school teachers, NCTE should undertake a 

consultation process with all the State Government to ensure that a consolidated set of 
guidelines uniformly applicable throughout the country could be framed with an element of 
flexibility in the light of state-specific ground realities.                                                        (Para 5.9) 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 
  The Committee is of the view that while mushrooming of sub-standard teacher education 
institutions needs to be curbed, setting up of teacher education institutions in uncovered areas is 
also required to be taken at priority. As inform ed by NCTE, in 24 Stat es/UTs which include all 
the North-East States, Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, U.P., Goa, 
Uttarakhand, Chandigarh, Delhi, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep and Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 
requisite number of teacher education institutions do not exist.                                          (Para 6.3) 
  The Committee strongly feels that a coordinated exercise by the Department and NCTE 
needs to be initiated for filling the very visibl e gaps in the availabilit y of teacher education 
institutions in such a large number of States. If need be, special support may be provided by the 
Central Government in this regard. At the same time, situation prevailing in States having 
surplus teacher training institutions also needs to be looked into. Viability of utilizing the 
services of trained teachers coming out from these States in all other States facing shortage of 
trained teachers can be looked into. Nobody would deny the fact that only qualified and trained 
school teachers have a significant role in the im parting of quality education to children, future 
of our country. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that a mechanism of assessment and 
accreditation of teacher education institutions needs to be evolved, on an urgent basis. Besides 
that, remedial steps need to be taken for strengthening all categories of teacher training 
institutions, so that component of pre-service and in service training becomes an essential part 
of service of school teachers and the element of their accountability could be realised.   (Para 6.4) 
  The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating the amendments / 
suggestions offered by it.                                                                                                          (Para 6.6) 
  The Committee would like the Department to submit a note to it with reasons with 
Recommendations/suggestions made by it which could not be incorporated with Bill.    (Para 6.7) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
16 April, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. XX of 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TEACHER 
EDUCATION  
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
A 
BIIL 
 
  to amend the National Council for Teacher Education 
Act, 1993, 
 B E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:- 
 1. ( 1) ThisAct may be called the National Council for 
Teacher Education (Amendment) Act, 2010.  
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Short title and 
commencement. 

 
73 of 1993. 
 
 
Amendment of section 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 
12A. 
Power of Council to 
determine minimum 
standards of education of 
school teachers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 2. In the National Council for Teacher Education Act., 1993 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, 
after the words “in The teacher education system”, the words 
“including qualifications of school teachers” shall be inserted. 
 3. In section 1 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:---- 
 “( 4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions 
of this Act shall apply to--- 
  ( a) institutions; 
  ( b) students and teachers of the institutions; . 
  ( c) schools imparting pre-primary, primary, upper
 primary, secondary or seni or secondary education and 
colleges 
 providing senior secondary or intermediate education
 irrespective of the fact, by whatever names they may be 
called; 
 and 
  ( d) teachers for schools and colleges referred to in 
clause 
 ( c).”. 
 4.  After section 12 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:--- 
 “12A. For the purpose of maintaining standards of 
education in schools, the Council may, by regulations, determine 
the qualifications of persons for being recruited as teachers in any 
pre-primary, primary, upper primary, secondary, senior 
secondary or intermediate school .or college, by whatever name 
called, established, run, aided or recognised by the Central 
Government or a State Government or a local or other authority: 
 Provided that nothing in this section shall adversely affect 
the continuance of any person recruited in any pre-primary, 
primary, upper primary, secondary, senior secondary or 
intermediate schools or colleges , under any rule, regulation or 
order 0 made by the Central Government, a State Government, a 
local or other authority, immediately before the commencement 
of the National Council for Teacher Education (Amendment) 
Act, 2010 solely on the ground of non-fulfilment of such 
educational qualifications as may be specified by the Council”.
  
 
Amendment of long title. 

Amendment of section 32.  5. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after 
clause (d), the, following clause shall inserted, namely:---  
  “( dd)  the qualifications of  teachers under section 
12A;”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 The National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993 has been enacted to provide for the 
establishment of a National Council for Teacher E ducation with a view to achieving planned and co-
ordinated development of teacher education system  in the country and the regulation and proper 
maintenance of norms and standards in the said system and for matters connected therewith. 
 2. Clause (d) of section 12 of the aforesaid Act empowers the Council to lay down guidelines 
in respect of minimum qualifications for a person to be employed as a teacher in schools or in 
recognised institutions. The object of this provision is to ensure quality of teachers, and thereby, 
teaching in schools uniformly across the country. In  pursuance of this provision, the Council has 
framed Regulations which are binding on all Stat e Governments in the matter of appointment of 
school teachers. 
 3. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Basic Education Board, U.P. vs. Upendra Rai 
and others  [Appeal (Civil) 8034 of 2001] has held that the Act does not deal with educational 
institutions like primary schools,  etc. Hence, the qualifications for appointment as teacher in the 
ordinary educational institutions like the primary schools cannot be prescribed under the aforesaid 
Act, and the essential qualifications are prescribed by the local Acts and Rules in each State.   
 4. The purpose of regulating the teacher education system is to ensure quality of teachers in 
the education system. In view of the aforesaid judgment, the minimum qualification for appointment 
of teachers in schools laid down by the Council has become redundant. 
 5. In the circumstances, it is considered necessary to amend the Act to clarity that the Act 
applies to schools, school teachers and the minimum qualifications for appointment of school teachers, 
so as to have uniform standards of teaching in schools in the country. 
 6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
      NEW DELHI; KAPIL SIBAL 
The 12th March, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 12A in the National Council for Teacher 
Education Act, 1993 so as to empower the Nati onal Council for Teacher Education to make 
regulations determining the qualifications of pers ons for being recruited as teachers in any pre-
primary, primary, upper primary, secondary, senior secondary or intermediate school or college, by 
whatever name called, established, run, aided or recognised by the Central or State Government or 
other authorities. 
 2. Sub-section ( 1) of section 32 of the Act empowers the Council to make regulations not 
inconsistent with the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder generally to carry out the 
provisions of the Act. Sub-section (2) of the said section enumerates the matters in respect of which 
the Council may make regulations. Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of the said 
section 32 so as to enumerate that the Council may make, regulations in respect of the teacher 
education qualification under the new section 12A sought to be inserted vide clause 4 of the Bill.  
 3. The matters in respect of which regulations  may be made by the Council are matters of 
detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power 
is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RAJY A  SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
to amend the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development) 
 
 
 
 
 

 ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TEACHER 
EDUCATION ACT, 1993 
(73 OF 1993) 
* * *
 An Act to provide for the establishment of a National 
Council for Teacher Education with a view to achieving 
planned and co-ordinated development of the teacher 
education system throughout the country, the regulation and 
proper maintenance of norms and standards in the teacher 
education system and for matters connected therewith. 
* * *
32.(1) * *
 ( 2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality 
of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely:---- 
* * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to make regulations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XVI  
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 5th May, 
2010 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes     --------       Chairman 
 2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
 3. Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani 
 4. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 5. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari  
  LOK  SABHA  
 6. Shri Suresh Angadi 
 7. Shri P.K. Biju 
 8. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 9. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 10. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 11. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 12. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
 13. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 
 14. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 15. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 16. Shri P. Vishwanathan 
 17. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
  Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
  Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
  Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
  Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
  Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer  
LIST OF WITNESSES 
Ministry of Human Resource Development 
Department of School Education and Literacy 
 1. Smt. Anshu Vaish, Secretary (SE&L) 
 2. Smt. Anita Kaul, Additional Secretary 
 3. Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
 4. Prof. Mohd. Akhtar Siddiqui, Chairperson (NCTE) 
 5. Shri Vikram Sahay, Director 

2. At the outset, the Chairman briefly mentioned a bout the salient features of ***, *** the National 
Council for Teacher Education (A mendment) Bill, 2010 for which the Secretary, Department of 
School Education and Literacy has been invited for oral evidence. 
3. * * * 
4. The Secretary then briefed the Committee on the National Council for Teacher Education 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010. She explained that the amendments are aimed to remove the ambiguity 
regarding applicability of the National Council fo r Teacher Education Act, 1993 on schools, school 
teachers and also provide minimum qualifications for appointment of school teachers so as to ensure 
uniform standards throughout the country. On a query whether necessary consultations were held with 
the State Governments with regard to the proposed extension of Council’s jurisdiction the Secretary 
clarified that the Department had not consulted the State Governments on this amendment Bill though 
the provision of regulations for minimum qualifications for school teachers was within the mandate of 
NCTE, the amendments to the Act are proposed to preclude the possibility of State Governments 
taking advantage of recent decision of Supreme C ourt saying that NCTE regulations for appointment 
are not applicable of school teachers. Taking into cognizance the importance attached with this crucial 
area and wide ramifications of the Bill, the Commit tee decided to obtain written views of the State 
Governments/UTs on the said Bill. The Committee also decided to forward a questionnaire for written 
replies from the Department within a week and also hear the views of experts on the Bill in its next 
meeting. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 
P.M. to meet again at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday the 18th May, 
2010. 
 
***Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XVII  
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 18th May, 
2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  --------   Chairman  
 2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
 3. Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
 4. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
 5. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
 6. Shri N.K. Singh 
 7. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
 8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  
  LOK SABHA    
 9. Shri Suresh Angadi 
 10. Shri Kirti Azad 
 11. Shri P.K. Biju 
 12. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 13. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 14. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
 15. Shri P. Kumar 
 16. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
 17. Capt Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
 18. Shri Sis Ram Ola 
 19. Shri Tapas Paul 
 20. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 21. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 22. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
  Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
  Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
  Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
  Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
  Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
I. * * * 
II. Shri R.S. Khan, Former Vice Chairperson,  National Council for Teacher Education.   

III. Prof. Mohammad Akhtar Siddiqui, Chairperson, National Council for Teacher Education.  
IV. Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law. 
 (i). Shri V.K. Bhasin, Secretary, Legislative Department 
 (ii). Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel. 
 (iii). Shri K. Sreemannarayana, Assistant Legislative Counsel 
 (iv). Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary 
2. * * * 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman apprised the Members about the experts invited for clarifications on 
*** *** *** the National Council for Teacher Ed ucation (Amendment) Bill, 2010 including the 
Secretary, Legislative Department, Law Ministry. 
4. * * * 
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Shri R.S. Khan, former Vice-Chairperson and 
Prof. M.A. Siddiqui, Chairperson, National Counc il for Teacher Education (NCTE) on the National 
Council for Teacher Education (A mendment) Bill, 2010 with special reference to role of NCTE, 
problem areas, past experience of NCTE with State Governments, impact of this amendment on the 
teacher education system etc. The Members of the Committee sought clarifications which were replied 
to by both the witnesses. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire on the said Bill to the 
Chairperson with the direction to send the response within a week. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew.) 
6. The Committee, then, heard the views of Shri V.K. Bhasin, Secretary, Legislative Department 
on the technical and implemental aspects of  *** *** *** the National Council for Teacher Education 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Members sought certain clarifications which were replied to by the 
representatives of Legislative Department. The Committee also decided to seek written replies of the 
Department on its questionnaire within a week for its consideration. 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
8.  The Committee then adjourned at 6.10 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 26th 
May, 2010 and on Friday, the 4th June, 2010. 
 
 
***Relates to other matter. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
XIX  
NINETEENTH MEETING 
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 4th June, 
2010 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  --------   Chairman  
 2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
 3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
 4. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
 5. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
 6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  
  LOK SABHA    
 7. Shri Suresh Angadi 
 8. Shri Kirti Azad 
 9. Shri P. K. Biju 
 10. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 11. Shri Jitendra Singh Bundela 
 12. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 13. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
 14. Shri P. Kumar 
 15. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
 16. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
 17. Shri Tapas Paul 
 18. Shri Brijbhushan Sharma Singh 
 19. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 20. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
  Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
  Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
  Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
  Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
  Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them of the day’s agenda 
which included *** *** clause-by-clause consider ation of National Council for Teacher Education 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.*** ***. 

3. * * * 
4. The Committee then took up clause by clause  discussion on the National Council for Teacher 
Education (Amendment) Bill, 2010. Members offered their suggestions on the statement prepared by 
Secretariat on the Bill. After some discussion, the Committee directed the Secretariat to prepared draft 
report on the Bill for its consideration in the next meeting. 
5. * * * 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 a.m., on Tuesday, the 15 th 
June, 2010. 
 
 
***Relates to other matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XX  
TWENTIETH MEETING 
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 15th June, 
2010 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  --------    Chairman  
 2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
 3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
 4. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 5. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
 6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  
  LOK SABHA    
 7. Shri Suresh Angadi 
 8. Shri Kirti Azad 
 9. Shri P. K. Biju 
 10. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 12. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
 13. Shri P. Kumar 
 14. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
 15. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
 16. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 17. Shri P. Viswanathan 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
  Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
  Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
  Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
  Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman apprised the Members about the day’s agenda which included *** 
*** and consideration and adoption of the Draft 224th Report on National Council for Teacher 
Education (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and sought their cooperation with respect thereof. 
3. * * * 
4.  The Committee reassembled after lunch and t ook up for consideration the Draft 224th Report on 
National Council for Teacher E ducation (Amendment) Bill, 2010. After some deliberations, the 
Committee adopted the report with minor changes. 

5. * * * 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M., on Tuesday, the 22nd 
June, 2010. 
 
 
 
***Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 