PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
INDIA’S PERFORMANCE IN INTERNATIONAL SPORTS

(Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 34th Report of the Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development)

(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 9TH DEC., 1998)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 9TH DEC., 1998)

g

wae

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

AUGUST, 1998/BHADRAPADA, 1920 (SAKA)


CONTENTS

Composition (OF THE COMNETIEE ५५६ <- 5 seuares ree ies ss aves tone ०-७
PREFACE
Cuapter I
Cuaprter II Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted
BY CEGOVEMMCNE, ०५, scorer esasaviscsnees cesta ess mit
Cnapter Ill Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ...........
Cuarter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ......
Cnaprer V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government
has not givenanynenly .:: i.08e a, cee ice ies os waaay "४०००३
MINUTES) . ७ ०००४३०७ ३३ हल्के tate sate Ree afm ३४३७ ७ ९ का किक ४ ५ कप कक

Paces
(i)-(iii)
(vy)
(1--16)
(17—31)
(32—35)

(36)

(7)
(39--47)


a मे 1 ass ie: at :
: का] Dara
ibebatgerearo eat it Py ee
oe अर री
of : हा छा)

पी अ०७०० :
CMe
Vara?

hes.
ernie



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1998-99)

Shri S.B. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

3. Shri Balkavi Bairagi

4. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

5. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

6. Shri O. Rajagopal

7. Shri Dina Nath Mishra

8. Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

9. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
10. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
11. Shri M.P. A. Samad Samadani
12. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
13. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
14. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
15. Dr. Akhtar Hasan Rizvi

LOK SABHA

16. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam

17. Shri Sartaj Singh

18. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

19. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

20. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

21. Dr. Sanjay Singh

22. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

23. Shri Indrajeet Mishra

24. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

25. Shri Ashok Singh

26. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

27. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
28. Shri Ashok Gehlot

29. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa
30. Shri Ajit Jogi

31. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

32. Shri Laxman Singh

33. Shri Shankar Pannu

34. Shri Abdul Hamid

35. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

36. Shri Samik Lahiri

37. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

38. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja

39. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

40. Shri HP. Singh

41. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
42. Shrimati Krishna Bose

43. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja

44. Shri S. Arumugham

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
@
4736 / BS/ F—2-A


pee ee

=i

an

Fi
225
Me
2



15.

16.
17.

18.
19.

21.

22.
23.

25.
26.
vif
28.
29.

31.
32.
33.

35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

41.
42.
43.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

Shri 5.8. Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
Dr. B.B. Dutta

Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Dr. Shrikant Ramchandra Jichkar
Shri Raj Nath Singh

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma
Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

Prof. (Shrimati) Bharati Ray
Shri R. Margabandu

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Dr.,.Mohan Babu

Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
LOK SABHA

Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
Shri Sartaj Singh

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Shri Jai Prakash (Hardoi)

Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
Maharani Divya Singh

Shri Mahant Abedyanath

Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
Chaudhary Paragi Lal

Dr. C. Silvera

Shri Ishwarbhai K. Chavda

Shri Dutta Meghe

Shri LG. Sanadi

Shrimati Krishna Bose

Shri ९५. Rajeshwar Rao

Shri A. Venkatarama Reddy

Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi

Shri Pawan Diwan

Shri Krishna

Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi

Dr. Ram Chandra Dome

Shri Samik Lahiri

Shri S.K. Kaarvendhan

Shri Mukhtar Anis

Dr. M. Jagannath

Dr. Bali Ram

Shri Ranen Barman

Shri Pradeep Jaiswal

Shrimati Hedwig Michael. Rego

(1997-98)

Gi)


PREFACE

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventy-
seventh Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its
Thirty-fourth Report on India's Performance in International Sports.

2. The Thirty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development was persented to Rajya Sabha on the 21st December, 1995 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd
December, 1995. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the report, received from the
Department of Youth Affairs and Sports were considered by the Committee. Clarifications were also sought by the
Committee from the Secretary and other Officials of the Department.

3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same on the 27th August, 1998. The Committee
at its meeting held on 19th November, 1998 decided to present the Action Taken Report in the House during the
Winter Session of Parliament.

New DELHI, S.B. CHAVAN,
27th August, 1998 Chairman,
Bhadrapada 5, 1920 (Saka) Department-Related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development.

4736/ RS/ F—3-A


CHAPTER I
REPORT

The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in its Thirty-fourth Report on India's Performance in International Sports which was presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.12.1995 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22.12.1995.

2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained
in the Report. They have been categorised as follows:

(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 1, 6, 8, 9, 11, 14, 17, 18,
19, 20, 26, 28, 29, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 40, 41, 47, 48, 49, 50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 63, 64, 65, 68, 69,
70, 71, 72, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85.

(ii) Recommendaions/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's
replies: 3, 4, 7, 10, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 30, 31, 38, 39, 61, 62.

(iii Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee: 2, 5, 12, 13, 15, 16, 21, 33, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 51, 52, 58, 66, 67, 73, 74, 80.
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been received -
Nil. ;
3. The Committee will now deal with some of its recommendations on the Action Taken Notes of the Government.
Recommendation No. 1

The Committee feels it should be our objective to see that every child takes part in sports and games that every
parent encourages the child to do so. It should also be our endeavour to see that as children grow, they do not lose
their enthusiasm for sports, not does the pressure of studies towards a bright career diminish their interest for
participating in sports and games.

Action taken

To promote sports and games amongst children a decision has already been tak~n to integrate physical education
and sports with the educational curriculum. The Central Advisory Board on Education (CABE) had recommended
to make sports and physical education a compulsory subject in schools and colleges. Following are the salient
recommendations of the CABE:—

(i) Physical education and sports should be made a compulsory part of curriculum and assigned at least 40
minutes everyday for all school going children;
(ii) Mass participation activities and sports competitions may be organised by the State Governments regularly
for schools and colleges;
(iii) Subject teachers may be trained as physical education teachers through pre-service and in-service training
courses;
(iv) Special weightage may be considered to be given to sportspersons who have excelled in school and
college admission; and
(v) State Governments may identify at least one school per district as a sports school for nurturing of talented
sportspersons.

These recommendations of the Sub-Committee have been accepted by the CABE, Deptt. of Education and
Deptt. of Youth Affairs & Sports. All the State Governments have been advised to implement the recommendations.
The progress of the implementation of the report was also discussed during the meeting of State Secretaries held
during October '96. Conference of Ministers and Secretaries of North East States held at Guwahati in
November, ’96 and Conference of Ministers of State for Youth Affairs & Sports held in February 97.


2

The Education Department has also set up a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri A.K. Pandya, Ex-
Secretary, Deptt. of Youth Affairs & Sports, Government of India, to review the progress of implementation of the
Sub-Committee Report in the Kendriya Vidyalayas, Navodaya Vidyalayas and the States. During the course of
these meetings it is seen that the Committee's report has been accepted by the managements of Kendriya Vidyalayas/
Navodaya Vidyalayas and these are being implemented in schools administered directly by the Government of
India. Also many of the States have already initiated action on implementation of recommendations of the
Committee.

Apart from the above, to provide encouragement to sportspersons at early stages of their career, the Department
provides monthly scholarship of Rs. 500 to talented children. The Department has also recently revised the scheme
of Promotion of Sports and Games in Schools which aims at encouraging effective participation in competitions at
inter-school, district, State and national levels. The scheme will provide an opportunity to a large number of
school children to participate in school level tournaments and will thereby give impetus to sports activities amongst
school: children. न

The Department has also proposed a new scheme as part of the IXth plan proposals called "National School
Fithess Programme”. It is proposed to formulate a batery of tests to judge the fitness level of school children in
High/Higher Secondary Schools and based on that stars and certificates will be provided to the students passing the
tests.

Comments of the Committee

1

The Committee desires that implementation of the recommendations of the CABE Sub-Committee should be
vigorously pursued with all the States. ‘National School Fitness Programme' proposed to be started by the Department
during IX plan is a welcome step. This new scheme is required to be finalised at the earliest. The Committee
recommends that the Department may take all necessary steps in this direction.

Recommendation No. 2

Our performance in creating a conducive environment for sports should also ensure that boys and girls with
high potential are encouraged to remain active in sports through a system which offers them due social recognition
and encouragement, as well financial benefit. This is very essential, if we are to become competitive internationally
as a nation.

Action Taken

The Department agrees with the observation of the Committee. At present, boys and girls with high potential are
being encouraged to continue with sports by providing them scholarship under the Scheme of Sports Talent Search
Scholarship. Further some of them are also being trained in the SAI Centres.

Due encouragement and Social recongnition is being provided to sportspersons for excelling in sports by
providing them with awards under the Schemes of Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award, Arjuna Award and Cash
Awards for winning medals in international sports events. In fact, Junior and sub-Junior's players are also entitled
to cash awards.

Besides, medal winners at Olympics and World Cup and World Championships are given a monthly pension of
Rs. 2,000 and gold medal winners at the Asian games are given a pension of Rs. 1500 per month.

While the Department is contributing its mite towards the objective of encouragement of sports, it is also
emphasised that unless the society recognises the sportspersons as achievers, little can be expected.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is not fully satisfied with the reply given by the Department. The social status is linked to
financial gains and financial position. Unless sports is financially viable, children and parents would not look
towards taking up sports as a career. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendations for developing
a system so as to ensure social recognition and encouragement as well as financial benefit to sportspersons.

Recommendation No. 5

There is also a need to develop at least one sports school, preferably residential, in each district with the
requisite playing facilities and equipments. These schools could ultimately be developed as centres of excellence
in sports, on the same pattern as is being done by China and East European countries.


Action Taken

Secretary, Department of YouthA ffairs & Sports has written to all Chief Secretaries of the States/UTs emphasising
the need to develop at least one sports school preferably residential in each district with appropriate facilities and
equipment.

It may be mentioned that the Deptt. is not in a position to set up such schools as setting up of such schools
would require substantial investment in terms of school building, sports infrastructure and recurring cost for
running of the school. With the limited budget of the Deptt. it is not possible to take up such a scheme.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee finds that very few sports schools in State like Rajasthan, Kerala, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh
have been set up till now. The Committee is of the firm view that a large number of sports schools spread throughout
the country is the ultimate requirement for producing world class sports persons successfully participating in
International events. Even if the Department does not have sufficient funds, corporate sector and private agencies
could be approached for funds. Besides this, the Committee feels that some of the schools in different states having
large play fields and sufficient infrastructure could be converted into sports schools. The Committee was informed
that in 14 districts of Maharashtra, under Kreeda Probodhini scheme, whereas children are enrolled in different
schools, they stay together and sports, nutritious food, exercise, physical education is taken care of under one roof.
The Committee recommends that the Maharashtra example should be brought to the notice of other States also so
that sports talent is identified at an early stage.

Recommendation No. 8

Coupled with the absence of sports consciousness and culture in the country, there is almost total Jack of sports
infrastructure at the grassroot level all over the country. The Committee found that the infrastructure, so far
created, is mainly confined to the metro cities, big industrial townships defence cantonments etc. and caters to the
needs of people living in the urban areas, whereas 80 percent of the population, which lives in the villages and
small towns, is generally deprived of this benefit. The tribal and rural areas, with their age old games, are devoid
of any sports infrastructure worth the name.

Action Taken

While agreeing with the recommendations of the Committee, it is submitted that the Working Group for the IXth
Plan set up by the Planning Commission has recommended that the Sports infrastructure at the grassroot level will
have to be developed by the State Governments. As a follow up measure, the Deptt. has already written to the
State Governments in this regard. The matter was also taken up during the Conference of State Secretaries held in
October "96 and State Ministers held in February 1997. States have been asked to provide greater funds for
development of sports infrastructure in their plans so as to meet the needs of villages, small towns, tehsil and
district headquarters. They have been asked to involve local bodies for creation of sports infrastructure at the
grassroot level.

On its part, the Deptt. is already administering a scheme of grants to State Sports Councils for creation of
sports infrastructure. The scheme provides for assistance to State Governments/UTs and registered voluntary
bodies for creation of sports infrastructure like playfields, indoor/outdoor stadia, swimming pool etc. in all areas
including small towns. Greater financial assistance is given under the scheme for hilly and tribal areas. However,
due to paucity of resources, the Department has not been able to meet the demands of sports infrastructure of the
country.

Recommendation No. 9

One of the reasons cited for the lack of sports infrastructure in the country is the non-availability of sufficient
funds for the promotion of sports. The amount provided for sports in the Central Government is less than 0.0001 per
cent of the Government's total budget. Even taking into consideration the States' provisions for sports, the percentage
of allocation does not improve either, which shows that sports is not a priority area.
Action Taken ;

Department of Youth Affairs and Sports is in agreement with the view that resources provided for development
of sports is totally inadequate. The Department has, on innumerable occasions, has brought this to the notice of

4736/ BS/ F—+A


4

the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. In the Annual Plan provisions for the year 1997-98, the
allocation for sports has gone up from Rs. 55 Crore in 96-97 to Rs. 75.66 Crore. The recommendations of the
Committee have helped in obtaining this higher allocation. However, this increase is also insufficient.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee agrees with the resource constraints being faced in the field of sports. The Committee feels
that recognising the necessity of providing/strengthening sports infastructure, sufficient funds should be allocated
by Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. Keeping in view India's dismal performance in various
international events, Planning Commission should atleast once make a realistic assessment of overall requirement
of funds for sports in the country. This is all the more necessary because India with second largest population in
the world and even after 50 years of Independence has not been able to produce world class sports-persons.

The Committee was informed that a small State like Manipur was spending quite a large amount on building
up sports infrastructure and other related activities. Not only Sports Department, other Departments in the state
were also contributing to a large extent. The Committee feels that this system under which different Departments
have coordinated and jointly contributed for one purpose should be studied so that other States are approached to
follow the Manipur example.

Recommendation No. 12

The Committee while visiting the Regional Centres of Sports Authority of India, LNCPEs, NIS and the important
stadia/sports complexes, found it distressing that barring the Bangalore, Calcutta and Gandhinagar Regional Centres,
the condition of most of the Sports complexes/stadia was far from satisfactory.

Recommendation No. 13

The Committee recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs & Sports should work out a proper plan and
schedule for maintenance of these buildings/stadia constructed at a huge cost. The Department should also introduce
a system of regular monitoring and inspection of these buildings by senior officials so as to ensure their proper
maintenance and upkeep.

Action Taken on Recommendations No. 12 and 13

There are five stadia in Delhi under the Sports Authority of India being looked after by'the Stadia Directorate of
SAI. The important details in regard to these stadia are summarised below:—

Sl. Name of the Maintenance
No. Stadia Agency
1. IN. Stadium cPWwD
2. National Stadium CPWD
3. Talkatora Swimming Pool NDMC
4. LG. Stadium
Cycling Velodrome SAI
$. Dr. Karni Singh
Shooting Ranges DDA

There are also 4 Regional Centre, (Bangalore, Calcutta, Gandhinagar, Imphal), 2 Sub-Centres (Aurangabad,
Guwahati), NIS Patiala, LNCPE, Trivandrum and a number of SPDAS, Sports Hostels & SAG Centres.

Earlier, maintenance schedules were being drawn up by SAI from time to time for the above complexes till 1992
and these were being reviewed in a meeting with the engineers of the maintenance agencies at a periodic interval
for necessary follow-up action. However, with the drastic cut in budgetary allocation this practice could not be
scrupulously adhered to as the maintenance agencies were left with no option but to attend to the urgent work
only.

The annual maintenance cost of SAI stadia at Delhi and the infrastructure created at various SAI Centres all over
India works out to approximately Rs. 5 crores per annum.

4736/ RS/ F—4-B


5

Since no regular maintenance could be taken up due to paucity of resources, now in addition to regular
maintenance, SAI needs Rs. 16.00 crores for special repairs of various stadia at Delhi and Rs. 2.52 crores for
infrastructure at SAI Regional Centres. The entire special repair programme can be taken up immediately provided
funds are available.

The non plan budget of SAI has been reduced from Rs. 11.63 crores in 1994-95 to Rs. 6.00 crores in 1997-98.
Ministry of Finance has opined that SAI should generate its own resources to take care of the Non Plan expenditure.
The generation of resources by SAI, though, has gradually increased from Rs. 1.83 crore in 1992-93 to Rs. 6.18
crores in 1995-96 to approximately Rs. 8 crore in 1996-97, is not enough to take care of the maintenance requirement.
As such a planned programme of maintenance cannot be taken up unless suitable budgetary support is provided to
SAI under Non-Plan. However, whatever is possible within the existing resources is being done after prioritising
the works.

As regards monitoring and inspections of these buildings, SAI and the Department are taking necessary action.
Further Comments

The Secretary stated that all the five stadia in Delhi are maintained by different organisations but the Department
has very little resources and within that they have to meet the expenditure. The maintenance agencies do not pay
for the maintenance and only SAI provides funds for this purpose, it was clarified. While agreeing that the
maintenance is not properly done, the Secretary informed the Committee that alteast Rs. 16 to 20 crores are
required for bringing these stadia up to the required level. The Secretary stated that sufficient funds should be
made available to the Department for major repairs since for the last twenty years there had been no proper
maintenance of these stadia for want of money. The Secretary further informed the Committee that for the last two
and a half years, all new schemes have been put on hold so that all the funds could be spent in completing the
unfinished stadia.

On the question as to whether the stadia should be handed over to local bodies for maintenance or not, the
Secretary agreed that they should be handed over to the local bodies.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is very constrained to note the pathetic condition in which the stadia are existing now. The
Committee strongly feels that the Department should approach the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission
without delay for providing a one time grant for immediate and necessary maintenance of all the stadia. The
Committee is of the view that new schemes should also be initiated side by side. The Committee feels that efforts
should be made to transfer all the stadia to the local bodies for their regular maintenance.

The Committee is of the view that a big stadium instead of being used only for the event for which it was built,
may be divided into 4 or 5 sub-divisions so that it can be used for different events. Not only this, infrastructure
available in big stadium can be made available to nearby schools, sports clubs, sports bodies etc.

Recommendation No. 15

The Government has erected huge and massive sports infrastrucutre in the metro cities and big towns. These
structures are used only when national or international tournaments take place. For the rest of the period, they are
just lying idle or under-utilised. Some of them are rented out for cultural programmes and other shows. There is
a problem of their maintenance as well. A plan should be drawn up for utilisation of the infrastructure.

Action Taken

The stadia which were built by the Central Government directly are under the management control of SAI.
Sports Authority of India, after its coming into existence, had also undertaken construction of several facilities of
very high standards. As has already been pointed out that due to budgetary cut of SAI and the insistance that SAI
should raise resources for its survival, increasingly the facilitiés will have to be rented out for raising resources.
The Department agrees that playing facilities should primarily be used for sports and games only. In fact the SAI
has already initiated a dialogue with the Govt of NCT Delhi for using the playing facilities for school children.
Renting out for other activities will, however, have to be continued for generating resources.

Recommendation No. 16

The Committee feels that instead of organising the games at the State Capitals, many of the games could be
held in other places in the State so that the sports infrasturcutre is not concentrated in one particular area.


Action Taken

National tournaments as also the international ones need to be held in such places, where good facilities are
available. At the same time, such facilities, once created, need to be utilised on a regular basis. In many small
places, such facilities of international quality are nor available, nor are they required. In fact, in small places what
is needed is decent playing facilities.

The matter has already been taken up with the Indian Olympic Association. In fact the latest trends are also in
favour of holding tournaments in places other than State Capitals. In the last national games events took place
both in Pune and Bombay. In the Karnataka National Games also, some of the events are taking place in Mysore.

Further Comments:

The Secretary further stated that school education being a state subject, the State Governments were primarily
responsible for starting sports activities right from the beginning or at the local level. Although attention of State
Governments had been repeatedly drawn by the Department they did not have suffcient funds for doing that. The
situation was so bad that a large number of schools in the States were continuing without adequate play grounds.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is pained to note that a large number of schools in the country do not have adequate playgrounds.
Immediate action is required to be taken for improving the situation and Department should impress upon all the
State Governments to make efforts for providing adequate playground for every school. The Committee feels that
sports appears to be a neglected subject. For the youth of the country, it is necessary that sports facilities are
provided everywhere. International meets come once in a while. If we do not start from the beginning, the
performance of our sports-persons is not going to improve. The Department should formulate schemes whereunder
sports activities can be started by the State Governments in every school of the country.

Recommendation No. 21

The Committee desires that, as an incentive, sportspersons who have participated in the state, national and
international events should be allotted houses or plots by Housing Boards and Urban Development Authorities on
priority basis at concessional rates. They may also be given house building loans by Banks and other Financial
institutions at low interest. Eminent sportspersons, who, after retirement, intend to start their own industry/
business, etc. may be given licenses for purpose, alongwith bank loans and land, if necessary.

Action Taken

The recommendation of the Committee has been brought to the notice of the concerned agencies like State
Governments etc.Although, there are cases in which individuals, companies, State Governments have given cash
awards or awards in other forms to a few sportspoersons, who have achieved excellence in international arena, till
today, no formal scheme or even a pattern has emerged. In certain games like cricket or tennis, the achievers have
been given gifts or cash awards. However, in other games, which do not have high spectator value or have not been
able to catch the imagination of the people in a big way, the lot of even international achievers is quite dismal.
However, as has been mentioned, the Department of Youth Affairs & Sports have been giving cash awards to those
who win medals in World level tournaments.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is constrained to note that no formal scheme has emerged so far to provide for loans, financial
incentives to the sports persons. The Department’s acceding to this fact is not going to take away its responsibility.
The Committee strongly feels that even though no other agency or State Government has evolved any such
scheme it is for the Department to take an initiative in this direction.

Recommendation No. 29

The Committee recommends that one of the outstanding sportpersons may be nominated to the Rajya Sahba in
recognition of his/her distinguished service to country.
Action Taken

The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, who in turn took it up with the Ministry of
Home Affairs. No final decision has been communicated to the Department in this regard.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that the Department may pursue the matter with both the Ministries of Parliamentary
Affairs and Home Affairs for an early decision in the matter.


Recommendation No. 33

The Commitee feels that kits should be provided: to players and teams well in advance before they leave for
international meets.

Action Taken

DYAS has already forwarded the Committee's recommendations to the National Sports Federation and IOA for
necessary action. It is the responsibility of the National Federations to provide kits to the players and teams well
in advance before they leave for international meets.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels that mere forwarding its recommendation to the National Sports Federations and IOA will
not be sufficient. Since the Federations do not feel accountable to any agency including the Department, it would
be a futile exercise. The Department should, therefore, insist upon the Sports Federations to adhere to this procedure
and in case of any complaint, strict action should be taken against them.

Recommendation No. 34

Efforts should be made to ensure that the diet available to sportsmen and women has the nutritional value
necessary to meet the specific requirements of different games and sports in which they participate. The Committee
is of the firm opinion that the Government should immediately raise the amount of diet allowance substantially so
that players can get a rich and nutritious diet.

Action Taken

The dietary requirements for Power and Non-Power disciplines have been worked out in consultation with the
National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad.

Boarding charges are enhanced from time to time to meet the cost of menu suggested by NIN. The rates of menu
for the coaching camps were last revised in March’96 and the existing rates for Non-Power and Power disciplines
are Rs. 90/- and Rs. 100/- per person respectively. The catering is being done at SAI Centres departmentally. Howerver,
in Delhi, it is being done by a private caterer.

Due to paucity of resources the rates for Board & Lodging of the sportspersons under SAI schemes like NSTC,
SPDA and ABSC have been Rs. 35 and for SAG and Sports Hostel, the same is Rs 40, even though the amount
required for providing diet according to the NIN norm is higher. In case the rates are enhanced considerably the
number of sports persons under the schemes will have to be proportionately reduced.

A Clarification was sought by the Committee as to what efforts have been made to increase the rates and the
response of the Finance Ministry, in this regard. The Secretary deposed before the Committee that the rates have
been revised recently from Rs. 35/- to Rs. 42/-. When the Committee sought to know as to whether it would meet the
requirement, he stated that it would meet the requirement, at the very basic level and there was a case for increasing
it.

Comments of the committee

The Committee is of the view that even the revised rates are very insufficient and the charges should be increased
sufficiently in order to enable the sports-persons to have adequate nourishment.

Recommendatiog Wo. 42

The Committee feels that Government should make arrangements to provide personal coaches to those
sportspersons who have adequate potential and hope of winning medals at international level. Thesé persons coaches
should also accompany the sportspersons whenever they go abroad to participate in international tournaments.

Action Taken

Personal coaches are also being allowed to train their wards (sportspersons) even in the national camps, in cases
where the sportspersons have extraordinary potential. Some of the eminent coaches who have continued to train the
sportspersons have been in the National camps and have accompanied the sportspersons abroad are- (i) Shri O.M.
Namibiar, Athletics and (ii) Shri Hargobind Singh, Athletics.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee finds that even though, there are a few instances of personal coaches being provided to some of
the sportspersons this is not being followed as 4 general rule even in the case of all the sportspersons going for

4736/ RS/ F—S-A


international events. The Committee, therefore, desires that once a sportsperson is decided to be sent for an
international event such a person should be provided a personal coach.

Recommendation No. 43

A comprehensive plan to upgrade the skills and qualifications of technical officials, referees and judges in the
identified disciplines needs to be taken up as quickly as possible.

Action Taken

Technical Officials, referees and judges are the reponsibility of the national sports federations. They have been
asked to prepare a comprehensive plan for upgrading the skills and qualifications of technical officials, referees
and judges as part of their Long Term Development Plans.

Comments of the Committee

The reply given is not acceptable to the Committee. The Department cannot be absolved of its responsibility
particularly in view of the shabby working of the National Sports Federations and their ineffective and inefficient
handling of their respective fields. The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken by the federations.
The Departments may give its compliance report at the earliest.

Recommendation No. 44.

The various federations/associations in the country are alleged to be the weakest link in the chain of sports
management and their functioning has been described as perfunctory. The selection of teams and players by them
is also stated to be lopsided, based on favouratism, nepotism and arbitrariness. There is no democratic functioning
at all in most of them. It is also stated that huge amounts of money are spent on the election of office bearers.
Many federations/associations are being headed by people who have nothing to do with sports.

Action Taken

The national sports federations/associations vary in terms of strengths and weaknesses. The management of
some of these federations/associations is satisfactory or even very good whereas in case of some others, indications
are that things are not satisfactory. As per the guidelines of the Department for selection of teams, the national
sports federations constitute the selection committees which include representatives of the Government and SAI
and the selection is supposed to be done by them on merit. However, sometimes, complaints do appear that
selections are not done entirely on merit.

As for the nature of functioning of the federations, they are not accountable to the Department. About spending
of huge amounts of money on election of office bearers, the Department has no authentic information. Many
federations/associations are being headed by people having background in sports, while it may not be true in case
of some others. As stated above, while the Department has no control over federations/associations as such, in
connection with giving up grants, the Department seeks to exercise some accountability. A set of guidelines exists
for this purpose.

The guidelines are proposed to be revised, defining the roles and responsibilities of national sports federations
more clearly, making them more professional and even incorporating provisions for de-recognition of federation.

Recommendation No. 45

Federations must hold their elections regularly and democratically. The first and the most important task
before each national federation is to mobilise its energies and efforts for obtaining sponsorship and financial
support from various sources.

Action Taken

This recommendation has been brought to the notice of the IOA and the National Sports Federations. As per
information available, many federations are holding their elections regularly. The IOA and national sports federations
have also been advised to mobilise its energies and efforts for obtaining sponsorship and having suppurt from
various sources. It is seen that financial sponsors have been mobilised by few federations, such as, cricket, tennis,
golf, hockey etc. The Department has also held series of meetings with organisations like CII, requesting them to
sponsor various sports projects and disciplines.

4736/ RS / F—S-B


Further Comments

The Department was asked to clarify whether there existed any mechanism whereby proper implementation of
guidelines defining the roles and responsibilities of national sports federations could be ensured. In response, the
Secretary explained that some of the federations, besides getting Central funds, were having their own source of
income by way of Doordarshan or TV rights, sponsorships etc. However, no accounts of money thus generated
were being made available to the Department. Not only this, no statements of accounts were being published by
these federations, it was clarified. So far as implementation mechanism was concerned, it was smooth in majority
of the cases. Only those federations which were not in receipt of any Government funds, did not feel bound by the
Department guidelines, it was informed.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee expresses its serious concern at this state of affairs prevailing in the sports federations. The
Committee feels that these sports federations, registered under the Societies Act, are duty-bound to file their
actounts. The money they spend is the money collected from the public. Therefore, it is obligatory on their part to
publish their accounts. The Committee is of the view that the annual statement of accounts filed by these federations
should not only reflect the funds released to them by the Centre but also the money received from other sources.

Recommendation No. 46

It is essential that the national federations organise competitions, tournaments and championships on a regular
basis throughout the sporting season: This can be achieved by monitoring, guiding and motivating their State/
district units.

Action Taken

This recommendation has been brought to the notice of the national sports federations. It is true that some of
the federations have been deficient in holding national championships regularly, particularly under various age
categories. The holding of national championships regularly is discussed at the time of reyiew of LTDPs.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee strongly feels that the Department should take action against those federations which do not
hold championships regularly. The Committée is of the firm view that non-holding of regular tournaments in the
mofussil areas, rural areas and small towns has been one of the most important factors contributing to the present
dismal scenario in sports. The Committee therefore recommends that the Department should make concerted
efforts to motivate the State Governments for taking up tournaments in a major way in the rural areas starting from
block level onwards.

Recommendation No. 49

Aj important area of resource mobilisation in whcih the Government can help the federations greatly is by way
of transferring the remaining sum of the advertising revenues earned by Doordarshan from showing sports
programmes to the concerned federations after deducting its costs.

Action Taken

The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Doordarshan. Some of
the federations have entered into arrangements with Doordarshan in this regard.

Further Comments

The Committee wanted to know the reaction of the Ministry of information and Broadcasting in the matter.
The Secretary informed that they had not received any further information from the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting who have again been approached. Normally views from each federation and Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting were taken by the Department. Only then, agreements were entered into between Doordarshan
and Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and the federations, the Committee was informed

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is of the view that if the federations are to be encouraged, sufficient revenues should be
allowed to them, The Department should, therefore, pursue the matter with the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting.


Recommendation No. 51
» There is no coordination or. cooperation between various agencies engaged in promotion of sports. There is no
accountability and responsiblity for poor performance in sports in international events. The Committee emphasises

the need for clearly demarcating the duties and responsibilities of each one of the agencies so that the accountability
could be fixed for their lapses.

Action Taken

For having propoer coordination and cooperation on structured ‘and orgat ised lines, it is felt that-suitable
legislation and rules and regulations under such legislation is necessary. While by and large, attempts at effective
coordination and cooperation are being made by the Department constantly with the IOA, national sports federations
and the State Governments, the results are not always commensurate with the efforts. Accountability and
responsiblity for performance in sports in international events can also be appropriately apportioned if there is
legislation, rules and regulations. However, it may be pointed out that in matters such as sports, where international
standards are constantly changing, normally upwards, and many other factors such as the state of development of
infrastructure, scientific and medical support available including the pharamacological factors, the effort put in
and the output by way of medals etc. cannot be determined with a reasonable degree of precision. It is not easy,
therefore, to fix accountability for lapses.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee does not agree with the contention of the Department that it is not easy to fix accountability for
lapses. If the Department cannot fix responsibility for poor performance and for lapses in the international events:
without any chance of winning any medal, it should find a via media to locate the lacunae in the system and to
provide for accountability for poor performance.

Recommendation No. 52

It is often seen that teams are selected virtually almost on the last day and at times had reported after the events
had already started. The Committee feels that this state of affairs is highly deplorable and has to be stopped forthwith
if we really intend to achieve medals in the international sports arena. The Committee feels that there is a need for
a long-term planning and selection of teams has to be made much in advance so that players are aware of their
selection and they could concentrate more on sports rather than running around till the last moment for various
clearances. The Committee also desires that once the teams are selected they should be sent to places of training and
also sufficiently in advance to the venue of the event for proper exposure and acclimatisation to the foreign
environment.

Action Taken

The recommendation has been brought to the notice of the national federations. The primary responsibility of
selecting the team well in time lies with the federations only. On the part of the Government, the procedure for
clearance of teams has been simplified whereby each proposal is considered even before the selection and an
approval in principle is conveyed to the federation and air seats are blocked. However, it is not possible for the
Government to actually issue the sanction as long the names of the persons are intimated to the Government.
Sometimes, due to various factors, selection of teams are done at a late stage which delays the final clearance of
teams.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is constrained to note the Department’s acceptance that sometimes due to various factors, selection
of team is done at a late stage which delays the final clearnace of teams. The Committee is of the firm view that if the
federations make advance preparations and select the teams sufficiently in advance then this problem will not arise.
The Government should, therefore, not clear the teams which are not selected sufficiently in advance. Unless this
condition is made mandatory by the Government, the federations will never fall in line.

Recommendation No. 53

The Committee suggests that each one of the sports organisations should have an annual calendar of events
giving the details of events, their venues and the dates for the entire year. The Committee also suggests that there
should be only one National Calendar of Events of various disciplines which should be finalised after consulting
different agencies involved in its prorhotion. This calendar of events should be sent to the Sports Authority of India
(SAI) by the concerned sports federations for consolidation and publication.


Action Taken

The recommendation has been brought to the notice of the rational federations. The annual calender for each
discipline is expected to be prepared by the concerned national federations. In fact, each federation should send
its national calender to the IOA which in turn should publish annually the consolidated calender and arrange to
send it to all concerned viz. SAI, DYAS, Doordarshan, AIR etc. and it should be the responsibility of the federation
to ensure that the said calender is updated from time to time.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires to know as to whether all the National Federations are adhering to the procedure and
preparing the annual calender of events regularly. Action should be taken against federations which do not prepare
the annual calender in time.

Recommendation No. 58

The Committee noticed that neither the sports psychology nor the sports medicine was being given any priority
in India. The Committee feels that all the organisations working towards promotion of sports must give due attention
and priority to both these disciplines. The Committee recommends that the services of good sports physiologists,
psychologists and sports medical experts be made available to our players on the ground. There is a need for a more
coordinated effort on the part of coaches, sports scientists and sports medicine doctors tp help sports persons
enhace their performance. Though SAI has made a beginning in this direction, yet a lot more needs to be done.

Action Taken

In India, only SAI has made a beginning in setting up facilities for sports sciences support. Practichlly no
initiative has been taken by the State Government in this direction.
SAI’s efforts to upgrade the scientific labs and the scientists have been limited due to availability of scarce

resources. However, based on availability of funds, a programme is being drawn up for sending our sports scientists
abroad for updating their knowledge.

The services of the sports scientists are freely available to the sportspersons in National coaching camps as well
as in the SAI schemes.

There is a considerable improvement in the interaction between coaches and sports scientists and constant efforts
are being made to improve it further.
Comments of the Committee

The Committee finds that the Department has not mentioned about the efforts being made by the sports federations
in this direction. The Committee desires that the federations should also be insisted upon taking necessary action
in this regard,
Recommendation No. 66

The Committee also feels that we should not send our teams to international sports events in the disciplines
where we do not have any chance of bagging medals. It would perhaps be better not to participate than participating
and losing in all the games, which would have a demoralising effect. Before participating in international events, our
players should be given enough exposure at the national level and, if need be, we may invite foreign teams to India
to participate in competitions.
Action Taken

In the present set up of international sports, the responsibility of sending Indian teams abroad is with the
federations and the IOA. In major events, such as Olympics/Asiad and Commonwealth Games, the Departmerpit
has been insisting upon clearing only such players/teams which meet the required standards. However, the advice
of the Government is not always accepted by the IOA and the national sports federations.

For building up sportspersons/teams, international exposure is essential, as it acclimatises the national players
with the international environment. As such, Government has been encouraging participation of foregin teams in
national events and has also been sending our players/teams for competition exposure abroad.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is surprised to note that the Government's advice for sending only such players/teams which
meet the required standards is not always accepted by the International Olympic Association (IOA) and the

4736/ RS/ F—6-A


12

National Sports Federations. The Committee is of the view that in such cases, the Government should not give
clearance. Similarly, Government funding should be stopped to such federations which send the teams without
attaining international standards.

Recommendation No. 67

The Committee feels that lack of funds and budgetary constraints are coming in the way of development and
promotion of sports. The amount earmarked by Government of India for sports in 1995-96 is only Rs. 68.86
crores, which works out to 0.0001 percentage of the total budget of the Government. The Committee recommends
that, to begin with, atleast 0.5 per cent of the total budget should. be earmarked for sports promotion.

Action Taken

The recommendation of the Committee was taken up with the Planning Commission. However, even though the
annual Plan allocation to the Department has been increased from Rs. 55 crore in 1996-97 to Rs. 75.66 crore in
1997-98, it is far below the figure of 0.5% of the total budget.

As regards allocating 0.5% of the total budget on sports in the State Governments, it was discussed in the State
Sports Secretaries’ Conference as also in the State Ministers’ Conference. The position, however, has not been
improved to any great extent.

Further Comments

The Secretary informed the Committee that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports had been neglected so
far as allocation of funds is concerned. It had remained stagnant at Rs. 95 crores for the past three years and in real
terms it kept on going down. However, during 1997-98, there has been a slight increase, i.e. Rs. 125 crores.as.a result
of recommendations made by HRD Committee. Out of Rs. 125 crores, Rs. 50 crores was for Youth Affairs which
was not directly related to sports and only Rs. 75 crores was for sports, the Secretary clarified.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that the Department should prepare a comprehensive scheme indicating the overall
requirement for development of sports in the country and bring it before the Committee and before the Parliament
and then they should approachd the Planning Commission for approval.

Recommendation No. 69

The Committee feels that the Government alone cannot deliver the goods. Public and private sectors’ involvement
is necessary in supplementing the governmental efforts. The Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for a joint
and coordinated approach by all the agencies, including public and private sectors, in pooling their resources to
Promote sports in the country. This is particularly necessary in the context of financial constraints, both at the
Central and State levels.

Action Taken

The Department is in agreement with the recommendation of the Committee. The Department has already taken
up the matter with the CII, Public and Private Sector Units for sponsoring development of sports in the country. In
the draft new National Sports Policy, it has been proposed to create a National Sports Development Fund with a
view to mobilising corporate funds for the development of sports in the country. Contribution from within and
outside the country to this fund will carry with it a hundred per cent income tax exemption. It is also proposed in
the new draft National Sports Policy that it will be made mandatory for all corporate houses to contribute 1% of
their annual net profit to this fund.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee welcomes the proposal to create National Sports Development Fund. It would go a long way in
providing support base for sports. The Committee was given to understand that all contributions made to the National
Sports Fund would be 100 per cent tax-free. The Committee feels that if a large number of industrial houses are
prepared to undertake a particular sports, then it is a fit case for tax-exemption.

Recommendation No. 71

Representatives of Industrial Houses appealed for tax exemption under revenue expenditure also for scouting
talent and training the teams. Such incentives are necessary for the continued support of the industrial houses in
sports. The Income Tax Act should, therefore, be suitably amended so as to give substantial tax exemption to

4736/ RS/ F—6-B


13

organisations investing in sports. Special Customs Duty exemption for certain categories of imported sports
equipments is required to be made. Liberalised access to foreign exchange for imports of sports equipments is
also called for.

Action Taken

At present under the provision of Section 35-AC of the Income Tax Act, 100% exemption is allowed to donors
in respect of certain sports projects.approved by the National Committee appointed under the Act. The Department
has also written to the Ministry of Finance with a view to providing tax exemption to the industrial houses for
revenue expenditure on sports with a view to attract greater investment in the promotion of sports. The Department
has also written to Ministry of Commerce to make sports equipment freely importable.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that the Department should pursue the matter with Ministries of Finance and Commerce
for an early approval of the proposals.

Recommendation No. 73

The Committee found that very limited sports infrastructure has been provided in the whole of North Eastern
region. The region is also denied major sports tournament and championships. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Governments and SAI, as well as national sports federations should concentrate in this sports
fertile area, not only for scouting and nurturing of potential sportspersons and providing adequate and suitable
infrastructure in this region but also for holding more and more competition.

Action Taken

The Department agrees with the recommendation of the Committee that a lot of talent is available in the North
East and has been therefore, making an effort to develop infrastructure in the North Eastern States. Against an
allocation of Rs. 6.50 crores under the scheme of Grants for Creation of Sports Infrastructure for 1996-97, an
amount of Rs. 1.52 crores has been released to North-Eastern States (Mizoram: Rs. 86.15 lakhs, Manipur:
Rs. 43.50 lakhs, Tripura: Rs. 14.50 lakhs and Assam: Rs. 8.00 lakhs).

Sports Authority of India has set up a number of Centres in the North East for development of talent in these
areas. A Regional Centre of SAI is functioning at Imphal and a Sub-Regional Centre at Guwahati. SPDAs are
functioning at Golaghat in Assam, Shillong in Meghalaya, Sports Hostels in Guwahati (Assam), Imphal (Manipur),
Dimapur (Nagaland) and SAG Centre at Aizwal (Mizoram).

As result of this efforts made by the Department, a number of talented sportspersons started emerging from
North East. Some of the important names are Ms. M. Kunjrani (Weightlifting), Shri Lalrem Sanga (Archery), Shri
Baichung Bhutia (Football), Shri Brojen Singh (Hockey).

Comments of the Committee

The Committee feels that the efforts being made are too negligible to tap the vast sports talent available in
North-Eastern Region. These efforts are needed to be stepped up.

Recommendation No. 74

The Committee is quite disappointed to learn that we have not been able to, till now, identify the sportspersons
who would represent India in the 1996 Olympics at Atlanta even though only seven months are left now. The
Committee strongly recommends that we should start selecting our players/teams without further delay not only
for Olympics 1996 and Asian Games 1998 but also for Olympics 2000 and prepare them scientifically with a view
to winning medals for the country.

Action Taken

Preparation for the 1996 Olympics and 1998 Asian and Commonwealth Games started even before the 1994
Asian Games were held with the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports issuing guidelines to the IOA and National
Sports Federations for preparing detailed Long Term Development Plans (LTDPs) in August, 1994. The National
Sports Federations were required to prepare their LTDPs soon after their return from the Asian Games. The process,
however, took much longer and the LTDPs received initially were very sketchy.

The LTDPs for the major disciplines were finalised during the early part of 1995. These reviewed the performance
of the teams in important international competitions, finalised the National and International Calendar, Coaching


14

Camps, Coaches-Indian and Foreign, Programme of Scientific Support and the list of probables. The Junior and
Sub-Junior Programmes were also considered wherever the Federations and SAI were able to indetify the potential.
‘The programme was implemented during 1995 and was reviewed again in early 1996 by having detailed discussions
with all the major federations.

After Atlanta Olympics in July/August, 1996 another review was taken at the level of Secretary with National
Sports Federations of Athetics, Archery, Badminton, Boxing, Weightlifting, Judo, Shooting, Hockey (Men & Women),
and Volleyball during the months of September-Deceber, 1996. The review of LTDPs is being held since December,
1996 at the level of Director General, SAI and the annual plans have been finalised in respect of Athletics,
Billiards & Snooker, Rowing, Squash, Weightlifting, Wrestling and Hockey (Women). The dates for other
disciplines such as Yateching, Table tennis, Kabaddi, Golf, Tennis, Hockey (Men), equestrian had also been fixed
but these federations requested for re-scheduling of the dates and these meetings are likely to take place in April
and May 1997.

As is clear from the above, the programme for training of sportspersons has already been started in most of the
disciplines. The Department has also decided to constitute Monitoring Committees viz. (i) discipline-wise Monitoring
Committee under the Chairmanship of DG, SAI which would form the first level; (ii) another Committee under
the Chairmanship of MOS which will monitor the overall performance of Indian contingent.

A number of junior & sub junior sportspersons are also being trained, from amongst whom participants for the
Olympic Games, 2000 are likely to be found.

Comments of the Committee

The level of preparations is evident from the results. The fact that India with its vast size of population could get
only one Bronze Medal is a testimony to the ill-preparedness of the country to compete in international events. The
Contmittee strongly feels that this trend has to be reversed.

Recommendation No. 75

The Committee feels that unless sports is also brought under the “Concurrent List” of the Constitution, sports
activities in the country cannot be uniformly regulated in an effective and coordinated manner.

Action Taken

In 1988 the Government approved a proposal to bring sports on to the councurrent list of the Constitution and a
bill was introduced accordingly, in the Rajya Sabha 24th November’88. However, it was decided that further
consultation with the States be undertaken.

The Prime Minister addressed a letter to all Chief Ministers on 3rd November’90. This resulted in 12 States
agreeing to the proposal and 12 opposed with no response from Manipur. Subsequently, letters were addressed by
the MOS/HRM to these 13 States. Out of these States, 4 have further conveyed their concurrence to the proposal.
Thus, 16 States have now agreed to the proposal. Out of the remaining 9 States, the State Governments of Rajasthan,
» & 8, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have not agreed to the proposal which State Governments of Karnataka,
Gujarat and West Bengal have stated that they are examining the proposal. Comments from Assam and Punjab are
yet to come.

This matter was again placed before the Cabinet and it was decided that this should be discussed under the
Chairmanship of Minister of Parliamentary Affairs with leaders of all political parties in the Parliament. Accordingly,
a meeting was held on 28th November 1996 to consider the proposal.

The matter was also discussed with the State Secretaries in the Conference held in October ’96 and with the
State Ministers in the Conference held in February’ 97. It was mentioned clearly that the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on HRD had also made recommendation that sports should be brought under Concurrent list of the
Constitution and a comprehensive legislation enacted by the Central Government. However it was seen that the
States which have not given their agreement to the proposal are still opposed to bringing the sports on to the
conurrent list of the Constitution even though the Department has very clearly stated that the proposal will not in”
any way affect the autonomy of the States. It has also been clarified that it was only an enabling provision which
will allow the Central Government to legislate so as to define the role and responsbilities of the various agencies,
especially in the context of our performance in important international events. It has also been mentioned that our
experience with regard to other sectors which figure on the concurrent list has been that the Central Government
and State Governments have worked in unison to achieve better results.


15

Further Comments

The Secretary informed the Committee that 2 majority of the States have agreed to the proposal. In a recent
conference of all the State Ministers of Sports, State Government of West Bengal which has been opposed all
along has also come around.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee desires that discussions should be continued with the States that have not agreed with the
proposal. The Committee however feels that merely bringing Sports under the jurisdiction of Concurrent List
would not serve the purpose. The Department would have to make concerted efforts to involve the State Governments
in giving Sports its due place.

Recommendation No, 78

At present, there are six Regional Centres at Chandigarh, Delhi, Bangalore, Calcutta, Imphal and Gandhinagar.
The Central Region, which is at present located in Delhi, should be shifted to Lucknow, as originally contemplated.
The North-Eastern region, comprising eight States including Sikkim, should have two centres, one located Imphal
and the other at Guwahati/Shillong. The Committee desires that each one of the Centres should be headed by a
Regional Director, with almost full powers. Two Executive Directors in Delhi could look after the administrative
and coordinating works of the organisation, as well as matters relating to teams. The Secretary, Department of
Youth Affairs and Sports, should not be the Director General of SAI. Instead, a full-time Chairman-cum-MD,
with 8009 sports background or interest in sports, should be appointed by the Government.

Action Taken

The recommendation of the Committee to have a full time Director General, SAI separate from Secretary,
Deptt. of Youth Affairs and Sports has already been implemented. It is felt that the present structure of SAI give
enough autonomy to Director General vis-a-vis the Department and as such there is no need to redesignate the
D.G. as Chairman-cum-Managing Director.

The Central Centre will be shifted to Lucknow only when the infrastructure for the Regional Centre is developed.
For the time being due to financial crunch, the proposal has been kept in abeyance. The Regional Centre at Imphal
and Sub-Centre at Guwahati are already functioning. The SAI Sub-Centre at Guwahati can be strengthened only
if funds are available. Most of the Regional Centres are already headed by Regional Directors who have adequate
administrative and financial powers.

Comments of the Committee

“The Committee recommends that necessary funds may be provided for shifting Central Regional Centre to
Lucknow and to strengthen the sub-centres.

Recommendation No. 80

The Committee feels that the National Sports Talent Contest Scheme appears to be very sound, reaching, upto
the village or panchayat level. However, in actual practice, it has achieved very limited results. After ten years of
its implementation, the scheme has thrown up very few outstanding sportspersons. The scheme is now operated
only in 44 schools in the country. SAI and State Government do not seem to be paying attenton to give adequate
publicity to it.

The Committee, therefore, feels that a wide publicity campaign should be launched through mass media/local
newspapers and also through locally elected bodies, well before the selection process starts. The Committee also
expresss its concern over the implementation aspect of the scheme, which is fraught with various flaws and
loopholes. The Sports Authority of India should periodically monitor the functioning of each school and also
insist on improving the sports infrastructure and boarding\lodging facilities. The Committee find that no serious
though has been given to the number of schools to be adopted which is borne out by the fact that the number of
schools adopted is not commensurate with the number of children selected. Henceforth, preference should be
given under NSTC Scheme to Kendriya Vidyalayas, Navodaya Vidyalayas, Sainik Schools and Government boys/
girls schools.

Action Taken

The recommendations of the Committee for giving adequate publicity has been noted and is being complied
with.

4736/ RS/ F—7-A


16

Monitoring is being done at Regional level as well as corporate office level. The position with regard to schools
have been reviewed by the DG. As a result of this review some of schools have been de-adopted and some held in
abeyance. 41 Schools and 3 Akhadas are operational at present.

The Governing Body of SAI has taken a decision to give preference to Kendriya Vidyalayas, Navodaya
Vidyalayas, Sainik Schools and other Government residential schools under this scheme in future.

Further Comments

The Secretary informed the Committee that assistance is being given directly to schools in rural areas on 100%
basis for improvement of playground etc. Schools should have playground and physical training teacher to be
eligible for this grant.

Comments of the Committee

The Committee is of the view that grants released through States under this scheme are not always reaching the
schools. The resource position in some of the States being very bad, the Central funds released for sports are being
used by the State Govts. for ways and means advance. The Committee is of the view that the Department should
evolve a via-media whereunder money is made directly available to the schools in far-flung areas. The Committee
also feels that for this purpose there should be a joint monitoring mechanism which should include besides Central
and State Govt. representatives, local M.Ps. and M.L.As.

4736 / RS / F—1-B


CHAPTER II

RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation No. 1

The Committee feels it should be our objective to see that every child takes part in sports and games that every
Parent encourages the child to do so. It should also be our endeavour to see that as children grow, they do not lose
their enthusiasm for sports, nor does the pressure of studies towards a bright career diminish their interest. for
Participating in Sports and Games.

Action taken

To promote sports and games amongst children a decision has already been taken to integrate physical education
and sports with the educational curriculum. The Central Advisory Board on Education (CABE) had recommended
to make sports and physical education a compulsory subject in schools and colleges. Followng are the salient
recommedations of the CABE:-

(i) Physical education and sports should be made a compulsory part of curriculum and assigned at least 40
minutes everyday for all school going children;
(ii) Mass participation activities and sports competitions may be organised by the State Government regularly
for schools and colleges;
(iii) Subject teacher may be trained as physical education teachers through pre-service and in-servce training
courses;
(iv) Special weightage may be considered to be given to sportspersons who have excelled in school and
college admission; and
(v) State Government may identify at least one school per district as a sports school for nurturing of
talented sportspersons.

These recommendations of the Sub-Committee have been accepted by the CABE, Deptt. of Education
and Deptt. of Youth Affairs and Sports. All the State Governments have been advised to implement the
recommendations. The progress of the implementation of the report was also discussed during the meeting of State
Secretaries held during October’ 96, Conference of Ministers and Secretaries of North East States held at Guwahati in
November "96 and Conference of Ministers of State for Youth Affairs and Sports held in February '97.

The Education Department has also set up a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri A.K. Pandya, ex-
Secretary, Deptt. of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of India, to review the progress of implémentation of
the Sub-Commitiee Report in the Kendriya Vidyalayas, Navodya Vidyalayas and the States. During the course of
these meetings it is seen that the Committee’s report has been accepted by the managements of Kendriya
Vidyalayas\Navodaya Vidyalayas and these are being implemented in schools administered directly by the
Government of India. Also many of States have already initiated action on implementation of recommendations
of the Committee.

Apart from the above, to provide encouragment to sportspersons at early stages of their career, the Department
provides monthly scholarship of Rs. 500 to talented children. The Department has also recently revised the scheme
of Promotion of Sports and Games in Schools which aims at encouraging effective participation in competitions
at inter-school, district, State and National levels. The scheme will provide an opportunity to a large number of
school children to participate in school level tournaments and will thereby give impetus to sports activities amongst
school children.

The Department has also proposed a new scheme as part of the IXth Plan proposals called “National Schools
Fitness Programme.” It is proposed to formulate a battery of test to judge the fitness level of school children in
High\Higher Secondary Schools and based on that stars and certificates will be provided to the students passing
the tests.

(Committee's comments on this reply may be seen in Chapter-I)

Recommendation No. 6

The University Grants Commission should identify as few colleges, preferably physical education colleges

which in addition to giving theoretical knowledge should encourage their students to participate in performance
17


18

sports. Governments should also seriously think of establishing a sports university to which all the colleges of
physical education could be affiliated.
Action Taken

‘The recommendation of the Committee has already been forwarded to University Grants Commission. However,
we have yet to receive a response from them. Regarding establishment of a Sports University, it may be mentioned
that Laxmibai National Institute of Physical Education (LNIPE) has already been accorded a Deemed to be
University status w.e.f. 21-9-95 subject to the Memorandum of Association being approved by the University
Grants Commission.

Recommendation No. 8

Coupled with the absence of sports consciousness and culture in the country, there is almost total lack of sports
infrastrucutre at the grassroot level all over the country. The Committee found that the infrastructure, so far
created, is mainly confined to the metro cities, big industrial township, defence cantonments etc. and caters to the
need of people living in the urban areas, whereas 80 per cent of the population, which lives in the villages and
small towns, is generally deprived of this benefit. The tribal and rural areas, with their age old games, are devoid
of any sports infrastructure worth the name.

Action Taken

While agreeing with the recommendations of the Committee, it is submitted that the working Group for the
एक Plan set up by the Planning Commission has recommended that the Sports infrastructure at the grassroot
level will have to be developed by the State Governments. As a follow up measure, the Deptt. has already written
to the State Governments in this regard. The matter was also taken up during the Conference of State Secretaries
held in October’96 and State Ministers held in February 1997. States have been asked to provide greater funds for
development of sports infrastructure in their plans so as to meet the needs of villages, small towns, tehsil and
district headquarters. They have been asked to involve local bodies for creation of sports infrastructure at the
grassroot level.

On its part, the Deptt. is already administering a scheme of grants to State Sports Councils for creation of
sports infrastructure. The scheme provides for assistance to State Governments/UTs and registered voluntry bodies
for creation of sports infrastructure like playfields, indoor/outdoor stadia, swimming pool etc. in all areas including
small towns. Greater financial assistance is given under the scheme for hilly and tribal areas. However, due to
paucity of resources, the Department has not been able to meet the demands of sports infrastructure of the country.
Recommendation No. 9

One of the reasons cited for the lack of sports infrastructure in the country is the non-availability of sufficient
funds for the promotion of sports. The amount provided for sports in the Central Government is less than 0.0001
per cent of the Government's total budget. Even taking into consideration the States’ provisions for sports, the
percentage of allocation does not improve either, which shows that sports is not a priority areas.

Action Taken

Department of Youth Affairs and Sports is in agreement with the view that resources provided for development
of sports is totally inadequate. The Department has, on inumberable occasions, has brought this to the notice of
the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. In the Annual Plan provisions for the year 1997-98, the
allocation for sports has gone up from Rs. 55 crore in 1996-97 to Rs. 75.66 crore. The recommendations of the
Committee have helped in obtaining this higher allocation. However, this increase is also insufficient.

(Committee's comments on this reply may be seen at Chapter-I)

Recommendation No. 11

The Committee feels that as far as possible there should be a condition regarding provision of a playfield while
granting permission for opening a school or college in rural, as well as urban area. Where, however, it is not
Possible to have a separate playfield in urban areas for want of space, a group of schools/colleges could be allowed
to use a common playfield at different timings.-Surplus land available with different Ministries, including Railways,
Defence, Civil Aviation and Tourism, etc. should be allowed to use as playfields. All the municipal corporations,
cantonment boards and development authorities should also be directed to ban the use of playfields for any other
purposes.

Action Taken

The Department has already taken up the matter with the State Governments and Ministry of urban Development

requesting that the public land should be earmarked as playfields and the development of playfields may be


19

integrated with the overall development of the housing colonies. The Deptt. has also written to the State Governments
that the availability of playfields should be made a necessary condition before granting recognition to a new
school or college. The State Government has been requested to develop playfields in the rural areas under schemes
like as Jawahar Rojgar Yojna etc. Letters have also been addressed to Ministries of Railways, Civil Aviation and
Defence in the matter.

Recommendation No. 14

The Committee, during its visit to Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education, Gwalior, noted that
even though it has been made a deemed university, no Director has been appointed for the Institute so far.

The Committee desires that the Director be appointed to the Institute expeditiously.
Action Taken

Order has been issued to appoint an In-charge Director, pending appointment of a regular Director, for which
action is being taken. .

Recommendation No. 17

Several cases of indisciplined behaviour of many of our sportspersons are reported, quite ‘often, in the press.
Coaches and managers are scared of reporting against them because of various reasons. The Committee is of the
firm view that the country can ill afford to take lightly the instances of indiscipline and lack of sportsmanship,
particularly from persons representing the country in international arena. The authorities, the Committee feels,
have to be firm and strict in handling the instances of indiscipline amongst sportspersons and ensure that such
people do not find place in the Indian contingents going abroad for international tournaments.

Action Taken

The Deptt. has advised Indian Olympic Association and all the National Sports Federations to ensure strict
discipline amongst sportspersons as per recommendations of the 34th Report of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

Recommendation No. 18 i

The Committee feels that if we really want to promote sports in the country we will have to make available
adequate incentives, good job opportunities and recognition of talent and achievements. At present, there are very
few incentives/rewards for our talented and outstanding sportspersons. The. Central Government, the State
Governments and the public sector undertakings do not offer good job opportunities for our sportspersons.
Recommendation No. 19

The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for fixing a percentage of jobs in each and every organisation
for sportspersons. This would definitely prove to be a strong incentive to take sports as a career, provided all the
organisations like Banks, Railways, Airlines, Public Sector undertakings, etc. meticulously implement the scheme
of employment of sportspersons under this category. At present, there is no mechanism to monitor this aspect by
the Government.

Action Taken on Recommendations Nos 18 and 19

The observations of the Committee have been noted. The matter has been taken up with the Deptt. of Personnel
and Training (DoPT) and the Chief Secretaries of various State Governments for implementing the recommendations
made by the Committee.

It is seen that more and more organisations are coming forward to promote sports. Several academies have
been opened by public/private sector industries and many of the organisation have floated their own teams in
specified disciplines, thereby opening greater employment avenues for sportspersons.
Recommendation No. 20

‘The Committve feels that in schools and colleges students, who perform well in sports, may be given some
percentage of grace marks in each subject. Similarly, certain percentage of seats for admission in colleges should
be reserved for students who have excelled in sports.

4736/ FS / F—8-


Action Taken

The recommendations of the Committee have been sent to the State Governments for consideration and necessary
action. The matter with regard to reserving seats for students at the time of admission in colleges on the basis of
their performance in sports was taken up with University Grants Commission (UGC). The UGC has issued detailed
guidelines whereby upto 10% seats in the first year of the under graduate level degree courses (Pass and Hons.)
may be reserved for sportspersons who have represented the State or the nation in national or international sports
events, provided they have obtained the minimum cut-off percentage of marks in their previous examination. The
UGC has also issued guidelines for allowing the sportspersons to move to the next class in case they are unable to
take examination because of their participation in coaching camps and tournaments. Such students would be
permitted to appear in subsequent examinations and carry credit for the papers cleared from one examination to
another till the entire course is completed and he/she becomes eligible for the award of degree.

Recommendation No. 26

The Committee notes that the existing cash awards system is not adequate to give the much-needed financial
support to sportspersons, and that cash awards for juniors and seniors are highly disproportionate; and that for some.
sports these are incredibly higher.

Action Taken

The Department has only one scale of awards for all sports disciplines under the scheme of Cash Awards.
Earlier the Junior and Sub-Junior were eligible for awards ranging from Rs. 5,000 to Rs. 15,000. In 1995-96 the
scale of awards for Juniors and Sub-Juniors have been revised and they are now entitled to cash awards at the
following scales:—

Junior Gold Silver Bronze
World Championship 1,00,000 , 75,000 50,000
Asian/Commonwealth Championships 50,000 40,000 30,000
Sub-Juniors
World Championship 50,000 40,000 30,000
Asian/Commonwealth Championships 25,000 20,000 15,000

Recommendation No. 28

The Committee also recommends that certain categories of sportspersons should be given preference in the
allotment of soft loans by the banks, petrol and LP gas agencies and other such incentives/benefits by the Government.
Action Taken

The Department had already written to the Ministry of Finance, Department of Banking and the State Chief

Secretaries with regard to providing soft loans by Banks and other financial institutions to outstanding sportspersons
for House Building and to start their own industry to business after their retirements.

The Department had also taken up the matter with regard to allotment of LP Gas agencies with Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas. The Ministry has indicated that they have already provided for 2% reservation in the
allotment of dealership/distribution of petroleum products to the outstanding sportspersons.

Recommendation No. 29

The Committee recommends that one of the outstanding sportpersons may be nominated to the Rajya Sabha in
recognition of his/her distinguished service to the country.
Action Taken

The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, who in turn took it up with the Ministry of
Home Affairs. No final decision has been communicated to the Department in this regard.

(Committee's comments on this reply may be seen at Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 32

The Committee is of the opinion that training forms the core of good performance and champions cannot be
produced by training the sportspersons just for a few months before the games. The training system in the country,


21

the Committee feels, leaves much to be desired. Sports training has to be properly planned and controlled for
achieving the best results.
Action Taken

‘The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The Deptt. has been trying its best since 1994 to
make the IOA and the National Sports Federations draw up Long Term Development Plans (LTDPs) which would
take care not only of preparations for the coming events in the short term but also include a programme for
development of Juniors and Sub-Juniors in the long term, so that they can be the mainstay for future events such
as 2000 Olympics and ‘2002 Asian Games. Such plans have been initiated in a few disciplines.

In addition, under SAI schemes, identified talented sportspersons are being continuously provided all facilities
for training.

It is true that the training system has ta be properly planned and controlled for achieving the best results. The
responsibility for drawing out the training plan for the sportspersons in the national coaching camps is that of the
National coach and the Federation who have to determine the major events in which the country would participate
and accordingly prepare the detailed training programme. The Deptt. is setting up discipline-wise monitoring
Committees under the Chairmanship of DG, SAI to regularly monitor the programme of training and
competition.

As regards training schedules for the trainees under SAI Schemes, it is the responsibility of the concerned
coach to prepare the training plan taking into account the age of the child and the level of participation. Training
Centers at fixed locations throughout the year except for the Summer coaching camps which are held during the
summer vacations. So far as sports promotional scheme of SAI are concerned, draft guidelines were prepared by
SAI in 1995 in consultation with sports scientists of India and foreign experts from CIS countries. Based on these
guidelines, long term training programmes for different disciplines are expected to be prepared by the concerned
coaches for the SAI trainees under different schemes.

So far as the running of SAI Schemes are concerned, Empowered Committee comprising of eminent sportspersons
looks into the implementation of the schemes.
Recommendation No. 34

Efforts should be made to ensure that the diet available to sportsmen and women has the nutritional value
necessary to meet the specific requirements of different games and sports in which they participate. The Committee
is of the firm opinion that the Government should immediately raise the amount of diet allowance substantially so
that players can get a rich and nutritious diet.

Action Taken

The dietary requirements for Power and Non-Power disciplines have been worked out in consultation with the
National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad.

Boarding charges are enhanced from time to time to meet the cost of menu suggested by NIN. The rates of
menu for the coaching camps were last revised in March’96 and the existing rates for Non-Power and Power
disciplines are Rs. 90/- and Rs. 100/- per person respectively. The catering is being gone at SAI Centres
departmentally. However, in Delhi, it is being done by a private caterer.

Due to paucity of resources the rates for Boarding and Lodging of the sportspersons under SAI schemes like
NSTC, SPDA and ABSC have been Rs. 35 and for SAG and Sports Hostel, the same is Rs. 40, even though the
amount required for providing diet according to the NIN norm is higher. In case the rates are enhanced considerably
the number of sports persons under the schemes will have to be reduced proportionately.

(Comments of the Committee for this reply may be seen in Chapter-I)

Recommendation No. 35

The Government should evolve a system of proper monitoring and evaluation of the performance of SAI
coaches deployed at various places. Coaches who work hard and show good results should be suitably rewarded.
Simultaneously, those who do not take interest in sports or fail to give any tangible results need to be dealt with
sternly.

Action Taken

Regional Centres of SAI have been monitoring and evaluating the work of SAI coaches in States/UTs since
1993-94 regularly. Organisations to which the SAI coaches have been deputed have also been requested to monitor
the working of SAI coaches.


22

Regarding incentives to the coaches for appreciation of the excellent results produced by their trainees/teams
in International competitions, DYAS has a scheme of Cash award. The coaches are being awarded under the
scheme.

For the performance upto National level, a letter of appreciation is proposed to be given to the coaches whose
trainees/teams have won medals in National Championships as the performance upto this level is the requirement
of the job for which they have been employed.

4, Suggestion regarding those coaches who do not take interest in their job or fail to give any tangible results to
be dealt with sternly, is noted and suitable action is being taken by SAI.
Recommendation No. 36

The Committee feels that once a good rapport is established between the coach and the students, it would not
be advisable to disturb such coaches in the overall interest of the students and the sports.
Action Taken ;

The recommendation is being followed. As per the existing transfer policy, a coach is allowed to continue at one
place for 5 years. If coach is producing good results, he/she is allowed to stay beyond 5 years at the same place.
Recommendation No. 37

Outstanding sportspersons who have represented the country in the international games and have now retired
from active sports, can work as good coaches. The Committee feels that services of such sportspersons would be

both beneficial and economical and it would also give them the much needed financial help and recognition of
their talent. The Committee desires that this system could be initially tried on an experimental basis which could

be subsequently extended or discontinued depending upon the results.

Action Taken

Services of the following outstanding sportspersons are being utilised by SAI as coaches and they are being

provided with adequate financial remuneration and recognition:—

1. Smt. Kamljeet Koonar Athletics
2. Shri Harmik Singh Hockey

३... Shri Sriram Singh Athletics

4. Shri Suresh Babu Athletics

5. 50 G.E. Sreedharan Volleyball
6. Shri Rajinder Singh Hockey

7. Shri M. Venu Boxing

8. Shri Shamial Khullar Gymnastics
9. Shri Ranjit Singh Athletics
10. Shri Manjit Walia Athletics
11. Shri M. Shyam Sunder Rao Volleyball
12. Smt. Shyamla Shetty Weightlifting
13. Shri 0.९ Irani Basketball
14. Shri LS. Sharma Handball

Services of some of the ex-international are being utilised to train the National teams namely:—

Even in the past, services of ex-internationals like S\Shri M.P. Ganesh, B-P. Govinda, Zafar Iqbal, Manjit Dua

1. Col. Balbir Singh Hockey
2. Shri M.K. Kaushik Hockey
3. Shri V. Bhaskaran Hockey
4... Shri U.K. Prabhu Athletics
5. Shri Gyansekharn Athletics
6. Shri Arumugam Football
7. Shri PK. Banerjee Football

and Ms. Indu Puri as national coaches have been utilised.


Recommendation No. 40

The Committee emphasises the need for continuous skill development and orientation of coaches in view of
the rapid changes in the techniques of various games. The Committee desires that the SAI should identify certain
specialised training institutes in various sports disciplines, both within the country and abroad, so that our coaches
could be deputed for referesher training courses from time to time to upgrade their skills. The Committee came to
know that, at present, there was no policy with regard to training of the coaches and that only a handful of coaches
were repeatedly being sent for foreign exposure. The Committee expresses its unhappiness over such a state of
affairs and recommends that a uniform policy be evolved for training the coaches without any discrimination.

Action Taken

The Committee’s recommendations have been noted for compliance. Care has been taken not to sent the same
coaches again and again for training. SAI is already working out detailed policy guidelines for training of coaches
Subject to availability of funds coaches would be sent for training to identify leading institutions abroad especially
in the priority categories of sports disciplines.

Recommendation No. 41

The Committee strongly recommends that the practice of making frequent changes of coaches be avoided and
whenever any team or player performs well, the credit should also be given to the coaches who are basically
Action Taken

The Committee's recommendations have been noted for compliance. Prior to the shifting of administrative
control of coaches from the State Governments to the SAI, the coaches used to be frequently posted from one
place to another. However, mono the position has changed and the coaches are being allowed to continue at one
Place for 5 years except in a few exceptional cases where the special circumstances may necessitate a change.

Coaches appointed to train national teams are also not changed unless it is proved that the coach is not
knowledgeable enough and does not devote full time to the training of the national teams.

Eminent coaches have been awarded Dronocharya and Padma Awards.
Recommendation No. 47

The National Federations are also responsible for enforcing the rules of the game and for ensuring that officials
who conduct games, tournaments and competitions are fully competent and fit for the purpose. The national
federations should ensure that the rules approved by the international federations to which they are affiliated, are
followed in recognised national championships.

Action Taken

This recommendation has been brought to the notice of the national sports federations. As per the information
available, the approved rules are being followed in recognised national championships generally. The national
sports federations are responsible for ensuring that officials who conduct the championships, tournaments ‘and
competitions, are fully competent and fit for this purpose.

Recommendation No. 48.

’ While it will take some time for federations to be financially independent, and to organise their work and
responsibilities along structured and well regulated lines, assistance from the Government of India for various
purposes may have to continue. However, Government may impose certain conditions with regard to such matters
as democratic functioning, appointment of selection committees, dope testing, age verification procedure, etc. as
are considered necessary to protect our sportspersons from exploitation and also to ensure against adverse publicity
in India and abroad.

Action Taken

~ This recommendation has been brought to the notice of national sports federations. The Government continues
to assist the national sports federations so that they can organise their work and responsibilities along the structured
lines. Under the revised guidelines, it is proposed to incorporate provisions relating to democratic functioning of
these bodies and appointment of appropriate selection committees, etc.



24
Recommendation No. 49

An important area of resource mobilisation in which the Government can help the federations greatly is by way
of transferring the remaining sum of the advertising revenues earned by Doordarshan from showing sports
Programmes to the concerned federations after deducting its costs.

Action Taken

‘The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Doordarshan. Some of
the federations have entered into arrangements with Doordarshan in this regard. (Committee's Comments on this
reply may be seen in Chapter-I)

Recommendation No. 50

This Committee also feels that IOA is not in a position to maintain any effective control and effect any
coordination with national sports federations/Associations. The IOA should reiterate to each federation the
importance of making long term development planning and also ensuring its implementation.

Action Taken

‘This recommendation has been brought to the notice of the IOA. The IOA tepresentative is invited at the time
of reviewing of LTDPs with various national sports federations so that an effective link can be established between
the IOA and the national sports federations. It is understood that the IOA exercises control over the national
sports federations, more by persuasion, than by more structured means.

Recommendation No. 53

The Committee suggests that each one of the sports organisations should have an annual calendar of events
giving the details of events, their venues and the dates for the entire year. The Committee also suggests that there
should be only one National Calendar of Events of various disciplines which should be finalised after consulting
different agencies involved in its promotion. This calendar of events should be sent to the Sports Authority of
India (SAI) by the concerned sports federations for consolidation and publication.
Action Taken

The commendation has been brought to the notice of the national federations. The annual calender for each
discipline is expected to be prepared by the concerned national federations. In fact, each federation should send
its national calender to the IOA which in turn should publish annually the consolidated calender and arrange to
send it to all concerned viz, SAI, DYAS, Doordarshan, AIR etc. and it should be the responsibility of the federation
to ensure that the said calender is updated from time to time. (Committee’s comments on this reply may be seen
in Chapter-I)

Recommendation No. 54

The Committee is happy to know that the sports goods industry had come a long way in producing good
quality equipments which are in great demand and that some of these have been approved even for Olympic
games. The Committee, however, feels that such quality production is confined to a few games like tennis and
cricket which are very costly. India still does not produce good quality and reasonably priced sports items of
common use. The Committee is of the opinion that making sports equipment easily available, upto the grassroot
level at economical cost, is absolutely necessary which would contribute not only to broadbasing the participation
but also creating a mass sports movement in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
of Youth Affairs and Sports should have a meeting with the representatives of sports goods industry to indentify
their problems, which should be sorted out in consultation with the Ministries of Commerce, Finance and Industry.
The Committee also feels that small and cottage industries involved in production of sports goods should be
encouraged so that they can sell their products to local buyers at reasonable prices.

Action Taken

The Department had convened a meeting with the representatives of the sports goods industry to identify their
problems. Subsequently the matter has been taken up with the concerned Ministries of Finance, Commerce and
Industry highlighting their problems, such as import of raw material, reduction in sales tax and easy availability
of raw material within the country.


Recommendation No. 55

During its visits to various places, the Committee received a number of complaints from players and organisers
of various sports events that sports, except a few like cricket, tennis and golf, are not given adequate coverage by
the Goverament-owned electronic media, particularly Doordarshan.

Recommendation No. 56

The Committee is of the opinion that media, particularly Doordarshan, is a potent and powerful instrument for
popularising sports. The Committee, keeping the condition of sports in the country in view, feels that endeavour
should be made to cover live, as far as possible, or though highlights, all the national championships at senior and
junior levels. The Committee feels that there is a need to increase the equipments and other facilities available
with Doordarshan and AIR so that they do not feel handicapped in covering important and major sports events.
The Committee also emphasises the need for improving the quality of live coverage and commentaries. Doordarshan
and AIR may also plan an effective role in projecting the techniques and style of eminent sportspersons by
showing them in slow motion on the national hook-up. There is also a need for calling eminent sportspersons in
programmes on fitness, yoga, sports and games.

Recommendation No. 57

The Committee is concerned to learn that some of the federations/boards are giving the telecasting/broadcasting
rights to foreign media companies, which is depriving Doordarshan of an opportunity to earn revenues for its
expansion and improvement. The Committee notes that suggestion of Director General, Doordarshan, to have a
legislation declaring some sports as of national importance so that national media would be bound to cover the
important events connected with them, as is being done in Britain.

Action Taken on Recommendations No. 55, 56 and 57

The recommendations of the Committee have been taken up with the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
and Doordarshan, whereby it has been reiterated that all important national/international championships for various
disciplines should be adequately covered and the required technical improvements also be effected. There does
appear to be some improvement in the extent of coverage by Doordarshan and many federations have also entered
into long term contracts with them in this regard. As suggested by the Committee, there is a need for evolving
revenue sharing formula between the Doordarshan and the national sports federations in respect of the telecast of
sports programmes and efforts are being made in this regard.

Recommendation No. 59

In view of the decentralisation of resources to panchayats, government should ensure that there is a sports
complex in each panchayat. Panchayats should also hold sports competitions and championships periodically.
There is also need for scouting talent at an early age and select them on scientific basis because it is all the more
easier to train the young ones. Panchayat bodies should take up this responsibility.

Action Taken

The Department has already written to the Ministry of Rural Development with a view to involving Gram
Panchayats in a meaningful manner for the development of sports at the grass root level.

In so far as creation of playfields is concerned in the rural areas, the Department has addressed to all State
Governments that they could be developed under various schemes, such as Jawahar Rozgar Yojana, after
identification of village common land for the purpose.

Recommendation No. 60

The Committee finds it disappointing that most of the State Governments have not made any concrete plan to
streamline the procedure for selection of sportspersons, coupled with lack of modern and regorous training,
results in disastrous performance at the international level. The Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for
streamlining the entire system of selection of sportspersons and their training so as to achieve the best results.
State Government should be asked to evolve long-term development programmes and also match them with
adequate budget. :

Action Taken

The matter has been taken up in real earnestness with the concerned state governments. Apart from clearly
demarcating the areas of activities for different agencies in the new draft sports policy, which is at present under
consideration, the Department also convened a conference of the state secretaries and later of the sports ministers.


26

‘The points raised by the Committee pertaining to the state governments have also been brought to the notice of the
state governments.
Recommendation No. 63

In India, there is a club culture but it is restricted to only football, cricket and wrestling. Club culture can be
developed by organising inter-club competitions and by providing patronage at different levels by government
agencies as well as business establishments. The Committee feels that the club culture needs to be encouraged
right from the panchayat level. The Committee feels that the government should probe into the working of the
National Sports Club of India. The Committee also desires that the other sports clubs existing in various parts of
the country should throw open their facilities/infrastructure to sportspersons on concessional basis.

Action Taken

The recommendation of the Committee has been brought to the notice of the State Governments for initiating
necessary action for development of club culture from the Panchayat level upwards and throwing open these
facilities to the sportspersons on concessional terms.

Recommendation No. 64

At present, there are about 32 to 34 disciplines in sports, on which the country is spending a lot of money. The
Committee feels that due to paucity of funds we should not spread our scarce resources thinly on each one of the
games and it would be desirable to concentrate on a few selected games and try to bag medals in these games in the
international arena.

Action Taken

Government agrees with the recommendations of the Committee to concentrate on a few priority sports.
Aceordingly, under the revised guidelines for Sports Federations the highest priority has been given to the disciplines
of Athletics, Boxing, Hockey (Men), Shooting, Weightlifting, Archery and Volleyball where we are comparatively
more competitive and close to international standards. This will help us to channelise greater resources to these
disciplines for purpose of assistance for coaching camps, participation in international events and development of
Junior and sub-Junior programme. It has also been decided to introduce the same concentration on priority sports
under the scheme of SAI such as Sports Talent Contest Scheme, SAI Training Centres, Special Area Game Scheme
and Army Boys Sports Company.

Recommendation No. 65

The Committee emphasises the need for concentrating on traditional rural and tribal sports like Kho-Kho,
Archery and Kabaddi in which India could always do better than the other countries.
Action Taken

The recommendation of the Committee to concentrate on traditional rural sports like Archery, Kho-Kho and
Kabaddi is agreed to. In sports like Kho-Kho and Kabaddi there is no expenditure on sports equipment and
playing facilities. As such they are the most popular sports in the rural areas of the country and are encouraged
under the various school level and college level competitions. In addition, the Department funds national sports
federations associated with these games for national championships. In case of Kabaddi, which is an Asian Games
discipline, coaching camps are also held for national teams.

Recommendation No. 68

Members of Parliament are given Rs. 1 crore every year under the MPs’ Local Area Development Scheme by the
Central Government. MLAs are also given special discretionary funds by the respective state governments. A
suggestion has come to the Committee that the MPs and MLAs may be requested to earmark at least one to five per
cent of this money every year for purchasing sports equipments in the schools/colleges in their respective
constituencies.

Action Taken

This recommendation was taken up with the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs and Ministry of Programme
Implementation. In its reply, Department of Programme Implementation has stated that a provision for construction
of buildings for sports activities such as sports stadium etc. is already provided under the guidelines on MPs’
Local Area Development Scheme. They have also stated that the Department of Programme Implementation
would examine the feasibility of making financial provisions under these guidelines for development of playfields


27

in schools and colleges. They have, however, stated that there is specific restriction on purchase of consumable
and non-consumable items and as such the Department’s request for making provision for purchase of sports
equipment from the MPs’ LADs fund cannot be agreed upon.

Recommendation No. 69

The Committee feels that the Government alone cannot deliver the goods. Public and private sectors’ involvement
is necessary in supplementing the governmental efforts. The Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for a
joint and coordinated approach by all the agencies, including public and private sectors, in pooling their resources
to promote sports in the country. This is particularly necessary in the context of financial constraints, both at the
central and state levels.

Action Taken

The Department is in agreement with the recommendation of the Committee. The Department has already
taken up the matter with the CII, Public and Private Sector Units for sponsoring development of sports in the
country. In the draft new National Sports Policy, it has been proposéd to create a National Sports Development
Fund with a view to mobilising corporate funds for the development of sports in the country, Contribution from
within and outside the country to this fund will carry with it a hundred per cent income tax exemption. It is also
proposed in the new draft National Sports Policy that it will be made mandatory for all corporate houses to
contribute 1% of their annual net profit to this fund.

(Committee’s comments may be seen in Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 70

The Committee recommends that each major industrial house, both in public and private sectors, should be
asked to adopt one sports discipline and they should take the total responsibility of scouting talent and nurturing
the same, including their participation in various national and international events. On reciprocal basis, the concerned
industrial house should have its nominee in the particular national federation/association.

Action Taken

The Department had already taken up the matter with the CII, Public and Private Sector Units to adopt one
sports discipline. In fact some Public Sector Units such as Air India, SAIL have already come forward by sponsoring
some sports discipline such as Hockey and Handball. Some private sector units have also sponsored specific
discipline e.g. Football and Archery by the Tatas. In the draft new National Sports Policy, it has been proposed that
various corporate houses will be encouraged to adopt particular discipline as well as the sports person for futher
development on a long-term basis and for this purpose tripartite agreement between government, federation and
industry will be entered into for various discipline.

Recommendation No. 71

Representatives of Industrial Houses appealed for tax exemption under revenue expenditure also for scouting
talent and training the teams. Such incentives are necessary for the continued support of the industrial houses in
sports. The Income Tax Act should, therefore, be suitably amended so as to give substantial tax ememption to
organisations investing in sports. Special Customs Duty exemption for certain categories of imported sports
equipments is required to be made. Liberalised access to foreign exchange for imports of sports equipments is
also called for.

Action Taken

At present under the provision of Section 35-AC of the Income Tax Act, 100% exemption is allowed to donors
in respect of certain sports projects approved by the National Committee appointed under the Act. The Department
has also written to the Ministry of Finance with a view to providing tax exemption to the industrial houses for
revenue expenditure on sports with a view to attract greater investment in the promotion of sports. The Department
has also written to Ministry of Commerce to make sports equipment freely importable.

(Committee’s comments may be seen in Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 72

There is a lot of duplication of efforts as various sports control boards such as Services, Railways, P&T, Banks
and Para Military police forces, Steel Plants, Coal Fields etc. are contributing in their own way for promotion of
sports without any co-ordination with each other. Much worse is the lack of cooperation and communication
between these bodies on the one hand and the Sports Authority of India (SAI) and the federation on the other. The


28

Committee is not happy with the chaotic situation and lack of coordination among various bodies is resulting in
loss of scarce of resources and time. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Youth Affairs
and Sports should take immediate steps to develop an effective machinery for regular dialogue and coordination
with various organisations, so that no effort is duplicated and wastage of time and money could be avoided.

Action Taken

The Department has addressed letters to the concerned sports promoting agencies with a view to establishing
effective coordination amongst various organisations and avoiding duplication of efforts in their zeal for promotion
of sports. Meetings have been held with a few Sports Control Board such as Services and Railways. The matter
will be further pursued.

Recommendation No. 75

The Committee feels that unless sports is also brought under the “Concurrent list” of the Constitution, sports
activities in the country cannot be uniformly regulated in an effective and coordinated manner.

Action Taken

In 1988 the Government approved a proposal to bring sports on to the concurrent list of the Constituion and a
bill was introduced accordingly, in the Rajya Sabha, on 24th November, 1988. However, it was decided that futher
consultation, with the States be undertaken.

The Prime Minister addressed a letter to all Chief Ministers on 3rd November 1990. This resulted in 12 States
agreeing to the proposal and 12 opposed with no response from Manipur. Subsequently, letters were addressed by
the MOS/HRM to these 13 States. Out of these States, 4 have further conveyed their concurrence to the proposal.
Thus, 16 States have now agreed to the proposal. Out of the remaining 9 States, the State Governments of Rajasthan,
J&K, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have not agreed to the proposal while the State Governments of Karnataka,
Gujarat and West Bengal have stated that they are examining the proposal. Comments from Assam and Punjab are
yet to come,

This matter was again placed before the Cabinet and it was decided that this should be discussed under the
Chairmanship of Minister of Parliamentary Affairs with leaders of all political parties in the Parliament. Accordingly,
a meeting was held on 28th November, 1996 to consider the proposal.

The matter was also discussed with the State Secretaries in the Conference held in October’96 and with the
State Ministers in the Conference held in February’97. It was mentioned clearly that the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on HRD had also made recommendation that sports should be brought under consucrrent list of the
Constitution and a comprehensive legislation enacted by the Central Government. However, it was seen that the
States which have not given their agreement to the proposal are still opposed to bringing the sports on to the
concurrent list of the Constitution even though the Department has very clearly stated that the proposal willl not
in any way affect the autonomy of the States. It has also been clarified that it was only an enabling provision
which will allow the Central Government to legislate so as to define the role and responsibilities of the various
agencies, especially in the context of our performance in important international events. It has also been mentioned
that our experience with regard to other sectors which figure on the concurrent list has been that the Central
Government and State Governments have worked in unison to achieve better results.

(Committee’s comments on this reply may be seen in Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 76

The Committee also recommends that the Government should bring forward a Central legislation, specifying
the roles and responsibilities of the SAI, federations/associations of the State bodies so that a uniform and common
approach could be adopted towards promotion of sports by different agencies. This law should also provide for an

effective regulatory mechanism in the sports arena without impairing the autonomy of various agencies. Such
legislations are already in existence in countries like USA, Germany, Thailand, Sri Lanka and China.

Action Taken

The Central Government will be able to introduce a sports legislation only if ‘sports’ as a subject is brought on
to the concurrent list of the Constitution.

Meanwhile, the Department has already formulated new guidelines for the development and management of
sports in the country. The guidelines cover areas such as demarcation of roles and responsibility of different
agencies i.e. the Federations, Government and Sports Authority of India, criteria for prioritising different disciplines


29

of Sports and for recognising sports federations, scales of assistance for national/international championships,
coaching camps, equipment support, participation in international competition selection ‘Committee procedures,
instructions for preparation of long term development plans and for handling of players’ grievances etc.

Recommendation No. 77

The Committee has come to the conclusion that the bureaucratic functioning of the SAI is proving to be a
major obstacle in the free and smooth operation of the regional centres. The Committee feels that unles these
Centres are strengthened, we cannot expect better results from them. The SAI office in Delhi could be just a
coordinating authority and should concentrate on policy, planning and monitoring. There should be a Sub-regional
centre of SAI in each State, with a Director in charge of it.

Action Taken

The Regional Director of SAI enjoy full autonomy and authority so far as administration of and expenditure on
approved schemes/projects is concerned. However, in the last two years due to paucity of funds, the RDs have to
frequently refer the matter to Corporate Office for release of funds. This apart, the Regional Directors are vested
with full powers for scouting and selecting the young talent and weeding them out where necessary as per the laid
down norms and their recommendations in this regard are submitted to DG for formal ratification.

Further, the Regional Directors have been authorised to transfer the Asstt. Directors and coaches within their
region from one Unit to another.

The opening of a sub-centre of SAI in each State with a Director level officer in charge can be considered only
if adequate funds/infrastructure is available. Further with some States developing their own structures and
investments in this area, it may be better to supplement their effort.

Recommendation No. 78

At present, there are six Regional Centres at Chandigarh, Delhi, Bangalore, Calcutta, Imphal and Gandhinagar.
The Central Region, which is at present located in Delhi, should be shifted to Lucknow, as originally contemplated.
The North-Eastern region, comprising eight States including Sikkim, should have two centres, one located Imphal
and the other at Guwahati/Shillong. The Committee desires that each one of the Regional Centres should be
headed by a Regional Director, with almost full powers. Two Executive Directors in Delhi could look after the
administrative and coordinating works of the organisation, as well as matters relating to teams. The Secretary,
Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, should not be the Director-General of SAI. Instead, a full-time Chairman-
cum-MD, with good sports background or interest in sports, should be appointed by the Government.

Action Taken

The recommendation of the Committee to have a full time Director-General, SAI separate from Secretary,
Department of Youth Affairs and Sports has already been implemented. It is felt that the present structure of SAI
gives enough autonomy to Director-General vis-a-vis the Department and as such there is no need to redesignate
the 0. 0, as Chairman-cum-Managing Director.

The Central Centre will be shifted to Lucknow only when the infrastructure for the Regional Centre is developed.
For the time being due to financial crunch, the proposal has been kept in abeyance. The Regional Centre at Imphal
and Sub-Centre at Guwahati are already functioning. The SAI Sub-Centre at Guwahati can be strengthened only
if funds are available. Most of the Regional Centres are already, headed by Regional Directors who have adequate
administrative and financial powers.

(Committee’s comments on this reply may be seen in Chapter-1)
Recommendation No. 79

The SAI governing body shall consist of fifteen members, including the Chairman-cum-MD, two Executive
Directors, seven Regional Directors, one Financial Advisor and four non-official Members elected by the. General
Council. The General Council of SAI, headed by the Minister of Human Resource Development, shall consist of
the Minister of Sports, the Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, the Chairman-cum-MD of SAI, the

Financial Advisor, the Executive Directors, Regional Directors and Directors of SAI sub-centre: ee meas
of the State Sports Authorities/Sports Council, Joint Secretary in the Ministry of HRD, five thd Awardees/

olympians, three coaches, Secretary General, IOA, five representatives of national sports federations, two
representatives of public sector sports control boards, five sports experts such as sports journalists and commentators
and three Members of Parliament. The number shall not exceed 100. am


30

Action Taken

The recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee will be placed for consideration before the
next meeting of the general body of SAI.

Recommendation No. 81

Out of 78 SPDA Centres proposed to be set up, only 33 centres have started functioning so far. The Committee
expresses its displeasure over such a tardy progress of the scheme and strongly urges upon the central as well as
the State Governments to work in close tandem with each other in the larger interest of development of sports. As
regards the suggestion of Tata Consultancy Services to phase out the SPDA scheme, the Committee is of the view
that it is not based on a sound proposition. To wind up the scheme simply on the pretext of States’ failure is not
sound, The SPDA centres should be converted into SAI Sub-regional centres in course of time, with additional
inputs.

Action Taken

The Governing Body of SAI has decided that SPDAs and Sports Hostels would be known by new name as SAI
Training Centes and there would be a total of 78 SAI Training Centres. It has also been decided that where living
accommodation is not upto the mark, SAI would take action to provide the same. The new SAI Training Centres
will be opened only when proper accommodation and sports infrastructure is available. :

Recommendation No. 82

Although the Committee expresses its overall satisfaction with the functioning and performance of the Speical
Area Games Scheme as far as archery, hockey and watersports are concerned, it is constrained to observe that the
achievements in other disciplines, particularly gymnastics and athletics, have not been upto the mark. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that based on the population/concentration of tribal and other communities,
Government should try to expand this scheme in the rural and tribal areas and take all necessary measures to
streamline and revamp the scheme.

Action Taken

The Governing Body of SAI has decided that the scheme of SAG will be continued and the existing Centres
will be further improved upon by providing sports infrastructure and best possible coaches. Regarding opening of
new SAG Centres it will depend upon the availability of resources.

Recommendation No. 83

The Committee recommends that Government should review the National Coaching Scheme to set right
shortcomings and streamline the functioning of the scheme at the earliest. The concept of sports hostel should be
reoriented and focussed towards achievement of excellence at the international level.
Action Taken

The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. As far as Sports Hostels are concerned, as
already mentioned in reply to Recommednation No. 81, it has been decided to call the sports hostels as well as
SPDAs, as SAI Training Centres and focus them towards achievement of excellence.
Recommendation No. 84

The Committee is also of the view that it is imperative to prioritise disciplines for sports hostel scheme and
select only those games in which India has the potentiality of achieving results in the international arena.

Action Taken

The Committee’s recommendations for prioritising of disciplines under the SAI Schemes have been accepted
and action is being taken accordingly. As a result of this decision, Basketball and Volleyball which has no scope
in the North-Eastern Region have already been discontinued.

Recommendation No. 85

The Committee found that the Army Boys Sports Company Scheme is functioning very efficiently because the
overall atmosphere of discipline in the Regimental Centres is quite conducive for the development of sporting
skills amongst children. The Committee is of the opinion that the amount of Rs. 35 being given for diet per head
under this scheme is quite inadequate and should be increased substantially. During the course of their interaction
with the Committee, representative of the Services Sports Control Board expressed a desire to have one school in


31

each Regiment. SAI may have to enlarge the scheme, accordingly, as it is likely to pay better dividends. The
Committee recommends that apart from extending the scheme to other regiments of the army, the scheme should
be extended to the central para-military forces also who are keen to run schools on the same lines as by army
regiments.

Action Taken

The Governing Body of SAI has decided to continue with the Army Boys Sports Companies (ABSC). The
scheme has shown some creditable performance at the national level. The money under the scheme is comparatively
inadequate, However, the increase for this scheme will depend upon the availability of resources. Regarding opening
of one school in each regiment and extending the scheme to other regiments of the Army, the matter can only be
considered provided funds are available for such extension,


CHAPTER III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE

Recommendation No. 3

The Committee emphasises that physical education and sports should be made an essential and integral of
educational activity in schools and colleges. There is need for reducing academic burden on the children, particularly
at the primary stage, so that they can spare enough time for sports.

Action Taken

Action Taken note against Recommendation no. 1 has already brought out that the CABE, Department of
Education and Youth Affairs and Sports have already accepted recommendation. The Department has advised the
State Governments to implement it. The progress is also being monitored through meetings with State Governments.
Regarding reduction of academic burden on the children, particularly at primary stage, the Department has taken
up the matter with NCERT and the Department of Education.

Recommendation No. 4

Ideally all the schools and colleges must have physical education teachers/coaches. Until it is possible, physical
education teacher may be provided in each secondary school and one in a group of primary schools. The Committee
feels that unless some financial support is provided to the schools and colleges specifically for this purpose and
fdr purchase of simple and basic sports equipment and consumable sports items, this objective would not be
achieved.

Action Taken

While provision of Physical Education Teachers in every School is the most desirable thing, it has been the
experience that this will entail huge expenditure on the part of the State Governments. The Central Government is
also not in a position to share this burden in view of the resource constraint. The matter was discussed in the
recent Conference of the State Secretaries and also that of the Sports Ministers. Most of the State Governments
expressed their inability to bear this additional burden. It is in this context that the strategy of equipping the
existing subject teachers with the skills required for Physical Training appears to be a sound one.

One of the recommendations of CABE was that the subject teachers may be trained as physical education
teachers through pre-service and in-service training courses. We have already written to all the State Governments
to implement the recommendations.

The Working Group for the Ninth Plan had suggested that a scheme for training of teachers be taken up. This

* proposal has been included in the Ninth Plan, but is yet to be approved by Planning Commission. Also, the matter

has been taken up with Education Department to make changes in the curriculum for B.Ed. and other Teacher’s

training courses so as to make it compulsory for all teachers to have physical education and sports as a subject
during training. The use of DIETs for pre-service and in-service training of teachers has also been suggested.

For development of infrastructure and provision of sports equipment, the Department through its various schemes
have been giving financial assistance to Secondary/Sr. Secondary Schools located in rural areas as well as to
colleges including engineering/medical/agricultural colleges.

Recommendation No. 7

The Committee strongly recommends that the functioning of the Association of Indian Universities should be
revamped to increase sports activities in the Universities and improving thereby their contribution to sports. The
inter-university sports, board, which existed before the independence, should be revived, so as to supervise sports
activities in our universities and their affiliated colleges.

Action Taken

This matter has been taken up with the Association of Indian Universities (410) which has stated that since the
functioning of AIU covers diverse areas including sports, culture, research, equivalence of degrees and international
cooperation in higher education, the recommendations of the Committee would require careful consideration and
the concurrence of the General Body.

a2


33

Further AIU has informed that the inter-university sports board is already in operation and it oversees all sports
activities of the Universities. The Board is quite active and it has organised inter-university competitions in 14
games for men, 10 games for women and 14 games for both men and women at 66 University centres.
Recommendation No. 10

The Committee feels that Government should plan the development of sports in a phased manner so that
necessary infrastructure is built up over a period of time and scarce resources earmarked for the purpose are
optimally utilised.

Action Taken

While the Department agrees with the above observations of the Committee, it may also be submitted that the
demand in the area of sports vastly outstrips the resources made available to the Department of Sports of the
Central Government and also to the sports departments of the State Governments. It may also be appreciated that
training for excellence would need international class infrastructural facilities as also equipment of the same
class. All these are costly and need increasing investment over a period of time.

The Department of Youth Affairs and Sports have tried to use the limited resources more effectively. For
instance, during 1996-97, no large infrastructure has been sanctioned and most of the resources have been utilised
for completing the construction of the infrastructure that have been initiated in earlier years.

Recommendation No. 22

The Committee was shocked to learn that till March, 1995 only 25 persons were recruited as sportspersons in
the 25 Ministries/Departments of the Government of India (except in Railways and Defence) and that too in the
Group “C” category.

Recommendation No. 23

The Committee feels that there is a lack of will and determination also in implementing the existing guidelines
in employing sportspersons by the Government. There is no provision for promotion of outstanding sportspersons
or giving them adequate cash awards after they win medals and bring laurels to the country.

Action Taken on Recommendations No. 22 and 23

While no precise data is available regarding employment of sportspersons in Government Departments, many
of the Departments in addition to Defence and Railways have been employing sportspersons on a regular basis.
Some of these organisations are Indian Airlines, Air India, Postal Department, Audit Department, Food Corporation
of India. Most of the State Governments are also employing sportspersons on regular basis. However, the problem
appears to be that most of these sportspersons are appointed at very low levels with very meagre pay, which do not
act as a suitable incentive. The Department, therefore, has been trying for suitable reservations in the higher cadre
also.

Recommendation No. 24

The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should have (i) a definite policy for recruiting
sportspersons in various ministries/departments and public sector undertakings; (ii) effective monitoring to get
regular feedback and to ensure proper implementation of the provisions of the policy, which is virtually non-
existed as on date; (iii) the Department of Sports and Youth Affairs should act as a nodal agency for this purpose;
(iv) the Government should also issue clear-cut guidelines to the Union Public Service Commission for recruiting
sportspersons in Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ services also as there are many sportspersons of international standard having
adequate educational qualifications for these categories of posts.

Action Taken

The observations of the Committee have been noted. The policy with regard to personnel are decided by the
Department of Personnel and the matter has been taken up with the Department of Personnel & Training (DOPT)
and the Chief Secretaries of various State Governments for implementing the recommendations made by the
Committee.

As per the existing provisions, 5% of the vacancies in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts can be filled up from amongst
sportspersons. However, such appointments can be made only when other requirements in terms of age and
educational qualifications are fulfilled. Sportspersons are also eligible for advance increments on the basis of their
performance in National and International events. The total number of increments to be awarded to a sportsperson
during his career should not exceed five. Certain Departments such as the Police Organisations also give out of
turn promotions to sportspersons excelling in major sports events.

The Department of Youth Affairs and Sports is implementing a number of schemes under which outstanding
sportspersons are given awards such as Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award, Arjuna Award in recognition of their
outstanding achievements in the field of sports. There also exists specific scheme entitled ‘Special Award’ to


34

Winners in International Sports events and their coaches under which awards ranging from Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 5
lakh is given to the medal winners at international events.

On a specific issue of filling up of 5% posts of Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ posts a meeting was held with DOPT on
29.10.96. The DOPT was of the view that the proposal may be examined in the context of public sector under
takings but the DOPT was not very encouraging about earmarking Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ posts in the Government for
sportspersons.

Recommendation No. 25

The Committee does realise the sportspersons’ concern about not getting adequate time for practice due to
pressure of work in their jobs. In such a situation, the Committee feels, it is the duty, both of the sportspersons and
their employers, to give top most priority to sports so long as the person is in full form and is in a position to win
medals.

Action Taken

While this is true in some cases, utilisation of sportspersons properly and giving them right opportunities will
depend largely on the sports consciousness of the employers. However, the Department is writing to all Departments
bring to their notice, the recommendation of the Committee.

Recommendation No. 27

The amount of cash awards and pension being given to sportspersons by the Government should be increased
substantially so as to make sports more attractive and lucrative. The Committee recommends that the Mini
Railways and the airlines operating in the country, both private and the Government, should provide free/concessi
tickets to eminent sportspersons.

Action Taken

The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Railways. Ministry of Railways
have agreed to provide concession to the Arjuna Award winners. Discussions have also taken place between the
officials of the Department and those of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The latter, however, have not agreed to the
proposal.

Recommendation No. 30

The Committee suggests that the Government should ensure that no player or team is sent abroad for participation
in international tournaments unless they are accompanied by qualified sports medicine doctors alongwith the
necessary kits and other aids.

Action Taken

For teams/sportspersons, who may be needing doctors during the tournaments abroad, a doctor is normally sent
at Govt. expense. In addition, for all major international sporting events like Asiad and Olympics, doctor is
invariably sent alongwith the team. For other international tournaments, normally a doctor is sent with the
contact sports teams.

Recommendation No. 31

The Committee was informed that, in some cases, the Government is paying only 90% of fare and the remaining
10% is to be borne by the player himself or herself. The Government should investigate as to why part payment of
air fare is being made to players attending international meets and ensure that such a thing is not repeated in
future.

Action Taken

Generally, the air tickets are provided to the players through the travel agent of the Department, M/s Balmer
Lawrie, which is a Government of India undertaking. The Department makes 100% payment directly to the travel
agent and therefore, there is no question of making the players pay 10% of the fare.

Recommendation No. 38

The Committee suggests that either the entire control of the SAI coaches should be given to the State Governments
who have comparatively better mach: sche for their close monitoring or they may be completely withdrawn. The
State Governments should be given full authority for all the service matters of SAI coaches, including their
postings and transfers.


35

Action Taken

As regards handing over the entire control of SAI coaches by the State Governments, the Department is of
considered view that services of the SAI coaches may be placed at the disposal of the State Governments with full
control provided the States bear the cost of SAI coaches. In a meeting of Secretaries and Directors of Sports of
States/UTs held on 24-25 October, 1996 at Delhi, the general opinion of the States was not in favour of taking SAI
coaches due to various administrative problems, particularly with reference to their pay scales etc.

Recommendation No. 39

One of the problems raised by the coaches deployed in the schools was that they did not have accommodation
either in the school premises or anywhere near the school. The Committee feels that it is a genuine problem which
needs to be looked into sympathetically and Government should try to give residential accommodation to these
coaches either in the school premises itself, or just near to their working place so that they could reach the ground
early in the morning.

Action Taken

SAI coaches working at SAI Centres i.e. Patiala, Chandigarh, Bangalore, Calcutta, Imphal and Gandhinagar
have been provided with residential accommodation. Few coaches working in the Delhi have also been provided
accommodation by the SAI.

As far as schools under NSTC are concerned, accommodation is provided to coaches in only such school which
are 100% residential. In semi-residential schools, the States/private managements do not have residential
accommodation available with them which can be provided to the coaches. In such cases like other SAI coaches,
these coaches are being provided house rent allowance. The managements of the schools assist the coaches to find
accommodation near the school premises.

Recommendation No. 61

The Committee finds that so far neither the Department of YouthA ffairs & Sports nor the Federations have taken
any particular interest in the development of sports among the Indian women and whatever distinction women have
achieved so far is largely due to their individual efforts.

Recommendation No. 62

The Committee feels that there is a need to give good incentives in the form of cash awards and medals so as to
attract mass participation by women. Many parents would like to send their daughters to play games but they are
hesitant to do so because of security and safety reasons. The Committee noticed that out of 18 sports hostels of SAI,
there is only one sports hostel for women and there is no exclusive SPDA hostel for girls. Therefore, the Committee
feels, there is a need for proper planning to develop sports amongst women by opening more sports hostels and
adopting more sports-oriented girls’ schools.

Action Taken on Recommendations No. 61 and 62

It is submitted that Government with its limited resources have taken steps to encourage women to participate in
sports. As a result of such efforts, Indian women have done comparatively well in Athletics and weightlifting.
Women sportspersons are also getting scholarships under the scheme of sports talent search scholarship. Generally
50% of the recipients of the scholarship are women. In recent years, some of the women have also won impressive
cash awards from the Department.

Unfortunately, due to serious resource crunch, it is becoming increasingly difficult for Sports Authority of India
to run the existing Hostels. Any new Hostel only for women sportspersons, therefore, cannot be considered at this
stage.


CHAPTER IV

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Please see Chapter I

Paras 2, 5, 12, 13, 15, 16, 21, 33, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 51, 52, 58, 66, 67, 73, 74, 80.


CHAPTER V

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED

Nil



MINUTES


भा

SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Monday, the 15th September, 1997 in Committee Room ‘A

Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS

i

SN aANAYN

11

i
पा.

veer a

Shri S.B. Chavan— Chairman
RAJYA SBHA

Dr. B.B. Dutta

Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik

Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri

Dr. (Shrimati)) Bharati Ray
Shri R. Margabandu

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
LOK SABHA

Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

). Shri Vaidhya Dau Dayal Joshi
. Shri Sartaj Singh

12.
12
14.
15.
. Shri 1.0. Sanadi
17.
18.
). Dr. Krupasindhu Bhoi
20.
21.
2
23.
24.
25.
26.

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya
Shri Rajendrasinh Rana

Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh

Dr. C. Silvera

Shrimati Krishna Bose
Shri A. Venkataram Reddy

Shri Krishna

Shri Shivanand H. Koujalgi
Shri Samik Lahiri

Shri S.K. Kaarvendhan

Dr. M. Jagannath

Dr. Bali Ram

Shri Ranen Barman

WITNESSES

*

Shri Bhaskar Barua, Secretary

Shri Arun Kumar Gupta, Director-General, SAI
Smt. Asha Swarup, Joint Secretary (Sports)

Shri Pradeep Kumar Sinha, Joint Secretary (Youth Affairs)
Shri 0.2 Bhatia, Executive Director (Operations), SAI

* Minutes of the Ist Meeting of the Committee relate to other matters.
*** Relate to other matters.

41

*

*

. Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Youth Affairs and Sports).

Ground


42
Shri Amrit Mathur, Secretary, SAI
Shri A.S.V. Prasad, Executive Director (Team & Academics)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri ९ P. K. Ramacharyulu, Under Secretary
Shri J. G. Negi, Committee Officer
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

2. The Committee sought the clarifications from the Secretaries, Department of ISM & H, Health and Youth
Affairs and Sports on some of the points on the Action Taken Reports furnished by the Departments on the National
Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta, National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur, India’s Performance in International
Sports and Functioning of the Central Government Health Scheme respectively. The Committee, thereafter
considered the draft Action Taken Reports on the National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta, National Institute
of Ayurveda, Jaipur, India’s Performance in International Sports and functioning of Central Government Health
Scheme and adopted the same after some modifications.

2.1. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Prof. Bharati Ray and Shri Vishnu Kant
Shastri and Dr. M. Jagannath and Shri 1.0, Sanadi in Lok Sabha to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Lok
Sabha respectively.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.25 p.m.


ञ्शा
EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 17th August, 1998 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT MEMBERS
1. Shri S.B.Chavan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Banarsi Das Gupta
Shri Balkavi Bairagi
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
Shri O. Rajagopal
Shri Dina Nath Mishra
Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
10. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
LOK SABHA
13. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
14. Shri Sartaj Singh
15. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
16. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
17. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
18. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
19, Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
20. Shri Mallangouda Basanagouda Patil
21. Shri Ajit Jogi
22. Shri Shankar Pannu
23. Shri Abdul Hamid
24. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
25. Smt. Krishna Bose
26. Shri S. Arumugham
WITNESSES

L * * *

yer anawn

R=

IL. * * *
वा Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Youth Affairs and Sports).

1. Shri Bhaskar Barua, Secretary

2. Shri J.P. Singh, Joint Secretary

* Minutes of Ist to VIIth meetings of the Committee relate to other matters.
***Relate to other matters

43


3. Shri Arun Kumar Gupta, Director General, SAI
4. Shri S.K. Panda, Director
5. Smt. Amarjeet Kaur, Director
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary
Shri M. K. Khan, Under Secretary
Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer
2. The Committee sought clarifications from the above mentioned witnesses of the Departments of *** and

Youth Affairs & Sports in connection with the Action Taken Reports on the *** and India’s Performance in
International Sports respectively.

3. * *

3.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30. p.m.

+#+ Relate to other matters

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4736RS—17.03.1999.


x
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 27th August, 1998 in Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBERS
. Shri 5.8. Chavan — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Balkavi Bairagi

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri Dina Nath Mishra

Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav

Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha

Shri M.P.A. Samad Samadani

. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy

12. Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA

13. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam

14, Shri Sartaj Singh

15. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal

16. Shri Chinmayanand Swami

17. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh

18. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri

19. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil

20. Shri Shamanur Shiv Shankarappa

21. Shri Ajit Jogi

22. Shri V.M. Sudheeran

23. Shri Laxman Singh

24. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel

25. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta

26. Shri H.P. Singh

27.

28.

29.

pen aneyn

= 5

|. Smt. Krishna Bose

. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
. Shri S. Arumugham
WITNESSES

*** Relate to other matters.
45



46

SECRETARIAT

1. Shrimati Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

2. Shri M.K. Khan, Under Secretary

3. Shrimati Manjeet, Committee Officer

2. * * x

3. The Committee adopted the following Reports subject to some modifications made by the Chairman:—
(i) Action Taken Report on India’s Performance in International Sports.

(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
(iv) * * *

(v) * * *

4. * * *
4.1 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
ig * * *

6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to meet again on 1ith September, 1998.

So

*** Relates to other matters.


*XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 19th November, 1998 in Committee Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri S. B. Chavan — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Banarsi Das Gupta

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

Shri Dina Nath Mishra

Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray

Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
Dr. C. Narayana Reddy

LOK SABHA

9. Shri Baswaraj Patil Sedam
10. Shri Shanker Prasad Jaiswal
11. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
12. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh
13. Shri Indrajeet Mishra
14. Dr. Bizay Sonkar Shastri
15. Dr. Ulhas Vasudeo Patil
16. Shri Mallanagouda Basanagouda Patil
17. Shri Shmanur Shiv Shankarappa
18. Shri V.M. Sudheeran
19. Shri Abdul Hamid
20. Shri Samik Lahiri
21. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
22. Dr. (Smt.) V. Saroja
23. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta
24. Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy
25. Shrimati Krishna Bose
26. Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
27. Shri S. Arumugham

WITNESSES

* * कर
SECRETARIAT
Smt. Vandana Garg, Deputy Secretary

Shri C. B. Rai, Under Secretary
>. * * *

9०:०० ७ # ७७ २

3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate requisite number of Members for presentation
of some Reports of the Committee to the Rajya Sabha and lay the same in the Lok Sabha during the
ensuing session of Parliament.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 p.m.

* Minutes of Ist to XIIIth meetings of the Committee relates to other matters.
***Relate to other matters.

47