 
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARON EDUCATION, WOMEN,
THREE HUNDRED Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty Eighthe Department of (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA  RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEEON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND 
    Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi August, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka)  
HUNDRED AND FIFTY SECONDON Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 202Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2023(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 202 
   Y STANDING COMMITTEE CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS Report No 352 
SECOND REPORT Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Demands for Grants 2023-24 of Education, Ministry of Education 3) , 2023) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in  

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARON EDUCATION, WOMEN,THREE HUNDRED Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty Eighth Report on of Higher Education, Ministry of Education(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  
 
  
Hindi version of this publication is also available  PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA   RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEEON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND  HUNDRED AND FIFTY SECOND REPORTON Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2023-24 of theof Higher Education, Ministry of Education Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2023)(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2023)        
 
  Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi August, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka)     
Hindi version of this publication is also available Y STANDING COMMITTEE CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS REPORT Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred 24 of the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education , 2023) 2023) 
  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................  1-28 
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ............................................................... .....  2-14  
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...........  15-23 
Chapter-III -  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee....   24-27 
 Chapter-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited…...............................................     28 
   
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE ...................     29-30 
6. MINUTES..................................................................................................     31-32  
7. ANNEXURE.................................................................................................     33-42  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13thSeptember, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. *Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
7. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. **Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. *** 
15. Shri Sangam Lal Kadedin Gupta 
16. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
17. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
28. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
29.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
31. Shri S. Venkatesan 
 
*Nominated w.e.f. 11.10.2022 
**Nominated w.e.f. 16.11.2022 
*** Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
(i) 

 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Fifty Second Report of the 
Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Three Hundred and Forty Eighth Report of the Committee on "Demands for Grants 2023-24 of 
the Department of Higher Education", which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on 28th March, 2023. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned 
Report were received from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education vide their 
communication dated 24h May, 2023.  
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on     
7th August, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 7 August, 2023                                                                                                                
Sravana 16,1945 (Saka)  
 
  
 
 
 
Shri Vivek Thakur  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
 
ACRONMYS 
 
ABC Academic Bank of Credit 
AI Artificial Intelligence  
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
BE Budget Estimates 
CCA Controller of Certifying Authorities 
CoE Centre of Excellence 
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
CSSS  Champion Services Sector Scheme  
CUs Central Universities 
DoPT Department of Personnel & Training 
DTH    Direct to Home 
EEC  Empowered Expert Committee  
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee  
EWS Economically Weaker Section 
FY Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GIA Grant-In-Aid 
HEFA Higher Education Financing Agency 
HEIs Higher Education Institutions 
HESPIS Higher Education Statistics and Public Information System 
IIM Indian Institute of Management 
IISc Indian Institute of Science 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IIIT Indian Institute of Information Technology 
IISER Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research 
IoE Institute of Eminence  
INI Institute of National Importance 
MERITE Multidisciplinary Education and Research Improvement in Technical  
 Education 
MIS Management Information Systems 
(iii) 

 
 
 
MoU            Memorandum of Understanding 
MREC                       Medical Relief & Education Committee 
MSDE                       Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
NAPS                       National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme 
NATS  National Apprenticeship Training Scheme 
NCrF                        National Credit Framework  
NEAT                       National Education Alliance for Technology 
NEP                        National Educational Policy  
NIT                           National Institute of Technology 
NMEICT                   National Mission in Education through Information and Communication Technology 
OOMF                      Output Outcome Monitoring Framework 
PAB                          Project Approval Board 
PFMS                       Public Financial Management System 
PMRF Prime Minister Research Fellowship 
PM-USP Prime Minister-Uchhatar Shiksha Protsahan 
RE Revised Estimates 
RUSA                      Rashtriya Uchhatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
R&D Research and Development 
SC Scheduled Caste 
SHEC State Higher Education Council 
ST Scheduled Tribe 
SSS                       Special Scholarship Scheme 
SNA            Single Nodal Account  
UCs             Utilization Certificates 
UGC                           University Grants Commission 
UNESCO                   United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UT                              Union Territory  
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

1  
REPORTThe Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in its 348thReport on Demands for Grants 2023-24 of the Department of Higher Education, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th March, 2023.2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned Report were received from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Educationvidetheir communication dated 24thMay, 2023. These have been categorized as follows. Chapter I: Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government Paras2.5, 2.8, 2.12, 2.14, 3.3.11, 3.3.13, 3.3.14, 3.3.17, 3.4.6, 3.4.7, 3.4.10, 3.5.1,3.7.7, 3.7.10, 3.8.5, 3.9.19, 3.9.20, 3.10.5Total - 18Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of Government's replies:-Paras2.9, 2.10, 2.13, 2.16, 3.3.15, 3.4.8, 3.4.9, 3.6.3, 3.7.6, 3.8.2, 3.8.3, 3.8.8Total - 12Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:-Paras- 3.3.12, 3.5.13, 3.8.4, 4.4Total - 4       Chapter-IV:  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited:-Paras - NilTotal - Nil

2  
CHAPTER-IRECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENTOVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATIONRecommendation1.Committee observes that in the FY 2022-23, the BE was Rs. 40828.35 Cr, which was kept same in RE 2022-23. BE for the next year 2023-24 has been kept at Rs.44094.62 Cr.                    (Para: 2.5 of the 348thReport of the Committee)Action TakenThe Department has informed that the observations of the Committee have been noted.Recommendation2.The Committee observes that the overall enhancement in allocation for autonomous bodies(UGC, AICTE, CUs, IITs, NITs, IIITS, IISc etc) is Rs. 4235.74 crores, which is an increase of 12.8 % over their allocation against BE 2022-23. Also, in BE 2023-24 Grant to UGC has been increased by 9.37% i.e. an increase of 459 crores. Further, Grant to Central universities have been increased by 17.66 %, Deemed University by 27%, support to IITs increased by 14%, and to NITs by 10.5% as compared to BE 2022-increased by 15%. In BE 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 400 crores has been provided for Prime Minister Research Fellowship (PMRF) as compared to Rs. 200 crores in BE 2022-23 i.e. 100% increase. The Committee appreciates the enhanced allocation over the BE 2022-23 under said Heads.(Para: 2.8 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed that the observations / appreciation of the Committee have been noted.Recommendation3.The Committee while noting the steps taken, is of the view that the pertinent issue of delayed submission of UCs by grantees/ Institutions needs to be addressed by putting in place a 

3  
mechanism that makes it possible to fix accountability of the officers concerned. The Committee recommends that the reasons given by grantees/ institutions in response to delay in submission also need to be properly scrutinized and verified. The Committee also recommends that the Department should take proactive steps for highlighting the status of each grantee/institution and pendency of UCs against it on a public platform or through regular reminders to ensure that this requirement gets fulfilled and to check any laxity on their part.           (Para: 2.12 ibid)Action TakenThe Department in its Action Taken Note has informed the Committee that for watching the pendency of UCs the department is operating a computerized UC package through which the pendency of outstanding UCs is watched and from time to time GIA/UC Cell posts the lists of pending UCs to all Programme Divisions for their clearance and Office of the Pr. CCA, Ministry of Education is maintaining records of Utilization Certificate. Recommendation4.The Committee observes that it would be an instructive exercise for the Department to enlist the present progress vis-avis the identified thrust areas and that such a comparative status report be prepared and submitted to the Committee for its assessment/perusal.    (Para: 2.14 ibid)Action Taken        The Department has informed the Committee that to keep a track, that the various schemes/ projects of the Department are running at a right pace, Annual Action Plan of the Department is prepared every year. In that Action Plan, medium term outcomes are projected corresponding to outputs/deliverables against the outlays and the quarterly Financial Targets are also assigned for each of the scheme. A copy of the Annual Action Plan for the year 2023-24 has been furnished by the Department (Annexure 1).Recommendation5.The purpose of each such evaluation is not only to get an independent view about the scheme but also a critical analysis of its impact and how far the scheme has been able to address its defined goals, the Committee recommends that a Report-wise and its recommendation-wise analysis vis-a-vis action taken on the pointed issue be undertaken so that necessary course correction, if needed, can be initiated.           (Para: 2.16 ibid)

4  
Action TakenThe Department has informed that the recommendations of the Committee have been noted.SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATIONCENTRALLY-SPONSORED SCHEME: RASHTRIYA UCHCHATAR SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RUSA)Recommendation6.The Committee appreciates the enhanced allocations under RUSA in BE 2023-24 which has witnessed increase of around 300%.                                                              (Para: 3.3.11 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed that the recommendation of the Committee has been noted.Recommendation7.The Committee appreciates the Department for improved approvals against targets set under various components under RUSA 2.0. However, the Committee also observes that there are reductions in targets for approvals under various components under RUSA 2.0 in comparison to RUSA 1.0 and recommends for increased targets and their approvals under various components for greater utilization of enhanced funds allocated under BE 2023-24.     (Para: 3.3.13 ibid)Action TakenThe Committee has been informed by the Department that the targets for the second phase of RUSA were kept on the basis of the review of the performance of the first phase of the scheme. This has led to better achievement rate of targets of RUSA 2.0 as compared to RUSA 1.0. The targets for RUSA 3.0 would be structured on a similar basis, based on the implementation of the previous phases, inputs of the States, the budget availability, etc.Recommendation8.The Committee notes that the RUSA has been extended till 2026, mainly to encourage the Higher Educational Institutions (HEIs)/ universities under the State Governments to improve their 

5  
overall educational standards. The Committee appreciates that RUSA has been instrumental in improving the educational eco-system under the State institutions where the funding to States is on the basis of critical appraisal of State Higher Education. It is also noted that RUSA describes of equity, access, and excellence in higher education. The Committee hopes that the extension of RUSA scheme will help to increase facilities like infrastructure, maintenance of labs and purchasing of high-quality lab equipment ensuring that quality teaching-learning outcomes take place in the State government HEIs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the focus of the scheme should shift to Tier II and Tier III cities to bring the requisite benefits from the scheme to these cities which have great potential.     (Para: 3.3.14 ibid)Action TakenThe Committee has been informed that the scheme of RUSA provides support to the States/UTs for infrastructural activities such as construction, renovation and equipment for supporting capacity building of institutions through smart class rooms, laboratories etc. The recommendation has been noted and the structure of RUSA 3.0 would be drafted to provide priority to unserved and underserved areas.Recommendation9.The Committee notes and appreciates that the number of Indian HEIs, over the years have been steadily increasing and at present there are 41 Indian institutions which are finding place in these ranking. The Committee is hopeful that the sustained steps for improving the higher education ecosystem that are being taken by the Department / UGC will lead to inclusion of more Indian institutions in these global rankings. The Committee suggests that to attract international students the Department through UGC should issue guidelines for higher education institutions pertaining to introduction of courses on Indian heritage and culture such as Vedic mathematics, Yoga and Ayurveda which will result into increase in the enrolment for foreign and domestic students keen to unravel and unfurl the reservoir of hidden knowledge in these ancient paradigm of learning that may eventually lead to improvement of world rankings of our institutions as well.      (Para: 3.3.17 ibid)

6  
Action TakenThe Department has informed that with a view to make people familiar with the rich cultural and intellectual heritage of India in the backdrop of a comprehensive perspective of National Education Policy-Guidelines for the introduction of courses based on Indian heritage and culture (Universal Human values, Vedic Mathematics, Yoga, Ayurveda, Sanskrit, CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMESINSTITUTES OF EMINENCE (IOE)/ WORLD CLASS INSTITUTIONSRecommendation10.The Committee observes and appreciates the impressive utilization under IoE which is 75% of RE 2022-23 during first three quarters of the current fiscal year. The Committee also appreciates the enhanced allocation for IoE, which is Rs. 1500 crs. (BE 2023-24) as compared to Revised Estimates (2022-23) of Rs. 1200 crs.       (Para: 3.4.6 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed that the recommendation of the Committee has been noted.Recommendation11.The Committee notes that World-class universities play key roles in creating and disseminating knowledge, educating a highly skilled workforce for technological and intellectual leadership, and serving the needs of society and thus the scheme serves the purpose of support and recognition towards such efforts. The Committee appreciates the extension of the scheme and recommends that it can be reassessed by the Department/UGC, so that, it is suitably realigned with the visions of NEP 2020 and modifications required, if any, be addressed.(Para: 3.4.7 ibid)Action TakenThe Committee has been informed by the Department in its Action Taken Note that the major reforms envisioned in the NEP-2020 are - promotion of holistic and multidisciplinary education, faculty and institutional autonomy, imaginative and flexible curricular structure, increased focus on research and innovation, optimal learning environments and support for students, internationalization of education, blended mode of learning, digital infrastructure etc.

7  
The Committee was also informed that the main objective of the World Class Institutions scheme is to enable higher educational institutions in the country to have affordable world class educational and research facilities. Further, in order to fulfill this objective, the regulatory framework of the scheme includes provisions that makes it imperative for the institutions to develop more disciplines, evolve inter-disciplinary courses, have cutting-edge research facilities, update curriculum as per latest developments, admit students strictly on merit basis, have financial assistance structure for economically weak but meritorious students etc. It was also informed that the regulatory framework also encourages the institutions to develop academic and infrastructure facilities to attract foreign students and faculty and have research collaborations with top global institutions, as part of internationalization measures. In January, 2021, the regulations for private institutions have been amended and notified to enable them to establish off-campus centres and off-shore campuses to expand presence of Institutions of Eminence.Recommendation12.The Committee notes that efforts at various levels are underway to grant IoE status to remaining two public institutions and five private institutions while one institution has expressed its inability to comply with the conditions of the letter of intent. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the process for granting status of IoEs be accelerated, so that, the remaining institutions also get the IoE status at the earliest. The Committee also directs that a status note on each of the two public institutions, five private institutions which are being considered for IoE status be placed before the Committee for its perusal.      (Para: 3.4.10 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed the Committee that regular efforts at the level of Ministry of Education have been carried out to grant the status of Institution of Eminence to remaining two public institutions i.e. Anna University, Tamil Nadu and Jadavpur University, West Bengal. Further, the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), received from four private institutions have been forwarded to the UGC for necessary vetting by the Empowered Experts Committee (EEC). However, the term of the erstwhile EEC has already been completed on 18.02.2021 and a new EEC is required to be constituted. It was also informed that a status note on the remaining two 

8  
public institutions and five private institutions, seeking IoE status is provided below: Status Note Institutions Seeking Status of Institution of Eminence1. Public Institutions:a. Jadavpur University: The State Public University had initially submitted a proposal with budget outlay of Rs 3299 Crore under the scheme. Subsequently, the Ministry had sought financial commitment from the State Government of West Bengal for their share of funds since the scheme has a provision to fund upto Rs 1000 crores of the proposed outlay only and to ensure continuity of funds for the implementation plans in case of any shortfall. However, the same was not agreed to by the concerned State Government. The Committee was also informed that consequently, the State Government revised the proposal, first to Rs 1015 Crore and then again revised steeply downward to Rs 606 Crore with 25% of the amount to be generated by the university at its level. Noticing a significant decrease in the budget outlay, the matter was referred to UGC & EEC to examine the proposal afresh and advice the Ministry in the matter. The Ministry has received the recommendation from the UGC and EEC to not consider the university for IoE status. b. Anna University: Being a State Public University, on the recommendation of EEC & UGC, the Ministry had sought financial commitment from the State Government of Tamil Nadu for its share of funds under the scheme to make good of the shortfall in funds, if any, to ensure proper execution of implementation plans under the IoE Scheme. However, the State Govt. had refused any financial commitment owing to its financial condition and informed that the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly had passed a bill, bifurcating the University into Anna Technological and Research University and Anna University. Also, a committee set up by the State Govt. had recommended that Anna University does not require IoE status. Therefore, the State Government of Tamil Nadu has withdrawn the proposal submitted earlier to confer the status of IoE on the university. In order to proceed further, the State Government was requested to re-confirm its decision, reply of which is awaited. 2. Private Institutions: a.Hamdard National Foundation (HNF) into Hamdard Education & Cultural Aid Committee (HECA) and Medical Relief & Education Committee (MREC) based on the resolution of the 

9  
family settlement deed is proposed. Since, IoE status was granted in toto, the EEC, after due deliberation has recommended to not consider the institution for IoE status. Finalization of MoUs of remaining 4 Private Institutions The Department has informed that the draft MoUs received from 04 private institutions, namely JIO Institute; Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore; Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneswar and Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore, recommended for IoE status have been forwarded to the UGC for placing it before the EEC and forward its advice.STUDENT FINANCIAL AIDRecommendation13.The Committee recommends to increase the amount under various scholarship programmes taking into account the real expenses borne by students in view of the fact that most beneficiaries of the Scheme are primarily students from low-income and socially disadvantaged groups.       (Para: 3.7.7 ibid)Action Taken(i) Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship (CSSS): - With the approval of Cabinet, the scholarship amount during the first three years at graduation level has been increased by 20%, i.e., Rs. 12,000 per annum from Rs. 10,000 per annum. To target more number of beneficiaries from lower family income group the parental annual income ceiling has been reduced to Rs. 4.5 lakh from earlier Rs. 8 lakh.(ii) Special Scholarship Scheme (SSS) for J&K&L: - Under the scheme the scholarship amount is disbursed based on type of courses the student is pursuing i.e. a. General Degreeb. Professional Degree coursesc. Medical CoursesThe amount disbursed to the students is divided into two parts:i. Academic Feeii. Maintenance Allowance 

10  
The Academic Fee for:-a. General Degree - Rs. 30,000 p.ab. Professional Degree Courses- Rs. 1,25,000 p.ac. Medical Courses -Rs. 3,00,000 p.aThe maintenance allowance for all types of courses is common i.e. Rs. 1 lakh p.a. which is disbursed in ten equal instalments. The amount aims to meet hostel, mess, books, stationery & other incidentals. It may, therefore, be concluded that the scholarship amount being provided to beneficiaries is sufficient to cover the academic expenses.Recommendation14.The Committee observes and appreciates the Department for enhanced allocations under PM Research Fellowship Scheme in BE 2023-24 to Rs. 400 crores from allocation of Rs. 200 crores which was enhanced to Rs. 300 crores in RE 2022-23. The Committee, recommends that the Department should closely look at the modalities of the Scheme, so that, the Research Ecosystem (ANUSANDHAN) as a whole gets fillip and brain drain of highly talented students could be stopped and the national priorities get aligned in chosen thrust-based and futuristic areas of research.                                        (Para: 3.7.10 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed that the observations of the Committee have been noted.DIGITAL INDIA e-LEARNINGRecommendation15.The Committee further recommends for development of new cooperative mechanisms between the higher educational institutions/ universities with industry to find ways to support and strengthen digital education initiatives in the country to create a system for income generation for students in order to make them self-sufficient.       (Para: 3.8.5 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed the Committee that for development of new cooperative mechanisms between the higher educational institutions/ universities with industry, University 

11  
Grants Commission (UGC) has launched the Guidelines on Internship/Apprenticeship embedded Degree Programme. The gap between industries and academics can be bridged by exposing students to various opportunities available on campus. Internship / Apprenticeship has a significant role in linking higher education with the industry's requirements.It was also informed that AICTE has launched National Educational Alliance for Technology (NEAT) as a Public-Private Partnership model between the Government and the education technology companies of India. Through an open invitation and screening, companies are invited to showcase their products on a National Portal developed for the learners, who may procure them based on their requirements. The aim of NEAT is to bring the best technological Products in education technology on a single platform for the convenience of learners. Technology Products using artificial intelligence for customized learning or e-content in niche areas having highly employable skills are being used by students and faculty members extensively.Recommendation16.The Committee takes note of the information furnished by the Department regarding the Budget allocations 2023-24 for Higher Education. The Department has also furnished details of a number of new initiatives planned by it, which are as under: Three Centres of Excellence will be set up in educational institutions to "Make AI in India and Make AI work for India". This is drawing from the fact that NEP 2020 recognizes the role of AI in all sectors of the economy which will require new skill set of the work force and AI has important role to play in the Agriculture, Health, Automobiles, Cyber Security, Smart Home/City Infrastructure, Data Analysis, Speech Recognition, Customer Service, Automated Stock Trading, Online shopping, Machine Translation, Digital Personal Assistance. Centers of excellence (CoEs) will implement the NEP 2020 vision of multidisciplinary research in agriculture, health and sustainable cities. It will also help premier educational institutions to transform research (ANUSANDHAN) to cutting edge technology needed essentially for a country of our size and diversity. National Data Governance Policy - unleashes innovation and research by start-ups and academia, a National Data Governance Policy will be brought out. This will help drive 

12  
100 labs for developing apps using 5G services will be set up in HEIs, to realize new opportunities, business models and employment potential. Labs will cover among others, apps like Smart Classrooms, Precision Farming, Intelligent Transports Systems and Healthcare. These will provide a fillip to employment, start-ups, businesses and promote innovation & entrepreneurship in our young engineers. Also, attempts to transform engineering education by introducing courses in emerging sector and make the approach multidisciplinary, not only in IITs, NITs and IISERs etc. but in engineering institutions across the country are underway.(Para: 3.9.19 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed the Committee that with regard to Centres for Artificial Intelligence (AI), a draft EFC memo prepared in consultation with IIT Madras is under consideration by the Ministry.Recommendation17.The Committee appreciates the initiatives and recognizing the importance of higher education and its role in advancement of the NEP 2020 vision, understands that much greater influx of funds would be required to translate the proposed initiatives into reality. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should undertake a thorough analysis of its funding requirements, category- wise, scheme-wise and NEP 2020 clause-wise along with the cumulative funding that can be generated through the States and private sector, so that, it can be taken note of and factored towards policy formulation and allocations in future.    (Para: 3.9.20 ibid)Action TakenIt has been informed by the Department that as per National Education Policy 2020, the Centre and the States / UTs work together to increase the public investment in Education sector to reach 6% of GDP. Various schemes / projects / programmes run by Ministry of Education have been aligned with National Education Policy 2020 (NEP 2020). As per the allocation of the budget by the Ministry of Finance, proportionate funds are allocated for various schemes / programs for their implementation by this Ministry.

13  
Recommendation18.The Committee is of the view that research and other policy efforts are primarily directed at improving research skills and MERITE programme also focuses on improving research skills and marketability in technical education. The Committee, therefore, recommends that due care be taken while rolling out the scheme so that the access to technical education among students of socio-economically disadvantaged groups, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and all Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) improve for making of new India.     (Para: 3.10.5 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed the Committee that MERITE (Multidisciplinary Education and Research Improvement in Technical Education) Scheme has been designed to improve the quality, equity and governance in technical education (engineering and polytechnic) in selected States/UTs, aligned with National Educational Policy-2020 (NEP-2020). Activities under the MERITE scheme have been organized under three components namely- (i) Improving quality and equity, (ii) Improving research for better skills, entrepreneurship and innovation and (iii) Governance. These components are targeted to improve the standards of technical education, bring about academic reforms, establish well defined governance structure, promote research infrastructure, enhance employability skills and address the equity needs of the student population in the selected States and participating institutions. The interventions are bound to extend direct and indirect benefit across multiple entities.It was further informed that with regard, to recommendation of the committee to take due care of the access to technical education among students of socio-economically disadvantaged groups, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and all Economically Weaker Section, the Department has informed that in order to improve the transition rate of UG students, the scheme will support Participating Institutions to provide students proactive advisement by faculty, academic counselling, and peer support services to improve student adjustment. It will also finance the provision of remedial courses by Participating Institutions, and the development and distribution of educational resources, including in Indian languages, to help close learning gaps. Further, the scheme will also focus on addressing barriers faced by women in pursuing careers in research and innovation. It will support women faculty members to apply for research, technology transfer grants, and innovation seed funding. This will include a mentoring and coaching program by successful women researchers as well as workshops to encourage the 

14  
increased participation of women in the application process. States will be encouraged to provide bridge support and dedicated information sessions for potential women professionals and enable them to develop competitive business proposals.*****

15  
CHAPTER-IIRECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLYOVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATIONRecommendation1.Further, the Committee takes note of the figures and facts furnished by the Department of Higher Education (at Table- 2 and 4) in respect of the percentage variations between BE 2022-23, RE 2022-23 and BE 2023-24. The Committee notices that broadly there is almost an increase of 8% in BE 2023-24 over RE 2022-23. There is also an increase of around 4.7 % in the allocation to Central Universities, which will receive an estimated Rs. 11,614 crores as against RE 2022-23of Rs. 11,091.15 crores. There is an increase of 3.3 % for the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), for which the allocation is Rs. 9,661.5 crores. Finally, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies (UGC and AICTE) under the Department receive an allocation of Rs. 5,780 crore which corresponds to an increase of 4.1% over RE 2022-economy continues to grow and evolve, allocations under the Union Budget 2023 in sectors like Higher Education, which are set to be asufficient to enthuse the said sector to provide new and exciting opportunities for those pursuing higher education. The Committee desires that while seeking financial allocations, the Department should focus on the aspirational growth which the Higher Education sector should direct to translate the vision outlined in NEP 2020 into reality. The Committee remains hopeful that using the present allocations, the Department will be able to push various initiatives which will increase access to educational opportunities for all students in higher education, provide enhanced financial aid and additional funding for research and development, which would surely result in more innovations and breakthroughs in the years to come. The Committee, therefore, recommends that proper physical and financial surveys of each of the schemes vis-a vis its targets should be carried out in a periodic manner to not only avoid time and cost overrun but also for their effective monitoring and implementation.                  (Para: 2.9 ibid)

16  
Action TakenThe Ministry in its reply informed the Committee that the target for both Output and Outcome indicators against financial outlay for each scheme is given in Output Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) for each year. It was also informed that for effective implementation of these educational schemes in the country, the Government regularly monitors them through periodic review meetings and the Public Financial Management System (PFMS). The Committee was further informed that the regulatory bodies of higher education i.e. University Grants Commission (UGC) and All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) also conducts review of its schemes. Based on the review, the Commission/ Council decides on the continuation/ closure / merger of the schemes for the next financial year. Also for monitoring implementation of NEP, 2020 in the States / UTs and HEIs across the country, regular high levelconsultation-cum-review meetings are held with States / UTs and HEIs. Recommendation2.The Committee also takes note of the details of expenditure incurred as on 31stJanuary, 2023 as given at Table- 5. The Committee finds that against the BE 2022-23 and RE 2022-23, the Department has been able to utilize Rs. 32,280.80 crores which is 79.06% of the funds allocated.               (Para: 2.10 ibid)Action TakenThe Committee has been informed that against BE 2022-23 and RE 2022-23, the Department has been able to utilize Rs. 40403.97 Crores which is 98.96% of funds allocated.Recommendation3.The Committee is of the view that while handling the various Audit Paras and responding/resolving them, the Department should also derive necessary learning from them and accordingly, should issue protocol to be followed in such cases.        (Para: 2.13 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed that the observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.

17  
Recommendation4.The purpose of each such evaluation is not only to get an independent view about the scheme but also a critical analysis of its impact and how far the scheme has been able to address its defined goals, the Committee recommends that a Report-wise and its recommendation-wise analysis vis-a-vis action taken on the pointed issue be undertaken so that necessary course correction, if needed, can be initiated.         (Para: 2.16 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed that the recommendations of the Committee have been noted.SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATIONCENTRALLY-SPONSORED SCHEME: RASHTRIYA UCHCHATAR SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RUSA)Recommendation5.The Committee further recommends that the Department in co-ordination with the State Governments and Institutions should prepare a monitoring framework for effective implementation of the scheme. The Committee also recommends that the Department should ensure that a periodic stock is taken of the progress made and the improvements that are needed in the scheme. The Committee further recommends that initiatives in consultation with various stakeholders, Vice Chancellors and esteemed academicians that can lead to enhanced learning, better research, and promoting innovation be pushed under the scheme to bring about transformative reforms in the Higher Education System of States through creation of an institutional structure for planning and monitoring at the State level, promoting autonomy in State universities, and improving governance in institutions.                                      (Para: 3.3.15 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed the Committee that regular review meetings, with the State/UTs are being held for monitoring the progress of the scheme. Also, the progress of States/UTs is reviewed through physical inspection reports and Utilisation Certificates furnished 

18  
by the respective State. Further, an online portal to maintain the scheme MIS is proposed to be developed for effective and transparent monitoring and implementation of the scheme.It was also informed that RUSA is implemented and monitored through an institutional structure comprising of bodies at the Central, State and institutional levels. RUSA Mission Authority, chaireMinister, the Project Approval Board (PAB) chaired by the Secretary, Higher Education and the National Project Directorate are the bodies in the Central Government which monitor the implementation of the scheme. At State level, the scheme is steered in each State/UT through State Higher Education Councils (SHEC) and State Project Directorates. It was also informed that these bodies are responsible for management, coordination, implementation and monitoring of the project at the State/UT levels.CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMESINSTITUTES OF EMINENCE (IOE)/ WORLD CLASS INSTITUTIONSRecommendation6.The Committee also recommends that while considering the institutions for the recognition as an IoE, factors like internationalization, eminent faculty inter disciplinary nature, multi-disciplinary research character, innovation ecosystem, transformational research outputs, etc., be also taken into account as these criteria will be helpful in placing these institutions on the international fora.       (Para: 3.4.8 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed the Committee that there is a stringent and rigorous selection procedure that is followed for selecting institutions as an Institution of Eminence as per the regulatory framework. Also, the institutions are expected to have multidisciplinary academic and research focus, presence of international students and faculty, capability to enhance infrastructure facilities, capacity for innovation and incubation among other such factors. The selection procedure also focuses on the potential of the institution to improve and secure a rank in top-500 of global institutions and then improve to eventually feature in top-100.  Recommendation7.The Committee also recommends the Department to consider seeking additional allocations under the scheme at the RE stage in case a view emerges that more Institutions can be 

19  
considered for recognition as IoEs which will lead these institutions to emerge as World Class Institutions that can help in quest for India emerging as a global academic hub.(Para: 3.4.9 ibid)Action TakenThe Committee was informed that subsequent to the budget announcement in the year ory framework for the World Class Institutions scheme was developed for identifying 10 institutions each from the public and private category and enabling them to emerge as world class teaching and research institutions.   It was also informed that the EEC and UGC have recommended 10 public institutions, out of which 08 institutions are provided financial assistance of upto Rs 1000 crore by the Government to enable them to execute their plans to achieve desired results. The budgetary allocation is based on the requirement of funds by the institutions under revenue and capital heads in each financial year.NATIONAL APPRENTICESHIP TRAINING SCHEMERecommendation8.The Committee observes that currently, two apprenticeship schemes are in implementation, namely, National Apprenticeship Training Scheme (NATS) by the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education (MoE) and National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme(NAPS) by the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE). NATS implements apprenticeship training for engineering graduates, diploma holders and general stream graduates; while NAPS is meant for the rest of the categories of apprentices. The Committee notes that though there may be a demarcation in target group of beneficiaries, however, both schemes seem to be aimed towards a similar objective. Noting that the convergence of both the schemes will be beneficial, the Committee recommends that a joint analytical evaluation study be undertaken by the Department in coordination with MSDE of both the schemes, their objectives and the level to which they would get fulfilled if a single scheme was implemented as that will be in consonance with the thrust on integration of education and skill development which the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 envisages.        (Para: 3.6.3 ibid)

20  
Action TakenThe Committee has been informed by the Department that the implementation of NATS by MoE and Education and Skill Development & Entrepreneurship in a meeting held on 17.08.2021 has given the demarcation that MoE will administer apprenticeship programs offered by educational qualification equivalent to Graduate or above and MSDE shall continue to administer apprenticeship program for rest of categories of apprentices below degree level. Further, the apprenticeship for graduate passed is different from apprenticeship of students qualified of 8thand 10thgrade as the subject of graduate apprenticeships needs synergy with UGC and AICTE and with educational institutions.STUDENT FINANCIAL AIDRecommendation9.The Committee notes the submissions of the Department and recommends that a study of the various scholarship schemes given for higher education, along with the categories of beneficiaries, state-wise, SC/ST, gender-wise etc across the various Ministries of Government of India be carried out to evaluate the amounts and other benefits under each scheme. This will help in coherent formulation of policies and identification of groups to whom targeted scholarships can be planned in a better way in future bringing the scholarships offered by other Ministries at par at least.       (Para: 3.7.6 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed the Committee that the Cabinet Secretariat videletter No. 2/CM/2022(i) dated 28.01.2022 conveyed that the Union Cabinet videits decision dated 19.01.2022 has approved continuation of the Scheme Student Financial Aid (Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha Protsanhan [PM-USP] Yojana till 31.03.2026 or till further review, whichever is earlier, comprising of 3 Central Sector Schemes of Scholarship Division namely (i) Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship for College and University Students; (ii) Special Scholarship Scheme for Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh; and (iii) Central Sector Interest Subsidy Scheme and Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Education Loan. Since the observation of the Committee is specific to scholarship schemes, action taken is furnished only for the first two schemes of the 

21  
Scholarship Division. The evaluation study of the schemes, as informed by the Department is given as under: 1. Third-party evaluation study of CSSS was conducted by the Institute of Economic Growth and approved by Secretary (HE) on 05.05.2020.2. Third party evaluation study of SSS for J&K was conducted by the Institute of Economic Growth and approved by Secretary (HE) on 14.05.2020.It was also informed that the evaluation study uses a combination of principles and research methods in order to assess the performance and implementation of the scheme and to measure its impact on delivering its goals to the concerned beneficiaries. The recommendations made in third party evaluation of the scheme have been taken into account and the NSP portal is being revamped to address the genuine concerns of stakeholders.DIGITAL INDIA e-LEARNINGRecommendation10.The Committee appreciates the enhancement in allocation under Digital India e-Learning that has increased in BE 2023-24 as compared to RE 2022-23.      (Para: 3.8.2 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed the Committee that the Digital India e-Learning schemes consist of NMEICT, Higher Education Statistics and Public Information System (HESPIS), Academic Bank of Credit (ABC), and PM- e Vidya. The RE 2022-23 for NMEICT Scheme was Rs. 400.00 Cr and BE 2023-24 is also 400.00 Cr. There is no enhancement in the budget allocated under NMEICT. Recommendation11.The Committee strongly feels that there is a pressing need to ensure that digital education penetrates even further and recommends that the Department should evaluate the schemes under -developing high-quality electronic content in all local languages to cater to the diversity in the country, build suitable infrastructure for virtual training and laboratories along with high-end 

22  
skill development courses, create guidelines for online/digital education to tackle the digital divide and to make use of technology for integrating the Indian education system.         (Para: 3.8.3 ibid)Action TakenThe Committee was informed by the Department that an independent third party evaluation of the various projects under National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology (NMEICT Phase II) has been undertaken by National Institute for Smarty Government (NISG) during the year 2020-21. It was also informed that based on their recommendations, an EFC note was prepared for continuation of NMEICT scheme, Cabinet has approved the National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology (NMEICT) Phase-III Scheme with recommended amount of Rs. 2,455/- crore (as recommended by EFC) for 15th Finance Commission Cycle till 31.03.2026. The Department also informed the Committee that the objective of the NMEICT phase III to provide quality higher education to remotest part of the country and bridge the digital divide, i.e., the gap in the skills to use computing devices for the teaching and learning among urban and rural teachers/learners in Higher Education domain and empower those, who have hitherto remained untouched by the digital revolution and have not been able to join the mainstream of the knowledge economy. It was further informed that NMEICT Phase III covers critical components related to above mentioned objectives such as translation of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) in regional languages, development of Virtual Labs, establishment of National Education Technology Forum and National Digital Education Architecture (NDEAR), SAMARTH e-Government suite for providing an integrated view of student and faculty lifecycle.Recommendation12.The Committee observes that Academic Bank of Credit (ABC), as envisaged in the National Educational Policy (NEP) 2020 is a national-level facility to promote flexibility of curriculum framework and inter-disciplinary/multi-disciplinary academic mobility of students across the higher education institutions in the country with appropriate "Credit Transfer" mechanism. The Committee recommends that the Department should lay great emphasis on popularising the novel concept.             (Para: 3.8.8 ibid)

23  
Action TakenThe Department in its Action Taken Note informed the Committee that as per recommendations of NEP 2020, Academic Bank of Credits (ABC) has been established which digitally stores the academic credits earned by students from HEIs registered with ABC, for awarding degrees/diploma/PG diploma/certificates taking into account credits earned by students. The Regulations on Academic Bank of Credits were notified on 29.07.2021 and further amended to enable students of all HEIs to open academic credit bank account irrespective of National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) status. It is further submitted that National Credit Framework (NCrF) has been jointly developed by the regulators of school, skill and higher education and released on 10.04.2023. It provides framework for accumulation of credit from academic grade, skill programme and relevant experience. It will enable multi-disciplinary education, establishing equivalence and mobility across streams, lifelong learning, recognition of prior leaning, multiple exit/entry.It was further stated that during zone-wise consultation-cum-review meetings with States/UTs held on 28.02.2023, 09.03.2023, 24.03.2023 and 11.05.2023, States/UTs have informed that they have started on-boarding ABC portal and students are getting registered on the portal. As of now 950 Universities and INIs are on-boarded and approximately more than 97 lakhs students have been registered, which can be considered a positive development in the field of higher education as a whole.****

24  
CHAPTER-IIIRECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEESCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATIONCENTRALLY-SPONSORED SCHEME: RASHTRIYA UCHCHATAR SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RUSA)Recommendation1.The Committee observes that funds are lying unutilized with the States/UTs due to revised instructions by Ministry of Finance for Centrally Sponsored Schemes regarding the Single Nodal Account (SNA) and the slow pace of compliance to these instructions by the States/UTs. In view of the above facts, the Committee recommends the Department to ensure better coordination with States/UTs and monitor the unutilized funds for improved utilization under RUSA 3.0 to curtail unspent amounts lying with States/UTs.                (Para: 3.3.12 ibid)Action TakenThe Committee has been informed by the Department that regular review meetings,workshops and communications are undertaken for providing guidance and assistance with the State/UTs to comply with the revised instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance. As a result, there has been an increase in the utilisation of unspent balances by States/UTs.Comments of the CommitteeThe Committee appreciates the fact that there has been an increase in utilization of unspent balances by States/UTs and recommends that a Status Note, mentioning the State/UT-wise progress and present status be furnished for information of the Committee.HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING AGENCY (HEFA) Recommendation2.The Committee notes that as on 31st December, 2022, projects worth Rs. 46700.03 crore have been approved by HEFA for which a loan amount of Rs. 35,253.18 crore has been 

25  
sanctioned and Rs. 16013.79 crore has actually been disbursed. The Committee agrees with the contention of the Department that outbreak of Covid-19 has dampened the demand, as the construction activities were closed and educational institutions were not in position to undertake new projects which resulted in approval of loans worth Rs. 35,253.18 crore, so far, falling short undertake sincere efforts to sanction more loans to mobilize the resources at the fullest, ensure speedy disbursal of sanctioned loans and to achieve targets in a time-bound manner during 2023-24. The Committee further recommends to expedite the revision of the HEFA scheme and notify it at the earliest to widen the scope for financing under HEFA.(Para: 3.5.13 ibid)Action TakenThe Department has informed that the recommendations have been noted.Comments of the CommitteeThe Committee is of the view that a comprehensive status note detailing the efforts made to sanction more loans, ensure speedy disbursal and current status against the targets defined, be furnished by the Department to evaluate the progress made so far. The Committee also seeks the current status in respect of HEFA Scheme and the action taken to widen the scope for financing under HEFA.DIGITAL INDIA e-LEARNING Recommendation3.The Committee appreciates the measures being taken by the Department to improve digital education in India which will also enable increased digital accessibility among students in rural areas particularly remote villages with access to high-quality education. Also, it has been noted that India's growing embrace of digital education is luring major international ed-tech platforms to provide students with online courses and expand their access to educational options. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Department should focus on identifying the remotest areas which are still left from digital accessibility and to equip students with contemporary and up to date e-learning platforms for preparation of workforce well equipped with industry-based skills and better employability.       (Para: 3.8.4 ibid)Action Taken

26  
The Committee was informed that the Department of Higher Education under PM e-Vidya today operates 22 DTH Educational channels to enable students to select the best courses /combination of courses to suit their interest; Educational Content delivered through DTH channels on 24x7 basis will reach in the remote areas where internet connectivity is very poor. Students/learners in the rural areas will get benefit from this initiative. It is expected that all 3.84 crores students enrolled in higher education system will be the beneficiary of this initiative.Further, a National Internship Portal has been developed under the NMEICT Scheme which aims to connect students across all locations with internship opportunities. Also, many of these opportunities are paid internship opportunities with stipends for the students.Comments of the Committee        The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Department of Higher Education. The Committee recommends that the Department should look into a proposal to start PM e-Vidya Scholarship Scheme for e-learning/ SWAYAMPRABHA Courses for underprivileged and students belonging to rural background. The scholarship scheme must cover all the expenses related to e-learning. Additionally, the streaming of 22 DTH channels should also be done on popular video streaming/social media platforms for better reach-out. The Committee further recommends the Department to monitor the progress of digital education and e-learning platforms in the country and to undertake a survey to ascertain and assess the accessibility of digital education and e-learning platforms to the students of the remotest and rural areas and apprise the Committee in this regard from time to time.        UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION (UGC), ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION (AICTE) and other Autonomous Bodies (CUs/ IITs/ IITs etc.)Recommendation4.In order to see a noticeable improvement, the Committee recommends the Department to take a proactive approach for monitoring the progress and actions being taken towards filling up of these vacancies in universities, premier institutions under AICTE, IIMs, IITs, NITs etc., in a time bound manner with permanent faculties as far as possible by the end of 2023. The Committee further recommends that special recruitment campaigns should also be undertaken.(Para: 4.4 ibid)

27  
Action TakenThe Department has informed the Committee that this Ministry is committed to fill existing vacancies. The institutes are also working to fill existing vacancies as soon as possible.  Ministry of Education has given directive to all the Central Higher Educational Institutions to fill up the vacancies in a Mission Mode. To complete the task, this Ministry has already initiated action for filling up of vacancies from September, 2021. These appointments include teaching positions (viz.Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors), along with Support staff (non-faculty), Registrars, Deputy Registrar, Assistant Registrars, Librarians etc. The Institute-wise data of filled up vacancies is also uploaded on the DoPT portal.Comments of the Committee           The Committee while noting the status recommends that a statement indicating the Institution-wise status of vacancies filled and vacant at present, along with the strategy to address the filling-up of remaining vacancies in a time-bound manner be placed before the Committee for its consideration.                                                                                                                                                 *****

28  
CHAPTER-IVRECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED-Nil-****

29  
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCERECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE (CHAPTER-III)SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATIONCENTRALLY-SPONSORED SCHEME: RASHTRIYA UCHCHATAR SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RUSA)The Committee appreciates the fact that there has been an increase in utilization of unspent balances by States/UTs and recommends that a Status Note, mentioning the State/UT-wise progress and present status be furnished for information of the Committee.(Para: 3.3.12)HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING AGENCY (HEFA) The Committee is of the view that a comprehensive status note detailing the efforts made to sanction more loans, ensure speedy disbursal and current status against the targets defined, be furnished by the Department to evaluate the progress made so far. TheCommittee also seeks the current status in respect of HEFA Scheme and the action taken to widen the scope for financing under HEFA.(Para: 3.5.13)DIGITAL INDIA e-LEARNINGThe Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Department of Higher Education. The Committee recommends that the Department should look into a proposal to start PM e-Vidya Scholarship Scheme for e-learning/ SWAYAMPRABHA Courses for underprivileged and students belonging to rural background. The scholarship scheme mustcover all the expenses related to e-learning. Additionally, the streaming of 22 DTH channels should also be done on popular video streaming/social media platforms for better reach-out. The Committee further recommends the Department to monitor the progress of digital education and e-learning platforms in the country and to undertake a survey to ascertain and assess the accessibility of digital education and e-learning platforms to the students of 

30  
the remotest and rural areas and apprise the Committee in this regard from time to time.              (Para: 3.8.4)UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION (UGC), ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION (AICTE) and other Autonomous Bodies (CUs/ IITs/ IITs etc.)The Committee while noting the status recommends that a statement indicating the Institution-wise status of vacancies filled and vacant at present, along with the strategy to address the filling-up of remaining vacancies in a time-bound manner be placed before the Committee for its consideration.                                                                                                                                       (Para: 4.4)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ***

31 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(EWCY&S)  
 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 10:00 A.M. 
on Monday, 7th August, 2023 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe 
Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev 
4. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
6. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
7. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
8.  Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
9.  Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
10. Shri Balak Nath 
11. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
12. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
13. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
14. Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms. Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
6. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
7. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
 

32 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee and in his opening remarks apprised that this meeting of the Committee has been 
called to consider and adopt three draft Action Taken Reports and one draft subject Report 
which are as under: 
(I) 352 nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 348th Report on “Demands for Grants 2023-
24 of the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education”; 
 (II) * * * 
 (III) * * * 
 (IV) * * * 
 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid three draft Action Taken Reports and 
one subject Report, one by one and adopted the same without any amendment. 
 
4. The Committee, however, authorized the Chairman, to correct any patent errors or make 
consequential changes, if any, in the Report. The Committee then decided to present/lay the 
Reports in both the Houses of Parliament during its ongoing Session on 8th August, 2023 and 
authorized Shri Vivek Thakur, M.P. and Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Shri 
Ghanshyam Tiwari, M.P. and their absence, Shri  Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya, to present 
the Reports in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Dharambir Singh, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod, M.P. were authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on 
the Table of Lok Sabha. 
   5.   The meeting adjourned at 10:35 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                         A.K. Mallick  
7th August, 2023                                                                                              Director 
 
 
 
 
*  Pertains to other matter. 

33 
 
Annexure 1 
(Rupees in crore) 
S. 
No.
Name of 
scheme/ 
Sub-
scheme 
 
Financ
ial 
Outlay 
2023-
24 
Outputs/deliverables  
against the Outlay  
2023-24 
Projected  
Medium term Outcomes 
Quarterly Financial Targets 
1st 
Quarter 
1.4.2023 to 
30.6.2023 
IInd 
Quart
er 
1.7.20
23 to 
30.9.2
023 
IIIrd 
Quarte
r 
1.10.20
23 
 to  
31.12.2
023 
IVth 
Quart
er 
1.1.20
24 to  
31.3.2
024 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
 Central Sector Schemes 
1 World 
Class 
Institution
s 
1500.0
0 
Eight publicly funded 
Institutions will implement 
the scheme as per their 
MoUs. 
 
Providing world class 
education within the 
country at an 
affordable rate to 
domestic students. 
Improvement in world 
rankings of the 
selected Indian 
Institutions. 
 
400.00 400.00 400.00 300.00 
2 Prime 
Minister's 
Girls' 
Hostel 
10.00 Construction of seven Girls 
Hostels in J&K. 3 in Jammu 
region, 3 in Kashmir region 
and 1 in Ladakh region. 
Increase in enrolment 
and retention of girl 
students in higher 
education in respective 
regions in J&K. 
2.50 2.50 2.50 2.50 
3 
 
PradhanM
antriUchc
hatarShiks
haProtsaha
nYojana 
1554       
3a Interest 
Subsidy 
and 
contributio
n for 
Guarantee 
Funds 
(PM-USP 
CSIS) 
 1.  Release of interest 
subsidy claims 
under the scheme 
through indicators: 
a. Number of students 
for whom interest 
subsidy claims 
were paid in the FY 
(Fresh)- 68000 
b. Number of students 
for whom interest 
1. Increase in 
the enrolment 
of students in 
Technical/ 
Professional 
Courses in 
Higher 
Educational 
Institutions 
across the 
country by 
increasing the 
452.00 324.00 232.00 292.00 

34 
 
subsidy claims 
were paid in the FY 
(Renewal)- 384000 
2. Credit Guarantee 
Fund for Education 
Loans: 
Total number of accounts of 
students guaranteed- 131429 
affordability. 
Reduce NPA burden 
on the lending banks 
which would result in 
increasing their 
confidence to cover 
more number of 
eligible students: 
3b Scholarshi
p for 
College 
and 
University 
students 
 
(PM-USP 
CSSS ) 
  
1. Release of 
scholarship to 
eligible students: 
a. Number of 
scholarship 
released during the 
year under the 
scheme (fresh) - 
75000 
b. Number of 
scholarship 
released during the 
year under the 
scheme (renewals) - 
105000 
c. % of female 
students among 
those receiving 
scholarships- 50% 
Improvement in 
enrolment of 
meritorious students 
from low income 
families successfully 
pursuing higher 
studies;  
17.00 5.00 90.00 142.00 
3c Special 
Scholarshi
p for 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
and 
Ladakh 
 
(PM-USP 
SSS  for 
J&K and 
Ladakh) 
 
1. Release of 
scholarship to 
eligible students of 
J&K through 
indicators 
mentioned: 
a. Number of 
scholarships 
released during the 
year under the 
scheme (Fresh)- 
4000 
b. Number of 
scholarships 
released during the 
year under the 
scheme (Renewal)- 
9300 
Increase in number of 
students from J&K 
who will be able to 
pursue higher studies 
outside the State. 
50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 

35 
 
% of female 
students among 
those receiving 
scholarships- 33% 
4 PM 
Research 
Fellowshi
p 
400.00 Selection and admission of 
meritorious students in the 
Ph.Dprograrnmes at IITs, 
IISERs, IISc and Central 
Universities/NITs (in top 25 
NIRF) that offer science 
and/or technology degrees. 
2560 Fellows have been 
selected so far and target of 
3000 fellows is likely to be 
achieved by Mar’23/Apr’23. 
The Scheme has been 
designed for 
improving the quality 
of research in various 
higher educational 
institutions in the 
country. With 
attractive fellowships, 
the scheme seeks to 
attract the best talent 
into research thereby 
realizing the vision of 
development through 
innovation. 
130.00 90.00 90.00 90.00 
5 National 
Mission in 
Education 
Through 
ICT 
400.00 DTH Educational Channels 
upgraded, 
Providing Connectivity, 
NDL and Other ICT 
Projects. 
To achieve the three 
cardinal principles of 
Education Policy viz., 
access, equity and 
quality  
40.00 60.00 110.00 190.00 
6 Higher 
Education 
Statistics 
and Public 
Informatio
n System 
(HESPIS) 
10.00 1. Registration of Higher 
Education Institutes (HEIs)  
(new/ unregistered) on a 
centralized  AISHE portal 
(https://aishe.gov.in) and 
collection of comprehensive 
Data on Higher Education 
from these registered HEIs ( 
around 60,000) on more than 
1100 fields including key 
parameters like  social-group 
wise Enrolment, Teachers, 
Hostel, programmes/courses 
etc. 
 
2 Setting up of AISHE Units 
in the remaining States/UTs 
and AISHE cells in 
Affiliating Universities to 
coordinate All India Survey 
on Higher Education. 
 
3. Coordination with 
States/UTs and Institutions 
to ensure timely uploading 
of data and its authenticity 
through trained Nodal 
Officers of Higher 
The survey will 
strengthen official 
Statistical system to 
produce Education 
Statistics periodically 
with timeliness and 
quality so as to assess 
and review the 
performance of 
education sector and 
regional divergences 
across the country.  
 
Institutional 
Coordination between 
Ministry and other 
data producing 
agencies will be 
strengthened to 
achieve the objectives 
of One Nation One 
Data. 
 
The data collected 
under AISHE will 
facilitate policy 
formulation and 
implementation 
2.50 2.50 2.50 2.50 

36 
 
Education institutions.  
 
4. Training and capacity 
building workshops to be 
conducted in States. 
relating to Higher 
Education including 
NEP. 
7 National 
Initiative 
for Design 
Innovation 
10.00 Enhanced reach and raised 
standards of design 
education and innovation in 
the country.  
 
 
Provision of Cost 
effective solutions for 
society, delivery of 
products for the rural 
part of country; This 
will enhance reach and 
raised standards of 
design education and 
innovation in the 
country. Increase in 
patents to be filed and 
products to be 
delivered.  
4.45 4.45 4.45 4.45 
8 Start up 
India 
Initiative 
in Higher 
Education 
Institutes 
11.21 Establishment of New 
Research Parks at IITs and 
IISc Bangalore. 
 
A full-fledged Research 
Park is already functioning 
in IIT Madras. Research 
Park at IIT-Kharagpur was 
inaugurated in Aug 2019 and 
at IIT-Delhi was inaugurated 
in Sept’2022. 
Research Parks at IIT 
Bombay, IIT Kanpur, IIT 
Guwahati, IIT Hyderabad 
and IISc, Bangalore are in 
various stages of 
construction. 
 
Promotion of research 
and re-strengthening 
of Industry Academia 
Collaboration 
(Research Parks are 
under construction) 
3.21 3.00 3.00 2.00 
9 Unnat 
Bharat 
Abh 
iyan 
9.40 1. Connect Institutes of 
Higher education with a 
maximum of 2000 villages. 
 
2. UBA      cells      
established      in      
the      Institutions. 
 
3. Adoption of clusters of 
Gram Panchayats by HEIs 
in their vicinity. 
 
4. Training of Nodal 
Officers selected at 
institution level. 
Building institutional 
capacity in HEIs in 
research & training 
relevant to the needs 
of rural India. 
Addressing key 
problems in rural 
India through use of 
technology; 
Strengthen the 
technical design of 
interventions in key 
sectoral areas of 
natural resource 
management such as 
2.35 2.35 2.35 2.35 

37 
 
 
5. Technical Institutions 
will assess problems in 
villages and suggest 
technological solutions & 
assist in the installation of 
solutions. Non-technical 
Institutions will work on 
awareness generation, 
social re-engineering and 
also identification of 
solutions. 
 
6. Monitoring at the 
Institution/District/State 
Government level once a 
quarter. 
 
7. IIT Delhi hosts an 
online portal wherein all 
participating institutions 
can login and enter the 
details of the villages 
selected, solutions 
identified and status of their 
implementation. 
8. Improving academics of 
UG/PG students for 
learning real life challenges 
of Rural Areas. 
water and soil, 
economic activities 
such as agriculture 
and related 
production, or related 
to crafts and artisans, 
infrastructure such as 
housing, roads, energy.
 
This will incorporate 
knowledge inputs into 
planning and 
implementation 
levels. 
 
Expect learning 
outcome for students 
in practical skill 
improvement through 
the course introduced 
by UGC under Unnat 
Bharat Abhiyan 
namely “Fostering 
social responsibility 
10 Impacting 
Research 
Innovation 
and 
Technolog
y 
(Implemen
tation of 
the 
IMPRINT 
Research 
Initiative) 
5.00 IMPRINT-II is based on a 
revised strategy after 
experience from IMPRINT-I 
which was implemented 
upto Mar’22. The proposals 
selected under IMPRINT-II 
are being funded by a Joint 
Corpus of MoE (erstwhile 
MHRD) and DST, with 50% 
contribution from each. 184 
projects have been approved 
under IMPRINT-II scheme 
with a total cost of 
Rs.163.42 Cr. Projects are 
being monitored regularly so 
as to achieve the objectives 
in the approved period. 
 
UchhatarAvishkarYojana 
(UAY)  Scheme has been 
Under IMPRINT-II, 
all projects are under 
execution and 156 
projects are expected 
to be completed in FY 
2023-24. 
 
102 projects under the 
UAY scheme have 
completed and 34 
projects are ongoing. 
2.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 

38 
 
subsumed under the Scheme 
“IMPRINT”. 136 projects 
has been approved under the 
scheme since its inception in 
2015. 
11 Impactful 
Policy 
Research 
in Social 
Science 
(IMPRES
S) 
  Nil* Identify and support 
research projects social 
science disciplines relevant 
to policy making, 
implementation and the 
society in each domain 
Insights and inputs 
from research in 
Social Sciences for 
thrust/key research 
areas relevant to 
policy makers and the 
society. 
Nil* NIL* NIL* NIL* 
12 Scheme 
for 
Promotion 
of 
Academic 
and 
Research 
Collaborat
ion 
(SPARC) 
50.00 SPARC Phase-I projects will 
complete by 31st March 
2023. SPARC Phase-II 
projects will start in FY 
2023-2024.  
 
As per the SPARC Apex 
Committee Meeting held on 
12th January 2023, Phase-II 
projects have to start from 
2023-2024 and for that a BE 
Provision of Rs. 211.59 Cr. 
has been requested for 
FY2023-24 to sanction 
around 300 + projects. 
 
Target Output-
Outcome 
Monitoring 
Framework 
(OOMF)for FY 2023-
24 as per the 
sanctioned SPARC 
SFC is Attached. 
The changes expected 
w.r.t. 
the proposed OOMF 
are highlighted in 
RED and shaded in 
Yellow. 
52.8975 52.897
5 
52.8975 52.897
5 
13 Scheme 
for 
Transform
ational and 
Advanced 
Research 
in 
Sciences 
(STARS) 
 25.00 1. Provide funding to 
research projects leading to 
scientific outputs of research 
publications, innovations in 
processes, potential patents. 
 
2. Training for young 
scientists (with Ph.D. / or 
PDF experience) in 
operations and maintenance 
of high-instruments and in 
providing services for 
research. 
 
3. Organisation of training 
workshops on research 
methodology research ethics 
& integrity, science 
communication in tier-II and 
tier-III cities and towns. 
 
 Research 
publications, Novel 
processes, potential 
patents. 
 
 
 
Increased number of 
young researchers 
supported through new 
projects 
 54.00 12.00  12.00  12.00 
14 PanditMad 45.00 Establishing Schools of In-service teachers  26.25 26.25 26.25 26.25 

39 
 
anMohan
Malaviya 
National 
Mission 
on 
Teachers 
and 
Teaching 
 
 
Education in 
Central/State/deemed 
Universities. 
 
Establishing Centres of 
Excellence (CoE) for 
Curriculum and Pedagogy 
which has 3 sub components 
– Centre of Excellence in 
Science & Maths, teaching 
learning Centres, Faculty 
development Centre. 
 
Establishing Centres of 
Excellence for Curriculum 
and Pedagogy which include 
CESME. 
 
Establishing Teaching 
Learning Centres (TLCs). 
 
Establishing Faculty 
Development Centres 
(FDCs). 
 
Establishing National 
Resource Centre for Higher 
Education. 
 
Setting up Institutes of 
Academic leadership and 
Education Management. 
 
Establishing Inter-University 
Centre for Education 
(IUCTE) teachers. 
 
Subject based Network. 
 
Innovation awards and 
teaching resources grants 
including workshop and 
seminars conducted. 
 
Leadership-for-
Academicians Program 
(LEAP). 
 
Establishing Centers for 
conducting Faculty 
Induction Program within 
will undergo capacity 
building /professional 
development program 
through CoE and other 
institutions set up 
under the scheme; 
Teachers will receive 
training in pedagogical 
and teaching learning 
methods. 

40 
 
PMMMNMTT Centres. 
 
Notifying Discipline specific 
NRCs within 
PMMMMNMT 
15 National 
Institution
al Ranking 
Framewor
k (NIRF) 
4.50 
 
 
1. Applications for ranking 
of HEIs in different 
categories and subject 
domains: 7,500  
 
2. No. of Categories / Sub-
category 12 
 
India Rankings (NIRF) 
is an annual exercise. 
As such medium term 
outcomes are not 
applicable. 
1.125 1.125 1.125 1.125 
16 Global 
Initiative 
for 
Academic 
Network 
(GIAN) 
10.00 1. HEIs identified and 
approved for as Hosting 
Institutions. 
 
Foreign experts invited for 
giving lectures and taking 
courses. 
 
Courses made available on 
digital platform 
Development of 
research /industry 
oriented short duration 
courses of 
international standard. 
3.4375 3.4375 3.4375 3.4375 
17 Programm
e for 
Apprentic
eship 
Training 
(Scholarsh
ips & 
Stipends) 
440.00 Eligible students selected for 
placement from amongst the 
applicants who wish to 
undergo training with the 
industry. 
Graduates/ 
Technicians will be 
equipped with 
practical knowledge 
and skills required in 
their field of work. 
112.50 112.50 112.50 112.50 
18 Study in 
India (SII) 
25.00 To increase the inflow of 
foreign students to India 
India will become a 
preferred education 
hub for foreign 
students. 
6.25 6.25 6.25 6.25 
19 ASEAN 
Fellowshi
p 
3.00 Grant of upto 1000 
fellowships to students 
of ASEAN countries to 
pursue integrated Ph.D 
programmes in the IITs, at a 
total outlay of Rs. 300 cr. for 
7 years (3 batches). For the 
students admitted, 
fellowships will be provided 
at the same rate as Indian 
students, along with the 
yearly research grant, as 
applicable. 
 
So far in three rounds, 65 
students have been selected 
I. To utilize the 
talent of 
immigrants of 
ASEAN 
countries for 
India’s 
advantage,  
II. To spread India’s 
soft power in 
these countries,  
III. To improve the 
international 
rankings of IITs 
and  
To improve India’s 
foreign policy strategy 
0.75 0.75 0.75 0.75 

41 
 
under the Scheme but owing 
to Covid pandemic 
worldwide, only 35 students 
have joined their respective 
institutes in the country and 
20 students have dropped 
after enrolling. Citing 
laggard response under the 
scheme various amendments 
were proposed under the 
scheme such as inclusion of 
M.Tech / Master 
programmes, waiver of 
tuition fees etc. to Ministry 
of Finance however the 
proposal was not agreed to. 
Further, Ministry of Finance 
suggested that the scheme 
may be continued on the 
same terms and conditions 
as approved by SFC till 
2025-26 and discontinued 
thereafter. 
and diplomatic goals. 
20 Champion 
Services 
Sector-
Education 
Service-
Internation
alization 
of Higher 
Education 
200.00 Scholarships, Strengthening 
of 
infrastructure,Strengthening 
Digital infrastructure- Multi 
lingual websites,Translation 
of promotional material text 
in multiple 
languages,Introducing the 
city and heritage walks 
,Orientation/ Seminar/ 
Workshops/ Alumni 
meets,Bridge courses in 
English  
 
 
Increase in inflow of 
foreign students to 
India ,Enhancing 
India’s reputation as  
global education 
provider  
 
50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 
21 
Higher 
Education 
Financing 
Agency 
(HEFA) 
Nil* Educational institutions to 
be funded to create state-of-
the-art research labs and 
other infrastructure; 
1.Large number of 
institutions to emerge 
with latest 
infrastructure, robust 
teaching and research 
facilities. 
2. Corresponding 
reduction in Budgetary 
funding for 
infrastructure 
development in 
centrally funded 
educational 
600.00 600.00 1200.00 1200.0
0 

42 
 
institutions 
22 Academic 
Bank of 
Credit 
10.00 Academic institutions 
including Universities, 
Institutions of National 
Importance, School 
Education Boards etc are on 
board under ABC. 
Online platform 
provided to the 
students for accessing 
academic credits 
 
3.50 3.50 3.50 3.50 
23 *RUSA 1500.0
0 
- - - - - - 
 
12.  Impactful Policy Research in Social Science (IMPRESS):- 
 
*The Scheme was for implementation upto 31.03.2021 only and the ‘Third Party Evaluation’ of 
the Scheme is presently under process for taking a view on further continuation of the Scheme. 
Therefore, no funds could be released under the Scheme from F.Y. 2021-22 onwards. Third party 
evaluation is being done by BHU and a report is still expected. 
15. Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya National Mission on Teachers and Teaching 
* Approval of the competent authority is yet to be received. In this regard, two Committees were 
constituted for setting up of Institutional Mechanism for the scheme, which have submitted their 
reports. Now, Ministry is in process of examining and designing the scheme as per UGC’s 
recommendations. The scheme PMMMNMTT is under examination and review. 
25 *Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) 
*The process for taking approval for the revised structure of the scheme is underway. 
Accordingly, it is excluded from the list, also it is excluded in OOMF 23-24. 
 