Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
REPORT NO.
311
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th December, )12 2019
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th December, )12 2019
THREE HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT
Khelo India Scheme

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

15
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
THREE HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT
Khelo India Scheme
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12th December , 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12th December , 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................... .. (iv)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... ....... 1-11
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .............................................................. 12-13
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... ..... 15-22
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................... . 23-34

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2019)
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
3. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
5. Shri Derek O’ Brien
6. Dr. Sasmit Parra
7. Dr. Sasikala Pushpa Ramaswamy
8. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
9. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
10. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
12. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen
13. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary
14. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu
15. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta
16. Shri S . Jagathrakshakan
17. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande
18. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji
19. Shri Asit Kumar Mal
20. Ms. Chandrani Murmu
21. Shri Balak Nalh
22. Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar
23. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad
24. Shri T. N. Prathapan
25. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod
26. Shri Jagannath Sarkar
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
28. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma
29. Shri Dharambir Singh
30. Shri S. Venkatesan
31. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Deputy Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer
Shrimati Suman Khurana, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee, present this Three Hundred Eleventh Report of the
Committee on the subject ‘Khelo India Scheme’
2. The Committee held a meeting on  22nd October, 2019 with the Secretary, Department of Sports,
Director General, Sports Authority of India and other officials of the Department of Sports on the subject
‘Khelo lndia Scheme.’
3. While drafting the Report, the Committee relied on the following documents.
(i) Derailed background note on the Khelo India Scheme; and
(ii) Replies to the Questionnaire on the Khelo India Scheme:
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 10
th December,
2019.
5. for facility of the reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been printed
in bold letters at the end of the Report.
DR. SA TYANARAY AN JATIYA
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
10th December,  2019 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 19, 1941 (Saka) Committee on Human Resource Development,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

    ACRONYMS
AIU : Association of Indian Universities
GC : General Council
KISG : Khelo India School Games
KIYG : Khelo lndia Youth Games
KIT : Khelo India Talent
KIA : Khelo India Athletes
LNIPE : Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical
NLEC : National Level Executive Committee
NPFAI : National Playing Fields Association of India
NSF : National Sports Federations
PAC : Project Appraisal Committee
PCI : Paralympic Committee of India
PETs : Physical Education Teacher
PPP : Public Private Partnership
SAI : Sports Authority of India
SGFI : School Games Federation of India
SIPDA : Scheme for Implementation of rights of Persons with Disabilities Act
TOPS : Target Olympic Podium Scheme
UTs : Union Territories
USIS : Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme
(iv)

1
REPORT
Sports and games have always been an integral component in the all-round development of human
personality. Besides, being a means of entertainment and physical fitness, sports have also played a great
role in generating the spirit of healthy competition and bonding within the community. It is also necessary to
mention that achievements in sports at International level have always been a source of national pride and
prestige.
2. In the recent past, India has seen great success at various sports events at international level. During
the year 2018. Indian sportspersons performed well in the Commonwealth, Asian, Para Asian, Summer
Youth Olympic Games, Men’s Hockey World Cup and International Boxing Association Women’s World
Boxing Championship. Notable performance of Indian sportspersons was also seen in 2019 in the International
Shooting Sport Federation events, Special Olympics, Archery World Championship, Commonwealth
Weightlifting Championship, Badminton and Wrestling World Championships. The Committee would like to
highlight that in spite of various proactive policies and programmes of the Department of Sports, Government
of India much of the success in these games is still attributable to the individual efforts of the players and
private coaching. However, the Government, in recent past, has made dedicated efforts in creating a sports
culture in the country by introducing a number of initiatives. One such initiative is the Khelo India Scheme
which is aimed at broad basing of sports and promotion of excellence in sports. According to the Department,
while priority is given to all its schemes, currently more focus is being given to Khelo India Scheme as it
boosted the Government’s efforts for overall promotion and development of sports in the country. In the
light of this background, the Committee decided to examine the Khelo India scheme as it seeks to create a
robust culture/mass participation and excellence in sports in the country.
KHELO INDIA SCHEME
3. The Secretary, Department of Sports in his presentation before the Committee in a meeting held on
22
nd October, 2019 submitted that Khelo India Scheme was being implemented from the year 2016-17. It
was further apprised that taking from the experience gained in implementing the scheme during the year
2016-17, and on the basis of consultations with major stakeholders, especially, the State Governments and
inputs received from them, the Khelo India Scheme was revamped with 12 verticals and notified On 14th
October, 2017 with a total outlay of ` 1756 crores. Briefing the Committee about the utilization and creation
of sports infrastructure under Khelo India Scheme, the Secretary submitted that 168 new sports infrastructure
projects have been sanctioned with an amount of Rs. 1143.33 crore, out of which  ` 585.75 crores have
been released. It was also informed that 10 projects have been completed and 80 were nearing completion.
The Committee was also apprised about the identification of talented athletes under the Khelo India Games
2018 and 2019 numbering 416 and 239 respectively. Details of selected athletes along with sports discipline
is placed at Annexure-I.
4. The Committee has been given to understand that the revamped Khelo India Scherne aims to improve
sports culture and achieve sporting excellence in the country and also to encourage sports all over the
country thus allowing the population to harness the power of sports through its cross-cutting influence,
namely, holistic development of children and youth, community development, social integration, gender
equality, healthy lifestyle, national pride and economic opportunities related to sports development.
5. According to the Department of Sports, for monitoring of the scheme, a Project Appraisal Committee

2
(PAC), shall appraise all proposals received under the scheme and place them before a Departmental Project
Approval Committee (DAPC) for approval. The approved projects will be subject to strict monitoring,
including third party monitoring, for which State level monitors shall be engaged.
6. It was also informed that under the vertical support to National/Regional/State Sport Academies a
total of 99 Academies (SAI, State Government/Central Government and Private) (Annexure-II) have been
accredited for training of Khelo India athletes selected under Talent Identification and Development vertical
of the Scheme. It was also informed that selected athletes had the option of joining the accredited academies
and 1313 athletes have joined accredited academies so far.
7. Among the constraints in realizing the goals of Khelo India Scheme, he cited inadequacy of funds,
quality of training, coaching, human resource and sports infrastructure being poor and inability of the
Department to replace outdated equipments due to fund constraints.
8. The Committee was also given to understand that the entire programme shall be steered by a General
Council (GC) chaired by the Minister in-charge, which will function as the highest policy making body for
the purpose or implementation of the scheme. The General Council will be supported by a National Level
Executive Committee (NLEC) headed by Union Secretary of Sports. The scheme shall have a Corpus Fund
known as Technical Support and Capacity Building Services (TSCBS) Fund for the purpose of technical
support and capacity building, which will be utilized inter-alia for engagement of professional and national
/ international consultants, carrying out national campaigns, publicity, and awareness activities, etc. The
scheme will have adequate flexibility. including need-based re-appropriation of allocations across components.
9. Accordingly, as informed by the Department, the scheme provides for complete transparency and
also provides for convergence with Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and Public Private Partnership
(PPP) activities. The selection of projects under the scheme would be done based on robust selection
criteria, including challenge method.
10. The Committee appreciates the objectives with which the Khelo India Scheme has been launched.
The Committee hopes that with the implementation of the scheme immense potential of the country in
sports will be realized and active participation of people in sports will improve the health and productivity of
the individuals, besides helping in socio-economic development of the country. Further, the Committee feels
that since recent success of the athletes/players is more attributable to individual efforts and private coaching,
it is time that the Government puts in more focussed efforts on training of the sportspersons.
11. The Committee also appreciates that the revamped Khelo India Scheme lays emphasis on the
development of rural and indigenous sports and also focuses on the far flung and inaccessible tribal areas
which are not on the sports network of the country. At these remote and inaccessible areas also consist of
the most backward and deprived section of the society, the Committee hopes that Khelo India Scheme will
bring them to the fore into the national mainstream. The Committee also hopes that the Department would
take special efforts to understand the needs and requirements of these sections of the society and take due
steps to address them for overall success of this scheme.
12. The Committee would like to highlight that the vision of Khelo India Scheme is to encourage sports
culture and excellence in sports for which an elaborate system consisting of officials in the Project Appraisal
Committee and General Council has been setup. The Committee recommends that the Department
should consider to appoint an eminent sportsperson or sports administrator as the Chief Executive

3
Officer in the General Council of the Khelo India Scheme to oversee the implementation of the
scheme as he/she would be more sensitive to the problems and needs of the budding athletes and
also act us an interface between the needs and aspiration of the athletes and the administrative
system for bringing best results.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
13. The Committee was apprised of the budgetary allocations and actual expenditure under the Khelo
India Scheme during the last three years, the details of which are given below:-
(` in crore)
Years                   Approved Allocation Actual Expenditure
Budget Estimate Revised Estimate
2017-18 350.00 350.00 346.99
2018-19 520.09 500.09 342.24
2019-20 500.00 - 318.33
(up to 11.10.19)
14. The Committee notes (hat during the year 2017-18 the actual expenditure matched both the BE and
RE allocations. However, during 2018-19 and 2019-20 actual expenditure has been  ` 342.24 and ` 318.33
crores only against the BE allocations of ` 520.09 and 500.00 crorcs respectively. On being pointed that the
Department could utilize up (0 67 and 63 per cent BE allocations only during 2018-19, the Department has
submitted that during 2018-19,  `  125 crore was re-appropriated from Khelo India Scheme to meet the
requirement of funds to implement an Arbitration Award by Supreme Court of India. Thus, the actual
availability of funds under Khclo India Scheme for the year 2018-19 was  ` 375.09 crore only. However,
total available allocation could not be spent due to Monthly/Quarterly Expenditure Plan (MEP/QEP) restrictions
imposed by Ministry of Finance on the entire Ministry.
15. On a specific query regarding constraints/impediments being faced by the Department in carrying out
the objectives of its major policies/programmes, the Department informed that inadequate funds, lack of
human resources. lack of Sports infrastructure in the country and lack of support in Sports Science and
Sports Medicines, which were in initial stage of development in the Country were the major constraints/
impediments being faced by them in implementation of its schemes for promotion and development of
Sports. Among the remedial measures, the Department emphasized on the need for increasing the budget
allocation for Khelo India Scheme and for Sports Authority of India.
16. The Committee has taken a note of this that on one hand the allocated funds remain under utilized and
on the other hand the Department feels the need for increasing the budget allocation for Khelo India Scheme.
The Committee also feels that when the Department has slated that funds allocation for the scheme is not
adequate divesting the fund for non-sports related expenditure is uncalled for. The Committee recommends
that if the objectives of Khelo India Scheme arc to be realized, then the Department should first
endeavour to make optimum utilization of funds which are already allotted to them.
17. The Committee further observes that creating/developing vast infrastructure for Sports in the Country
which is one of the main objectives of the Khelo India Scheme cannot be achieved in the absence of

4
adequate resources. The Committee recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts
in first utilizing the allocated funds rationally and then getting/mobilizing the adequate resources.
It should approach private and corporate sector for mobilizing the resource in the sports sector. The
Department should also make efforts to go in for Public Private Partnership mode to create sports
infrastructure in the country for broad-basing of sports and for achieving excellence in sports at
National and International Levels. The Committee also recommends that necessary convergence of
Khelo India with the MPLADS Scheme should be expedited.
18. On the Public Partnership mode for creating sports infrastructure in the country, the
Committee recommends that focused strategies are required to rope in public-private sector as has
been done in the State of Odisha where the Srate Government and corporate sector have come
together to fund ten high performance centres like badminton and shooting etc. The Committee
further recommends that the Department should motivate the States to replicate this appreciable
example of Public Private Partnership in sports sector.
VERTICALS UNDER KHELO INDIA SCHEME
19. The Khelo India Scheme has tw elve verticals for overall development of Sports in the Country. Of
the twelve verticals three i.e. (i) play field development (ii) utilization and creation/upgradation of Sports
infrastructure and (iii) sports for peace and development are implemented by the Department of Sports.
Eight verticals namely (i) state level khelo India centres (ii) annual sports competitions (iii) talent search
and development (iv) sports for women (v) support to national/regional state sports academics
(vi) promotion of sports among persons with disabilities (vii) promotion of rural and indigenous/tribal
games and (viii) physical fitness or school going children are implemented by the sports authority of
India. Remaining one vertical i.e. community coaching development is implemented by the Lakshmi Bai
National Institute of Physical Education (LNIPE). The Committee has been given to understand that
under each of these verticals, certain achievements have been made. Some of the important verticals that
need focussed strategies to yield tangible results across the country, caught the attention of the Committee
are as indicated below:-
20. Talent Identification and Development: According to the Department, National Competition.
involving schools colleges, Universities and National Sports Federations under Khelo India Scheme, National
Championships and National sports talent search portal of SAI, provide a platform for identification of
talented sportspersons in priority sports disciplines in which the country has potential/advantage. The
Department submitted that the identification of sporting talent involves conduct of pan- India trials of
children by talented scouts (to be engaged for the purpose) in association with States/UTs. The Department
further added that the players shortlisted by the Talent Screening Committee (TSC) members from various
competitions of same/varied age groups are called for an assessment camp wherein the Talent Identification
and Development Committee members finally select the talented players, who are then subjected to Age
Verification Test (TW3 method). The players who dear the age verification test are finally selected to the
Scheme of Khelo India with approval of the High Powered Committee (HPC). It is a two layer process for
finally selecting the players as mentioned below:
(i) Talent Scouting Committee (TSC) -The Committee comprises of eminent coaches and players.
They initially shortlist the players from various national level competitions and the shortlisted
players are called for the assessment camp.

5
(ii) Talent Identification and Development Committee (TIDC)  - This Committee comprises of
eminent coaches / players who recommend the final selected list to various sporting academics
for systematic and scientific training/coaching after assessment camp. In individual events
usually position hoders are inducted into the scheme whereas in team games initially short
listing is done and then the selection takes place during the assessment camp.
21. The Department added that 2720 athletes in 20 ports disciplines have been selected from various
national championships, open selection trials, and assessment camps from Khelo India School James 2018
(KISG), and Khelo India Youth Games 2019 (KIYG) for assistance under Talent Search and Development
vertical.
22. The Committee observes that through this vertical a number of procedures/level of selection like
conducting pan-India trials, shortlisting of talent by Talent Scouting Committee (TSC). assessment at camp,
age verification selection by High Power Committee etc. have been created for electing potential talent, The
Committee feels that subjecting the sportsperson to repeated tests may lead to favouritism, regionalism and
may vitiate the selection procedure. The Committee recommends that the talent identification and
selection procedure may he made simpler and a single window selection procedure may be provided
after which the selected sportsperson may be sent for training.
23. Utilization and creation of sports infrastructure: The Department submitted that majority of the
schools, colleges and even universities lack proper play grounds as well as sporting infrastructure in the
country. The Department further added that efforts would be made to utilize the existing available sports
infrastructure through a system of active management committee consisting of players and members of
neighbourhood community over the country especially those under the control of Central and tale Governments.
A suitable mechanism will be evolved to indentify gaps in availability of sporting infrastructure across the
country and fill all the gaps with support under Khelo India. This vertical will have the following two sub-
components:-
(i) University Centre of Excellence Programme for setting up centers of sporting excellence in
selected universities.
(ii) Creation of Appropriate Sports Infrastructure wherein grants-in-aid will be provided to States/
UTs, SAI etc, to develop critical sports infrastructure and other infrastructure where there are
gaps.
24. As per the Department, 168 new ports infrastructure projects including projects sanctioned under
pre-revised Khelo India scheme were approved in 28 States/Union Territories, The Department informed
that under this scheme 66 new Sports infrastructure projects were sanctioned during the period from
1.1.2018 to 1.3.2019 at an estimated cost of ` 450.22 crore. The Department further added that a total
amount of ` 176.46 crore has been released to beneficiaries for creation of sports infrastructure projects
under Khelo India scheme including committed liabilities of infrastructure project sanctioned during the
previous years under the Khelo India scheme erstwhile Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme (USIS). The
Department gave details of grant released under this vertical. (Annexure -III) .
25. From a perusal of the grant released, the Committee finds that only a few, States/U’Ts namely
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka Maharashtra, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Telangana,
Punjab, Manipur, Gujarat, Puducherry and Sikkim have been given the grant. The Committee is anguished to

6
note that States like Bihar. Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Tamil Nadu arc missing from the list of
States for which funds for development of Sports Infrastructure were released, The Committee notes that
these States have a very large part of the tribal areas of the country and many regions are very remote and
inaccessible. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry t0 focus attention on these States
also especially the tribal areas as they are fertile grounds for discovering athletes especially in
sports like Hockey, Archery, athletics and football to ensure uniformity across Stales in creating
sports infrastructure.
26. The Committee also points out that out of the total sanctioned amount for the Infrastructure
Development. less than half of the amount has been released till 31.3.2019. The Committee recommends
that the Department should ensure that lack of funds should not hamper the creation and up gradation of
sports infrastructure in these states. The Committee feels that the Ministry should carry out periodic evaluation
of developmental projects and their effectiveness in achieving sport goals.
27. The Committee further recommends that the Department, in coordination with the State
Government, should indentify private residential schools having ports infrastructure/facilities for
at least four sports disciplines of international specified standards and develop them under Khelo
India scheme as Model Residential Sports Schools or Centres of Excellence in ports where children
are allowed to nurture and develop their talent in sports. Such centre may be established in every
district of the country.
28. Physical Fitness of School Going Children:  It aims to evolve region a wise National Fitness
Parameters and to provide tool-kit to each school to evaluate physical fitness of all school going children. In
pursuance of the objective of spreading awareness about games. Khelo India Mobile Application was launched
to enable the general public to gel information and case of access to the various aspects of the game (HOW
TO PLAY), available playfields across India (WHERE TO PLAY) or mapping the fitness parameters of the
young school going population of the country. The Department further added that the fitness section has
two versions: one for the public at large and the other specifically customized for schools.
29. The Department informed that the fitness mapping for general public would enable every household/
parent to map the fitness level of their children. The fitness mapping for schools would help in mapping the
fitness level of school children in India. The Department further added that the fitness app would give a
unique opportunity to develop the National Fitness India (NFI) for the first time for the children of the
country. The Department further added that this fitness data would help us to map and identify the potential
sports talent amongst the children and be further used for mapping and recommending sports disciplines for
shortlisted children. For Physical fitness assessment, in the Khelo India Mobile Application, 3,958 Schools
and 31,916 assessors are registered. 14,38,823 student profiles have been created and out of this 8.05,872
number of fitness assessments have been made.
30. The Department further added that the first national Level Training of Trainers programme for CBSE
teachers was held from 19
th December, 2018 to 28 th December, 2018 at Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, New
Delhi. The Department further informed that training was given to all the participants nominated by the
CBSE and after completion of training, certificates were distributed to all the participants and 198 Physical
Education Teachers were given certificates of Master trainers.
31. The Committee appreciates the emphasis on the physical fitness of the school going children and

7
conducting of National level competitions at the school and college level. The Committee feels that this
scheme would give results in the long term and bring new sportspersons to compete in international
competitions and bring glory and laurel to the country.
32. The Committee while highly appreciating the initiative under this vertical recommends that
sports may be made an integral part of our education system, as it will enable the system to catch
the talented children at a very young age. It will also imbibe discipline in character and generate
great leadership qualities among the children of the country.
33. Sports for Peace & Development:  Under this component, the Government of India under a special
package for Jammu and Kashmir is providing funds for enhancement of sports facilities in the State for
optimal utilization of sport infrastructure, support in terms of coaches, equipment, consumables, technical
support, competition etc. will be provided. Block level competition in sports disciplines popular in the State
of J&K will be organized for positive engagement of youth. Similar efforts in case of other extremism and
terrorism affected areas would be made under this vertical. Central Government has provided a special
package J&K of  ` 200 crore for enhancement of sports facilities in the State of Jammu and Kashmir to
engage the youth of state in constructive sporting activities. Total financial assistance of  ` 21.40 crore has
been sanctioned for conducing sporting activities in 93 Districts (as identified by Ministry of Home Affairs)
of 13 States (Left Wing Extremism Affected Areas I North Eastern states / Jammu & Kashmir) for providing
opportunity to the residents of the State for engaging sporting activities and thus weaning away the youth
from disruptive activities.
34. The Committee appreciates that the State of J&K has been given a special package for promotion of
sports and enhancement of sports facilities. The Committee feels that J&K is disturbed for years due to
terrorism and such packages will infuse new enthusiasm in youth towards sports and it will leave a positive
imprint on their minds. The Committee recommends that the budget earmarked for Jammu and Kashmir and
other conflict affected States is utilized completely so that the expected outcome may be achieved.
35. Promotion of sports among person with disabilities: The Khelo India Scheme has a dedicated
vertical promotion of sports among persons with disabilities. It aims at creation of specialist sports
infrastructure for persons with disabilities to make the stadia disabled friendly/barrier free and to organize
the sports activities. Financial assistance was given to Special Olympic Bharat (SOB) for organizing various
activities such as training of coaches, holding district games, State competition and National level games in
2017-18. Financial assistance was also given to Paralympics Committee of India (PCI) to conduct Indian
Open Para Athletics Championship, 2018 (International Paralympics Committee Approved) held at Bangalore
from 10th to 12th July 2018.
36. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department for promotion of sports among the
persons with disabilities. The Committee recommends the Department to take more steps to help the
persons with disabilities to interact with other sportspersons and encourage them to exchange ideas
on health and fitness. This would act as a motivation to other persons with disabilities who are not
engaged in any sports related activities. It will also help in changing the attitude of the society
towards persons with disabilities and encourage the society to motivate and support such sport persons.
37. Promotion of rural and indigenous/tribal game:  It aims to showcase our rural and indigenous/
tribal games. Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat (EBSB), which aims to enhance the interaction between people of

8
diverse cultures living in different States and Union territories. To enhance the mutual understanding amongst
people, Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat bas been implemented under this vertical. Forty one events have been
conducted for disciplines, including rural and indigenous/tribal games, namely Mallakhamb, Sqay, Kalaripayattu,
Yachting, Kho-Kho. Handball, Table Tennis and Roll-ball under this programme. Apart from Organizing
EBSB programme, Thang-Ta, Gatka, Kalarippayattu and Mallakhamb identified for support under this vertical
and projects sanctioned for infrastructure, equipment, training, demonstration/competition events and
scholarship to medal winners. ` 6.43 crorcs have been sanctioned for the approved projects.
38. The Committee appreciates that tribal/indigenous and rural games are also being promoted by the
Department. The Committee, however, recommends that efforts should he made to organize
International Sporting events to showcase and popularize the games like Kalaripayattu, Mallakhamb
and Kho-Kho etc. which are also considered as the source of many modern day sports.
SHORTAGE OF COACHES
39. Keeping in view that no sportsperson can achieve glory at national and international level in the
absence of specialised, focused and individual coaching assistance. The role of coaches is of critical importance
in developing skills in the athletes. On a specific query regarding the shortage of coaches, the Department
submitted that out of 1524 post or coaches in various cadres at present there were 980 coaches working in
various capacities thus creating a shortfall of 544 coaches. The reason given by the Department for shortage
of coaches was inadequate allocation of funds to SAI for salary and pensions. The Department further
submitted that it is making constant efforts to make sufficient funds allocated for this purpose.
40. The Committee observes that 544 posts of coaches lying vacant is a pathetic situation. How the
Department plans to train the young sports talent without availability of qualified coaches is unimaginable,
Further, the Committee is of the view that against the sanctioned strength of the posts there is always
availability of funds. Therefore, the submission of the Department regarding fund shortage for salary and
pension do not appear to be convincing. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the vacant posts
of the Coaches should be filled up expeditiously if excellence in sports is to be achieved. Further the
country has a pool of talented and experienced coaches running their own academies in some of the
sports disciplines. The Committee recommends that the. Department should endeavour to rope in
such coaches for visiting other academics/Centres in different states to coach other athletes/
sportspersons.
TRAINING OF SPORTSPERSON FOR IMMEDIATE RESULTS IN INTERNATIONAL TOURNAMENTS
AND OLYMPICS
41. The Committee has gathered that through Khelo India initiative, the Government has made long term
plans to identify talent and train them for international sports events such as Olympics 2028 and 2032. While
it is heartening to note that we have long term planning for preparing our athletes for future international
events however, there is a need to have a fast track training of selected players by best coaches to
get immediate results in the international sports events.  The Committee further notices that in the year
2018-19, 1518 players were selected for training, out of which only 625 joined the training camps in the
accredited academies and 893 dropped out, which is a sizeable number. The main reason for such dropout
was that these accredited academics did not have provision for integrated education and hence these players
were reluctant to leave their schools in the middle of the academic year. Due to this, the time, resources and

9
efforts that were Put in to identify these players were wasted. The Committee recommends that all
accredited academics should have integrated educational and hostel facilities so that trainees are
also able to complete their basic education. The Committee also recommends that educational
needs of the trainees must be integrated in the training programme to minimize the dropout rate
and also to fully utilize the identified talent which is selected after a long drawn process.
42. The Committee recommends that the Government should also identify new place for training
in already existing private schools, colleges and academics which have infrastructure of sports and
hostels. These institutions should be affiliated by SAI under Khelo India Scheme and he provided
with certified coaches so that these identified sports persons can be trained all over India a training
has a far reaching impact.
43. The Committee observes that sports are an extremely important component for the overall development
of our nation. India, in the last few years has made steady progress in the field of sports. This tremendous
potential needs to be showcased at a global platform. It’s time we inspire young talent, give them top-
notch infrastructure and training at the highest level. For achieving this there is need for creating the
sport trinity of talent, infrastructure and training and focused implementation of Khelo India
Scheme. We need to inculcate a strong spirit of participation in sports that enables player to
demonstrate their true potential, only then can India realize its dream of becoming a sports
super power.
Thus, in the conclusion the Committee makes the following recommendations:
(i) That the Department should consider to appoint an eminent sportsperson or sports
administrator as the Chief Executive Officer in the General Council of the Khelo India
Scheme to oversee the implementation of the scheme as he/she would be more sensitive
to the problems and needs of the budding athletes and also act as an interface between
the needs and aspiration of the athletes and the administrative system for bringing
best results. (Para 12)
(ii) That if the objectives of Khelo India Scheme arc to be realized then the Department
should first endeavour to make optimum utilization of funds which are already allotted
to them. (Para 16)
(iii) That the Department should make concerted efforts in first utilizing the allocated
funds rationally and then getting/mobilizing the adequate resources. It should approach
private and corporate sector for mobilizing the resources in the sports sector. The
Department should also make efforts to go in for Public Private Partnership mode to
create sports infrastructure in the country for broad-basing of sports and for achieving
excellence in sports at National and International Levels. The Committee also
recommends that necessary convergence of Khelo India with the MPLADS Scheme
should be expedited. (Para 17)
(iv) That the Public Partnership mode for creating sports infrastructure in the country be
adopted and focused strategies to rope in public-private sector has been done in the
State of Odisha are needed, where the State Government an d corporate sector have
come together to fund ten high performance centres like badminton and shooting etc.

10
Also that the Department should motivate the States to replicate this appreciable
example of Public Private Partnership in sports sector. (Para 18)
(v) That the talent identification and selection procedure should be made simpler and a
single window selection procedure should he provided after which the selected
sportsperson should be sent for training. (Para 22)
(vi) That the Ministry should focus attention on identified States, especially having tribal
areas as they arc fertile grounds for discovering athletes especially in sports like Hockey,
Archery athletics and football etc. This is required to ensure uniformity across States
in creating sports infrastructure. (Para 25)
(vii) That the Department, in coordination with the State Government, should identify private
residential schools having sports infrastructure/facilities for at least four sports
disciplines of international specified standards and develop them under Khelo India
Scheme as Model Residential Sports Schools or Centre of Excellence in sports where
children are allowed to nurture and develop their talent in sports. Such centres may be
established in every district of the country. (Para 27)
(viii) That the sports should be made all integral part of our education system, as it will
enable the system to catch the talented children at a very young age. It will also imbibe
discipline in character and generate great leadership qualities among the children of
the country. (Para 32)
(ix) That the Department should take more steps to help the persons with disabilities to
interact with other sportspersons and encourage them to exchange ideas on health and
fitness. This would act as a motivation to other persons with disabilities who are not
engaged in any sport related activities. It will also help in changing the attitude of the
society towards persons with disabilities and encourage the society to motivate and
support such sports persons. (Para 36)
(x) That the efforts should be made to organize International Sporting events to showcase
and popularize the games like Kalaripayattu, Mallakhamb and Kho-Kho etc which arc
the source of many modern day sports. (Para 38)
(xi) That the vacant posts of the Coaches should be filled up expeditiously if excellence in
sports is to be achieved. Further the country has a pool of talented and experienced
conches running their own academics in some of the sports disciplines. The Department
should endeavour to rope in such coaches for visiting other academics/Centres in
different states to coach athletes/sportspersons. (Para 40)
(xii) That all accredited academics should have integrated educational and hostel facilities
so that trainees are also able to complete their basic education. That the educational
needs of the trainees must be integrated in the training programme to minimize the
dropout rate and also to fully utilize the identified talent which is selected after a long
drawn process. (Para 41)

11
(xiii) That the Government should also identify new places for training in already existing
private schools colleges and academics which have infrastructure of sports and hostels.
These institutions should be affiliated by SAI under Khelo India Scheme and be provided
with certified coaches so that these identified sports persons can be trained all over
India as training has a far reaching impact. (Para 42)

OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
KHELO INDIA SCHEME
That the Department should consider to appoint an eminent sportsperson or sports administrator
as the Chief Executive Officer in the General Council of the Khelo India Scheme to oversee the
implementation of the scheme as he/she would be more sensitive to the problems and needs of the
budding athletes and also act as an interface between the needs and aspiration of the athletes and
the administrative system for bringing best results. (Para 12)
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
That if the objectives of Khelo India Scheme are to be realized, then the Department
should first endeavour to make optimum utilization of funds which are already allotted to
them. (Para 16)
That the Department should make concerted efforts in first utilizing the allocated funds
rationally and then getting/mobilizing the adequate resources. It should approach private and
corporate sector for mobilizing the resources in the sports sector. The Department should also
make efforts to go in for Public Private Partnership mode to create sports infrastructure in the
country for broad-basing of sports and for achieving excellence in sports at National and International
Levels. The Committee also recommends that necessary convergence of Khelo India with the
MPLADS Scheme should be expedited. (Para 17)
That the Public Partnership mode for creating sports infrastructure in the country be
adopted and focused strategies to rope in public-private sector as has been done in the State of
Odisha are needed, where the State Government and corporate sector have come together to
fund ten high performance centres like badminton and shooting etc. Also that the Department
should motivate the States to replicate this appreciable example of Public Private Par tnership in
sports sector. (Para 18)
VERTICALS UNDER KHELO INDIA SCHEME
That the talent identification and selection procedure should be made simpler and a single
window selection procedure should be provided after which the selected sportsperson should be sent
for training. (Para 22)
That the Ministry should focus attention on i dentified States, especially having tribal areas
as they are fertile grounds for discovering athletes especially in sports like Hockey, Archery,
athletics and football etc. This is required to ensure uniformity across S tates in creating sports
infrastructure. (Para 25)
That the Department, in coordination with the State Government, should identify private
residential schools having sports infrastructure/facilities for at least four sports disciplines of
international specified standards and develop them under Khelo India Scheme as Model Residential
Sports Schools or Centres of Excellence in sports where children are allowed to nurture and develop
their talent in sports. Such centres may be established in every district of the country. (Para 27)
That the sports should be made an integral part of our education system, as it will enable the
12

13
system to catch the talented children at a very young age. It will also imbibe discipline in character
and generate great leadership qualities among the children of the country. (Para 32)
That the Department should take more steps to help the persons with disabilities to interact
with other sportspersons and encourage them to exchange ideas on health and fitness. This would
act as a motivation to other persons with disabilities who are not engaged in any sports related
activities. It will also help in changing the attitude of the society towards persons with disabilities
and encourage the society to motivate and support such sports persons. (Para 36)
That the efforts should be made to organize International Sporting events to showcase and
popularize the games like Kalaripayattu, Mallakhamb and Kho-Kho etc. which are the source of
many modern day sports. (Para 38)
SHORTAGE OF COACHES
That the vacant posts of the  Coaches should be filled up expeditiously if excellence in sports
is to be achieved. Further the country has a pool of talented and experienced coaches running
their own academies in some of the sports disciplines. The Department should endeavour to rope
in such coaches for visiting other academies/Centres in different states to coach athletes/sports
persons. (Para 40)
TRAINING OF SPORTSPERSON FOR IMMEDIATE RESULTS IN INTERNATIONAL
TOURNAMENTS AND OLYMPICS
That all accredited academies should have integrated educational and hostel facilities so that
trainees are also able to complete their basic education. That the educational needs of the trainees
must be integrated in the training programme to minimize the dropout rate and also to fully utilize
the identified talent which is selected after a long drawn process. (Para 41)
That the Government should also identify new places for training in already existing private
schools, colleges and academies which have infrastructure of sports and hostels. These institutions
should be affiliated by SAI under Khelo India Scheme and be provided with certified coaches so
that these identified sports persons can be trained all over India as training has a far reaching
impact. (Para 42)

MINUTES

17
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met on Tuesday, the 22nd Ocober, 2019
at 3.00 P.M., in Committee Room No. ‘A’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
3. Shri Sasmit Patra
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
7. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu
8. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande
9. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji
10. Shri Balak Nath
11. Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar
12. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad
13. Shri T. N. Prathapan
14. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod
15. Shri Jagannath Sarkar
16. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
17. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma
18. Shri Dharambir Singh
19. Shri S. Venkatesan
20. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer
Shrimati Suman Khurana, Committee Officer

18
WITNESSES
DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS
1. Shri Radhey Shyam Julaniya, Secretary
2. Mrs. Kiran Soni Gupta, AS&F A
3. Shri Sandeep Pradhan, DG(SAI)
4. Shri L.S. Singh, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Inder Dhamija, Joint Secretary
6. Shri Rohit Bhardwaj, Director
7. Shri Amin Kumar Yadav, Director
8. Commd. Raja Gopalan, CEO (TOPS)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee and apprised
them about the agenda of the meeting i.e., major programmes and policies being implemented by the
Department, achievements made so far, constraints faced by the Department in this regard and views to
accomplish its programmes and policies as well as status of Khelo India Scheme, preparation for Tokyo
Olympics 2020, and status of Sports University at Manipur, Imphal. Thereafter, the Joint Secretary and
Financial Advisor of the Secretariat briefed about the achievements of the Chairman and his contributions
made to the Committee.
3. The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary, Department of Sports and his team to the meeting and
requested them to brief the Committee on the major programmes and policies being implemented by the
Department, achievements made so far, constrains faced by the Department in this regard and views to
accomplish its programmes and policies as well as status of Khelo India Scheme, preparation for Tokyo
Olympics 2020, and status of Sports University at Manipur, Imphal. The Chairman also desired to know
about the status of contribution to NSDF, the Fit India initiative and other recent steps taken by the Department
in the field of Sports.
4. The Secretary introduced himself and other officers accompanying him to the Committee and then
made a brief power point presentation covering the different aspects of the agenda of the meeting.
5. The Secretary informed the Committee that National Sports Policy, 2001 has twin objectives of broad-
basing of sports and achieving excellence in Sports at National and International levels. He further highlighted
the various schemes of Department of Sports like, Khelo India Scheme, Assistance to National Sports
Federations, Human Resource Development in Sports, Sports Institutions, Sports Awards Scheme and so
on.
6. The Secretary informed that NSDF has been operational since 1998 and the objective is of promotion
of sports for achieving excellence at both National and International levels. He further added that the present
corpus is of Rs. 106 crore and the total funds received so far are ` 160.76 crore. The Committee was also
briefed about the other major policies of the Department.
7. The Members thereafter sought clarifications on the following issues:-
(i) the funding pattern of the sports infrastructure projects, with special regard to Indian sports like
Kabbadi, Wrestling, Kho-Kho etc.

19
(ii) the steps taken to increase the presence of SAI centres in the country and the budget outlay for
SAI;
(iii) the steps taken to motivate the corporate entities to give funds under their corporate social
responsibility initiative to sports and even try to adopt villages and blocks for sports development;
(iv) road map for inviting private contributions to sports on the lines of PPP initiatives; and
(v) road map to expedite the National Sports University at Imphal and the steps taken so far.
8. The Secretary, Department of Sports further informed the Committee about the shortage of coaches
in SAI. He described that the present strength of coaches is 780 only and there is alarming shortage of 720
coaches. As regards the shortage of Funds, he apprised the Committee that there is acute shortage of funds
and he was compelled to borrow Rs. 40 crore from NSDF to manage salaries and expenses of sports
hostels upto November, 2019. He also informed the Committee about the area specific talent available in
country whom the Department needs to focus in order to promote sports.
9. The Chairman appreciated the efforts made by the Department and its associated organizations in
promoting sports and providing support and motivation to the athletes in the country. He, however, was of
the opinion that more efforts were needed to identify and groom the athletes so that they can bring glory to
the country in sports.
10. The Secretary, Department of Sports replied to some of the queries of the Members. With regard to
queries not answered orally, the Chairman directed the Secretary to send the written replies to the Secretariat,
at the earliest.
(The Witnesses then withdrew)
11. The Chairman, on the basis of inputs received from the Members, made an announcement about the
selection of following subjects by the Committee for examination during the year 2019-20:-
I. Department of Higher Education:
(i) National Education Policy-Education and its Management within available resources.
(ii) Faculty position in higher education sector.
(iii) Education loan facilities available to Students.
II. Department of School Education & Literacy
(i) Functioning of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya.
(ii) Better implementation of the Provisions of RTE Act with special emphasis on Section
12(i) (c) on EWS reservations.
(iii) T eacher recruitment and Training;
(iv) Functioning of C.B.S.E.
III. Ministry of Women and Child Development:
(i) Functioning of Central Adoption Resource Agency (CARA).

20
(ii) Evaluation of Anganwadi services-Objectives, achievements, infrastructure in Anganwadi
Centres and working conditions of Anganwadi workers/Anganwadis helpers and adequacy
of their honorarium.
IV . Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
(i) Preparation for 2020 Olympic Games;
(ii) Implementation of Khelo India Programme; and
(iii) S tatus of National Sports University, Manipur
12. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
13. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.

21
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met on Tuesday, the 10th December, 2019
at 4.00 P.M., in Committee Room No. ‘A’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. M. V . Rajeev Gowda
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Shri Derek O’Brien
5. Dr. Sasmit Patra
6. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
7. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
8. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh
LOK  SABHA
9. Shri Rajendra Agrawal
10. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen
11. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu
12. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta
13. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji
14. Shri Asit Kumar Mal
15. MS. Chandrani Murmu
16. Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar
17. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad
18. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod
19. Shri Jagannath Sarkar
20. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
21. Shri Dharambir Singh
22. Shri S. Venkatesan
SECRETARIAT
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Deputy Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer
Shrimati Suman Khurana, Committee Officer

22
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt the draft 311th Report on the Khelo India Scheme.
3. The Committee considered the draft 311th Report and adopted the same after some discussion.
4. The Committee, then, decided to present the 311 th Report to the Rajya Sabha and lay on the table of
Lok Sabha on 12th December, 2019. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence,
Dr. Sasmit Patra and Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe MP, Rajya Sabha to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha
and Shri Asit Kumar Mal MP, Lok Sahba and his absence Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma MP, Lok Sabha to lay
the Report in the Lok Sabha.
5. The meeting then adjourned at 4.30 
P.M.

ANNEXURES

25
ANNEXURE - I
Details of Khelo India Athletes elected from Khelo India School Games (KISG),
Delhi 2018 And Khelo India Youth Games (KIYG), Pune 2019
Sl. Sports Discipline KISG , Delhi 2018 KIYG, Pune 2019
No.
1. Archery 16 15
2. Athletics 41 21
3. Badminton 11 10
4. Basketball 8 0
5. Boxing 50 25
6. Football 24 0
7. Gymnastics 23 0
8. Hockey 18 0
9. Judo 27 18
10. Kabaddi 16 32
11. Kho-kho 18 29
12. Shooting 28 12
13. Swimming 45 15
14. Table Tennis (Not Part of
KLSG, 2018) 0 4
15. Volleyball 10 16
16. Weightlifting 30 31
17. Wrestling 51 11
TOTAL 416 239

ANNEXURE - II
List of Accredited Academies under Khelo India
List of Private/State Govt. Aacademies
S1. No. Sports Discipline                    Accredited Academies
1 2                                 3
1. Army Sports Institute, Pune
2. MP Academy, Jabalpur
3. Archery Punjabi University, Patiala
4. Birsa Munda Archery Academy, (Compound), Silli, Ranchi
5. Archer’s Academy, Pune
6. Army Sports Institute, Pune
7. Ashwini Sports Foundation, Kodagu
8. Kalinga Institiute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneshwar
9. Athletics M.P Academy, Bhopal
10. MAR Athnasius Sports Academy, Ernakulam
11. Sports Authority of Gujarat, Kheda
12. Bhonsala Military School, (Boys) Nasik
13. Usha School of Athletics, Khozikode
14. BBD UP Badminton academy, Lucknow
15. Centre for Sports Excellence PVT Ltd (In association with
Prakash Padukone Badminton Academy), Bangalore
16. Ganguly Prasad Badminton academy, Hyderabad
17. Pullela Gopichand Badminton Foundation, Hyderabad
18. Badminton Suchura Badminton Academy, Hyderabad
19. United Shuttlers, Delhi
20. Manipur Badminton Academy, Imphal
21. K.C. Sports Club, Jammu
22. Shining Star Academy, Bahadurgarh
23. Kayns Badminton Academy, Hyderabad
24. Army Sports Institute, Pune
25. Boxing Inspire Institute of Sports, Bellary
26. Mary Kom academy, Imphal
27. Punjab state institute of Sports, Mohali
26

27
28. Army Sports Institute, Pune
29.  Fencing Sports Authority of Gujarat, Kheda
30. Chhattisgarh Sports Academy, Bilaspur
31. Gymnastics MA Stadium (Only Rhythmic), Jammu
32. Chandigarh Hockey Academy (Boys), Chandigarh
33. Hockey MP Hockey Academy (Girls), Gwalior
34. Surjeet Hockey Academy (Boys], Jalandhar
35. Khalsa Hockey Academy (Girls). Arnritsar
36. Hockey MP Hockey Academy (Boys), Bhopal
37. Punjab State Institute of Sports, (Boys), Mohali
38. Inspire Institute of Sports, Bellary
39. Judo Sports Authority of Gujarat, Judo Academy, Nadiad
40. Krida Probodhini Balewadi, Pune
41. Punjab Institute of Sports, Mohali
42. Centre for Sports Science, Chennai
43. Rowing Rowing Academy, Ropar
44. MP Academy, Bhopal
45. MP Academy, Bhopal
46. Gun for Glory Academy, Pune
47. Gun for Glory Academy, Jabalpur
48. Shooting Centre of Sports Science, Chennai
49. Dashmesh shooting Academy, (Girls), Badal
50. Lakshva Shooting Club, Mumbai
51. Manav Rachna Centre of Excellence, Faridabad
52. Centre for Sports Excellence Pvt. Ltd. (In association with
Dolphin Aquatics), Bangalore
53. Swimming Punjab University, Chandigarh
54. Glenmark Aquatic foundation, Mumbai
55. Shishukunj Swimming Academy, Indore
1 2                                 3

28
56. Delhi Public School, Sonepat
57. Table Tennis Raman T.T, Chennai
58. Sports Aurhorlty of Gujarat, Bhavnagar
59. Volleyball Rajiv Gandhi Indoor Stadium (Girls), Pathamthitta
60. Sports Authority of Gujarat, Nadiad
61. Army Sports Institute, Pune
62. Weightlifting Centre for Sports Science, Chennai
63. Kalinga Instltiute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneshwar
64. Army Sports Institute, Pune
65. Wrestling Inspire Institute of Sports, Bellary
66. Jagjit Wrestling Academy, Jalandhar
67. Sports Authority of Gujarat, Kheda
List of SAI Accredited Academies
S1. No. Sports Discipline                    Accredited Academies
1 2                                 3
1. Archery SAI National Archery Academy, Sonepat
2. SAI National Archery Academy, Guwahati
3. SAI National Athletics Academy, Sonepat
4. SAI National Athletics (Sprint & Pole Vault) Academy, JNS
Athletics Deihi
5. SAI National Athletics (Sprints & Jumps) Academy,
Trivandrum
6. SAI National Athletics (Middle & long distance) Academy,
Bhopal
7. SAI Regional Badminton Academy, Guwahati
8. Badminton SAI Regional Badminton Academy, Bhuvneshwar
9. SAI Pullela Gopi Chand National Badminton Academy,
Hyderabad
10. SAI National Boxing Academy, Rohtak
11.
Boxing
SAI National Boxing Academy, Imphal
1 2                                 3

29
12. SAI National Cycling Academy, Delhi
13.
Cycling
SAI National Cycling Academy, Guwahati
14. Fencing SAI, NIS, Patiala
15. Gymnastics SAI National Gymnastics Academy, Kolkata
16. SAI National Gymnastics Academy, Delhi
17. Hockey SAI National Hockey Academy, Delhi
18. Judo SAI National Judo Academy, Bhopal
19. SAI National Judo Academy, Imphal
20. Kabaddi SAI, STC, (Girls) Dharamshala
21. SAI, Gandhi Nagar (Boys), Gandhinagar
22. Kho-Kho SAI STC, (Girls), Dharamshala
23.
Para Sports
SAI National Para Sports Academy, Gandhi Nagar
24. SAI National Rowing Academy, Alleppey
25. Rowing SAI National Rowing Academy, Jagatpur
26. Shooting SAI National Shooting Academy, Delhi
27. Swimming SAI National Swimming Academy, Delhi
28. Table Tennis SAI National Table Tennis Academy, Kolkata
29. Weightlifting SAI National Weightlifting Academy, Aurangabad
30. SAI/SAG National Weightlifting Academy, Imphal
31.
Wrestling
SAI National Wrestling Academy (Boys), Sonepat
32. SAI National Wrestling Academy (Girls), Lucknow
1 2                                 3

ANNEXURE - III
S1.No. Name of Name of the Project Grant Grant
State sanc tioned released
1 2             3 4 5
1. Rajasthan Construction  of  Academy  Building  &  Solar 1.00 0.75
Lights at Deedwana Stadium
2. Rajasthan C onstruction  of  Basketball  court,  Volleyball 1.50 1.125
court, Solar Light, Water Tank & 200 Meter
Athletic Track at Khinwsar Stadium.
3. Rajasthan Laying  of  synthetic  athletic  track  at  Swarna 7.00 3.00
Jayanti Stadium, Jhunjhunu.
4. Kerala C onstruction  of  Indoor  hall  No.2.  LNCPE 8.00 3.00
Thiruvananthapuram
5. Karnataka Construction  of  multi-purpose  indoor  hall  at 1.50 0.75
Shiralakoppa town, Shivamogga District.
6. Rajasthan Construction  of  multi-purpose  indoor  hall  at 8.00 3.00
Swarnajayanti Stadium, Jhunjhunu.
7. Telangaua Laying of synthetic athletic track at Warangal 7.00 3.00
City.
8. Karnataka Laying  of  synthetic  athletic  track  at  District 7.00 3.00
Stadium, Hassan.
9. Punjab C onstruction of Multi-purpose  Indoor  hall  at 7.47 3.00
War hero’s Stadium Sangrur,
10. Rajasthan Construction  of  Boundary  wall,  Basketball 1.50 1.125
court, Volleyball court, Cricket Ground, S olar
Lights,  Office  Building  and  toilet  Block  at
Dechu Stadium, District Jodhpur.
11. Rajasthan Construction  of  Boundary  Wall,  Basketball 1.50 1.125
court, V olleyball court, Cricket Ground, Solar
Lights  Office  Building  and  toilet  block  at
Lohawat Stadium District Jodhpur.
12. Rajasthan Construction  of  Boundary  Wall,  Basketball 1.50 1.125
court, Volleyball court, Cricket Ground, Solar
Lights  Office  Building  and  toilet  block  at
Bapini stadium District Jodhpur.
13. Rajasthan Construction of Indoor Hall & ticket Block at 1.00 0.75
Sri Karanapur Stadium, District Sri Ganganagar.
30

31
14. Rajasthan Construction  of  Badminton  Arena  with  four 3.60 2.70
Championship   Badminton   courts   with
infrastructure at SMS Stadium, Jaipur,
15. Rajasthan Construction  of  one  all  glass  championship 1.50 1.125
squash court at SMS Stadium, Jaipur
16. Rajasthan C ompletion  of  Shooting  Range  at  Bhilwara 1.00 0.75
Stadium.
17. Uttar C onstruction of multi-purpose indoor hall at 3.06 1.50
Pradesh V illage - Haliya Block- Haliya District Mirzapur.
18. Arunachal C onstruction of Multi-purpose indoor hall at 8.00 3.00
Pradesh K henewa under Bamang Administrative Sub-
Division East Kameng District.
19. Uttar Co nstruction of multi-purpose indoor hall at 3.68. 2.00
Pradesh V illage Nagaon, Vikash Khand-Nagwa, District
Soanbhadra.
20. Uttar Construction of multi-purpose indoor hall at 7.99 4.00
Pradesh Panchali Khurd. District Meerut.
21. Uttar Construction  of  multi-purpose  indoor  hall 2.72 1.50
Pradesh with natural court and running track at village-
Mau, Block-Mohanlalganj, District Lucknow.
22. Arunachal Con struction  of  multi-purpose  indoor  hall  at 8.00 3.00
Pradesh T araklangdi, Pania under Kra- Daadi District.
23. Arunachal Con struction  of  multi-purpose  indoor  hall  at 8.00 3.00
Pradesh Kiojoring, Nacho under Upper Subansiri.
24. Arunachal Construction  of  Multi-purpose  Hall  at  Govt. 8.00 3.00
Pradesh Secondary  School  Lida,  Gusar  Circle  under
Upper Subansiri.
Construction  of  Multipurpose  Hall  at  Roing, 8.00 3.00
Lower Dibang Valley District.
25. Arunachal Construction of Multi-purpose Indoor Hall at 8.00 3.00
Pradesh Palin, Petrol pump colony Kra-Daadi District.
Construction of Multi-purpose Indoor Hall at 8.00 3.00
Gov. hr. Sec. School, Itanagar.
26. Arunachal Construction  of  Synthetic  Athletic  Track  at 7.00 3.00
Pradesh Jeng, T awang District.
1 2                       3 4 5

32
27. Karnataka Construction   of   Multi-purpose   Sports 8.00 3.00
Complex/Indoor Hall at Hubli Dharwad
28. Maharashtra Up-gradation of Swimming Pool at Municipal 5.00 2.00
Council. Katol, District Nagpur.
29. Arunachal Construction of Multi-purpose Hall at ADC 8.00 3.00
Pradesh HQ. Kodukha upper Subansiri District
Construction of Multi-purpose hall at Govt. 8.00 3.00
higher Sec. School Dirang West Kameng
District
30. Madhya Construction  of  swimming  pool  at  Indira 4.95 2.50
Pradesh Gandhi National Tribal University (IGNTU).
Laipur, Amarkantak District Anuppur.
31. Rajasthan D evelopment of playfields (17) in different 8.85 8.85
schools/locations in Rajasthan.
32. Arunachal Con struction of Multipurpose Hall at Kaimai 8.00 3.00
Pradesh in Tirap District.
33. Arunachal Construction of Multipurpose Hall at Raga 8.00 4.00
Pradesh ADC HQ under Lower Subansari District.
34. Uttar Construction  of  Multipurpose  Hall  at  Beer 8.00 4.00
Pradesh Bahadur College, Gorakhpur.
35. Uttar C onstruction   of   Multipurpose   Hall   and 5.58 3.00
Pradesh Running Track at Village Dhedui Block Patti,
District Pratapgarh.
36. Uttar C onstruction   of   mini   stadium   at   Village 14.56 5.00
Pradesh Mangraura, Tehsil Patti, District Pratapgarh.
37. Arunachal Construction  of  Multipurpose  Hall  at  Mer 8.00 3.00
Pradesh under East Siang District
38. Maharashtra Up gradation  of  Hockey  Astro  turf  at  Shiv 12.87 12.87
Chhatrapti Kridapeeth Sports Complex. Pune
and Upgradation of Shooting range at Shiv
Chhatrapti Kridapeeth Sports Complex, Pune
39. Uttar Construction of Multipurpose Hall at Village- 2.30 1.00
Pradesh Ganeshpur,      Block-Pharenda,    District-
Maharajgani. Uttar Pradesh
1 2                       3 4 5

33
40. Uttar Construction  of  Multipurpose  Hall  with 3.21 1.50
Pradesh Athletic Track at Village Mudgaon, Block,
Mohammadabad, District Farrukhabad sadar.
41. Uttar Co nstruction of Multipurpose Hall at Village 4.53 1.50
Pradesh Rafat Nagar Senthara, Block Nidhauli Kalal,
Tehsil Etah, District Etah
42. Uttar Laying of 400 Mtr. Synthetic Athletic Track 7.00 3.00
Pradesh at Sports Stadium, Saharanpur.
43. Arunachal Constru ction  of  Multipurpose  Hall  at  Bilat 8.04 3.00
Pradesh under East Siang District.
44. Uttar Construction of Multipurpose Hal l at village- 7. 04 3.00
Pradesh Mondapandey, District Moradabad.
45. Uttar Construction of Multipurpose Hall at Village 8.00 3.00
Pradesh &. Block Aspur Deosara, District Pratapgarh.
46. Uttar C onstruction  of  Multipurpose  Hall  with 3.10 1.50
Pradesh athletic  tracks  at  village-Sunnamai  Near
Roadways   workshop,   Block-Sultanganj,
District Mninpuri.
47. Uttar C onstruction  of  Multipurpose  Hall  with 2.98 1.50
Pradesh athletic  tracks  at  Village-Bargadahiya  near
Soodipur, Block-Dubouliya Tehsil-Harraiya,
District Basti.
48. Uttar Construction of Multipurpose Hall at Village 8.00 3.00
Pradesh Maksudabad,   Block   Kalyanpur,   District
Kanpur Nagar.
49. Manipur C onstruction  of  Football  field  and  RCC 3.65 2.00
gallery at HAO Gound Chirrgarnarhak, lmphal
West.
50. Manipur Construction of multi-purpose indoor hall at 5.98 3.00
Charoibung Public Ground, Mayang I mphal
West.
51. Manipur C onstruction of football field and RCC gallery 3.64 2.00
at Hiyangrthang Kangieibung, lmphal West.
52. Uttar Construc tion of Multipurpose Hall at Village 3.31 1.50
Pradesh Patchara Kalan, District Mirzapur.
1 2                       3 4 5

34
53. Uttar Con struction of Multipurpose Hall at Village 3.98 1.50
Pradesh Dharauli, District Barabanki.
54. Uttar Con struction of Multipurpose Hall, 400 Mtr. 5.39 1.50
Pradesh Natural R unning Track at Gram-Midhaului,
Blcck-Chhibramau, District Kannaui.
55. Uttar Construction of Multipurpose Hall at Village 8.00 3.00
Pradesh Si maria   Talukek   Maharajpur,   Puranpur,
District Pilibhit,
56. Gujarat Construction of Swimming Pool at Swarnim 5.00 3.00
Gujarat Sports University, V alavav, District
Vadodara, Gujarat,
57. Maharashtra C reation of sports infrastructure facilities, 6.00 3.00
namely, Scaling Gallery, Basketball Ground,
Lawn Tennis Court and Sports academies
and training centre/Hostel at Nashik Municipal
Corporation.
58. Uttar Construction of Multipurpose Hall at Village- 6.10 2.50
Pradesh Alahadapur, Block-Dhanipur, District Aliaarh.
59. Arunachal Construction   of   Multipurpose   Hall   at 8.00 3.00
Pradesh Mahdepur under Lekang Circle.
60. Puducherry Laying of synthetic athletic track at Indira 7.00 3.00
Gandhi Sports Complex. Uppallam.
61. Sikkim Construction of Multipurpose Hall at Soreng, 7.90 3.00
62. Madhya Laying of astro turf hockey field at Railway 2.90 0.45
Pradesh S tadium Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
63. SAI, New C onstruction of 300 Bedded hostel in SAI 70.88 40.6
Delhi. Regional Centre at four locations.
TOTAL 450.22 214.59
1 2                       3 4 5