PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CH
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND         
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 31
THREE HUNDRED 
Review of Education Standards, Accreditation Process, Research, 
Examination Reforms 
Universities
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 
(Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, 
 
 PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, 
SPORTS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2022/Ashadha,1944(Saka) 
AND         REPORT 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
HUNDRED AND FORTY FIRST REPORT
ON  
f Education Standards, Accreditation Process, Research, 
n Reforms and Academic Environment in Deemed/ Private
Universities/Other Higher Education Institutions
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 4th July
Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 4th July, 202
Y STANDING ILDREN, YOUTH AND 
Report of the Department related Parliamentary  
REPORT f Education Standards, Accreditation Process, Research, n Deemed/ Private Institutions July, 2022) 2022) 
REPORT NO. 341 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in  

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATI
THREE HUNDRED AND FO
Review of Education Standards, Accreditation Process, Research, 
Examination Reforms 
Universities
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya 
(Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN,
SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
f Education Standards, Accreditation Process, Research, 
Examination Reforms and Academic Environment in Deemed/ Private
Universities/Other Higher Education Institutions
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 4th July,
Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 4th July, 202
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2022/Ashadha,1944(Saka) 
  
Hindi version of this publication is also available Y STANDING ON, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND REPORT  f Education Standards, Accreditation Process, Research, n Deemed/ Private Institutions , 2022) 2022) 

CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …....................................................  (i)-(ii) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................      (iii)-(iv) 
3.  ABBREVIATIONS............................................................................................ (v)-(vi) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................  1-49 
5. OBSERVATIONS/SUGGESTIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF  
THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………………………………...  39-49 
6. MINUTES..................................................................................................................  50-58  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13thSeptember, 2021) 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri R. S. Bharathi 
3. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Shri Bikas Ranjan Bhattacharya 
6. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
7. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
8. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
10. Ms. Sushmita Dev* 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
17. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21 Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22. Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
29. Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. Smt. Prathibha Singh# 
____________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f. 27.09.2021 
# Nominated w.e.f. 07.02.2022 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Sunil Dutt Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer  
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 

PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been 
authorized by the Committee present this Three Hundred and Forty First Report of 
the Committee  on the subject "Review of education standards, accreditation 
process, research, examination reforms and academic environment in 
Deemed/Private Universities/other Higher Education Institutions". 
 
2. As Higher Education in India is up for an overhaul with t he National 
Education Policy 2020 bringing in multi -dimensional changes -right from the 
regulatory framework to curriculum structure and research environment, the 
Committee had decided to look at the subject and try to identify the issues which 
confront the Higher Educational Institutions (HEIs) as the policy directions under 
NEP-2020 are being implemented. The Committee heard the views of the 
Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education, and representatives of 
University Grants Commission (UGC), Al l India Council for Technical Education 
(AICTE), National Board of Accreditation (NBA), National Assessment and 
Accreditation Council (NAAC), Association of Indian Universities (AIU) besides 
Vice Chancellors/ Directors of Private/ Deemed Universities in it s meeting held on 
9th June, 2022. Besides this, the Committee in order to gain first -hand experience 
and have deeper insights towards understanding the issues and challenges faced by 
the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) visited IIT, Guwahati, IIT, Bomb ay, 
Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, Central Agricultural University  and 
National Sports University,  Imphal and SNDT Women's University, Mumbai and 
interacted with the Directors/ Vice Chancellors. Views of representatives of 
Gauhati University, A ssam Science and Technology University, GuwahatiCollege 
of Architecture and Planning , Gauhati Medical College and Hospital, Manipur 
University, Institute of Chemical Technology (ICT), Mumbai were also heard. The 
Committee also interacted with various Public Sector Banks on the issue of 
funding of education sector to understand the guidelines/ issues concerning it.  
 
3. While drafting the Report, the Committee relied on the following documents 
along with the oral submissions made before the Committee:  
(i) Background note and replies to the questionnaire submitted by the 
Department of Higher Education and bodies like UGC, AICTE, 
NAAC, NBA, Banks; 
(ii) National Education Policy-2020; 
(iii) Representatives from Deemed and Private Universities and their 
written submissions; and 
(iii) 

(iv) Submission and presentation made by Institutes of Higher Education 
which the Committee visited. 
 
4. The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the representatives 
of the Ministries/Departments for furnishing necessary information/documents and 
rendering valuable assistance to the Committee in its deliberations. The Committee  
also wishes to express its gratitude to all the distinguished persons who appeared 
before the Committee and placed their valuable views on the Subject and furnished 
written notes and information in connection with the examination of the Subject.  
 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations of the 
Committee have been presented in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
6. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its 
meeting held on the 20th June, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
20th June, 2022                                                                                                                
Jyeshtha 30,1944 (Saka)  
 
  
 
 
 
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 AI Artificial Intelligence 
 AICTE 
AMS 
AllIndia CouncilforTechnicalEducation 
Academic Management System 
 ASTU Assam Science & Technology University   
 CAG Comptroller & Auditor General 
 CAU Central Agricultural University  
 CBCS ChoiceBasedCredit System 
 CEC ConsortiumofEducationalCommunications 
 CeNSE 
CeRA 
CSR 
Centre for Nano Science and Engineering 
Consortium for e-Resources in Agriculture 
Corporate Social Responsibility 
 CTYE 
CUET 
Catch Them Young for Engineering 
Common University Entrance Test 
 DARE Department of Agricultural & Research Education  
 DoHE 
DRDO 
DST 
DVV 
ECLGS 
Department of Higher Education 
Defence Research and Development Organisation 
Department of Science and Technology 
Data Validation and Verification 
Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
 EOC 
GATI 
EqualOpportunityCells 
Gender Advancement for Transforming Institutions 
 GCAP Guwahati College of Architecture & Planning 
 GER GrossEnrolmentRatio 
 GIAN GlobalInitiativeofAcademicNetworks 
 HEFA 
HEGC 
HigherEducation FinancingAgency 
Higher Education Grants Commission 
 HEI Higher Education Institution 
 ICT InformationandCommunicationTechnology 
 ICT Institute of Chemical Technology 
 IDP Institutional Development Plan 
 ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
 IIIT IndianInstituteofInformationTechnology 
 IISc Indian Institute of Science 
 IISER Indian InstituteofScienceEducationandResearch 
 IIIPRS Indian InstituteofIntellectualPropertyRightsStudies 
 IIT IndianInstituteofTechnology 
 IIQA Institutional Information for Quality Assessment  
   (v) 

IMPRINT 
LOCF 
MAHE 
ImpactingResearchInnovationandTechnology 
Learning Outcome Based Curriculum Framework 
Manipal Academy of Higher Education 
 MOOCS MassiveOnlineOpenCourses 
 NAAC 
NAAS 
NABH 
 
NABEEA 
National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
National Academy of Agricultural Sciences 
National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & Healthcare 
Providers 
Network of Accreditation Bodies for Engineering Education in 
Asia 
 NBA National Board for Accreditation 
 NAHEP 
NERF 
National Agricultural Higher Education Project 
Nirma Education and Research Foundation 
 NHEQF National Higher Education Qualification Framework 
 NIRF NationalInstitutionalRankingFramework 
 NIT NationalInstituteofTechnology 
 NMEICT NationalMissiononEducation ThroughICT 
 NQRI NationalQualityRenaissanceInitiative 
 NSQF 
NSU 
NationalSkillQualificationFrameworks 
National Sports University 
 NTA National Testing Agency 
 ODL Open Distance Learning 
 PMMMNT PanditMadanMohanMalviya NationalMission onTeachers 
andTeaching 
 PPP 
QIP 
RKMVERI 
PublicPrivate Partnership 
Quality Improvement Programme 
Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Educational and Research 
Institute 
 RUSA 
SDG 
RashtriyaUcchatarShikshaAbhiyan 
Sustainable Development Goals 
 SID 
SNDT WU 
SSR 
SWAYAM 
TIFR 
UAY 
Society for Innovation and Development 
ShreematiNathibaiDamodarThackersey Women's University  
Site Survey Report 
Study Webs of Active–Learning for Young Aspiring Minds 
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research 
UchhatarAvishkar Yojana 
 UGC 
VR 
UniversityGrantsCommission 
Virtual Reality 
   
(vi) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
1. INTRODUCTION:  
 
1.1 Since time immemorial, India has been a seat of learning especially higher 
education. The ancient Indian universities of Nalanda, Vikramshila, Vallabhi and 
Takshashila stand testimon y to this fact which had thousands of students from within 
the country and across the world pursuing studies in the multidisciplinary environment. 
India was known as Vishwa Guru as far as centre for higher learning was concerned. 
The Indian education system  produced great scholars like Aryabhata, Varahamihira, 
Charaka, Susruta, Bhaskaracharya, Panini, Patanjali, Maitreyi, Gargi and many others 
who made valuable contributions to world of knowledge in fields as diverse as 
mathematics, metallurgy, astronomy, me dical science etc.  The originality of scientific 
and mathematical knowledge of the country fascinated the world.  
 
1.2 Keeping in tune with its illustrious past, India, after attaining independence, 
decided to set -up several institutions which imparted higher education to cater to the 
needs of the country and helping in the nation building. In the process, it has also started 
strengthening existing reputed Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). Some of these 
higher inst itutions were created under the Act of Parliament and given the tag of 
'institute of national importance'. Significant developments have been made in the fields 
of higher education since then, h owever, much remains to be done to bring back India's 
glorious past of th e great Indian tradition  of education to create well -rounded and 
innovative individuals to enable the socio-economic transformation of the country 
besides re -establishing India's position and status as centre of higher learning . 
Refurbishing of the Nalanda University in the recent past is an example of restoring our 
glorious past of higher learning besides strengthening institutions such as IITs, IIMs and 
other research centres.  
 
1.3 The higher education plays a significant role in imparting kno wledge and 
developing skills thereby empowering people which lead to the growth of economy and 
contribute to the national building.  Hence, emphasis has been given to t he pursuit of 
higher education to make the country a robust knowledge hub. Gradually , India has 
once again started moving towards becoming a knowledge economy and society. 
Consequently, more and more youth aspiring for higher education are joining such 
institutions. 
 
1.4 The aim and objective of higher education is to develop good, thoughtful , and 
creative individual s who in the course of their higher studies not only become out of 
box thinkers but also contribute to the well being of society. Thus, a quality higher 
education must enable personal accomplishment and enlightenment, constructive public 
engagement and productive contribution to the society. Higher education must form the 
basis for knowledge creation and innovation thereby contributing to the national 

2 
 
economy. Quality higher education, therefore, not only creates opportunities for 
individual employment but also contributes towards prosperous nation in all its 
dimensions. It symbolizes the progress of a nation and social and economic well -being 
of the society at large.  
 
1.5 Thehigher education segment in India has tremendous potential for growth, and 
offers viable investment avenues for private sector and foreign institutions. The 
Government has madeefforts to reform the sector by overhauling the regulatory 
framework and enabling access to education for all.  
 
1.6 The knowledge landscape is undergoing rapid change in the presentday world.  
Massive changes in the scientific and technological fields such as artificial intelligence, 
data analytics and learning by machine , robotics  etc. will not only wipe out unskilled 
jobs but also lead to increasing demand for skilled manpower involving mathematics, 
computer science and data science coupled with multidisciplinary abilities across 
physical science, social science and humanities. Th e rise in pollution, infectious disease, 
shortage of food and energy resources world -wide will also lead to requirement of 
skilled manpower with micro-level learning. In the present era of changing employment 
landscape and global ecosystem, the emphasis ha s shifted on critical thinking and 
analysis process rather than simply rote learning, from not only what to learn but how to 
learn. Today's requirement of education, therefore, is to shift the Pedagogy towards 
more holistic, experiential and enquiry driven  coupled with matching curriculum. The 
other important objective of education is to not only create an environment conducive to 
overall growth but also prepare the people for a gainful employment as well. 
 
1.7 It has also been felt that the methods of evaluating the knowledge and 
performance of students require improvement  so as to do away with the present system 
of rote-learning to create passion for knowledge and understanding.  The need is felt to 
have a unified and equitable system of evaluation proc ess instead of multilevel and 
separate discipline based evaluation to bring more equity into the system.  
 
1.8 Another significant aspect in the reforms of education al standards is the 
accreditation process  which has evolved over a period of time . It was st arted by the 
University Grants Commission in 1994 in India in pursuance of the recommendations 
made by the National Policy of Education, 1986 and the Programme of Action (POA), 
1992 which lay special emphasis on evaluating the quality of higher education i n India. 
Since then , this process has undergone substantial change and has acquired a status 
which determines the quality of education in higher institutes. What furthermore is 
required to be done and achieved will be the focus area of this study as well.   
 
1.9 It is against this perspective that it becomes all the more imperative to strive for 
major reforms in the education standards to bridge the gap between the present 
education ecosystem and current state of learning outcomes vis -s-vis what is required 

3 
 
and as pired for, so as to bring quality, equity and integrity of highest standards. The 
aspiration is also towards making the Indian education system at par with global 
standards so as to attract best of talents which will go a long way in taking the country 
to greater height of development and prosperity. 
 
1.10 It is briefly against this backdrop but not limited to, the Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) decided to review the present education 
standards in various higher educational  institutes of the country, reforms which are 
presently required in the educational ecosystem, examination process, accreditation 
process, research standards and academic environment in general in Higher Education 
Institutions (HEIs) . It is the endeavour o f the Committee to suitably incorporate the 
vision and objective s of NEP -2020 while broad basing its observations and 
recommendations based on interactions the Committee has had with several institutes of 
higher education across the country and written sub missions made by the Government 
organizations and administrative bodies under it.     
 
1.11 In the following chapters, each sub -topic of the subject under study will be 
minutely scrutinized based on the written submissions, first -hand interaction s with 
stakeholders and observations of the Committee followed by recommendations which 
the Committee propose to make.  
 
2. National Education Policy (NEP)-2020 
2.1 Realizing the pertinent need for the Indian higher education system to be re -
adjusted and revamped to meet the emerging requirements and to equip student s for a 
professional life towards meeting the increasing need for creative, multidisciplinary, 
and highly skilled workforce for employment, some of the key reforms introduced 
under the vision of NEP 2020, include:  
2.1.1 Quality Universities and Colleges : NEP 2020 envisions to introduce certain key 
changes to the higher education system, which inter alia include: 
a. moving towards a higher educational system consisting of large, multi -
disciplinary universities and colleges, with at least one in or near every 
district; 
b. moving towards faculty and institutional autonomy; 
c. re-vamping curriculum, pedagogy, assessment and student support for 
enhanced student experiences; 
d. establishment of a National Researc h Foundation to fund outstanding peer -
reviewed research and to actively seed research in universities and colleges;  
e. governance of higher education institutions by highly qualified independent 
boards having academic and administrative autonomy; and  
f. increased access, equity, and inclusion through a range of measures, 
including open schooling, online education and Open Distance Learning, 

4 
 
keeping in view the needs of learners with disabilities and substantial 
increases in scholarships at private/philanthropic u niversities for 
disadvantaged and underprivileged students. 
2.1.2 Institutional Restructuring and Consolidation : NEP 2020 intends to end the 
fragmentation of higher education by transforming higher education institutions into 
large multidisciplinary universities and colleges, each of which will aim to have 3,000 
or more students. The idea is to build vibrant communities of scholars and peers, break 
down harmful silos, enable students to become well -rounded across disciplines 
(including artistic, creat ive and analytic subjects as well as sports), develop active 
research communities across disciplines (including cross -disciplinary approach) and 
increase resource efficiency, both material and human across higher education.  
2.1.3 Shift Towards Holistic Edu cation: NEP 2020 advocates for promotion of holistic 
education to ensure well rounded development of students. It is thus proposed that 
multidisciplinary universities and colleges will facilitate the move towards high -quality 
education with flexibility in curriculum and engaging course options being developed 
and offered to the students. The higher education system is thus proposed to have 
multidisciplinary institutions of higher learning with high quality teaching, research, 
and community engagement. All higher education institutions will move towards 
becoming large multidisciplinary institutions with programmes across disciplines and 
fields, offered either in their institutions or through higher education institutions 
clusters. 
2.1.4 Internationalization: NEP 2020 focuses on promoting India as a global study 
destination providing premium education at affordable costs. It is thus intended that 
high performing Indian universities will be encouraged to set up campuses in other 
countries and similarly select universities will be permitted to operate in India. Research 
collaboration and students exchange programmes between the Indian institutions and 
global institutions will be promoted and the credits acquired in foreign universities will 
also be permitted to be counted for award of degree. 
2.1.5 Teacher Education : Recognizing the importance of creating a team of teachers 
that will shape the next generation, NEP 2020 lays equal emphasis on revamping 
teacher education as well. The teacher education needs to be co nducted within 
composite multidisciplinary institutions having departments of almost all subjects.  
2.1.6 Professional Education : NEP 2020 envisages that professional education will 
become an integral part of the overall higher education and thus it must also 
significantly involve critical and interdisciplinary thinking and research. Thus, the 
practice of setting up stand -alone tech nical universities, health science universities, 
legal and agricultural universities or institutions in these fields shall be discouraged and 
all existing stand -alone professional education institutions will have to become multi -
disciplinary institutions b y 2030, either by opening new departments or by operating in 

5 
 
clusters.  
2.1.7 Promoting High Quality Research : NEP 2020 focuses on a comprehensive 
approach for transforming the quality and quantity of research in India. Thus, to focus 
on research and promo te research culture in all higher education institutions in an 
interrelated and coordinated fashion, NEP 2020 provides for setting up of a National 
Research Foundation (NRF) which would bring a quantum jump in funding and support 
for research. The overarch ing goal of NRF shall be to enable a culture of research to 
permeate through universities and higher education institutions across India.  
2.1.8  Transforming Regulatory System of Higher Education : Presently, the regulatory 
system has been rife with very b asic problems, such as heavy concentrations of power 
within a few bodies, conflicts of interest among these bodies and a resulting lack of 
accountability. NEP 2020 mandates for setting -up of a common regulatory regime for 
the entire education sector, elimi nating duplication and disjunction of regulatory efforts. 
A single regulator, the National Higher Education Regulatory Authority ( NHERA) will 
be set up to regulate in a ‘light but tight' and facilitative manner.Separately, a new 
General Education Council ( GEC) shall also be set up to frame expected learning 
outcomes for higher education programmes, also referred to a ‘graduate attributes'. A 
National Higher Education Qualification Framework ( NHEQF) will be formulated by 
the GEC and it shall be in sync with the National Skills Qualifications Framework. 
2.1.9Higher Education Grants Commission ( HEGC): HEGC will be created which will 
take care of funding and financing of higher education based on transparent criteria 
including the Institutional Development Plan  (IDP) prepared by the institutions and the 
progress made in the implementation of the IDPs. HEGC will be entrusted with 
disbursement of scholarships and on developmental funds for starting new focus areas 
and expanding quality programme offerings in HEIs across disciplines and fields. 
3. STATUS NOTE BY DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION, MINISTRY 
OF EDUCATION 
 
3.1 EDUCATION STANDARDS, RESEARCH AND ACADEMIC 
ENVIRONMENT  
 
3.1.1 It has been submitted that the Ministry of Education (MoE) and the University 
Grants Commission (UGC) have taken various steps to promote inclusive reach of 
Higher Education and Research Studies which include establishment of Educational 
Institutions and e nabling digital reach of higher  education and d uring the last three 
years, 141 universities have been established . It has been informed that to meet the 
growing demand of highly skilled technical manpower, there are 23 IITs functioning in 
the country as on date, which impart world class  education in various disciplines of 
science, technology and engineering.  Also, in order to reduce regional imbalance in 
imparting quality technical education in the country, six new IITs , out of the total 

6 
 
23,were established by the Government, which comm enced their Academic sessions 
from year 2015/2016 and the establishment of these new IITs has, on one hand given an 
opportunity to more number of students to get quality education and on other hand has 
taken a step towards enhancing technical and research output of the country. 
 
3.1.2 The Department informs that t o complement the renewed focus of the 
Government on developing indigenous R&D capabilities, boosting manufacturing and 
creating a successful startup culture in the country, following steps have been taken:  
a. Research Parks: Research Parks are being established in various IITs and 
IISc. Research Park at IIT Madras and Kharagpur are already fully 
functional and the one at IIT Gandhinagar is under construction with 
funding from Department of Science and Technology. Research Par ks at 
IIT Bombay, IIT Delhi, IIT Kanpur, IIT Guwahati, IIT Hyderabad and IISc 
Bangalore are in various stages of construction.  
b. Impacting Research and Innovation Technology (IMPRINT): 
IMPRINT is a flagship national initiative of the Government,which aims a t 
providing solutions to the most relevant engineering challenges and 
translating knowledge into viable technology in ten selected technology 
domains, viz. health care, energy, sustainable habitat, Nano technology 
hardware, water   resources and river syste ms, advanced materials, 
Information and communication technology, manufacturing, security and 
defence, and environmental science and climate change. It is a pan IITs 
and IISc Joint Initiative seeking to develop a roadmap for research.  142 
research project s at a total cost of Rs.320.78crore for 3 years with joint 
funding by MoE and various participating Ministries/Departments are 
currently under execution under IMPRINT -I.  Out of 142 projects, 29 
projects have achieved their objectives, prototypes are ready  for 42 
projects and rest projects are being monitored regularly so as to achieve 
the objectives in the extended period, if needed. IMPRINT-II was 
formulated with a slightly modified strategy by merging the schemes 
IMPRINT and UchhatarAvishkar Yojana  (UAY).  The projects under 
IMPRINT-II will be funded jointly by MoE and DST in the ratio of 50:50 
by creating a joint corpus. Other participating Ministries/ Industries may 
also volunteer to fund the projects relevant to them. Details of the projects 
approved and cost thereof have been shared and are as under: - 
 
Phases  Project  Cost (In Cr.) 
IMPRINT-
II(A+B)  
125  104.58   
IMPRINT-II-C  51  41.18   
TOTAL   176  145.76  

7 
 
 
Calls for proposals under IMPRINT -II-C-2 have been made by Science 
and Engineering Research Board (SERB) under DST in consortium mode, 
which are under different stage of evaluation.   
 
c. UchhatarAvishkar Yojana (UAY): UAY functions towards  promoting 
innovation of a higher order that directly impacts the needs of the 
Industry and thereby improves the competitive edge of Indian 
manufacturing.  The project envisages collaboration between the 
academia and industry – within or outside India.   The funding pattern of 
the projects selected is 25% by Industry; 25% by participating 
Department/Ministry; and 50% by MOE. Currently, 136 projects at a total 
cost of Rs. 360.50 crore with joint funding by MOE, participating 
Ministries and Industry are curren tly under execution. Under the scheme, 
57 Projects have since been completed.  
 
3.1.3 Improving Gender Balance : It has been informed that by implementing the 
recommendations of the Committee that was formed under the chairmanship of 
Director, IIT -Mandi, wi th a view to improving female enrolment in the B.Tech . 
Programmes in IITs, the female enrolment in B.Tech . Programmes in IITs during the 
year 2018, 2019 & 2020 increased to 15.29%, 18%  and 19.8 % respectively. Inthe year 
2021, the female enrolment in B.Tec h. was 19.72% by creating 1534 supernumerary 
seats.   
 
3.1.4 Prime Minister’s Research Fellowship: The Department informs that in order 
to attract best talent for undertaking research in the frontier areas of science and 
technology, preferably those addressing the national requirements, a maximum of 3,000 
most talented students from all recognized Universities/Institutes will be selected as per 
PMRF guidelines to enroll in the Ph.D . program in IITs/IISc/IISERs and selected 
CUs/NITs (in NIRF top 25) an d would be incentivized by providing attractive rates of 
fellowship. Also, in addition, a research grant of Rs.2.00 lakh per year for a period of 5 
years will be given to each fellow to meet the cost of presenting research papers. It is 
further informed th at the Scheme has been appraised by the Expected Family 
Contribution ( EFC) and approved by the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 
07.02.2018 and as on date, 1509 fellows have been admitted under the scheme, who are 
pursuing Ph.D. programmes in various Institutes in the country.  
 
3.1.5 ASEAN Fellowship Scheme: It has been informed that under this Scheme,the 
competent authority has approved grant of upto 1000 fellowships to students of 
ASEAN countries to pursue integrated Ph.D . programmes in the IITs, at a total outlay 
of Rs. 300 cr. for 7 years (3 batches). For the students admitted, fellowships are 
provided at the same rate as Indian students, along with the yearly research grant, as 
applicable. The IITs make provision to cover livi ng expenses of the selected students 

8 
 
from their own resources. So far in three rounds, 65 students have been selected under 
the Scheme but owing to Covid pandemic worldwide, 35 students have joined in online 
mode (out of which 14 have been able to join the ir respective institutions in the 
country) and other students have either deferred or dropped after enrolling.  
 
3.1.6 Patent by IITs: It is informed that 1535 patents have been filed/ granted/ 
registered by 23 IITs in the last 3 years. Out of these, 69 patents have been converted 
into products and processes, which have benefitted the country. The total commercial 
value of these patents that have become commercially viable is Rs. 1321.17 lakh. The 
Department submits that IITs are institutes of national im portance and have been front 
runners in the field of research and innovation that have benefitted industry and as well 
as society. It was observed that these IITs leading the patents generation are having all 
the components such as IPR Cells/Technology Tra nsfer Cells, dedicated IPR 
Policy/Guidelines for engaging collaborative research with research laboratories and 
industries. They also have startup policy for new entrepreneurs and a dedicated 
incubation cell for successful commercialization. 
 
3.1.7. Digital University: It has been informed that in the Union  Budget 2022 -2023, 
establishment of Digital University  has been announced . Th is University will provide 
access to students across the country for world -class quality universal education with 
personalized learning experience at their doorsteps. The Department of Higher 
Education, in consultation with University Grants Commission (UGC), All India 
Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and other stakeholders has initiated the 
process to ensure the early start of this digital university. 
 
3.1.8 Research Promotion Scheme (RPS): This Scheme aims to create research 
ambience by promoting research in technical disciplines and innovations in established 
and emerging technologies. The objective of this scheme is to cr eate and update the 
general research capabilities of the faculty members of the various Technical Institutes. 
Institutions are provided funds for this scheme limited to Rs. 25 Lakhs.  
 
3.1.9 Indian Knowledge System: It has been informed that t he Department of Higher 
Education, has established an Indian Knowledge System (IKS) Division at AICTE with 
a vision to promote interdisciplinary research on all aspects of Indian Knowledge 
System, to preserve and disseminate IKS knowledge for further research and societ al 
applications. 
 
3.1.10 IDEA - LAB:The Department has informed that AICTE has launched a scheme 
on January 1, 2021 to establish AICTE -IDEA (Idea Development, Evaluation & 
Application) Lab in the technical institutions to support the new age learning and 21 st 
century skills and encouraging students for application of Science, Technologies, 
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fundamentals towards enhanced hands -on 
experience, learning by doing and product visualization. It has been submitted that 

9 
 
AICTE co -funds the 24x7 IDEA Lab, providing up to 50% of the project cost, not 
exceeding Rs. 55 lakh; the remaining amount has to be brought by the college from the 
industry/ any other source.  
 
3.1.11 Scheme for Transformational and Advanced Research in S ciences (STARS): 
Department of Higher Education inform ed that this new scheme was launched 
February, 2019 with the objective to provide funding to faculty of Higher Educational 
Institutions for research projects in basic sciences which are inter -disciplinary and 
translational in outcomes. Also, the projects need to be India -centric and focused on 
socially relevant research. The basic thrust domains of the Scheme include Physics, 
Chemistry, Biological Sciences, Nanosciences, Data Sciences & Mathematics and 
Earth Sciences. The scheme also has a provision to encourage projects from talented 
researchers from eligible institutions in Tier -II cities and below.  It has further been 
informed that a total budget of Rs. 250 crores have been allocated for the Scheme fo r a 
period of three years, with additional two years for monitoring and presently the Apex 
Committee (headed by Secretary (HE)), has approved a total of 141 project proposals 
across 37 Institutions, as recommended by the Domain Expert Committee for funding . 
Also, in the financial year 2019 -20 an amount of Rs. 33 Crores were released for the 
141 projects approved for funding in the first round.   
 
3.1.12 Pursuing of two academic programmes simultaneously : In this respect the 
Department has informed that NEP 2020 policy envisions imaginative and flexible 
curricular structures to enable creative combinations of disciplines for study, that would 
offer multiple entry and exit points, thus, removing currently pr evalent rigid boundaries 
and creating new possibilities for life -long learning and centrally involve critical and 
interdisciplinary thinking. Keeping this in view, UGC has issued guidelines in April, 
2022 that a student can pursue two full time academic pr ogrammes in physical mode 
provided that in such cases, class timings for one programme do not overlap with the 
class timings of the other programme (other than Ph.D. programme).  
  
 
3.2 EXAMINATION REFORMS 
 
3.2.1 National Testing Agency (NTA) : It has been informed that the National Testing 
Agency (NTA) was established as a premier, specialized, autonomous and self -
sustained testing organization to conduct entrance examinations for 
admission/fellowship in higher educational institutions in a standardized meth od. In 
order to help the students to practice well for NEET (UG) and JEE (Main) entrance 
examinations, National Testing Agency (NTA) has launched a Mobile App ‘National 
Test Abhyas’ to facilitate candidates’ access to high quality mock tests online free of  
cost. As per NEP -2020, the principles for university entrance exams will be similar. 
Thus National Testing Agency (NTA) will work to offer a high -quality common 
aptitude test, as well as specialized common subject exams in the sciences, humanities, 

10 
 
languages, arts, and vocational subjects, at least twice every year. It has further been 
mentioned that in pursuance of the National Education Policy, 2020, it has been decided 
to conduct common entrance test for admission in central universities from the 
academic year 2022 -23 to reduce the burden on students, universities and the entire 
education system. The Common University Entrance Test (CUET) for undergraduate 
programme is to assess the students of different boards at the same level, giving them 
equal opportunity.  
 
3.2.2 Examination Reforms-AICTE: It is informed that f uture engineering graduates 
not only need to be knowledgeable in his/her own discipline, but also need a new set of 
soft, professional skills and competencies. With a view for developmen t of a suitable 
exam format, AICTE had constituted a committee in this regard  and t he Committee 
finalized the policy on Exam Reforms to be adopted by the Institutions and Universities 
and the same has been launched. The main recommendations of the Committe e 
were:Courses on Artificial Intelligence (AI), Internet of Things (IoT), Block chain, 
Robotics, Quantum Computing, Data Sciences, Cyber Security, 3D Printing & Design 
and other emerging technological areas must be included in the UG/PG Program in 
Engineering.Greater focus is on multi -disciplining courses by reducing the seats in 
conventional disciplines and converting the existing seats into these courses. AICTE is 
conducting workshops on Exam Reforms for Controller of Examination, Deans and 
Senior Faculty members of various universities and institutions as well. 
 
3.3 ACCREDITATION PROCESS 
 
3.3.1 NATIONAL ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION COUNCIL (NAAC):  
National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) is an autonomous body 
established by UGC to assess and accredit institutions of higher education in the 
country. NAAC assesses and accredits higher educational institutions, who apply for 
NAAC accreditation, using seven identified criteria to serve as the basis of its 
assessment procedures viz., Curricular Asp ects, Teaching -Learning and Evaluation, 
Research, Consultancy and Extension, Infrastructure and Learning Resources, Student 
Support and Progression, Governance, Leadership and Management and Institutional 
Values and Best Practices. 8868 institutions have b een accredited by NAAC as on 
25.01.2022. NAAC accreditation process is being simplified [NAAC manual for Self 
Study Report (SSR) for affiliated & constituent college (UG, UG&PG) to reduce 
number of parameters to 57 from 96, as well as to address regional variations]. NAAC 
manual for provisional accreditation of colleges has been approved.  
 
3.3.2 NATIONAL BOARD OF ACCREDITATION (NBA): It has been informed 
that National Board of Accreditation (NBA) was established in order to assess the 
qualitative competenc e of programs offered by technical institutions from Diploma to 
Postgraduate level in Engineering & Technology, Management, Pharmacy 
&Architecture, etc. It has been stated that Accreditation is process of quality assurance 

11 
 
and improvement, whereby a techni cal program is critically appraised to verify that the 
program continues to meet and/ or exceeds the norms and standards prescribed by the 
regulatory authority from timetotime. NBA accredits programs and not the institutions. 
Further, it has been stated that Ne twork of Accreditation Bodies for Engineering 
Education in Asia (NABEEA) is a network of accreditation bodies in Asia  and this 
network promotes engineering education and develops mutual cooperation towards 
better accreditation sy stem in Asia. NBA acquired the membership of NABEEA in 
2011. It is submitted that the n umber of programs accredited by the NBA during past 
five years has increased consistently (except for the year 2020 -21 because of Covid 19 -
pandemic) as indicated below.   
 
Financial Year  2017-2018  2018-2019  2019-2020  2020-21  2021-22  
No. of Programs 
Considered for  
Accreditation 
1076  1284  1323  765  1395  
 
3.3.3 In regard to NEP -2020, it has been informed that a stage -wise mechanism for 
granting graded autonomy to colleges, through a transparent system of graded 
accreditation, will be established and colleges will be encouraged, mentored, supported, 
and incentivized to gradually attain the minimum benchmarks required for each level of 
accreditation. Over a period  of time, it is envisaged that every college would develop 
into either an Autonomous degree -granting College, or a constituent college of a 
university - in the latter case, it would be fully a part of the university. With appropriate 
accreditations, Autono mous degree granting  Colleges could evolve into Research -
intensive or Teaching-intensive Universities, if they so aspire. Also, HEIs will have the 
autonomy and freedom to move gradually from one category to another, based on their 
plans, actions, and effec tiveness. The Accreditation System will develop and use 
appropriately different and relevant norms across this range of HEIs. However, the 
expectations of high quality of education, and of teaching -learning, across all HEIs will 
be the same.  All colleges currently affiliated to a university shall attain the required 
benchmarks over time to secure the prescribed accreditation benchmarks and eventually 
become autonomous degree -granting colleges. This will be achieved through a 
concerted national effort including suitable mentoring and governmental support for the 
same. Norms, standards, and guidelines for systemic development, regulation, and 
accreditation of Open Distance Learning ( ODL) will be prepared, and a framework for 
quality of ODL that will be recommendatory for all HEIs will be developed.  
 
4. A detailed Questionnaire was also sent to the Department of Higher Education , 
Ministry of Education  seeking information on various aspects of the subject, especially 
from the perspective of NEP - 2020, and the information that has been shared therein 
comprises of the following points:  
 
(i) Estimated Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) in Higher Education in India is 

12 
 
27.1% which is calculated for 18 -23 years of age group. For scheduled Castes , it 
is 23.4% and for Scheduled Tribes , it is 18.0%. GER for male population at all 
India level is 26.9% whereas for SC male it is 22.8% and 18.2% for ST male. 
Similarly, GER for female population at all India level is 27.3%, whereas for SC 
female it is 24.1% and for ST female it is 17.7%.  
(ii) NEP parameters have been incorporated in all Manuals for the process of 
Assessment and Accreditation like University Manual, Autonomous College 
Manual, and Affiliated Manual etc. from December 2021. Institutions accredite d 
from December 2021 onwards have to make use of the latest manual only.  
(iii) UGC has initiated necessary measures to bring multidisciplinary education 
back to prepare students to develop deeper skills, to approach problems with 
broader perspectives etc. Some o f the initiatives are formulation of a draft 
National Higher Education Qualification Framework (NHEQF), revision of the 
Choice Based Credit System and has draft Curricular Framework and Credit 
System developed for Four Year Under Graduate Programme and dra ft 
guidelines being developed  to transform Higher Education Institutions in to 
Multidisciplinary Institution 
(iv) AICTE has taken various initiatives for improving education standards and 
promoting research in all spheres including examination reforms and acade mic 
environment in the country. AICTE has revamped the existing curriculum and 
launched outcome based model curriculum for Diploma, Undergraduate and Post 
Graduate Courses in Engineering and PGDM/MBA Courses. Student internship 
has been redefined and made mandatory whether in corporate world or at 
Institutions of National Importance, National Laboratories or in Development 
Sector. Universal Human Value Education has been made an integral part of 
Course Curriculum. Also, Model curriculum has been prepared fo r courses in 
Emerging Areas to be permitted in Engineering institutes from academic year 
2020-21 like Artificial Intelligence (AI),Information of Technology (IoT),Block 
chain, Robotics, Quantum Computing, Data Sciences, Cyber Security,3D 
Printing & Design,  Augmented Reality (AR)/Virtual Reality (VR) other 
emerging technological areas to be included in the UG/PG Program in 
Engineering. Besides this, AICTE has made provisions of awarding minor degree 
to students in B.Tech. courses if they earned 20 additional  credits in new 
emerging areas in discipline and honuors degree to student in the same discipline 
if they earned 20addittional credits in new emerging areas pertaining to the same 
disciplines.  
(v) To motivate and encourage institutions to have accreditations of courses 
being conducted by them, technical institutions having at least is to have their 
60% programs NBA accredited in next four years, else no extension of approval 
will be granted. Approx imately, 327 Margdarshaks have been identified and 
trained to m entor the institutions. Eleven institutions  have been  selected under 
the scheme “Margdarshan”. AICTE’s Examination Reform Policy has been 
released and the sensitization of the same has also been carried out through 

13 
 
various webinars/workshops. Technical Ins titutions and Universities in the 
country have already been requested to adopt the Examination Reforms Policy. 
To facilitate this, Model Questions Paper and question bank has been 
developed/shared through AICTE by means of workshops in association with 
collaborating universities.   
(vi) Towards increasing the quality of education,Quality Mandate is UGC’s 
initiative to address the major challenges faced by Higher Education. Some of the 
initiatives undertaken to fulfil the purpose are “Deekhasharambh”(a guide to 
Student Induction Programme), Learning Outcomes based Curriculum 
Framework (LOCF) in 31 Undergraduate subjects , JeevanKaushal -Curriculum 
for Life Skills, Credit course curriculum for 30 hours on “Fostering Social 
Responsibility Community Engagement of HEI s in India”, policy document on 
“Enabling and Enhancing University and Industry Linkage”,  guidelines for 
Evaluation Reforms,  policy document on ‘Student Career Progression and 
Alumni Network’,  guidelines for Teacher Induction Programme “Guru 
Dakshta”, P ARAMARSH- a scheme of UGC to mentor institutions seeking 
National Assessment and Accreditation Council accreditation, MULYA 
PRAVAH – a guideline for inculcation of Human Values and Ethics in Higher 
Educational Institutions, SATAT - A framework for eco -friendly and sustainable 
university campuses, Handbook for Vice Chancellors - a ready reckoner guide 
for the essential knowledge domain required for the visionary functioning and 
book on Quality Mandate for Higher Education Institutions.  
(vii) Modernization & Remov al of Obsolescence (MODROB) is ascheme to 
provide financial support to institutions to equip their laboratories with modern 
equipment and upgrade infrastructure facilities, keeping in view the rapid 
advancements in technology. Institutions were provided fu nds for replacement of 
obsolete equipment with modern, state -of-the art equipment to ensure quality of 
educational process. Funding for this scheme is limited to Rs.20 lakhs.  
(viii) UGC has launched a new scheme STRIDE (Scheme for Trans -disciplinary 
Research for India’s Developing Economy) to promote creation of new 
knowledge, inculcate innovative research culture and cognitive thinking and 
improve quality of doctoral research in the areas which are locally and socially 
relevant, nationally important and globally significant. STRIDE aims to identify 
young talent, strengthen research culture, build capacity, promote innovation and 
support trans-disciplinary research relevant to national  development and to fund 
high impact national network projects in the identified thrust areas in humanities 
and human sciences and Indian knowledge systems.   
(ix) Taking note of the requirement for skill development among students, 
National Vocational Educatio n Qualification Framework (NVEQF) which was 
later on assimilated into National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) has 
been launched. Various Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) are developing 
Qualification Packs (QPs), National Occupational Standards (NOSs) a nd 
assessment mechanisms in their respective domains, in alignment with the needs 

14 
 
of the industry. In view of this, and in order to prepare an industry -ready work 
force, UGC has implemented three schemes namely, Community College, B.Voc 
degree programme an d DeenDayal Upadhyay Kaushal Kendra, and facilitated 
Colleges and Universities to offer skill -based programmes such as 
B.Voc&M.Voc under National Skills Qualification Framework (NSQF).  
(x) In order to internationali ze the Indian higher education system and 
promote India as a global study destination, UGC issued the Guidelines on 
Internationalization of Higher Education in July, 2021. The Guidelines provide 
for establishment of Office for International Affairs and Alumni Connect Cell in 
the campuses of each Uni versity. In line with the vision of NEP, 2020, UGC has 
notified the UGC (Academic Collaboration between Indian and Foreign Higher 
Educational Institutions to offer Twinning, Joint Degree and Dual Degree 
Programmes) Regulations, 2022 in May, 2022.  
(xi) The tech nical, medical, agricultural and sports education in all the 
universities are governed by their respective Statutory Councils. UGC specifies 
Degrees under Section 22 of the UGC Act 1956. The UGC Notification on 
Specification of Degrees 2014 and its Amendme nts issued from time to time are 
available on the UGC website. 
(xii) UGC has developed guidelines on “Evaluation Reforms in Higher 
Educational Institutions”. The document has been prepared with the help on an 
Expert Committee which provides a comprehensive view of evaluation, and also 
covers different types of assessment by considering requisite learning attributes.  
Adequate focus is also given to need for more proportion of testing based on 
internal assessment modes. The document has also touched upon the gradi ng 
system used and to be considered. It also focuses on the moderation process and 
important aspects to be considered for conduct of moderation during evaluation 
process. 
(xiii) Universities are autonomous institutions having autonomy to conduct their 
affairs per taining to academic and administrative activ ities. UGC does not 
interfere in the day to day functioning of Universities that design and develop 
their own structure to ensure consistency, cohesiveness and coordination  
 
5. ROLE AND CONTRIBUTION OF BANKS IN FUNDING OF HIGHER 
EDUCATION: The Committee also had interaction with representatives of various 
Banks on the issue of funding of education sector especially Deemed / Private 
Universities. The representative of StateBank of IndiasubmittedthatSBI is extending 
financial assistance to the Private College/ Deemed Universities based on the 
commercial viability of the project for creation of movable / immovable properties, 
furniture / fixtures / Lab equipment /College Buses etc. and repayment capability based 
on the cash flows. SBI has Consultancy Services Cell in each Local Head Office, which 
provide valuable inputs for validating the project so that redundancies, if any, are 
eliminated.  
 

15 
 
5.1 The Bank further added that a t present, the Bank loans up to a limit of Rs 5.0 
crores per borrower for setting up of Schools (Under Social infrastructure) is eligible for 
classification as Priority Sector advance.   RBI may consider inclusion of Higher 
Education Institutions (HEI) with  enhanced threshold up to Rs 100.00 crores under 
Social Infrastructure. It was further informed that during the last three Financial Years, 
Bank has undertaken 94 Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activities with an outlay 
of Rs 16.38 crores towards gi rl education and women empowerment, benefiting approx. 
25,000 girl children and women. During the FY 2021 -22, an amount of Rs. 22.80 cr was 
sanctioned for Education programs. Bank has reached out to 21,82,248 children and 
teachers to improve their learning  outcomes during the last three years. Approximately 
50% of these beneficiaries i.e. more than 10.00 lakh are girl children and female 
teachers.   
 
5.2 The Indian Bank during the course of the meeting mentioned that reduced rate of 
interest for premier ins titutes likeIITs/IIMs/ISBs further giving some interest rebate to 
girl students is serviced during moratorium period.Bank provideseducation loans, not 
only for professional courses but alsoforvarious approvedcourses as under: - 
(a) Approvedcoursesleadingtograduate/postgraduatedegreeandPGdiplomascon
ductedbycolleges/universitiesrecognizedbyUGC/AICTE/ICMR/NAACaccred
ited'A'ratedinstitutionsetc. 
(b) Job oriented courses for studying part -time courses and approved by 
theappropriate authorities. 
(c) Joborientedspecializedprogrammeslikemaritimecourseswhichareofferedinc
ollaborationwithforeigninstitutions which maynotbehavingrecognitioninIndia. 
  
5.3 The representatives of the UnionBank of India highlighting the role of Banks in 
helping Professional Education Institutions with th eir funding, in Engineering, 
Agricultural and other technical areas informed that the Bank is extending credit 
assistance to Professional Education Institutions for setting up of the institute/purchase 
of the equipment and also towards the working capital requirement. The representatives 
of the Union Bank of India on a query regarding whether the Education Sector was 
included under the ambit of the credit line guarantee scheme for small enterprises that 
was launched to provide relief to affected Sector due to the Covid pandemic, it was 
informed that there is no specific provision under ECLGS Scheme for educational 
institutions. However, eligible borrowers under ECLGS 1.0 with credit facilities up to 
Rs 50 crores shall include Educational Institutions also an d accounts with sanction limit 
of Rs 2.86 crores have been extended the ECLGS supports by the Banks.  
 
 
6. DEPOSITIONS 
 
 The under -mentioned officials from several stakeholder organizations appeared 
before the Committee to depose their views on the subject : 
 

16 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name and Designation Organization 
1. Shri K. Sanjay Murthy, 
Secretary 
 
Department of Higher Education, Ministry 
of Education 
2. Dr. M. P. Poonia, Vice -
Chairman 
 
All India Council for Technical Education 
3. Prof. Rajnish Jain, Secretary University Grants Commission 
 
 
4. Prof. Amiya Kumar Rath, 
Adviser 
National Assessment and Accreditation 
Council 
5. Dr. Anil Kumar Nassa, Member 
Secretary 
National Board of Accreditation 
6. Prof. (Dr.) O. P. Kalra, Vice 
Chancellor,  
SGT University 
7. Dr. Anup Kumar Singh, 
Director-General 
Nirma University 
8. Shri Somnath Das, OSD Manipal Academy of Higher Education 
 
9. Swami A tmapriyananda, Pro -
Chancellor 
Ramakrishna Mission Vivekanand 
Educational and Research Institute  
10.  Dr. (Mrs.) Pankaj Mittal, 
Secretary-General 
Association of Indian Universities 
 
 
6.1 UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMSSION (UGC) 
 
Representative of the UGC in their deposition highlighted the role and domain of the 
UGC and the various initiatives that are being taken in respect of NEP -2020.It was 
mentioned that UGC is aligning all its activities, academic or in governance and also 
revisiting all the regulations, including those concerning Deemed Universities, to push 
forward the vision as outlined in the NEP -2020. The initiatives that w ere mentioned 
were Academic Bank of Credits, pursuing two academic programmes simultaneously, 
Internationalization of Higher Education, academic collaboration between Indian and 
foreign HEIs, Common Universities Entrance test, Study Webs of Active Learning  for 
Young Aspiring Minds (SWA YAM), ODL and Online education etc.  On the issue of 
criteria being adopted by the UGC to grant accreditation to the colleges and 
Universities,it was informed that NAAC, an Inter University Centre o f UGC deals with 
accreditation and till 31.5.2022, number of Universities and Coll eges that stand 
accredited by NAAC is 9059. It was also informed that at present there are 879 
autonomous colleges and 126 Institutions Deemed to be Universities in the country. It 

17 
 
was also informed tha t UGC has not set up any internal Committees for monitoring the 
functioning of Central Universities. However, issues relating to improvement of quality 
of education, promoting research and innovation, faculty development, collaboration 
with the industry an d research laboratories, effective use of technology in teaching -
learning process, mandatory accreditation, etc. are periodically reviewed with Vice 
Chancellors of Central Universities by University Grants Commission (UGC) and 
Ministry of Education. With r egard to capacity building of teachers in the higher 
education and providing autonomy to each and every higher educational institution in 
India, it was submitted that with an aim to maintain high standards of teaching in 
Universities and Colleges, the Sche me of Academic Staff Colleges  (ASCs) were 
introduced in 1986 -87. At present, there are 66 Human Resource Development Centres 
(HRDCs) (formerly known as ASCs) all over India. These HRDCs, so established, are 
conducting Orientation Programmes known as GURUDAKSHTA for newly recruited 
faculty and Refresher Courses of two weeks duration for in -service teachers. Special 
courses in Gender Sensitization and Teacher Education are also been offered by the 
HRDC’s. Also, UGC-Human Resource Development Centres fac ilitate effective 
systems to provide opportunities for professional and career development of teachers 
necessary for quality education and research so that they are well equipped and 
motivated to accept new challenges emerging from growth of new knowledge,  
international competitiveness and changing requirements of learners, especially in the 
institutions of higher education.  It was also submitted that UGC has notified the 
regulations to promote autonomy in HEIs:  
 
6.2 ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATI ON(AICTE) 
 
AICTE representatives stated that AICTE is basically meant for regulating 
technical education in the country such as engineering, management, arts, crafts, design, 
hotel management at the UG level, polytechnic level, and at PG level.  Thus , AICTE is 
regulating entire technical education in the country and there are approximately 9000 
institutes in the country.  It was mentioned that as far as giving approval is concerned, 
in every institute, they are having an online mechanism.  There is no physi cal 
movement of any inspector and during Covid time they had taken the advantage of the 
situation and the requisite technology has been developed.  It was submitted that their 
scrutiny process is completely online.  It was mentioned that after 2017 Supreme  Court 
order, deemed to be universit ies have also come under the purview of AICTE and they 
are also taking approval for their technical courses.  It was also mentioned that efforts 
are to align all the activities, all the education system with the National  Education 
Policy.  Complete curriculum of courses, including management  and engineering has 
been revamped and even the deemed to be universities or most of the State universities 
are following this model curriculum. Empowering the teachers is also an important task 
being performed and since 2020 around  2.5 lakh teachers in technic al education have 
been trained, majority of them through online mode.   
 

18 
 
6.3 NATIONAL BOARD OF ACCREDITION ( NBA) and NATIONAL 
ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITION COUNCIL(NAAC) 
 
6.3.1 NBA: Representatives of NBA submitted that the National Policy on Education 
(NPE) 1986 recognized the need for a Statutory Body at the national level responsible 
for overseeing the growth and quality of technical education in the country. 
Accordingly, the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) was established by 
an Act of Parliament in 1987 and as a part of its programs and activities, National Board 
of Education (NBA) was first established by AICTE as one of its Boards with the 
mandate to undertake the periodic evaluations of technical institutions and programs on 
the basis of specified norms and standards as recommended by AICTE.  NBA conducts 
evaluation of programs of technical institutions based on the prescribed evaluation 
criteria and parameters. This may include, but not limited to institutional vision, mission 
and objectives, organization and governance, infrastructure facilities, quality of teaching 
and learning, curriculum design and review, support services (library, laboratory, 
instrumentation, computer facilities, etc.) and any other aspect as decided by the 
Competent Authority of NBA. It was mentioned that NBA, has completely switched 
over to Outcome Based Accreditation by bringing in necessary changes in its process, 
parameters and criteria for accreditation and NBA accreditation process consists of the 
four stages and to proceed to the next stage the institute must complete t he previous one. 
The stages are : Initial Stage, Pre -Assessment Stage, Assessment Stage and Post 
Assessment Stage (Decision -Making). It was also submitted that though there are no 
specific imped iments; however, the NBA faces the obstacles of inadequate pool of 
evaluators having expertise in outcome -based accreditation and deputation of evaluators 
/ experts by its parent University / institution as and when required, for conducting the 
programs. 
 
6.3.2 Representative of NAAC submitted that NAAC was established in 1994 with the 
recommendations of the National Education Policy, 1986  and Programme of Action, 
1992. The vision of NAAC is to make the quality the defining element of higher 
education in India through a combination of self -evaluation and external evaluations 
and increasing the assessment and accreditation process, collaborations, 
teaching/learning process.  He submitted that the process followed is entirely robust and 
totally ICT driven. Representative of NAAC also submitted that they have analyzed 
with international criteria, which are more or less similar but our universities are lacking 
in the component  called public perception and Indian universities are getting very less 
score on this component.  It was explained that the parameter takes into account as to 
how many international students are, what is the student exchange programme with 
international co mmunity and international universities, how many international faculty 
members have visited a University and are teaching a course. On these aspects , our 
universities are getting minimum score. It was informed that the general challenges that 
NAAC faces are that o once the HEI submit the IIQA/SSR/DVV they won’t follow -up 
the portal & guidelines of NAAC, many times supporting documents are not provided 

19 
 
by the HEI’s and sometime HEI’s are not very serious while providing the supporting 
documents. It was submitted that NAAC have defined the benchmarks and standards for 
calculating the score of a particular metric and scaling the institution respectively. These 
benchmarks are measured in 0 to 4 likert scale. Score of A&A process is calculated by 
adding the value institution has scored with respect to each metric as categorized by 
benchmarks. Finally on the basis of the CGPA obtained by the institution in maximum 
possible score of 4.00, to the C letter grade ,final grade is assigned on a seven -point 
scale standard r anging from A++ . In order to  sensitize the HEIs about implementation 
of NEP, NAAC has introduced the concept of “Institutional Preparedness for NEP” in 
the SSR profile section.  
 
6.4 SECRETARY, HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
Secretary mentioning the challenges that are faced by  NBA and NAAC, stated 
that as on date, only 30 per cent of the universities were in the accreditation system, 
only 20 per cent of the colleges are there in the accreditation system. Thus, there is a 
long way to go as , out of 50,000 colleges, there were less than 9,000 colleges who are 
accredited. Accreditation is a procedure wherein standardization happens as to what 
minimum benchmarks are to be  created. Thus, till large body of colleges are going  
towards an accreditation process, the realization of quality in this entire sphere will be 
hard to achieve as it is not mandatory at present.  
 
6.4.1 He further submitted that National Education Policy, 2020, has proposed to go for 
a binary system which is an internationally accepted system wherein one is  either 
accredited or not accredited and a timeframe has been given for that.So, the UGC has 
constituted a Committee under Prof. Sridhar. He has prepared a roadmap how you can 
go towards this binary accreditation and I think going forward that will be a line that 
will be taken. He clarified that accreditation is done only course -wise by NBA, while 
the NAAC is doing the institution -wise.  He submitted that in the  Higher Education 
Regulatory Commission Bill , one  of the verticals will be the accreditation body and 
eventually all will merge to become one body for the entire country. Thus the roadmap 
is clearly defined and they will be going towards that procedure.  
 
6.4.2 The other thing mentioned here is whether these common entrances are 
compulsory or not.  On the aspect of improving quality, it is needed that the curriculum 
is up to date, and meeting  the requirements of what the industry or what the sector 
requires.  Anot her step is to ensure that we have the faculty to deliver that curriculum. 
On the issue of Indian Universities not figuring in top Universities, it was submitted that 
an assessment has been made for the last few years and hopefully the steps being taken 
will result in a turnaround. 
 
6.5 SGT UNIVERSITY 
 

20 
 
6.5.1 The Sri Guru Gobind Singh Tercentenary (SGT) University was established 
under the Haryana Private Universities (Amendment) Act No. 8, 2013. The 
University is part of the Dashmesh Educational Charitable Trust, founded in 1999.  
SGT University, besides being in the top private universities in India, is also highly 
rated. SGT has received several awards including the Diamond rating from the QS -
IGAUGE ranking. The University boast of having Asia’s one and onl y National 
Reference Simulation Centre for Nursing & Medical Sciences, established in 
association with Jhpiego, Laerdal Medical India. 
 
6.5.2 Vice-Chancellor, SGT University apprised the Committee of the number of 
Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) along with the enrolment in private universities 
which is 24.5% in 2019 -20. He then suggested some reforms regarding Accreditation 
Processes such as streamlining the process for starting new courses and providing 
greater autonomy to universities; reviewing norms  for enrolment of international 
students/ foreign collaborations and ensuring optimal use of infrastructure / learning 
resources within the University for various course running under different Regulatory 
Bodies. It was also informed that NAAC may consider  accreditation of individual 
Academic Programme in addition to the current practice of   Institutional Accreditation  
 
6.5.3 He also suggested research related reforms such as UGC may consider the 
research proposals for competitive grant even from institutions not covered under 
Clause 12B of the UGC Act, establishment of Cluster Central Instrumentation Facility 
along with financial support and research journals in UGC -CARE list at the time of 
publication should be considered by the Accreditation Agency even if journal is 
removed from that list at a later stage. He also threw light upon the examination process 
and reforms therein and suggested that in Council-governed courses, the  component of 
formative assessment may be significantly increased. In order to implement NEP 2020, 
some measures taken/to be adopted such as promoting Multidisciplinary and 
Interdisciplinary for Holistic Learning and Integration of Technology with Educatio n & 
Administration were also highlighted. 
 
6.6 NIRMA UNIVERSITY 
 
6.6.1 Renowned industrialist and philanthropist Dr Karsanbhai K Patel, the founder of 
the Nirma Group of Industries, established the Nirma Education and Research 
Foundation (NERF) in the year  1994 with a vision to promote higher education and to 
provide excellent educational facilities to the youth in India. In 1995, Nirma Institute of 
Technology- affiliated to Gujarat University - was established by the NERF. It was 
followed by the establishme nt of Nirma Institute of Management in 1996.The 
University Grants Commission (UGC) duly recognized the University under Section 2 
(f) of the UGC Act. 
 
6.6.2 It was informed by Dr. Anup Kumar Singh, Director -General, that Nirma 

21 
 
University has recently been re -accredited by "A+" grade by the NAAC in its third 
cycle for the period 2022 -27. It was also informed that the existing system of 
accreditation by both the national accreditation agencies, i.e., NAAC and NBA are 
satisfactory. However, the University is expecting an improved accreditation system by the 
proposed body, i.e., National Accreditation Council (NAC) under NEP-2020.  
 
6.6.3 While deliberating upon the research and examination reforms, it was informed 
that the Universit y has formed regulations to curb malpractices and maladministration 
in conducting examinations and deals strictly with unfair means during conduction 
of exams. Also, the University has formed various regulations for research, research 
ethics, policy for promotion of academic integrity, prevention of plagiarism, etc and they 
are in place. 
 
6.6.4 For the academic year 2022 -23, the University is in the process of 
implementing the NEP -2020. Accordingly, the programme structure of 
undergraduate programmes is r evised to offer all the programmes with duration of four 
years. Nirma University has reframed the curricula on the lines of NEP -2020.It was also 
informed that in order to implement NEP 2020, the University has also revised the 
curricula of all undergraduate programmes based on the draft National Higher Education 
Qualification Framework notified by the UGC. In order to provide more flexibility in 
the curricula, provisions have been made to opt for Major and Minor in all the 
programmes. Further, the Universit y is waiting for the final notifications from the 
UGC with regard to curricula, framework, multi entry and exit policy, 
implementation of Academic Bank of Credit, focus on interdisciplinary research, 
internationalization of higher education, higher flexibility to students, etc.  
 
6.7 MANIPAL ACADEMY OF HIGHER EDUCATION (MAHE)  
 
6.7.1 Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE), an Institute of Eminence 
Deemed to be University, has its roots in setting up of its flagship medical college in 
1953 by its founder Dr T M A Pai. While deliberating upon the educational standards 
and accreditati on processes, it was informed by Dr. Somnath Das, Officer on Special 
Duty that MAHE is participating in the accreditations like NAAC, NBA, NABH, and 
NABL, including Institution of eminence alongwith participating in the NIRF ranking 
conducted by the Ministry of Education. MAHE is also complying with more than eight 
different regulatory bodies.  
 
6.7.2 Some major challenges which were highlighted were maintaining the balance 
between quantitative and qualitative education requiring huge data gathering, upload ing 
in multiple portals, multiple internal audits, and external audits/visits and continuous 
communication between different agencies including regulatory bodies, confusion with 
different formats, and expectations of different agencies. 
 

22 
 
6.7.3 It was also informed that presently, as many as 14 different regulatory bodies and 
professional councils , have been a major impediment and interfere with higher 
education systems and processes. It was suggested to have an overarching single 
regulatory body for all str eams of higher education and a single accreditation body to 
avoid multiple documentation/duplication. Selected Institutions like Institutions of 
Eminence, Institutions of Excellence and Institutions of National Importance should 
have more autonomy and flex ibility and should be less regulated and register 
themselves with the regulator and should be free to function with minimal supervision 
and inspections. However, any complaint against such institutions needs to be 
investigated.  
 
6.7.4 To curb malpractices  and maladministration in conducting exams, reforms such 
as digitization of examination and evaluation system, which includes b iometric-based 
login-preventing impersonation, e nsuring availability of the question paper 
synchronously for all the students at a predefined time and auto submission of answer 
scripts on time  simultaneous question -wise valuation of answer scripts by 
internal/external evaluators  were touched upon.With regard to research and 
examinations being conducted by the universities, it was in formed that research  to be a 
part of the curriculum for final year students, research ethics and integrity are to be 
strictly followed in the conduct and publishing of research, degrees in research as post -
graduation in research can be initiated. 
 
6.7.5 While touching upon the measures undertaken in view of implementing the NEP 
2020 by Manipal University, it was informed that a  Steering Committee was formed 
under the chairmanship of Vice Chancellor on 22 nd October, 2020 to develop an 
implementation plan. Th e Steering Committee co -opted Ten Sub Committees, who 
were given the task of developing implementation plan for their respective allotted areas 
of NEP 2020 implementation. Further, four pillars for strategic implementation of NEP 
with focus on Academics, R esearch, and Innovation; online education and technology 
integration; faculty and leadership development and effective governance; liberal arts, 
humanities, teacher, and vocational education; internationalization and Equity and 
Inclusion in Higher Education and Student Support were highlighted. 
 
6.8 RAMAKRISHNAMISSION VIVEKANANDA EDUCATIONAL AND 
RESEARCH INSTITUTE (RKMVERI) 
 
6.8.1 Established in 2005, RKMVERI is an  institution deemed -to-be university  as 
declared by the Ministry of Human Resource Development  (now Ministry of 
Education), Govt. of India, under Section 3 of University Grants Commission (UGC) 
Act, 1956. At present, it operates through  four campuses  situated at the following 
locations: Belur Math near Kolkata (main campus and headquarters), Coimba tore, 
Narendrapur (Kolkata) and Ranchi.  The multi -campus university  houses many 
departments organized under 5 schools, covering a diverse range of subjects such as 

23 
 
Sanskrit studies, physics, mathematics, computer science, yoga, rural and tribal 
development, agriculture, disability management, disaster management, etc. and 
conducting programmes at various levels ranging from undergraduate/diploma to 
doctoral.  
 
6.8.2 Swami Atmapriyananda, Pro -Chancellor informed t he Committee that creating 
awareness on emerging trends in Education, Special Education, Agriculture Education, 
and Fundamental Sciences and the knowhow of integrating them with experience in real 
life setting. He also informed that for developing a unique research eco -system with 
emphasis on ‘translational research’ steps such as Disability Management and Special 
Education alongwith General & Adapted Physical Education and Yoga, Integrated 
Agriculture and Rural Development, Agricultural Biotechnology, Integrated 
Agriculture, Rural and Tribal Development and Organic Farming are being focused 
upon. He further suggested that suitable amendment be made in the UGC Act so that 
deemed universities are not debarred from using the term 'university'.  
 
6.9 ASSOCIATION OF INDIAN UNIVERSITIES (AIU) 
 
6.9.1 The Secretary General, AIU informed the Committee that AIU came into 
existence as the “Inter University Board (IUB)” on 23 rd March, 1925 to bring all 
Universities on a common platform and is registered as a Society as the “Association of 
Indian Universities (AIU)” on 29th September, 1967. AIU has representation in several 
boards and has representation in several international o rganizations. The functions and 
activities of the AIU as informed to the Committee are Think Tank on Higher 
Education, Coordination and Liaisoning Capacity Building/Leadership Development 
Research, Publications & Information Dissemination , Cultural Activit ies & Youth 
Festivals Sports Promotion, Events and Championship , Evaluation & Equivalence of 
Degrees, Library Services to Universities. 
 
6.9.2 It was also informed that AIU provides an intellectual platform to the community 
of higher education for debating  the issues and policies of emerging concerns and 
providing research-based recommendation to the Government of India for enriching the 
policy framework on higher education. Further, AIU is the nodal agency for granting 
equivalence to the degrees awarded by  the accredited foreign universities and 
institutions for the purpose of admission to higher academic courses and employment.  
 
7. Visits and Depositions 
 
The Committee in order to gain first -hand experience and have deeper insights 
towards understanding the issues and challenges faced by Higher Education Institutions 
(HEIs) visited IIT, Guwahati, IIT, Bombay, IISc, Bangalore, Central Agricultural 
University, National Sports University in Imphal and SNDT University, Mumbai and 
interacted with the Directors/ VCs. Views of representatives of Gauhati University, 

24 
 
Assam Science and Technology University, College of Architecture and Planningand 
Gauhati Medical Coll ege and Hospital inGuwahati, Manipur University, ICT, Mumbai 
were also heard. The Committee also interacted with various Public Sector Banks on the 
issue of funding of education sector to understand the guidelines/ issues concerning it. 
Depositions of the  following representatives ofthese Universities/ Institutes before the 
Committee are as under:  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name and Designation Organization 
1. Prof. T.G. Sitharam, Director Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati 
2. Prof. Madhurjya P. Bora, IQAC Gauhati University 
3. Dr. Nripen Das, Registrar Assam Science and Technology University, 
Guwahati 
4. Prof.(Dr.)  Achyut Baishya, 
Principal cum Chief 
Superintendent   
Gauhati Medical College and Hospital 
5. Shri Saahil Das, Architect College of Architecture and Planning, 
Guwahati 
6. Dr. Anupam Mishra, Vice 
Chancellor 
Central Agricultural University, Imphal 
7. Shri R.C. Mishra, Vice 
Chancellor 
National Sports University, Manipur 
8. Prof. N Lokendra Singh , 
Vice-Chancellor 
Manipur University, Imphal 
9. Prof. Govindan Rangarajan, 
Director 
Indian Institute of Science (IISc) Bangalore 
10. Shri Subhasis Chaudhuri, 
Director 
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay 
11.  Prof. S.S. Bhagwat, Dean Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 
12. Dr. UjwalaChakradeo, Vice 
Chancellor 
SNDT Women University, Mumbai 
 
 
7.1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY-GUWAHATI 
 
7.1.1  The Director, Indian Institute of Technology -Guwahati (IITG) while deposing 
before the Committee touched upon the thrust areas of the National Education Policy 
(NEP), i.e. innovation, incubation and challenges before start -up ventures  and he 
mentioned that a new course, B.Sc.(Data Science) Programme is planned to cater to the 
industry trend and attract more non JEE students.  
 
7.1.2 On educational standards, research and academic environment in IITG, it was 
informed that one of the major focus and thrust areas has always been to establish world 

25 
 
class technical education, knowledge creation via research and academic 
collaboration/MOUs with national and international institutions/universities/ 
organizations to enhance its global outreach and strengthen its existing international 
collaborations. IITG is an academic institution dedicated to creating and spreading 
knowledge in a range of di sciplines and fields, delivering quality higher education at all 
levels, serving national needs, and furthering public interest.  
 
7.1.3 Recalling the onset of the COVID -19 pandemic resulting in disruption of many 
academic and research activities worldwide , the Institute continued to connect with 
academic and industry to promote collaborations ranging from student and faculty 
exchange, joint research projects and student internships. On foreign collaborations 
front at that time, IIT Guwahati had 74 honorary  faculty members as well as industry 
experts affiliated to the institute who were internationally acclaimed faculties joining 
the institute from various top Universities across the world. It was also informed that 
presently there were 31 international students in the institute.  
 
7.1.4 The institute has also tried to expand the scope of technical education in the line 
of global and national requirements; it has diversified into 11 academic departments, 7 
inter-disciplinary academic centres and 5 academic sc hools covering all the major 
engineering, science and humanities disciplines.  
 
7.1.5 Responding to the Committee' query about role of IIT -G in effectively handling 
the pandemic, it was informed that during the pandemic also IIT kept on undertaking 
quality research, developing products and imparting quality education. IIT Guwahati 
has contributed research in the fields of Epidemic pattern and disease, Ventilator, 
Hospital beds, etc. They have also developed many products such as mobile robot for 
carrying drug/food in COVID -19 isolation wards, vaccine storage device, and carrying 
medical waste disposal in the COVID -19 isolation wards.  IITG also extended its 
support to train the faculty members of neighbouring institutes in conducting online 
classes and asses sments. Through E&ICT academy of IITG, since 2018, IITG has 
trained lakhs of students and teachers in high ended technical topics of importance.  
 
7.1.6 Informing the Committee regarding its focus on research, it was submitted that a 
new research park buil ding was in the final phase of construction and was likely to be 
ready by mid2022. The institute has also intensified its activities in the direction of 
promoting start -ups as well as encouraging entrepreneurs to develop products at IIT 
Guwahati. The insti tute is also implementing the Impacting Research and Innovation 
Technology (IMPRINT) and UchhatarAvishkarYoj ana with focus on a viable industry -
academic collaboration where industry shares a part of the cost of research.  IIT-G has 
also focused on filing i ntellectual properties. So far institute has filed more than 150 
patents in the last 5 years. IIT-G is also trying to build a digital University.  
 
7.1.7 On review of educational standard and academic environment envisaged by the 

26 
 
NEP-2020, it was submitted  that in order to prepare a roadmap for the implementation 
of the same, Director, IIT -G has constituted a committee on 3 rd November 2020 which 
consulted faculty members of all Departments, Centres and Schools of the Institute. 
After multiple deliberations,  the Committee summarized the feedback and submitted its 
report. Multi -disciplinary curriculum in IIT Guwahati is developed to address SDG 
targets. In this direction, 9 new Centres /Schools have been recently established to 
servethe needs of such a curricu lum. Good quality of work is going at our centre -for-
linguistic-science-and-technology at IIT Guwahati in the areas of preservation and 
archiving of minority languages spoken in India, speech and written text analysis of the 
languages and technology develo pment in Indian languages with special emphasis on 
NE Indian languages. In line with NEP -2020, IIT Guwahati is working on introducing 
various online programmes on the focused areas. Some of these programmes are in 
coordination with Industry partners for creating work-ready graduates. 
 
7.1.8 On being asked about  the implementation plan of NEP -2020, it was submitted 
that the Institute looks forward to align its Research & Development activities as per the 
strengths of the institute and play a major role as per the policy guidelines to be 
developed under the National R esearch Foundation. Being a leading research institute 
recognized globally (QS world rank 41 and India Rank 02 in research citation per 
faculty); IIT expects to have adequate participation in the decision -making bodies to 
help in tapping up the national and international funds for the Institute research growth.  
 
7.1.9 On examination reforms, it was submitted that IIT -G follows a continuous 
evaluation and grading system. In assessing a students' performance in subjects/courses 
(Theory, Laboratory), seminars , project work etc., a well -defined system of continuous 
assessment is adopted by the Institute while maintaining faculty autonomy. In 
conformity with this practice, there is one mid -semester examination and an end 
semester examination for every theoretical subject- in addition to continuous assessment 
and quizzes by instructors. The weightages assigned to different components of 
assessment are announced by the concerned instructor at the beginning of the semester.  
 
7.1.10 Informing the Committee about acc reditation, it was submitted that as per the 
decision of the IIT Council, the Internal Peer Review process of all the 'Academic 
Departments was initiated at IIT Guwahati in 2013, which was followed by an External 
Peer Review, which submitted its Report in 2014. The next academic peer review is 
planned in 2024. It was informed that IIT Guwahati received an Overall Qualitative 
Evaluation of 87%. 
 
7.2 GAUHATI UNIVERSITY 
7.2.1 Guwahati University, one of the oldest universities in Northeast, is a collegiate 
public funded State University, set up in 1940. It is accredited grade "A" by National 
Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC).  
 

27 
 
7.2.2 Director, the Internal Quality Ass urance Cell (IQAC) represented the University 
to the Committee. On the challenges faced for effective utilization of water, flood 
prevention and disaster management, he informed that Gauhati University had taken a 
number of new initiatives in that field e. g. the newly established Centre for 
Brahmaputra Studies funded by Ministry for Development of North Eastern Region 
(MDONER) and Aqua Culture and Bio Diversity Centre and Botanical Garden and 
Research Centre.  
 
7.2.3 Responding to the query of the Chairman of the Committee on steps taken for 
implementation of NEP - 2020, Director, IQAC, highlighted the implementation of the 
SWAYAM MOOCS platform as an aspect of the NEP -2020 for which trial run has been 
scheduled by January 2023 of the Clusters.  
 
7.3 ASSAM SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY UNIVERSITY  
 
7.3.1 Registrar, Assam Science and Technology University (ASTU) informed the 
Committee that the University was established by Government of Assam under Assam 
Science and Technology University Act, 2009 to provide education and research in 
Science & Technology and other professional courses in the state of Assam.  ASTU, as 
of now , has 32 affiliated colleges/institutions conducting undergraduate/ postgraduate 
programmes in engineering, science, management, pharmaceutical science and some 
other professional courses. The University also conducts an in -house post -graduate 
course in Energy Engineering. During the course of discussions with the representatives 
of ASTU, the Committee was informed of the setting up of the Plasma Pyrolysis Plant. 
It was also informed that the Government should focus on the infrastructure 
development needs of the Science & Technology. Registrar also requested for allocation 
of more funds and recruitment of more faculty teacher's position to cater to the 
academic need. 
 
7.3.2 Responding to the query of the Committee on preparedness for NEP -2020, it was 
informed through written submission that the 23 rd meeting of Academic Council, Assam 
Science and Technology University, held on 06/11/2020 resolved vide Resolution No. 
AC-23/11/2020 to adopt the National Education Policy -2020. The Council decided to 
rename and re structure the courses into a multidisciplinary format in 3 schools namely 
Schools of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Social Science and Liberal Arts, 
Management Studies and Entrepreneurship. It was added that the preparation for 
adoption was in process. 
 
7.3.3 On the query raised by the Committee about involvement of ASTU with the local 
community, it was informed that the university engages with the local communities, 
particularly, young children to keep them aware about the scope and importance of 
science and technolog y education, Swachata, etc. E very year, the University conducts 
National Science Day, National Technology Day, World Environment Day etc. in the 

28 
 
schools of fringe area of the University. In each event, students from 4 to 8 schools 
participate in various activities.  
 
7.3.4 It was further added that the University engaged itself in teaching of science 
subjects in the school s of fringe area, particularly for the students of XI and XII 
standard. In 2019 and 2020 , the university conducted STEM (S cience, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics) Education programme, called "Catch Them Young For 
Engineering" (CTYE) in 14 remote districts of Assam (Nalbari, Bongaigaon, Dhubri, 
Sonitpur, Dhemaji, Karbi-Anglong, Karimganj, Dima-Haso, Golaghat, Jorhat, Charideo, 
Tinsukia, Nagaon &Majuli) where about 10,000 students participated representing over 
127 Schools. Additionally, 10 National Service Scheme Unit s have also been sanctioned 
for the University by the Government of Assam.  
 
7.4 GAUHATI MEDICAL COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL 
 
7.4.1 Gauhati Medical College is a premier institute of North East India and is the 
second medical college of Assam established on 20 th September, 1960. Currently, the 
intake capacity of graduate student is 200 student s w.e.f. 2019 and for post Graduate 
seats, it is 210. At present, GMC has Super Specialty courses in 12 Departments with 
total intake of 37 seats per annum. 
 
7.4.2 Deposing before the Committee, the representatives of Gauhati Medical College 
in their written submission submitted that Gauhati Medical College has requirement of a 
total of 1920 hostel seats whereas at present, infrastructure has a capacity of 1239. The 
gap of 700 seats especially for Post Graduate and Post Doctoral students were urgently 
required at Gauhati Medical College.  
 
7.5 GUWAHATI COLLEGE OF ARCHITECTURE & PLANNING  
 
7.5.1 Guwahati College of Architecture and Planning (GCAP) is an institution 
affiliated under Assam Science & Technology University and approved by the Council 
of Architecture, New Delhi and under the aegis of permission from Higher (Technical) 
Education Department, Government of Assam. It is also approved by Institute of Town 
Planners, India.  
7.5.2 GCAP was established in 2006 by Dona Foundation. It claims to be a need -based 
architecture college in the North East Region. The college offers five years Degree 
course on Bachelor of Architecture, five years Degree course on Master of Planning in 
Urban & Regional Planning and three years Degree course on B achelor of Science in 
Interior Design. GCAP is also associated with CEPT University, Ahmadabad for 
development of Institute/education. 
7.5.3 Chief Executive Officer of Guwahati College of Architecture and Planning made 
a presentation before the Committee h ighlighting about the College of Architecture and 
courses offered by them. 

29 
 
7.5.4 The Chairman of the Committee desired to know about the efforts to attract 
foreign students and development of new technology using drone to explore various 
public utility and research aspects. The Chairman also suggested the Guwahati College 
of Architecture & Planning for involvement in Smart City consultancy projects.  
7.5.5  During the discussion, the Chairman and Members raised many issues of 
common interest for all institutions/Universities. Issues such as availability of drinking 
waters, flood management, maintain the ration of sc heduled caste, scheduled tribes, 
other backward class students in higher educational institutions were flagged by the 
Members during the discussion.  
 
7.6 CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY, IMPHAL  
 
7.6.1 The Central Agricultural University (CAU) was established under Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) , Ministry of Agriculture and farmer's 
Welfare, Government of India on 26th January, 1993 by the Central Agricultural 
University Act, 19 92 of Parliament with its headquarters at Imphal, Manipur. It is a 
fully residential university covering all the North -East Hill states under its jurisdiction 
except Assam. The university has 13 constituent college s along with 6 Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs ), 6 Multi Technology Testing Centers and 6 Vocational Training 
Centers. The total student strength of the university is 2668. A total of 337 
Undergraduate and 147 Postgraduate students completed their degrees and 15 
students were also awarded PhDs during the year 2020-21.  
 
7.6.2 As regardseducational standards, it was informed to the Committee that the 
University offers 9 Undergraduate, 45 Masters and 25 PhD Degree programmes in 
different subjects/disciplines through its 13 constituent colleges. Under Ins titutional 
Development Plan (IDP) -National Agricultural Higher Education Project, the 
University has established 7 smart classrooms and 6 language laboratories and 
incubation centers for improving educational standard including communication and 
business skills. It was further added that all the colleges have digitally interlinked well 
equipped 24X7 library facilities with Consortium for e -Resources in Agriculture 
(CeRA). E-books have been purchased for easy accessibility by the students/staff.  
 
7.6.3 It was further submitted that the University has also developed digital 
platforms like e -office and Academic Management System (AMS) with internet 
connectivity up to 100 mbps.  During the COVID  pandemic, the University had 
conducted online classes and Online Classes Monitoring Committee was formed at 
the level of Dean.The University also introduced cross campus teaching facilities 
via online mode to make up for any deficient teachers in the part icular subject and 
also for increasing competition among the faculties and students.  
 
7.6.4 On implementation of the NEP -2020, it was submitted that the University was 
in the process of its implementation and has signed Memorandum of Understanding 

30 
 
with cluster of Institutes located in Manipur in the several areas of collaboration. 
Regarding success in competitive examination, such as GATE, it was informed that a 
total of 338 students secured ICAR -JRF& ICAR -SRF and 52 students qualified 
GATE examination till  April, 2022.Since inception till 2021, 5255 students had 
passed out from the University.  
 
7.6.5 In response to the Committee's query about accreditation process, it was 
submitted that the accreditation process of the University, its constituent colleges 
and its degree programs for another five years had already been completed. The 
university had started the accreditation process by submitting the relevant information 
in the National Agricultural Education Accreditation Board (NAEAB) portal on 
15thApril 2021. Subsequently after submission of Self Study Reports, the Peer Review 
Team (PRT) reviewed for accreditation of the University, its constituent colleges and its 
degree programs during 11th,12th& 14 th March, 2022 and decision of the NAEAB is 
awaited. 
 
7.6.6 With regard to research, it was submitted that at present the university has 75 
ongoing internally funded research projects and 112 externally funded projects 
including 35 All India Coordinated Research Project s(A1CRPs) and 4 All India 
Network Research  Projects (AINRPs) in areas of Integrated Farming System (IFS), 
conservation of indigenous breeds of animals, fishes, insects and crops, climate 
change, bio -fertilizer and bio -pesticides, entrepreneurship and skill development, 
artificial intelligence and drone based technologies.  
 
7.6.7 It was further added that 266 and 109 Intra Mural Research Projects and 
Externally funded Projects respectively had been completed.Many of the technologies 
developed by the university are of national importance.Four High Yielding Verities 
(HYVs) of rice an d one Cassava variety TCa13 -1 (CAU -Umangra 1) were 
developed.Under the quality seed production programme, 812 tons of certified seeds of 
rice, 300 tons of rapeseed mustard, 95 tons of groundnut, 120 tons of soybeans w ere 
produced.Altogether, 1001 training programme were organized  which benefited 45400 
farmers. 
 
7.6.8 In response to the Committee's query about examination reforms, it was 
submitted that for fair assessment/evaluation of the students belonging to same faculty 
and also, for bring ing a conducive atmosphere amongst the faculties/students, the 
University followed uniform examinations in each of the six faculties.The University 
followed external system of examination for end term examinations in which the 
question papers were set and evaluated by experts from outside the University.  
 
7.6.9 To improve quality of research being conducted, publication of 2 research papers 
in National Academy of Agricultural Science (NAAS) rated journals with four or 
above ratings or publication of 1 rese arch paper in NAAS rated journals with 6 or 

31 
 
above ratings is made mandatory for award of Master’s degree. In case of Ph. D. 
degree, publications of 2 research paper in NAAS rated journals with six or publication 
of 1paper in NAAS rated journals with above 6 is made mandatory for award of Ph.D. 
degree. The university has made Anti -plagiarism software report of theses mandatory 
for award of Postgraduate courses and Ph.D. degrees. It was, further, submitted by the 
University authorities  that uniform question p attern and marking system have been 
followed for conducting comprehensive examination after duly approved by Academic 
Council. 
 
7.6.10 In response to the Committee's query about steps taken to impart education 
during and after COVID 19 pandemic, it was inf ormed that taking innovative step, the 
University had conducted online examinations via Evaluer software during the year 
2020-21. 
 
7.6.11 On the issue of academic environment for agriculture education, it was submitted 
that the University had excellent academic environment for education with focus on 
agricultural education of the North-eastern Region. Apprising the Committee on the staff 
strength of the University, it was submitted that the University has total staff strength of 
1113 including 25 administrative, 322 teaching and 766 non -teaching positions. The 
University maintains Faculty -Student ratio of 1:6.89 for increasing teaching output  
and outcome. 
 
7.6.12 On the issue of incentivizing the research scholars, students and extension 
workers, it was informed that to encourage students for pursuing research and to 
recognize the outstanding original research done by Postgraduate and Ph.D . students 
under Central Agricultural University , Imphal, the university had initiated the Best 
Thesis Award. Similarly, the University also initiated the Best Extension Worker Award 
to motivate the extension workers serving in the University.  
 
7.6.13 On collaboration with the foreign Universities, it was informed that a total of 37 
faculties had been selected for deputation in reputed institutes in South -East Asian 
countries in frontier areas of their respective subject under IDP -NAHEP project.97 
undergraduate  students have been selected for three months foreign training in 
entrepreneurship development in Universities/Institutes in South -East Asian countries. 
The University had already signed MoU with 45 universities/institutes in a number of 
countries and 2 international organizations and in the process with 17 
institutes/universities in 13 South-East Asian  countries. 
  
7.6.14 On collaboration with higher research institution s within the country and 
abroad, it was informed that under Institutional Devel opment Plan ( IDP), National 
Agricultural Higher Education Project ( NAHEP) with assistance from World Bank 
sanctioned to the University by the Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR), 
a total of 119 different motivational and entrepreneurship progra ms were conducted.  

32 
 
Also 4 IDP regional workshops on start -ups and entrepreneurship with 618 
participants and  16 National training on Entrepreneurship Development with 1846 
participants were conducted.  
 
7.7  NATIONAL SPORTS UNIVERSITY (NSU), MANIPUR  
7.7.1  During its visit to the National Sports University(NSU), Manipur the Committee 
interacted with its Vice Chancellor, who in his presentation informed that NSU was set 
up in 2018 and the University is presently functional  from its temporary campus at the 
Khuman Lampak Sports Complex at Imphal, which has been provided by the State 
Government.  He further stated that the National Sports University Act was passed by 
the Parliament on 17th August, 2018 and the University is registered with Association of 
Indian Universities. He further informed that presently the University is offering five 
programmes which are M.Sc. in Sports Coaching, MA in Sports Psychology, Masters in 
Physical Education and Sports (MPES), B.Sc . in Sports Coaching and Bachelor in 
Sports Education & Sports (BPES).  
7.7.2 He further added that foundation stone for the University’s proposed 325acre 
campus at Imphal West, has been laid which will bring flexibility to open new 
Schools/Departments in consonance with the advances and developments in s ports 
science, sports medicine, and allied areas. He further informed that the University, once 
developed, will be the first one of its kind to promote sports education in the areas of 
sports sciences, sports technology, sports management, and sports coach ing. It will also 
function as the national training centre for selected sports disciplines by adopting the 
best international practices by signing Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) with 
international universities.  
 
7.8 MANIPUR UNIVERSITY  
 
7.8.1 The Manipur University is located in Imphal city on the western side of the Indo -
Burma Road. The University was upgraded from State University to a Central 
University in October, 2005.  
 
7.8.2 In response to the Committee's query on review of the education al standards, it 
was submitted that they had introduced semester system and the curriculum of the 
Under Graduate level were being revised periodically. On implementation of NEP -
2020, it was submitted that process for revision of syllabus as per the policy was under 
process and would be implemented from the academic session 2022 -23. The curriculum 
will be purely Learning Outcome Based Curriculum Framework (LOCF).  
 
7.8.3 With regard to accreditation process, it was submitted that the University has 
been re-accredited by National Assessment & Accreditation Council "A" grade in the 
second cycle on 16 th December, 2016 and re -accreditation for third cycle was under 
process. University has submitted Institutional Information for Quality Assessment 

33 
 
(IIQA) for NAAC Accreditation and the same has been approved in April, 2022. As per 
National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF), ranking of the University is in the 
category of 100-150 as per last year records.  
 
7.8.4 In response to Committee's query about quality of  research being undertaken, it 
was submitted by the University authorities that more than 800 research scholars were 
presently pursuing PhD in various departments. In the year 2020 -21, faculty members 
had published 242 research papers in the UGC Care liste d journals, 93 papers in the 
book chapters and total of 53 research projects amounting to Rs. 25,04,75,368/ -. It was 
added that University has established R&D Cell .The Research Scholars has a Research 
Club of the University and regular activities are conducted in those platforms.  
 
7.8.5 On being asked about the examination reforms, it was submitted that the 
examination standing Committee for both Undergraduate and Postgraduate had decided 
the appropriate evaluation procedures to cope with the changing scen ario with due 
approval of the competent authority. The previous overall pass percentage of students to 
Postgraduate students of the University was 80.69. Comprehensive continuous 
evaluation system had been introduced.  In addition to that, plagiarism softw are was 
also being used for examining the PhD thesis at the time of submission of the thesis.  
 
7.8.6 Briefing the Committee about the academic environment, it was informed that the 
University has congenial environment for teaching -learning and academic act ivities 
with Information & Communication Technology (ICT) facilities. The University 
computer centre was functioning well and it provides training to the employees of the 
University from time to time. More than 3000 people consisting of students, scholars,  
and faculty and staff along with their families were living inside the campus. The 
campus had sufficient facilities for students in terms of Canteen, Shops, eateries and 
facilities for sports.  
 
7.8.7 In response to the Committee's query about the roadmap  drawn by the University, 
it was submitted that the University would focus on full implementation of the NEP 
2020, promote research on local contents, biodiversity issues of Manipur, North Eastern 
Region of India, neighboring countries and its belt keeping  in mind the national 
importance, focus on resolving issues of the university and initiatives for improvement 
on the NAAC and NIRF rankings. In addition to that, the University of Manipur would 
focus on attraction of more international students and improve  the diversity in the 
campus. 
 
7.9 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF SCIENCE, BANGLORE  
 
7.9.1  The Committee undertook a study -visit to Bengaluru and Mumbai from 26 th to 
28th May, 2022 and first visited the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) Bangalore and held 
its deliberation on the subject under consideration. The IISc is a premier deep research 

34 
 
institute in the country with a rich legacy of fundamental scientific contributi ons as well 
as the application of its research findings for the benefit of society. Its research output is 
diverse, multidisciplinary and cut across traditional boundaries. In keeping with its 
mandate to “provide for advanced instruction and to conduct ori ginal investigations in 
all branches of knowledge as are likely to promote the material and industrial welfare of 
India” , the Institute has always strived to strike a balance between the pursuit of basic 
knowledge and applying its research for industrial and social benefit. 
  
7.9.2  Director,IISc Bangalore submittedbefore theCommittee 
thattheInstitute'sMissionwastobuild leaders and Entrepreneurs through holistic, 
transformative and innovative education. He further informed thatIIScwasestablished in 
1909.Therewere 
37Departmentswith489facultymembersinallbranchesofscienceandengineering.He also 
highlighted the vision of the institute which was to be among the world's foremost 
academicinstitutions through the pursuit of research  excellence and the promotion of 
innovation.Theinstitute 
asrapidlymodernizingitsinfrastructurebyupscalingitsresearchequipmentandengagingsubs
tantialinternational facultyand students. 
7.9.3  He then briefed the Committee of the accolades and accreditation pr ocess and 
informed that the institution has a NAAC accreditation of A++ category under NIRF 
rankings. He then apprised the Committee of the various courses such as B.Tech . in 
Math and Computing; M.Tech . programmes in Quantum & Smart Manufacturing; New 
certificate programmes in Digital Health and Imaging, Digital Manufacturing and Smart 
Factories, Artificial Intelligence, Deep Learning, Computational Data Sciences. He also 
mentioned about the workshops conducted in advanced areas: Internet of Things (IoT) 
and embedded systems , Augmented and Virtual Reality , Solar energy systems , 
Multirotor drones Lightning-interaction with aircrafts, tall structures. 
  
7.9.4  Since one of the topics for deliberation was research also, the Director, therefore, 
highlighted the research-based objectives of the institution alongwith the ongoing 
programmes to be launched in the said direction such as digital health, biomedical 
systems and devices, vaccine drug delivery and quantum technologies. The Committee 
was then presented with the ARTPARK initiative of IISc Bangalore which is structured 
to bring with Government Industry and startups for impact and build India’s leadership 
in AI & Robotics technology, the objectives of which were Learning and education for 
AI age, creation of ne w jobs for tomorrow via tele operated robots, implementation of 
Digital intelligent healthcare and ensuring security of nation with strategic contributions 
for Atmanirbhar defense programmes.  
 
7.9.5  The representatives from ARTPARK then informed the Comm ittee of the 
initiatives and projects such as launch of Xray Setu (for quick and rapid assessment of 
lung health), Avtaar Robotics (for capturing skills of human nurse remotely), Project 
Eklavya (to scale up AI learning among students) and Data Setu (for m aintaining 

35 
 
highest standards around data privacy) and various Academic Initiatives such as 
Innovation Grant programme and Innovation Fellow. 
  
7.9.6  During its visit to IISc Bangalore, the Committee also visited Society for 
Innovation and Development (SID ) at IISc campus and was briefed about various 
technological developments therein. It was informed that SID was set up in 1991 in 
collaboration with IISc Bangalore to nurture knowledge, create infrastructure and bring 
new talents in fields of research and technology. It was also informed that since 
inception, SID has evolved and refined its model of engagement and actively takes its 
missions through its three divisions namely CORE for engaging in large corporations in 
collaborative research; TIME to put mid sized entrepreneurs on disruptive growth path 
via innovation; and STEM for incubating start -ups having deep science and societal 
impact at their core. 
 
7.9.7  During its visit to IISc Bangalore, the Committee also visited Centre for Nano 
Science and Engine ering (CeNSE) which was established in 2010 to pursue 
interdisciplinary research across several disciplines with a focus on nanoscale systems. 
Current research topics include, but are not limited to nanoelectronics, MEMS/NEMS, 
nanomaterials and devices, ph otonics, nano -biotechnology, solar cells and 
computational nano -engineering. The officials of CeNSE also threw light upon the 
state-of-the-art nanofabrication facility with a clean room spanning 1400 square meters 
located at the centre alongwith several ch aracterization labs that cater to material, 
electronic, mechanical, chemical and optical characterization.  
 
7.9.8  With regard to research and innovation, the Director, IISc Bangalore highlighted 
its expansion of existing Joint Advanced Technology Programm e with DRDO, 
Advanced aerospace systems & materials, high temperature materials, micro & nano 
systems, AI & robotics, quantum technologies. The Committee also visited the 
Incubation and Innovation Hub in IISc Bangalore campus and interacted with various 
researchers and students therein. The Committee was then apprised of the various 
projects and technologies being developed in the hub in collaboration with various 
private companies of the country and various other eminent institutes.  
 
7.10 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, BOMBAY 
 
7.10.1  The Committee during its study -visit to Mumbai visited Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT), Bombay and interacted with its Director/ faculties on the subject of 
review of education standards, accreditation process, research,  examination reforms and 
academic environment, etc. The Committee, thereafter, also interacted with Dean, 
Academics and other faculty members of the Institute of Chemical Technology (ICT), 
Mumbai who were present at IIT Bombay.  
 
7.10.2  IIT Bombay, set up  in 1958, is recognized worldwide as an education and 

36 
 
research leader in the fields of science & technology and engineering. The Institute was 
granted the status of ‘Institution of Eminence’ by the Ministry of Education on July 9, 
2018. Its vision is to be come a leading global technology university that provides a 
transformative education to create leaders and innovators, and generates new knowledge 
for society and industry. 
 
7.10.3 The Director, IIT Bombay apprised the Committee that the Continuing Educati on 
& Quality Improvement Cell conducts outreach programs to disseminate state -of-the-art 
research to other faculty in sister universities through the AICTE -QIP mode, as well as 
to the industry practitioners through continuing education mode. These program s help 
to proliferate the technologies developed at IIT Bombay, and eases their adoption and 
translation to practice. A new Masters of Engineering Program in Entrepreneurship for 
working professionals has also been approved for roll out through the Desai Se thi 
School of Entrepreneurship. A large number of working professionals from industry as 
well as faculty and students have participated and acquired knowledge from short - and 
long-term certificate courses. During 2020 -21, a total of 51 Continuing Education  
Programme (CEP) courses were conducted with about 945 participants with revenue of 
around Rs 5.50 crores. 
 
7.10.4 With regard to the Research & Development Activities, the Committee was 
informed that the Office of Dean (R&D) or IRCC (Industrial Research and Consultancy 
Centre) engages and facilitates research and development initiatives at IIT Bombay by 
administering R&D projects, facilitating industry interactions, managing intellectual 
property and licensing activities, reviewing and finalizing R&D related agreements and 
contracts, supporting high end research infrastructure and disseminating R&D related 
information in various fora. The R&D activities during 2021 -22 can be summarized as 
below:   
 
 
 
 
 
Financial 
Year  
2021-22 
Sponsored Research 
Projects 
Consultancy Projects Patents 
No. of 
Sponsored 
Projects 
242 No. of 
Consultancy 
Projects 
648 No. of 
Patents 
Filed 
131 
Sanctioned 
Outlay (Rs. 
in Cr.) 
220 Sanctioned 
Outlay (Rs. 
in Cr.) 
79 No. of 
Patents 
Granted 
96 
 
7.10.5 The Director, IIT Bombay thereafter, deliberating upon the initiatives undertaken 
in the light of NEP, 2020 apprised the Committee of the following:  
(i) Initiatives undertaken as per NEP: Following NEP -2020, IIT Bombay has 
created provisions for multiple exit points from the undergraduate programs. Exit after 3 
years with a B.Sc. (Engg) degree, exit after 4 years with the usual UG degree, and exit 
after 5 years with a dual degree (B.Tech. +  M.Tech.) in the same or different 

37 
 
disciplines. The M.Phil. program has been discontinued and a new 2 -year M.A. is being 
started for those who have completed a 3 -year Bachelor’s program. The Institute is also 
starting a new Bachelor’s program encompassing the Liberal Arts, Sciences, and 
Engineering subjects to provide a more holistic and multidisciplinary education. IIT 
Bombay is registered on the Academic Bank of Credits and presently allows a certain 
number of credits earned through NPTEL/ SWAYAM courses towards completion of 
graduation requirements. 
(ii) Future roadmap for the implementation of NEP: A total revamp of the 
undergraduate curriculum is being undertaken which will allow students to have more 
hands-on experience and also provide options for multidis ciplinary. A one year 
M.Engg. program for working professionals will be launched soon. A Master’s program 
in ‘Development Practice’ is being started to train personnel from the development 
sector. Ph.D. programmes in areas such as AI and Data Science, Digi tal Health care will 
target students from diverse backgrounds and will give a boost to translational research.  
(iii) Innovation & Translation Ecosystem: IIT Bombay has a vibrant ecosystem for 
translating academic research & innovations to higher Technology Readi ness Levels 
(TRL) and further opening opportunities for creating societal and industrial impact. 
Faculty and student innovations are nurtured to higher TRLs through entities such as:  
(i) SINE for technology incubation, 
(ii) Technology Innovation Hub (TIH) for focu sed technology translators in   
IoT, and 
(iii) Research Park for joint technology development with Industry.  
(iv)  National & International Collaboration: IIT Bombay has signed a total of 122 
MoUs across several prestigious universities globally and across India for growing its 
education & research partnerships and collaborations at the national and international 
levels. Bi -directional student exchange progr ams, faculty mobility to conduct joint 
research, and joint degree programs are some of the mechanisms of interactions. Joint 
PhD programs with international universities (8), Executive MBA program and a joint 
Master’s Program (2), and co -supervised PhD pro grams (8) are examples of research 
interactions with global universities. The IITB -Monash Research Academy, which 
offers joint PhD programs, is physically located on the campus of IIT Bombay.  
(v) Gender Initiatives: In pursuit of its commitment to promote equity and create a 
safe academic and work environment for all its employees and students, the institute has 
put in place certain initiatives. IIT Bombay applied for and was selected as one of the 30 
Indian institutes in the DST -GATI pilot project, which s tands for Gender Advancement 
in Transforming Institutions. Through GATI, the institute is collecting and analyzing 
data to propose new initiatives and policies. At present, the percentage of women to 
men across undergraduate and postgraduate programs in ST EM disciplines is 19:81. At 
the same time, with the supernumerary seats, 20% women have entered the B.Tech.  
program last year. In order to prepare these women students for their time on the 
campus, the institute runs an orientation session for the incomin g women students in the 
B.Tech. program. In non -STEM disciplines (under -graduation and post -graduation) 
there are 41% women. With respect to faculty, there are 30% women in non -STEM 

38 
 
disciplines and 11% in STEM disciplines.  
 
7.11  INSTITUTE OF CHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY (ICT), MUMBAI 
 
7.11.1 The Committee then, heard the views of Dean (Academics) of the Institute of 
Chemical Technology (ICT), Mumbai (Deemed to be University) at IIT Bombay during 
its study visit and was apprised of the various programs being offered by them for both 
under-graduation and post -graduation. During the interaction, the Committee was 
informed of the strategy of the institute for creation of world -class facilities for 
innovation and bringing dedicated leaders together. The institutio n also raised issues 
related to funding of R&D projects, innovation centres and also measures adopted and 
bottlenecks faced in relation to student related reforms and examination processes . 
 
7.11.2 It was informed that the institute has been graded as A++ by NAAC and an 
overall rank of 21 under NIRF 2021 alongwith bagging the Higher Education 
Excellence Award for Excellence in Enabling Research Environment 2021. While 
deliberating upon the faculty quality, it was highlighted that faculty of ICT has several 
awardees such as 3 Padma Vibhushan, 8 Padma Bhushan, 8 Padma Shri and various 
fellowships from recognized institutions/bodies. Also, 410 patents had been filed out of 
which 330 were in the last 10 years. 
 
7.11.3 It was also informed that several startups h ave been founded by ICT students and 
Alumni. Further, S.M. Mokashi Incubation Centre -ICT NICE was also inaugurated on 
26th January, 2021for promoting innovation and research among students and faculty. 
Also, ICT’s Innovation and Start -up Policy has already  been implemented to promote 
the same. Throwing light upon the quality of student projects, Committee was i nformed 
of the Project relating to Plagiarism/ Similarity Index which is determined by using 
iThenticate software. 
 
7.11.4 As highlighted, the vision  of the institute was to continuously evolve curricula to 
brighten the future of chemical, biological, materia l and energy industries of the nation. 
The institute shall strive to impart the education to its students to devise new solutions 
to meet the need s of all segments of society with regard to material and energy while 
protecting the environment and conserving the natural resources.  
 
7.12 SNDT WOMEN'S UNIVERSITY, MUMBAI 
 
7.12.1 The Committee also held discussions with the Vice -Chancellor of 
SNDTWomen'sUniversity, Mumbai during the study visit on thesubject 
underconsideration. It was informed that i t was the first Women's University in India 
and South East Asia which was establish ed by Bharat Ratna Maharshi Dr. D.K. Karve 
in 1916 and got its statutory recognition in 1951. Although a State University, it has all 
India jurisdiction and affiliated colleges in 7 States. TheCommitteewasapprised abou t 

39 
 
the innovationsintroduced bythe Universityasunder: 
 
a.Researchbeinganimportantcomponentthestudents,facultyanddepartmentalresearchwere
encouragedthroughfellowship,researchgrantsandworkshopsonpreparingresearch;  
b. Innovationincurriculumdesignanddevelopment; 
c. Deploymentof InformationandCommunicationTechnologies(ICT)foronlineadmissions 
and student cycle, to connect campuses of Mumbai and Pune and 
SNDTWU/integrateICTs intoteaching-learningprocess; 
d. 
InternationalizationthroughMoUssignedwithmanyforeignuniversities,jointprogrammes,r
esearch, and student internship planned;Effective end -to-end use of ICT for reforms in 
examinations; and 
e. University-Industry Partnership, where industries offer fellowships  and industry 
expertsact as mentors, interact with students as visiting professors, guide students 
duringinternshipetc. 
 
OBSERVATIONS 
 
(i) The Committee observes that reforms in the Indian higher education system have 
been long overdue. Happily, the National Education Policy (NEP) - 2020 marks a 
significant shift in the traditionally established  ways of teaching and learning. The main 
focus of this policy is not only on improving the quality of education, but also on 
formulating an effective regulatory regime for higher education institutions across 
India. 
 
(ii) The Committee notes that with a cl early spelt out objective of improving the 
academic environment for higher education institutions across India, NEP 2020 rightly 
focuses on curbing the commercialization of higher education in India. It prescribes 
that all educational institutions will be audited as per standards of audit for section 8 
company (not-for-profit company) and the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
may also refine the norms for educational institutions, including ensuring that related 
party transactions, services or cha rges by any other names are not used to profit from 
the institution by the promoters / sponsor / management.  
 
(iii) The Committee observes that in order to accelerate the growth of Higher 
education and achieve the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) targets as env isaged by the 
Government, it is imperative that the country would need more Universities to meet the 
rising demand for higher education and this also calls for greater emphasis on public -
private partnership. 
 
(iv) The Committee observes that the Higher ed ucation scenario has also witnessed 
the growth of specialized universities in many States both in the private sector and in 
the public sector but conceptually a “University” as such broadly encompasses the 

40 
 
study of the world that we live in and is to provi de essentially a very broad -based 
education with an interdisciplinary approach. 
 
(v) The Committee observes that as institutions navigate the post pandemic world, 
they will need to discard the one -size-fits-all approach to delivering education, revamp 
collaborations with key stakeholders, and reorient their focus towards inclusion. The 
Committee further observes that there is a visible shift the way education is delivered 
and for this Higher education institutions need to be conscious of evolving student 
preferences as they reopen campuses and revamp education delivery and face post 
pandemic challenges.  
 
(vi) The Committee observes that in order to build a self -reliant higher education 
system, besides the Higher education institutions, other stakeholders, i ncluding 
students, industry, and the public sector banks in particular as well as the Government 
in general need to synergize their efforts towards that goal.   
 
(vii) The Committee observes that one of the major parameters that impacts the 
quality of educ ation is a permanent mechanism to review and update curriculum to 
meet with the evolving demands of both, the pursuit of knowledge and the pursuits of 
earning livelihood.  
 
(viii) The Committee observes that there is a pressing need to streamline the 
compliance system, reduce multiplicity of agencies seeking compliances and make the 
compliance regimes oriented towards Ease of running an Educational Institution while 
protecting the i nterests of the entire Educational Community consisting of the students, 
guardians, teachers and administrators too.  
 
(ix) The Committee observes that while on the one hand, dependable internet 
facilities will have to be further developed, the State Gov ernments and independent 
institutions will also have to explore the possibility of using established satellite 
technologies for providing uninterrupted education in hybrid format, now called as 
Phygital (Physical plus Digital). Some State Governmentsseem to be lackadaisical in 
their approach towards this.  
 
(x) The Committee is of the view that as part of the administrative reforms which the 
Department of Higher Education may be considering towards the education sector, a 
Single Window System to be ev olved through joint efforts of both, State Governmentsas 
well as the Central Governmentwill help expedite approval from various regulatory 
authorities which Private/ Deemed/ other Universities are required to obtain.  
 
(xi) The Committee is of the view that  Education should be treated a t par with the 
infrastructure sector and provided long -term loans and funds besides providing access 
to banks, financial institution loans as priorities for infra -structure support to 

41 
 
highereducation. 
 
(xii) The Committee obse rves that there is a growing need to evolve structured 
academic programmes at different levels for building the decision-making capacities of 
Vice Chancellors, Principals and Governing Body members   of Educational 
Institutions to ensure a more effective institutional leadership. After a certain period of 
time, the Govt can think about appointing only those academics as college Principals 
and VCs who have completed institutional leadership programmes.  
 
(xiii) During the course of its study visit, the Committee came across several promising 
innovative and start -up initiators from IISc and IITs who had come up with many 
interesting and significant inventions. The Committee observes that many institutions 
are going the extra mile in promoting innovation culture by way of encouraging young, 
out of the box thinkers. However, there is also a growing need to evolve a mechanism in 
consultation with the CAG and the Ministry of Finance to ensure that innovators an d 
incubates can also easily participate in the bidding process in response to Govt tenders 
by suitably redesigning the RFPs and other frameworks of rules and regulations. A 
window of opportunity to such innovators and entrepreneurs alone will help them 
sustain in the face of tough competition.  
 
(xiv) The Committee observes that in certain States, Deemed Universities and local 
colleges have been engaging in a tough competition to attract students and this has led 
not just to crass confusion but a feeling of  being cheated amongst the students and their 
guardians. State Gov ernments and the relevant bodies of the Govt at the centre should 
proactively take measures to prevent emergence of this kind of situation.   
    
(xv) The Committee observes that there was an  urgent need to revisit and revamp the 
norms for starting online courses and the concerned authorities should take measures 
in this regard. It also observes that parameters for assessment and recognition of 
various courses under regulatory bodies need to b e updated to bring them in tune with 
the current best practices. Also, efforts be made towards offering a level playing field as 
far as grants in aid were concerned.  
 
(xvi) The Committee observes that as per the data of All India Survey of Higher 
Education (AISHE), there are 1,043 universities, 42,343 colleges and 11,779 
standalone institutions and out of these, almost 78.6 per cent are in the private sector - 
aided or unaided colleges and only about 21 per cent are in the Government sector. The 
Committee a lso observes that the Private sector is contributing in a significant way 
towards the overall growth in Higher Education and most of them also expect some 
financial support as some incentive and the same merits attention.   
 
(xvii) The Committee observes that, at present, barely 20% of the approximately 50,000 
educational institutions go for formal accreditation. Considering the importance of 
accreditation as it underscores standardization and a guarantee towards minimum 

42 
 
benchmark, more efforts to offer incentives to bring institutions under accreditation 
system is the need of the hour. 
 
(xviii) The Committee observes that in spite of the financial support provided by the 
Centre, some State Gov ernments have not undertaken revamp of engineering and 
technology syllabi especially in polytechnics and ITIs and this calls for stringent action 
against such State Governments.  
 
SUGGESTIONS 
 
Taking into consideration all the issues that figured in the discussions during 
interactions with the stakeholders, the Committee suggests that — 
 
(i) the Department may consider appointing a study group to assess the overall 
performance of Private as well as Deemed Universities and also revisit the 
Private University Regulation, 2003 and Deemed to be University Regulation, 
2019, in the light of several positive as well as some negative aspects ( like 
violation of UGC and AICTE rules and regulations while structuring and 
introducing any new academic programme and similar such issues) of the overall 
impact of emergence of Private/ Deemed Universities.  
 
(ii)  The Department should evolve a mechanism to ensure that a good research 
proposal could be accorded permission regardless of Section 12B of the UGC 
Act, 1956 because it is a competitive grant , and  many times it is coming in the  
way of institutions being eligible for research grant from the UGC.  
 
(iii) the Department of Higher Education should take initiative and recommend 
availing the services of institutes of higher learning like IIMs, IITs, IIITs, IISc 
and TIFR etc . to various Mini stries for undertaking the review/ evaluation of 
Govt schemes and welfare programmes as well as Infra Projects.  
 
(iv) the Department of Higher Education may well consider amalgamating 
NBA and NAAC and establish a single National Accreditation and Assessment 
Agency in order to avoid any overlap and provide a seamless unitary 
accreditation process with minimal documentation.  
 
(v) the Department of Higher Education and the concerned bodies, NBA and NAAC, 
may consider taking stringent penal action in cases where institutions are found 
to be cheating students by falsely claiming higher ranks in accreditation. Making 
the list of institutions and their rankings public through media advertisement also 
may be considered. 
 
(vi) the Department may consider incentivising Engineering Education in 

43 
 
regional languages by way of awards for good translators and writers on 
engineering subjects in regional languages.  
 
(vii) the Universities and IITs may consider introducing a structured 
mechanism to seek feedback from every enrolled student at the end of semesters 
and the courses related to aspects such as cohesiveness in academic environment, 
promotion of academic scholarship, scope for innovation and skill developmen t 
etc.  
 
(viii) the Universities may think about setting up a special cell to address the 
issues faced by students belonging to EWS categories. Such cells may make 
measures & incentives of governmen ts devised for the welfare of EWS students , 
more effective.  
 
(ix) the Universities should empanel mental health professionals and therapists 
in order to provide assistance & guidance to the students suffering from mental 
health issues, stress and depression.  
 
(x) the universities should ensure the adequate availability of resources and facilities 
to accommodate the requirements of specially abled (Divyang) students, slow -
learners, students with dyslexia and other learning disabilities.  
 
(xi) the universities should pr oactively take efforts to adhere with the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDG4 exclusively talks about ensuring 
inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning 
opportunities for all) and publicise their relevant achiev ements regularly in view 
of the National and global importance of such issues.  
 
(xii) the Department may create a framework formandatory teaching of a 
Financial Literacy Module (FLM) to be completed by all students of HEIs at will 
during the entire span of their undergraduate courses as to effectively address the 
questions of financial literacy and inclusion  in the context of emerging Start Up 
Culture.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Taking into consideration all the issues that figured in the discussions during 
interactions with the stakeholders as also the points made by Hon’ble Members during 
the course of discussions, the Committee recommends as follows : 
 
1. The Committee taking note of the thrust areas and the proposed reforms as 
outlined for the Higher education sector i n the National Education Policy (NEP) -
2020 recommends that the Department of Higher Education must formulate a 

44 
 
visionary blueprint with a clear time bound roadmap and strict monitoring 
mechanism, towards each of the policy directions for their successful , effective and 
time-bound implementation.   
 
2. The Committee notes that the National Education Policy, 2020 envisages the 
creation of the Higher Education Commission of India (HECI) as the principal 
regulator for higher education, with four verticals for r egulation, accreditation, 
funding, and academic standards and also a Bill to provide for HECI is under 
drafting stage. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that the aspects 
relating to protection of interests of stakeholders, clear demarcation of its 
jurisdiction to avoid any regulatory overlaps and gaps, independent nature with 
adequacy of resources and performance accountability be given due consideration. 
The Committee recommends that instead of having too many parallel regulatory 
bodies in the high er education sector, a simplified hierarchy of regulatory bodies 
may be constituted which will have a final say in implementation of Government 
rules/regulations/acts etc.  
 
3. The Committee recommends that the Department of Higher Education/ 
UGC and the Universities should collectively review the current state of academia -
industry partnerships and take measures to strengthen them further as these can 
greatly help mitigate the shortage of skilled workforce. The Committee is of the 
view that such collaborati on between the industry and the higher educational 
institutions would help students develop crucial entrepreneurship/ business skills, 
provide hands-on experience and help create a robust talent pool.  
 
4. The Committee appreciating the move towards establ ishing a Digital 
University to provide access to students across the country of world -class quality 
universal education with personalized learning experience at their doorsteps, 
recommends towards developing more such hubs and spoke models of education 
delivery. The Committee recommends that public universities can act as hubs with 
local institutions serving as the spokes, and can thus become a carrier of quality 
education to all parts of the country.  Further, the Committee recommends that a 
new Phygital or Physical plus Digital (hybrid) way of instructions be experimented 
with in a structured manner and its impact assessed scientifically.  
 
5. The Committee recommends that donations and community contribution 
towards higher education institutions should be encouraged through appropriate 
policy measures. Donations by individuals, alumni and institutions should be 
encouraged through tax incentives . All donations to the higher education 
institutions should be 100% tax deductible. Institutions building a vibrant Alumni 
Base may be given some incentives in taxes and other charges.  
 

45 
 
6. The Committee, noting that sincere efforts are required to attract  and retain 
faculty with good research skills, recommends for undertaking a review of the 
current system of faculty recruitment, appraisal, assessment, promotions and for 
developing a rewards -based regime on performance measured through research 
contributions and publications. Also, the model of appointing talented 
alumni/senior students/Ph.D . scholars as  Teaching Assistants ,beneficial to the 
Universities, faculty and research students , be studied and implemented. This will 
help such researchers/scholars to get exposure to the teaching skill and to mitigate 
the shortage of faculty in universities/institutions.  
 
7. The Committee recommends enhancing international collaborations in the 
form of student exchanges, faculty exchanges, joint teaching, research, 
conferences, publications, executive education programmes and study -abroad 
programmes as such activities will not only broaden the horizon of the participants 
but will also help in promo ting the global engagement of Indian higher education 
institutions. The Committee strongly recommends that the Dep artment must 
review and take appr opriate action on the Destination India Report prepared by 
the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR).  
 
8. The Committee recommends that world class training programmes for 
academic administrators be developed as highquality education administration has 
generally remained a neglected aspect of the Indian higher education system. Also, 
courses such as Bachel or of School/College/University Management Science for 
non-teaching staff to manage educational services, exam management, academic 
administrations need to be formulated as they form the backbone of any 
educational institution. The Committee further recomm ends that there should be 
Institutional Leadership/ Management course for aspiring/existing Principals/ 
Administrative Heads of the Colleges/ Universities to give them exposure to the 
management skills required to lead the institutions.  
 
9. The Committee n otes that even after several decades, many State 
Universities regularly fail in smooth and flawless conduct of examinations. 
Instances like — 
a) Question paper leak  
b) Administering a wrong question paper  
c) Confusion about seating arrangements and Exam centre  
d) Rampant cases of copying  
e) Framing questions that are out of syllabi 
f) Wrong examiners being appointed for assessment ; and  
g) Student-Examiner Nexus  
 
etc. are still not uncommon. Hence the Committee recommends that the parameter 
of the Institution’s exam management competency be also considered as a 

46 
 
mandatory norm towards consideration of accreditation. The NAAC and NBA 
should award marks to such univer sities/institutes who conduct examinations 
smoothly. Besides, experiments like the Question Bank system and adoption of 
complete digitization of the examination process by institutes/universities to ensure 
fair and timely conduct of examination and declara tion of results , amongst others 
may be incentivised.  
 
10. The Committee notes the need to carefully examine, assess and analyze the 
issues and challenges for NBA and NAAC, through compilation of a structured 
feedback of HEIs so that requisite reform proce ss can be taken forward to make 
these bodies a benchmark for quality accreditation. Also, it is recommended that 
the norms for frequency and periodicity of the accreditations be defined so that 
institutions do not develop a tendency to carry the score for years, without a 
review, which leads to complacency, and undermines quality mechanisms.  
 
11. The Committee recommends that the experiment of providing courses in 
humanities in technology institutions be reviewed so as to assess its impact on the 
academic climate in such institutions. However, keeping in view the broad thrust 
of NEP, 2020 towards holistic and multidisciplinary education, the Committee also 
recommends the incorporation of social sciences/ humanities/ arts modules in the 
technical education curriculum for the development of students with well rounded 
personalities.    
 
12. The Committee, keeping in view the global trend in student learning, 
recommends that the Department of Higher Education along with its bodies must 
undertake an expert study to help provide avenues toward s empowering students 
to chart their education pathways as per their needs and interest, leveraging 
traditional and other partnerships to bolster learning and making efforts towards 
ensuring widespread diffusion of education. The Committee, agreeing with t he 
axiom of students becoming “the architect of their own education”, recommends 
that Universities must push for an open curriculum where students, instead of 
completing a set of core courses, can explore and sample a range of subjects before 
making their choice on what to pursue in depth and move towards taking greater 
ownership of their education, pursue education at their own pace, pave the way for 
lifelong, self -driven learning. The Committee recommends that UGC and other 
regulatory bodies should undertake an exercise towards realizing this aim.  
 
 13. The Committee  recommends the  formulation of a Comprehensive National 
Research Policy encompassing all kinds of research activities - both in social as well 
as physical sciences —with explicitly defined norms  and quantifiable parameters. 
While doing so, the Committee also recommends that all our well identified 
national developmental needs in social sector as well as infrastructure and science 
and technology be given high priority.  

47 
 
 
14. The Committee recommen ds for a deep study on improving educational 
standards through innovation in education , especially through the use of 
technology and based on such a study, a blueprint be prepared for each of the 
HEIs to be followed to enhance the standards of education al l across the country.  
 
15. Noting the growing commercialization of education in certain States and the 
disturbing trend of many colleges associating with coaching classes to prepare 
their enrolled students in certain cities, making the learning process a farce 
through this unholy ne xus between coaching classes and colleges, the Committee 
recommends that the Government, in coordination with State Governments must 
work out mechanisms to curb such trends and punish such institutions by 
derecognizing them. Towards this end, the Committee  recommends that a study 
group may be set up by the Central Government to assess the ground realities.  
 
16. The Committee taking note of the shortage of adequate and qualified faculty 
to provide quality education and observing that many young students are  not 
attracted towards the teaching profession since the recruitment process is quite 
prolonged with many procedural formalities, recommends that the Department of 
Higher Education may consider some reforms to shorten the time. Also, the faculty 
may be enc ouraged to undertake consultancy on sharing of resources basis in a 
uniform manner.  
 
17. The Committee recommends that at least on an experimental basis a 
mechanism for ensuring the accountability and performance of faculties in the 
universities and colle ges should be put in place similar to that of foreign 
universities where the performance of college professors/ teachers is evaluated by 
their peers and students. Such performance appraisal would help improve the 
quality of teaching. 
 
18. In order to enhance the quality of education, especially in the various fields 
of engineering, the Committee recommends for mandatory mentoring of some 
chosen colleges, especially catering to students from a rural background or those 
located there, by the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs). Such mentoring should 
encompass all aspects, including faculty skill upgradation, infrastructure 
enhancement to help pave the way towards student excellence. IITs should also 
proactively engage and develop Question Banks and Model Te sts etc . which can 
help other Colleges in improving their benchmarks of teaching students.  
 
19. The Committee recommends policy reform initiatives to fulfill the vision of 
“Atmanirbhar Universities” which abide by the vision of a ‘self -sustaining’ and 
‘self-generating’ University. Towards the realization of this vision, the Committee 
also recommends towards adequate autonomy, growth friendly regulatory  

48 
 
framework, enabl ing environment to raise significant financial resources  and 
energizing towards innovation, entrepreneurship and collaboration of Universities , 
under a defined policy to be formulated by UGC.  
 
20. The Committee recommends that the Department of Higher Education 
should formulate policies/ initiatives keeping in view the Master Plans that States 
formulate towards the higher education sector. This will help, on the one hand in 
better resource allocation and coordination between the States and the Ministry in 
extending financial support, and on the othercurb the tendency of politicization of 
approvals for colleges by Universities and State Governments . 
 
21. The Committee recommends adoption o f Cluster System in higher 
education, as a defined policy, through sharing of resources such as libraries, 
infrastructure, Laboratories, best practices and other human resources which will 
prove beneficial and UGC must evolve norms towards such sharing by reputed 
Universities/ IITs etc.  
 
22. The Committee recommends that the Gov ernmentgive an active 
consideration to the demand that deemed universities be allowed to use the term 
'university' by amending Clause 23 of the UGC Act, 1956 which states that no 
institution, other than a university established or incorporated by a Central Act, a 
Provincial Act or a State Act is entitled to use the word 'University' , as the term 
'deemed un iversity' creates a lot of confusion in foreign countries as there is no 
concept of deemed university in many parts of the world.  
 
23. Taking note  of the fact that many deemed Universities in order to make 
quick money were starting Open Distance Learning c ourses undermining the 
qualitative research work, the Committee strongly recommends adequate 
measures to curb such tendencies after carefully examining the options.  
 
24. The Committee notes that many Universities and IITs as well as IIMs have 
started Incu bation Centres. While these are steps in the right direction, the 
Committee recommends that the advisability of evolving a new branch of 
knowledge creation namely Incubation and Innovation Studies be explored. Such 
studies would help assess the impact of t hese centres as well as gather new insights 
into the sociology of the new start -up culture. This will also enable the assessment 
of incubation and innovation activities taking place in universities and monitor its 
success and failure.   
 
25. While the incr easing usage of cutting edge technologies such as Artificial 
Intelligence, Machine Learning, Robotics, Virtual Reality etc. is welcome  for 
several reasons, the Committee recommends that a task force should be set up at 
central level to explore the possibil ity of incorporating these new emerging 

49 
 
technologies in contemporary syllabi and develop them for increasing the 
employment opportunities. 
 
26. The Committee recommends that the Department advise the HEIs to consider 
a ‘Unipass’ system like in many educati onal institutions abroad which comprises a 
digitally enabled card for utilization of all internal and external facilities provided 
by the HEIs and government to students. This is especially important given that 
most HEIs in India issue multiple paper cards  like health card, library card etc. 
separately to students. 
 
 
 
*** 
 
 
 

50 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, 
WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
XVII 
SEVENTEETH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 10:30 A.M. on 
Friday, the 9th June, 2022 in Committee Room- ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, Ground Floor, 
New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2.  Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad  
5. Shri K. C. Ramamurthy  
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
7. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
9. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary  
10. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
11.  Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
12. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
13. Shri Dharambir Singh 
14. Shri S. Venkatesan 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.D. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3.  Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
5. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
6. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
SGT UNIVERSITY 
Prof. (Dr.) O. P. Kalra   Vice Chancellor  
 
NIRMA UNIVERSITY 
Dr. Anup Kumar Singh   Director-General 
 
MANIPAL ACADEMY OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
Somnath Das   Officer on Special Duty      
V Rangarajan   Director Finance 
Dr Guruprasad Rao     Deputy Registrar (Academics) 

51 
 
 
RAMAKRISHNA MISSION VIVEKANANDA EDUCATIONAL AND 
RESEARCH INSTITUTE (RKMVERI) 
 
Swami Atmapriyananda  Pro-Chancellor 
 
ASSOCIATION OF INDIAN UNIVERSITIES (AIU) 
 
Dr. (Mrs.) Pankaj Mittal  Secretary General 
Dr.Amrendra Pani   Joint Director (Research) 
  
  DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION (AICTE) 
 
 
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMSSION (UGC) 
 
 NATIONAL BOARD OF ACCREDITATION (NBA) 
Dr. Anil Kumar Nassa    Member Secretary   
Dr. Priyanka Singh    Senior Manager   
Mrs. Kanchan Madhwal   JEO   
 
NATIONAL ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION COUNCIL (NAAC) 
 
Prof. Amiya Kumar Rath   Adviser ICT 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee 
and stated that the agenda for the meeting is to deliberate upon the subject "Review of education 
standards, accreditation process, research, examination reforms and academic environment in 
Deemed/Private Universities/other Higher Education Institutions". He then informed that the 
Committee shall be hearing representatives from Association of Indian Universities (AIU) 
Shri K. Sanjay Murthy Secretary (HE), Ministry of Education 
Shri Rakesh Ranjan Addl. Secretary (TE), Ministry of Education 
Shri Vineet Joshi Addl. Secretary (CU), Ministry of Education 
Ms. Kamini Chauhan Ratan  Joint Secretary, M/o Education 
Ms. Neeta Prasad Joint Secretary, M/o Education 
Shri P.K. Banerjee Joint Secretary, M/o Education 
Ms. Saumya Gupta  Joint Secretary, M/o Education 
Ms. Darshana MomayaDabraL Joint Secretary & FA, Ministry of Education   
Shri S.E. Rizwi Joint Secretary, M/o Education 
Shri Mrutyunjay Behera Economic Advisor (CU&A), M/o Education 
Shri R. Rajesh DDG, M/o Education 
Prof. Rajive Kumar Member Secretary, AICTE 
Dr. M. P. Poonia Vice-Chairman, AICTE 
 
    Prof. M. Jagadesh Kumar Chairman, UGC  
    Prof. Rajnish Jain Secretary, UGC  
    Dr. Surender Singh Additional Secretary, UGC 

52 
 
alongwith representatives from various Deemed and Private Universities namely Manipal 
Academy of Higher Education, Karnataka; Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Educational and 
Research Institute, West Bengal; Nirma University, Ahmedabad; and SGT University, Gurugram 
in the forenoon session and in the afternoon session of the meeting, the Committee would hear 
the Secretary and other officials from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of 
Education alongwith representatives from University Grants Commission (UGC); All India 
Council for Technical Education (AICTE); National Board of Accreditation (NBA); and 
National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC). 
2. With these remarks, the Chairman asked the representatives from various deemed and 
private universities to present their views on the subject before the Committee.   
Oral Evidence of representatives from various Private/Deemed Universities 
3. Vice-Chancellor, SGT University apprised the Committee of the number of Higher 
Education Institutions (HEIs) alongwith the enrolment in private universities which is 24.5% in 
2019-20. He then suggested some reforms regarding Accreditation Processes such as 
streamlining the process for starting new courses and providing greater autonomy to universities; 
reviewing norms for enrolment of international students/ foreign collaborations and ensuring 
optimal use of infrastructure / learning resources within the University for various course 
running under different Regulatory Bodies. It was also informed that NAAC may consider 
accreditation of individual Academic Programme in addition to the current practice of   
Institutional Accreditation  
4. He also suggested research related reforms such as UGC may consider the research 
proposals for competitive grant even from institutions not covered under Clause 12B of the UGC 
Act, establishment of Cluster Central Instrumentation Facility along with financial support and 
research journals in UGC-CARE list at the time of publication should be considered by the 
Accreditation Agency even if journal is removed from that list at a later stage. He also threw 
light upon the examination process and reforms therein and suggested that in Council-governed 
courses, the component of formative assessment may be significantly increased.  
5. The Director-General, Nirma University informed the Committee that the University has 
recently been re-accredited by "A+" grade by the NAAC in its third cycle for the period 2022-
27. It was also informed that the existing system of accreditation by both the national accreditation 
agencies, i.e., NAAC and NBA are satisfactory. However, the University is expecting an improved 
accreditation system by the proposed body, i.e., National Accreditation Council (NAC) under NEP-
2020.  
6. While deliberating upon the research and examination reforms, he informed that the 
University has formed regulations to curb malpractices and maladministration in conducting 
examinations and deals strictly with unfair means during conduction of exams. Also, the 
University has formed various regulations for research, research ethics, policy for promotion of 
academic integrity, prevention of plagiarism, etc and they are in place. It was also highlighted that 
Nirma University has reframed the curricula on the lines of NEP-2020.  

53 
 
7. The Officer on Special Duty, Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE) informed 
that the institute has its roots in setting up of its flagship medical college in 1953 by its founder 
Dr T M A Pai. While deliberating upon the educational standards and accreditation processes, it 
was informed that MAHE is participating in the accreditations like NAAC, NBA, NABH, and 
NABL, including Institution of eminence alongwith participating in the NIRF ranking conducted 
by the Ministry of Education. MAHE is also complying with more than eight different regulatory 
bodies.  
8. Some major challenges which were highlighted by him were maintaining the balance 
between quantitative and qualitative education requiring huge data gathering, uploading in 
multiple portals, multiple internal audits, and external audits/visits and continuous 
communication between different agencies including regulatory bodies, confusion with different 
formats, and expectations of different agencies. 
9. He also informed that to curb malpractices and maladministration in conducting exams, 
reforms such as digitization of examination and evaluation system, which includes biometric-
based login-preventing impersonation, ensuring availability of the question paper synchronously 
for all the students at a predefined time and auto submission of answer scripts on time 
simultaneous question-wise valuation of answer scripts by internal/external evaluators were 
introduced. While touching upon the measures undertaken in view of implementing the NEP 
2020 by Manipal University, it was informed that a Steering Committee was formed under the 
chairmanship of Vice Chancellor on 22nd October, 2020 to develop an implementation plan.  
10. The Pro-Chancellor of  RKMVERI informed that the institute was established in 2005 
and is an institution deemed-to-be university as declared by the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (now Ministry of Education), Govt. of India, under Section 3 of University Grants 
Commission (UGC) Act, 1956. At present, it operates through four campuses situated at the 
following locations: Belur Math near Kolkata (main campus and headquarters), Coimbatore, 
Narendrapur (Kolkata) and Ranchi. The multi-campus university houses many departments 
organized under 5 schools, covering a diverse range of subjects such as Sanskrit studies, physics, 
mathematics, computer science, yoga, rural and tribal development, agriculture, disability 
management, disaster management, etc. and conducting programmes at various levels ranging 
from undergraduate/diploma to doctoral.  
11. He further informed the Committee that creating awareness on emerging trends in 
Education, Special Education, Agriculture Education, and Fundamental Sciences and the 
knowhow of integrating them with experience in real life setting. He also informed that for 
developing a unique research eco-system with emphasis on ‘translational research’ steps such as 
Disability Management and Special Education alongwith General & Adapted Physical Education 
and Yoga, Integrated Agriculture and Rural Development, Agricultural Biotechnology, 
Integrated Agriculture, Rural and Tribal Development and Organic Farming are being focused 
upon. He further suggested that suitable amendment be made in the UGC Act so that deemed 
universities are not debarred from using the term 'university'. 
Oral Evidence of representatives from Association of Indian Universities (AIU) 

54 
 
12. The Secretary General, AIU informed the Committee that AIU came into existence as the 
“Inter University Board (IUB)” on 23rd March, 1925 to bring all Universities on a common 
platform and is registered as a Society as the “Association of Indian Universities (AIU)” on 29th 
September, 1967. AIU has representation in several boards and has representation in several 
international organizations. The functions and activities of the AIU as informed to the 
Committee are Think Tank on Higher Education, Coordination and Liaisoning Capacity 
Building/Leadership Development Research, Publications & Information Dissemination, 
Cultural Activities & Youth Festivals Sports Promotion, Events and Championship, Evaluation 
& Equivalence of Degrees, Library Services to Universities. 
13. It was also informed that AIU provides an intellectual platform to the community of 
higher education for debating the issues and policies of emerging concerns and providing 
research-based recommendation to the Government of India for enriching the policy framework 
on higher education. Further, AIU is the nodal agency for granting equivalence to the degrees 
awarded by the accredited foreign universities and institutions for the purpose of admission to 
higher academic courses and employment.  
14. The Members raised various queries and expressed their views on the subject. Some of 
the queries raised by the Members were responded to and the one which remained unanswered, it 
was mentioned that the replies would be send to the Secretariat at the earliest.   
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
(After the lunch-break) 
15. The Chairman desired the Secretary, Department of Higher Education to throw light upon 
the measures adopted to address the problem of poor infrastructure which is becoming a major 
challenge to the higher education system alongwith the steps that have been / are being taken to 
manage Faculty shortages and to attract and retain well-qualified teachers. He further desired to 
be apprised of the programmes launched to enhance and promote collaboration between Indian 
higher education institutes and top international institutes and also generate linkages between 
national research laboratories and research centres of top institutions for better quality and 
collaborative research.  
Oral Evidence of representatives from various Organizations 
16. The representative of the UGC in their deposition highlighted the role and domain of the 
UGC and the various initiatives that are being taken in respect of NEP-2020. It was mentioned 
that UGC is aligning all its activities, academic or in governance and also revisiting all the 
regulations to push forward the vision as outlined in the NEP-2020 through its initiatives such as 
Academic Bank of Credits, pursuing two academic programmes simultaneously, 
Internationalization of Higher Education, academic collaboration between Indian and foreign 
HEIs, Common Universities Entrance test, Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring 
Minds (SWAYAM), ODL and Online education etc.   
17. It was informed that NAAC, an Inter University Centre of UGC deals with accreditation 
and till 31.5.2022, number of Universities and Colleges that stand accredited by NAAC is 9059. 

55 
 
It was also informed that at present there are 879 autonomous colleges and 126 Institutions 
Deemed to be Universities in the country. It was further informed that at present, there are 66 
Human Resource Development Centres (HRDCs) (formerly known as ASCs) all over India. 
These HRDCs, so established, are conducting Orientation Programmes known as 
GURUDAKSHTA for newly recruited faculty and Refresher Courses of two weeks duration for 
in-service teachers. Special courses in Gender Sensitization and Teacher Education are also been 
offered by the HRDC’s. Also, UGC-Human Resource Development Centres facilitate effective 
systems to provide opportunities for professional and career development of teachers necessary 
for quality education and research so that they are well equipped and motivated to accept new 
challenges emerging from growth of new knowledge, international competitiveness and 
changing requirements of learners, especially in the institutions of higher education. It was also 
submitted that UGC has notified the regulations to promote autonomy in HEIs:  
18. The representatives from AICTE stated that AICTE is basically meant for regulating 
technical education in the country such as engineering, management, arts, crafts, design, hotel 
management at the UG level, polytechnic level, and at PG level.  Thus, AICTE is regulating 
entire technical education in the country and there are approximately 9000 institutes in the 
country.  It was mentioned that as far as giving approval is concerned, in every institute, they are 
having an online mechanism.  There is no physical movement of any inspector and during Covid 
time they had taken the advantage of the situation and the requisite technology has been 
developed.   
19. It was mentioned that after 2017 Supreme Court order, deemed to be universities have 
also come under the purview of AICTE and they are also taking approval for their technical 
courses.  It was also mentioned that efforts are to align all the activities, all the education system 
with the National Education Policy.  Complete curriculum of courses, including management and 
engineering has been revamped and even the deemed to be universities or most of the State 
universities are following this model curriculum. Empowering the teachers is also an important 
task being performed and since 2020 around 2.5 lakh teachers in technical education have been 
trained, majority of them through online mode.   
20. The representatives of NBA during the course of the meeting informed that the National 
Policy on Education (NPE) 1986 recognized the need for a Statutory Body at the national level 
responsible for overseeing the growth and quality of technical education in the country. 
Accordingly, the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) was established by an Act 
of Parliament in 1987 and as a part of its programs and activities, National Board of Education 
(NBA) was first established by AICTE as one of its Boards with the mandate to undertake the 
periodic evaluations of technical institutions and programs on the basis of specified norms and 
standards as recommended by AICTE.   
21. It was informed that NBA conducts evaluation of programs of technical institutions based 
on the prescribed evaluation criteria and parameters. This may include, but not limited to 
institutional vision, mission and objectives, organization and governance, infrastructure facilities, 
quality of teaching and learning, curriculum design and review, support services (library, 
laboratory, instrumentation, computer facilities, etc.) and any other aspect as decided by the 

56 
 
Competent Authority of NBA. It was mentioned that NBA, has completely switched over to 
Outcome Based Accreditation by bringing in necessary changes in its process, parameters and 
criteria for accreditation and NBA accreditation process consists of the four stages namely Pre-
Assessment Stage, Assessment Stage and Post Assessment Stage (Decision-Making).  
22. The representative of NAAC submitted that NAAC was established in 1994 with the 
recommendations of the National Education Policy, 1986 and Programme of Action, 1992. The 
vision of NAAC is to make the quality the defining element of higher education in India through 
a combination of self-evaluation and external evaluations and increasing the assessment and 
accreditation process, collaborations, teaching/learning process.  He also mentioned that the 
process followed is entirely robust and totally ICT driven.  
23. The Secretary, Department of Higher Education while mentioning the challenges that are 
faced by NBA and NAAC, stated that as on date, only 30 per cent of the universities were in the 
accreditation system, only 20 per cent of the colleges are there in the accreditation system. Thus, 
there is a long way to go as, out of 50,000 colleges, there were less than 9,000 colleges who are 
accredited. Accreditation is a procedure wherein standardization happens as to what minimum 
benchmarks are to be created. Thus, till large body of colleges are going towards an accreditation 
process, the realization of quality in this entire sphere will be hard to achieve as it is not 
mandatory at present.  
24. He further stated that National Education Policy, 2020, has proposed to go for a binary 
system which is an internationally accepted system wherein one is either accredited or not 
accredited and a timeframe has been given for that.So, the UGC has constituted a Committee 
under Prof. Sridhar. He has prepared a roadmap how you can go towards this binary 
accreditation and I think going forward that will be a line that will be taken. He clarified that 
accreditation is done only course-wise by NBA, while the NAAC is doing the institution-wise.  
He submitted that in the Higher Education Regulatory Commission Bill, one of the verticals will 
be the accreditation body and eventually all will merge to become one body for the entire 
country. Thus the roadmap is clearly defined and they will be going towards that procedure.  
25. The Members raised various queries and expressed their views on the subject. Some of 
the queries raised by the Members were responded to and the one which remained unanswered, it 
was mentioned that the replies would be send to the Secretariat at the earliest.   
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
26. A verbatim record of the meeting was kept. 
27. The meeting adjourned at 4:18 P.M. 
New Delhi,                                                                                                       A.K. Mallick  
9th June, 2022                                                                                                  Director 

57 
 
  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, 
WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 12:30 P.M. on 
Monday, the 20th June, 2022 in Committee Room- ‘4’, Parliament House Annexe, Extension, 
New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri R. S. Bharathi  
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad  
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
8. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
9. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
10. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
11. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
12.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
13.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
14.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
55.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
17.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3.  Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
6. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
  
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee 
and stated that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the draft Report on the subject 

58 
 
"Review of education standards, accreditation process, research, examination reforms and 
academic environment in Deemed/Private Universities/other Higher Education Institutions". 
 
2. The Chairman then shared that his term as Member of Rajya Sabha will be ending shortly 
and this may be his last meeting of this Committee under his Chairmanship. He also expressed 
his sincere gratitude to all the Members of the Committee for their cooperation, active 
participation and meaningful contributions in all Committee meetings, study visits, adoption and 
presentation of Committee Reports. He then thanked the Secretariat and all the officials of 
Committee Section for smooth functioning of the Committee. 
3. The Members of the Committee then thanked the Chairman for his effective working and 
kind behavior towards all and wished him luck for his future project or engagements. 
4. The Chairman and the Members then suggested some more recommendations which were 
agreed to by the Committee. The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Report 
and after a brief discussion, adopted the same with suggested recommendations. 
5. He also informed that in view of the fact that both Houses of Parliament are not in 
Session and his term is going to expire on 4th July, 2022, the Committee would present the above 
mentioned Report to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in near future at a suitable date so that the 
Report could be forwarded to the Ministries concerned for necessary action.   
6.    The meeting adjourned at 1:20 P.M. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                       A.K. Mallick  
20th June, 2022                                                                                                     Director 