                                                                                
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
335 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIFTH  REPORT 
ON 
REFORMS IN THE EDUCATION OF PERFORMING AND 
FINE ARTS 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th February, 2022) 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIFTH  REPORT 
ON 
REFORMS IN THE EDUCATION OF PERFORMING AND 
FINE ARTS 
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th February, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  


 
C O N T E N T S 
 
  PAGES 
 
1 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i)-(ii) 
2 PREFACE 
 
(iii)-(iv) 
3 ABBREVIATIONS 
 
(v)-(vii) 
4 REPORT 
 
1-49 
6 MINUTES 
 
50-65 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  

 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & 
SPORTS 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th   September, 2021) 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri R. S. Bharathi  
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. * Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad  
7. Shri K. C. Ramamurthy  
8. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
9. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
17. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
18. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
19. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
20. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
21.  Shri Balak Nath 
22.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
23.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
24.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
25.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
26. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
29. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. **Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
31. *** Smt. Pratibha Singh 
---------------------------------- 
* Ms. Sushmita Dev nominated as Member w.e.f. 27.09.2021 
** Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 07.02.2022 
*** Smt. Pratibha Singh nominated as Member w.e.f. 07.02.2022 
 
 (i) 

SECRETARIAT 
 Shri S. D. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary (LR) 
 Shri. A.K. Mallick, Director 
 Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
 Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  

 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Thirty Fifth 
Report of the Committee on the subject "Reforms in the Education of Performing and Fine 
Arts".  
2. Arts and Culture are the two important ingredients that shape the characteristics of 
any civilisation. India is not just a country, it is a civilisation with a history of many 
millennia. As rightly described by Pt Deendayal Upadhyay our civilisational journey has 
always been through continuity with change as it always has been ‘From the past, through the 
present and to the future’!  In this endless journey, Arts and Culture play the role of a vehicle. 
Mahatma Gandhi had once observed that “All true art must help the soul to realize its inner 
self”. Combining the ethos these thoughts espouse and the way our educational system is 
undergoing the change envisaged by the National Education Policy 2020 which affirms that 
"The curriculum must include basic arts, crafts, humanities, games, sports and fitness, 
languages, literature, culture, and values, in addition to science and mathematics, to develop 
all aspects and capabilities of learners; and make education more well-rounded, useful, and 
fulfilling to the learner”, the Committee  had taken up this subject for examination and to 
make its observations/ recommendations  which can help further the cause of adding more 
value to education of Performing and Fine arts in our country through a slew of reforms.  
3. During the course of its deliberations on the subject, the Committee interacted with 
representatives of the Ministry of Culture, Department of School Education & Literacy and 
Department of Higher Education of the Ministry of Education and the representatives of 
Centre for Culture Resources and Training, Lalit Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi,    
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, NCERT, CBSE, UGC, KVS, NIOS , NCTE, 
School of Performing & Visual Arts, IGNOU and Faculty of Fine Arts, Jamia Millia Islamia. 
The Committee also visited and interacted with stakeholders from several institutes and 
prominent personalities in order to have a first hand, in-depth and better understanding of the 
issues which are impacting Performing, Fine and Visual art education. The Institutes/ 
personalities which were visited/ interacted with are National School of Drama and  National 
Gallery of Modern Art and Kathak Kendra;  New Delhi; Kalakshetra Foundation, Chennai;  
Film and Television Institute of India and Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune;   
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya Mandal, Sir J.J. School of Arts, Vrindaban  
Gurukul, (Institute established by Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia) and Whistling Woods 
International (Film School), Mumbai; and Dr. Padma Subrahmanyam, President, Nrityodaya, 
Chennai.  
4. The Draft Report was circulated to the Members of the Committee in its meeting held 
on 1st February, 2022 and also through emails dated 1st and 5th February, 2022 seeking their 
suggestions.  
5. The Committee considered the Draft Report and the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained therein in its meeting held on 7th February, 2022 and adopted the Report in the 
same meeting.  
6. The Committee expresses its sincere gratitude to the representatives of the 
Ministries/Departments and various organizations, and prominent personalities for placing 
before it their valuable suggestions, materials and information required in connection with the 
examination of the subject. 
 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI                                                                                    
7thFebruary,2022                                                                                                                            
Magha 18, 1943 (Saka)                                                               
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on  Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 

ABBREVIATION 
 
AICTE 
 
All India Council of Technical Education 
 
AIL 
 
Art Integrated Learning 
AISHE 
 
 
All India Survey on Higher Education 
AVI Accredited Vocational Institutes 
 
BORI Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 
 
CBCS 
 
Choice Based Credit System  
 
 
CCERT 
 
Council of Computer Education Research and Training  
CCRT Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
 
CEC 
 
Consortium of Educational Communication 
 
CFOL 
 
Centre for Open Learning 
CTSSS Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme  
 
 
DoHE Department of Higher Education 
 
DoSEL Department of School Education  & Literacy  
 
DIET District Institute of Education and Training 
 
FTII 
 
Film and Television Institute of India 
IGNCA Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 
 
IGNOU Indira Gandhi National Open University 
 
IIH Indian Institute of Heritage and Conservation 
 
JMI Jamia Millia Islamia 
 
KF Kalakshetra Foundation 
 
KVS 
 
Kendriya Vidyalaya  Sangathan  
 
LOCF 
 
 
Learning Outcome based Curriculum Framework 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 
 
 

MERU 
 
Multidisciplinary Education and Research University 
 
 
MOOCs 
 
 
Massive Open Online Courses 
NAI National Archives of India  
 
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and 
Training 
 
NCFSE National Curriculum Framework for Secondary 
Education 
 
NCF National Curriculum Framework 
 
NCTE 
 
 
National Council for Teacher Education 
NEP 
 
National Education Policy 
NET 
 
National Eligibility Test 
NGMA National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi  
NIOS 
 
National Institute of Open Schooling  
NISHTHA 
 
National Initiative for School Heads’ and Teachers’ 
Holistic Advancement 
 
NME-ICT 
 
 
National Mission on Education through Information 
and Communication Technology 
 
NMICHM   
 
National Museum Institute of History of Art, 
Conservation and Museulogy 
 
NRLC National Research Laboratory for Conservation of 
Cultural Property   
 
NSD National School of Drama 
 
NVS 
 
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti 
 
SCERT State Council of Educational Research and Training 
 
SNA Sangeet Natak Akademi 
 
SOPVA School of Performing and Visual Arts 
 
SPIC MACAY 
 
Society for the Promotion of Indian Classical Music 
And Culture Amongst Youth 
 
STRIDE 
 
Scheme for Trans -Disciplinary Research for India’s 
Developing Economy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) 
 
 

SWAYAMP  
 
Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring 
Minds 
 
SYA Scholarship to Young Artistes  
 
TIE  Theatre in Education   
 
TGT 
 
Trained Graduate Teacher 
UGC University Grants Commission 
 
UNESCO 
 
 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

1 
 
REPORT  
 
“Art awakens a sense of real by establishing an intimate relationship between our inner being and the 
universe at large, bringing us a consciousness of deep joy.”---Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Since time immemorial, India has been the land of art and culture where it has thrived in one 
form or the other. The art of telling stories, transmitting values and norms from generation to generation 
has been deep rooted and have got expressed through man y unique/ creative ways. At a time when no 
modern means of recording or capturing these cultural art forms and artifacts were available, the only 
way it got transmitted over the years was through various forms of Art like Performing arts, Fine arts, 
Visual arts and Folk arts, by ways of rehearsing and replicating through generations. Similarly, 
traditional dance forms from across the country have been passed on to the next generations through 
‘Guru-Shishya parampara’. Such examples abound in India which has  a vast and diverse cultural 
heritage. Thus, Art become an important tool in the preservation of our culture, tradition, norms, values, 
customs and ethos.   These art forms also acted as a bridge between the past and the present and enable 
continuity and perpetuate harmony in the social life.  
1.2 Any art form is a reflection of creative expressions of the society. The finer expressions like 
Music, Dance, Architecture, Literature, Theatre, Drawings, Murals, Sculpture etc. portray the life of 
people, geograp hical surroundings, religious themes, historical facts etc. Hence, when education is 
imparted by amalgamating the different art forms and in different contexts, it becomes enriching, 
enjoyable and interesting. It inculcates values and aesthetics of life fo r a positive future. The mediums 
and forms of Art allow children to develop both a playful as well as a disciplined exploration of 
themselves and diverse materials and also facilitate them to experiment with many forms of expression. 
Fine arts, music, danc e and theatre all contribute to the development of self, both cognitive and social. 
Language, exploration of nature and an understanding of self and others can all be experientially learnt 
and understood by children through various art forms. Every teacher  has to practise integration of arts 
and culture with own subjects and disciplines and incorporate education of arts in their pedagogy.   
1.3 Quality education requires motivated students and teachers, appropriate curricula and inclusive , 
accessible environments free from any form of discrimination. It involves addressing complex 
challenges in today’s knowledge societies and increasingly knowledge -based economies. The prevalent 
education system in the country needs to instil in students a sense of community and an appreciation for 
its cultural diversity; build students’ self -esteem and confidence; provide them with the creative, 

2 
 
innovative abilities and flexibility ---as skills required for meaningful employment in the modern 
workplace thereby contributing positively to the country’s socio-economic development.   
1.4 Education in arts and culture is as necessary as any other subjects for the overall ( cognitive, 
affective and psycho motor) development of every student. It helps in development o f imagination, 
expression, communication, visualization, creativity, innovation, scenario building, creative problem 
solving, and divergent, critical and reflective thinking. Education in arts and culture enhances student’s 
ability to understand their cult ural heritage as a national treasure and conserve and preserve it. 
Experiencing arts and its explorations during the school years give them avenues to nurture creativity 
which helps in the holistic development and makes them contributing citizens. Educatio n in arts and 
culture also provides opportunity for experiential learning, space for joyful experience through 
exploring, appreciating, creating, imagining and expressing. A  learning environment and creative 
content which would enable children learn freely and grow on their own with teachers as facilitators. Art 
education is also helpful to the  sensory and other skills in divyang children lea ding to their quicker 
inclusion into the mainstream of the process of learning. It further helps in the development o f multiple 
perspectives and other points of view to foster qualities such as respect, empathy, open mindedness and 
compassion, self-esteem and confidence, individuality, sense of self and self -identity including personal 
identity and social identity, humane values of peaceful co-existence with nature and other human beings 
and development of holistic and well-rounded individuals equipped with the key 21st century skills. 
1.5 The terms categorizing various art forms can be succinctly defined as under:  
 Fine Art: art form practised mainly for its aesthetic value and its beauty rather than its 
functional value. Fine arts is a creative art whose products are to be appreciated primarily or 
solely for their imaginative, aesthetic, or intellectual content. Fine arts mainly consist of seven 
disciplines which are Music, Dance, Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, Poetry and Literature.  
 Performing Art: art form or skill of music (vocal, instrumental, percussion), dance and theatre, 
which includes classical, semi classical and traditional art form. Performing arts as a discipline 
of education was taught since ancient times in our Vishwavidyapeeths like the Takshashila, 
Vikramshila, Nalanda etc., and are performed in front of audience. This includes Music, Dance, 
Theatre or Drama, Opera etc. These are expressions of human beings through body movement, 
hand gestures, music, facial expressions, costumes, etc. used for communication.  
 Visual Art: creative art whose products are to be appreciated by sight. There are five purposes 
for visual art: Ceremonial, Artistic Expression, Narrative, Functional and Persuasive. Visual Arts 
include painting, drawing, printmaking, sculpture, ceramics, photography, video, filmmaking, 
design, crafts and architecture. 

3 
 
 
 Traditional Art: art that is part of a culture of a certain group of people, with skills and 
knowledge passed down through generations from masters to apprentices. Traditional Arts 
include literature (including poetry, drama, story, and so on), the Visual Arts (painting, drawing, 
sculpture, etc.), the graphic arts (painting, drawing, design etc), the Artificial arts (sculpture, clay 
modeling), the decorative arts (enamelwork, furniture design, mosaic, etc.), the Performing arts 
(theatre, dance, music), music (as composition), and architecture (often including interior 
design).  
 Indigenous Art: arts created by the original people who are inhabitants of a land wherein 
different traditions, culture and region exist to preserve their identity and existence through their 
language, culture, folktales, arts, crafts etc. These Arts provide a means of cultural expression 
and are a vehicle for the maintenance and transmission of culture. These are the indigenous 
forms of art, based on the traditional knowledge system. Indigenous arts include all art forms 
such as paintings, metal crafts, pottery and terracotta, weaving, textile, dance, songs, instruments 
and drama. 
 1.6 Involvement in the Arts is associated with reform and improvement in motivation, concentration, 
confidence and teamwork. Education in Arts is seen as crucial, if the social, cultural and economic 
benefits of the Arts are to be fully realized. The promotio n of the study of Fine arts and Performing arts 
can be seen in three contexts, namely as a means to build an appreciative and informed audience, as a 
means to develop the professional Arts practitioner and to prepare students to engage in a creative, 
cultural life.   The UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, 
mentions that t he performing arts is one of the domains that are inter alia  manifested as part of 
“intangible cultural heritage” while also defining “Safeguarding” them as  measures including the 
identification, documentation, research, preservation, protection, promotion, enhancement, transmission, 
particularly through formal and non-formal education, as well as the revitalization of the various aspects 
of such heritage. Also, the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of 
Cultural Expressions recognizes the sovereign right of States to maintain, adopt and implement policies 
to protect and promote the diversity of cultural expression, both nationally and internationally . India has 
ratified both the UNESCO conventions and as such is committed to implement them. In fact, our 
Constitution also prescribes th at it shall be the fundamental duty of every citizen to value and preserve 
the rich heritage of our composite culture.  UNESCO has also designated April 15 every year as the 
World Art Day , which is a celebration to promote the development, diffusion and enj oyment of art 
noting that Art nurtures creativity, innovation and cultural diversity for all peoples across the globe and 
plays an important role in sharing knowledge and encouraging curiosity and dialogue. Further , it has 

4 
 
been stated that these are qualit ies that art has always had, and will always have if we continue to 
support environments where artists and artistic freedom are promoted and protected and in this way, 
furthering the development of art also furthers our means to achieve a free and peaceful world.  
 1.7 The National Education Policy 2020 (NEP) is a huge step forward in providing universal access to 
quality education rooted in Indian ethos and at par with global standards. Promotion of Indian Arts & 
Culture has been prioritised in the NEP -2020. The Policy observes that it is necessary to 
introduce students to their culture to have a sense of belongingness and identity and to help them value 
their culture and traditions. The students must develop a strong sense of their own cultural history, 
languages, arts, and traditions to boost their self -esteem and benefit the society as a whole. A chapter 
exclusively focuses on this aspect (chapter 22). Besides this, the chapter on Curriculum and Pedagogy in 
Schools (Chapter 4) has highlighted integration of these aspects throughout the curriculum. The NEP 
2020 has recommended that curriculum must include basic arts, crafts, humanities, games, sports and 
fitness, languages, literature, culture, and values. Inclusion of the rich heritage of ancient and etern al 
Indian knowledge and thought has been a guiding principle of this Policy.  
1.8 NEP, 2020 also mentions that Fine arts, Indian culture and philosophy have had a strong influence 
on the world. These rich legacies must not only be nurtured and preserved for posterity and heritage but 
also researched, enhanced, and put to new uses through our education system. This implies they need to 
be integrated in a holistic, multidisciplinary educational framework  to facilitate development of 
creativity and originality of students and to encourage them to innovate.  This would promote a student’s 
holistic development besides academic performance; diffusing hard boundaries between arts and 
sciences, curricular and extra-curricular activities, vocational and academic streams, and so on.  
1.9 Keeping in view the emerging educational scenario in the context of provisions of NEP, 2020 and its 
thrust on Art education, the Committee had felt that examination of the subject of “Reforms in the 
Education of Performing and Fine Ar ts” would be topical in the current context. The Committee had 
also noted that such a subject has not been examined in detail from the perspective of what issues bog 
down Art education in our country and what can be done to give it a fillip. The Report is an endeavor in 
this direction.  
2. INPUTS RECEIVED FROM STAKEHOLDER MINISTRIES/ DEPARTMENTS / 
BODIES  
2.1 MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
2.1.1 The Ministry has informed that it is broadly working on the protection, development and 
promotion of the country’s tangible and intangible heritage and has a comprehensive knowledge domain 
which would be imperative in supporting the cause of reforms in Fine arts and Performing arts 

5 
 
education. All the autonomous institutions under the aegis of the Ministry have opined that there  is a 
need of inclusive curriculum starting from the primary level schooling as the ability to appreciate arts 
and aesthetics would indirectly transform the growth of a student positively in the long run. It is felt that 
many of the art and cultural forms have been neglected because they lack an audience informed of its 
content and form. In other words, the ability to appreciate the finer aspects and nuances of a Performing 
art or Fine arts need to be addressed beyond the traditional notions of ‘upbringing,  circumstantial 
advantages, hereditary entitlements etc’. Thus, it is important to extend opportunity to get trained in 
gaining qualities of ‘appreciation, critique, analysis, creativity, discussion and dissemination’ especially 
in the field of art and cul ture, and the curriculum of school and college education should reflect such a 
qualitative turn. It could be in the line of Science education per se whereby the elementary, high school 
and the graduate courses deal with a basic and essential requirement in  the field of Science which is 
good enough to make the student capable to appear for a specialized profession. In arts and culture, it 
could be done through basic introduction of an art form/ painting /sculpture /cultural practices etc. and 
then leading to the finer aspects of appreciating the techniques and global practices around such form of 
art in higher classes / courses. It has been submitted that with a developing economy the country would 
be better positioned to cater to the need and requirements of  art and cultural institutions and thereby 
promoting career opportunities of those endowed with aesthetic qualities; however it requires a market 
that would attract the students after their education for which more infrastructure and resources are 
required. The Ministry has stated that Autonomous bodies under the Ministry of Culture play a pivotal 
role in the dissemination of arts and cultural education in the country. 
2.1.2 Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT): It was informed that CCRT functions 
as an autonomous organization under the aegis of Ministry of Culture, Govt. of India and  is one of the 
premier institutions working in the field of disseminating arts education and linking culture with 
education. Over t he years, CCRT has conducted action research and worked out methodologies for 
providing art and cultural components in teaching, learning processes and thereby to some extent, 
achieving the objectives of the integrated approach to arts education using cult ure bases to understand 
the various school disciplines.  
2.1.2.1  It has been further informed that CCRT has been  conducting a variety of in -service school 
teachers and teacher -educators training programmes throughout the years, which are held in different  
parts of the country. The CCRT is keenly interested in implementing the reforms promoting Fine Arts 
and Performing Arts education, which is within its mandate and its mission for the past 40 years. 
2.1.2.2  On the aspect of issues and challenges in the fi eld of Arts Education,  CCRT states them as 
under:  

6 
 
 CCRT is executing Training Programmes for large number of Teachers / Teacher Educators 
every year. But during Covid-19 pandemic outbreak, the offline and on campus training forms 
have been transformed into online mode. In the year 2020-21, the CCRT organized 24 e-learning 
workshops, and 2501 teachers were trained from all parts of the country. However, it has been 
observed and experienced that performing and practical aspects of programmes of Fine Arts such 
as learning of traditional arts & crafts etc. are not taught as effectively in online/ virtual mode as 
they used to be conducted in offline / physical mode.  
 It has also been  noted that after obtaining training from the CCRT on Fine Arts, when CCRT 
Trained Teachers wish to implement the teaching – learning activities in the school, they face 
administrative problems such as non-cooperation and ‘no permission’ of the school heads. As 
Fine Arts teaching is still considered as secondary and co-curricular subject, therefore, it has not 
been taken on priority basis. 
 As a unified syllabus inclusive of art is not recommended by Education Departments to schools, 
consequently, availability of resource materials at grass root level is also a genuine problem in 
Fine Arts Education.  
2.1.2.3  CCRT further informed that the impact of Fine Arts and Performing Arts education cannot be 
measured in percentages or marks obtained by students, but it can be gauged by the way in which they 
react to real life situations.  Aspect s of “Culture”  that are expected to be included in the reforms 
promoting Fine arts and Performing arts education, and should form part of Arts education and the 
syllabus are  creative element,  eternal values of truth, goodness and beauty as they will gen erate  
development of character and awareness of local cultural manifestations. Their integration with 
curriculum and pedagogical practices in schools and colleges is required.  It has also been submitted that 
the role of Arts education should be to provid e school students with an opportunity to develop 
sensitivity and creativity through learning of Fine Arts and Performing Arts,  as this prepares the youth 
not only for participation in the cultural life, but as a recognized fact by educationists, such crea tive 
activities sharpen the intellect and lengthen the concentration span of the child, thus improving all-round 
standards, including in academics. 
2.1.3 Lalit Kala Akademi, New Delhi: It has been informed that the prime motive of the Akademi is 
propagation and promotion of Visual Arts and the Akademi consistently supports the skill development 
and skill enhancement of Visual artists and their allied traits. The Akademi through its various regional 
centres provides studio facilities in different fields of Visual Arts and these work for the enhancement of 
skills in the fields of graphics, sculpting, painting, ceramics etc.  

7 
 
2.1.3.1 Admissions are given to artists to work in these studios and these studios are equipped with basic 
facilities of Etching Machines , Printing Machines, Furnaces, Kiln.  Every year admissions are given 
whereby young upcoming and senior artists work in these studios and upgrade their skills. The studios 
are run under the professional supervision of skilled supervisors who provides skill and guidance in 
making use of studio space and in making the artworks efficiently. For developing the skills of patrons 
of visual arts, the Akademi provides scholarship to 40 young and budding artists in the field of Visual 
Arts.  
2.1.3.2It has also been informed that the Akademi provides space for exhibitions of different artists, art 
groups and different institutions to showcase their talent and promote Visual Arts, and it gives 
Scholarship, Financial Assistance to artists, and organizes Exhibitions, Wor kshops, Seminars, Triennale 
to encourage & promote study and research in art. The National Exhibition of Art and Print Biennale are 
some of the major events for the promotion of Arts.  
 
2.1.3.3 Some of the issues highlighted by Lalit Kala Akademi in their inputs are as under:  
 Lack of quality research and publications on the Art works preserved in the collection of the 
Government and Privation organizations. 
 Inadequate manpower, infrastructure and art scholars. 
 Unavailability of information about art works of Indian masters. 
 Insensitivity towards digitalization and preservation of art works. 
 Outdated Arts education system and unavailability of bilingual publications.  
 
2.1.3.4 The Akademi has made the following suggestions for reforming the Arts Education System: 
 Uniformity in syllabus of all Fine Art Colleges and Universities.  
 Bilingual publications of eminent Art Historians as course material. 
 Visits to Museums, Art Organizations, Academies and historical sites and workshops in the field 
of Performing and Fine Arts must form a part of curriculum.  
2.1.4National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi(NGMA): NGMA has submitted that Arts Education 
is structured through three complementary pedagogical streams, which are study of artistic works; direct 
contact with artistic works (such as concerts, exhibitions, books, and films); and engaging in arts 
practices. It has also been mentioned that there are three dimensions to Arts Edu cation, which are the 
student gaining knowledge in interaction with the artistic object or performance, with the artist and with 
his or her teacher;  through his or her own artistic practice; and through research and study (of an art 
form, and of the relationship of art to history).  

8 
 
2.1.4.1 NGMA has highlighted the issues of urgent need for research in this area and for updating the 
Fine Arts education curriculum and its implementation, ensuring the availability of Resource 
persons(highly skilled profession al art teachers in schools, colleges & universities) andInfrastructure 
Facilities as most of the Fine Arts educational institutions require proper infrastructure and availability 
and accessibility of Instructional Media, since classrooms lack basic educati onal aids - materials, tools 
and equipment.  
2.1.4.2NGMA has suggested that the roadmap for effecting a change in Arts education  should aim to 
communicate a vision and develop a consensus on the importance of Arts Education for building a 
creative and cul turally aware society; encourage collaborative reflection and action; and garner the 
necessary financial and human resources to ensure integration of Arts Education into education systems 
and schools. It has also been suggested that ‘Learning in and throug h the arts’ (Arts Education and Arts-
in-Education) would enhance active learning;  locally relevant curriculum that captures the interest and 
enthusiasm of learners and respect for, and engagement with, local communities and cultures; and 
trained and motivated teachers. NGMA suggests that educational content and structure should not only 
reflect the characteristics of each art form but also provide the artistic means to practice communication 
and to interact within various cultural, social and historical contexts.  
2.1.4.3 Further suggestions on Arts education mention:  
 Forms of arts can be taught as individual study subjects, through the teaching of the various arts 
disciplines, thereby developing students’ artistic skills, sensitivity, and appreciation of the arts, 
and must be seen as a method of teaching and learning in which artistic and cultural dimensions 
are included in all curriculum subjects.  
 Art institutions should develop and adopt applied and integrated curriculum which can 
strengthen vocational, academic and workplace skills that will facilitate self-actualization, 
sustainability, employment generation. 
 Policies should be designed for national and regional research in the area of Arts Education, 
taking into account the specificities of ancestral cultures as well as vulnerable population groups. 
 Development of strategies for implementation and monitoring should be encouraged, so as to 
ensure the quality of Arts Education. 
 Arts Education should be given a permanent central place in the educational curriculum, funded 
appropriately, and staffed by teachers of appropriate quality and skill. 

9 
 
 Participation by local arts practitioners / Indigenous art practices in learning contexts and the 
inclusion of local art forms / Indigenous art forms and techniques in learning processes should be 
facilitated in order to strengthen local cultures and identity. 
2.1.5 Kalakshetra Foundation (KF),  Sangeet  Natak Akademi(SNA) and Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for the Arts (IGNCA):  : In respect of these bodies, it has been stated that Kalakshetra 
Foundation (KF) is recognized as an Institution of National Importance by an Act of Parliament and is 
now functioning as an autonomous body under the Ministry of Culture. The Foundation is awa rding 4 
year Diploma in Bharatanatyam /   Music / Visual Arts and Post Graduate Diploma in Bharatanatyam /   
Music / Visual Arts for 2 years for the Diploma holders. Also, through Sangeet Natak  Akademi, the 
Ministry has created several schemes and implements  policies to provide sustenance to art and culture 
both at the community level in rural India and professional work throughout the country, and constant 
efforts are being made to make these schemes relevant to the present times both in actual and virtual 
modes. The IGNCA offers seven one -year Post Graduate Diploma courses and four short -term 
Certificate courses t o attract the people towards Indian art and to nurture trained manpower in the 
related fields. 
 
2.1.6 National School of Drama (NSD) : Besides offer ing the present three -year diploma course in 
Acting, Design & Direction, the innovations/reforms required at National School of Drama state that the 
School is planning to offer more courses in theatre and allied arts. Also, the Repertory Company is the 
regular performing wing of the school, which besides staging 3 -4 new plays every year, undertakes 
performance of all old plays in Delhi and different parts of the country and abroad. Over the years 
Repertory Company has produced a variety of plays ranging fro m stylised musicals to realistic 
contemporary works of Indian drama to translations and adaptations of foreign language plays.TIE Co. 
has been exploring and implementing the application of Theatre and Drama in the service of education 
for the last 30 years . The company has been conducting Summer Workshops, Online Workshops and 
Sunday Club with children. The Summer workshop aims at the social integration of children from 
various backgrounds to sensitize them towards themselves and their surroundings through theatre 
activities in a play way method. The workshop is divided in to 4 weeks, during which children  explore 
Self, Family, Education and Society. 
  
2.1.7  Centralization of Cultural Centres: It has been informed that the Government has proposed to 
establish an Indian Institute of Heritage and Conservation(IIH)  under Ministry of Culture with the 
status of a deemed University. This Institute shall be set up by integrating  Institute of Archaeology (Pt. 
Deendayal  Upadhyaya Institute of Archaeology),  School of Archival Studies under National Archives 
of India, New Delhi, the National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property (NRLC), 

10 
 
Lucknow, National Museum Institute of History of Art, Conservation and Museulogy (NMICHM) and 
Academic Wing of Indira Gandhi National Centre for the   Arts (IGNCA), New Delhi and these  partner 
institutes are to become various schools of IIH. It has been further informed that following are the issues 
for which approval of UGC for starting of new Schools and new Courses under IIH is required:-  
 Preparation of University ordinance and other guidelines 
 Constitution of new Society of IIH as per revised MOA 
 Calling for meeting of the new Society i.e., Society of IIH, for constitution of Board of 
Management and other University authorities 
 Appointment of Chancellor, VC, PVC, Dean & Directors and other office bearers 
 Constitution of new Academic Council, Executive Committee and Finance Committee 
of the IIH 
 Constitution of Board of Studies of various schools 
 Approval of the Courses by the University authorities like Board of Studies and 
Academic Council 
 Proposal to be submitted to UGC for approval of new schools and new courses 
 Announcement of Admission process 
 Starting of Academic Session of IIH 
 
2.1.7.1 On the issue of  starting of First Session of Indian Institute of Heritage (IIH) PG Courses, the 
Ministry has informed that it has been decided that  till the approval of the UGC to the IIH is granted, 
courses conducted by the National Archives of India (NAI) may be continued under current name. After 
the name change approval from Ministry of Education, the PG Diploma courses and short term courses 
of IGNCA, ASI and NAI may also be launched under IIH. Once the UGC approval is received, all 
courses presently conducted by various cultural institutions as well as new courses will be started under 
IIH. 
  
2.1.8 In respect of career/job opportunities currently available for artists passing out from the various 
Arts institutions across the country, and the efforts tow ards the  promotion of Arts, the Ministry has 
informed as under: 
 
 Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) is implementing the Cultural Talent Search 
Scholarship Scheme (CTSSS) for the students in the age group of 10 to 14 years. Along with this 
CCRT is also partially implementing two more schemes namely Scholarship to Young Artistes 
(SYA) in the age group of 18 to 25 years  for advance training and Junior and Senior Fellowship 

11 
 
under the “Scheme for the Award of Fellowships to Outstanding Persons in the field of Culture” 
for the age group of 25 years and above to carry out research in the field of Indian Art & Culture. 
These Schemes of Scholarship & Fellowship help them to pursue their training and take up the 
art forms as sustainable and gainful employment by the student/society. 
 
 Fine Arts graduates develop a range of practical and creative skills and gain valuable experience 
of entering exhibitions, competitions and building up a portfolio of work, and the career options 
that emerge are Advertising Art Director, Art Therapist, Commercial Art Gallery Manager, 
Community Arts Worker, Conservator, Exhibition Designer, Fine Artist, Graphic Designer, 
Illustrator, Museum/gallery Exhibitions Officer, Printmaker, Secondary School Teacher, Faculty 
Members in Arts College, Animator, Arts Administrator, Concept Artist, Estates Manager, 
Interior and Spatial Designer, Jewellery Designer, Multimedia Programmer, Museum/gallery 
Curator, Special effects Technician. 
 
 The students/ artists passing out from NSD may have the possibilities of recruitment to superior 
posts and services under the Central Government where specialization in the field of Dramatics 
is required. They also get the opportunity to work with State Academies, Song & Drama 
Divisions, Sangeet NatakAkademi, Doordarshan, faculty members in Drama Deptt. of 
universities etc. Besides, the students can work with Film Industry, Entertainment Industry,as 
freelancers, researchers, art directors, artistes in the repertory of NSD & T.I.E. Co., direct plays, 
act in plays/movies/web series/short films or be facilitators, teachers, theatre workshop 
conductors etc. 
 
2.2 DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & LITERACY, MINISTRY OF 
EDUCATION 
2.2.1 The Department has informed that the National Educational Policy, 2020 has recommended 
several initiatives for the integration of Arts and Culture  in school curriculum. Curriculum and 
pedagogy in schools should be holistic, integrated, enjoyable and engaging. It must include basic arts, 
crafts, humanities, games, sports and fitness, languages, literature, culture, and values, in addition to 
science and mathematics, to develop all aspects and capabilities of learners; and make education more 
well-rounded, useful, and fulfilling to the learner.  
2.2.2 As a follow up action, it has been stated that CBSE has been initiating the following:  
 CBSE offers a compulsory subject called Arts Education in classes IX-X 

12 
 
 CBSE has prepared and released the guidelines/Handbook on Art Integrated Learning to promote 
the integration of all kinds of Arts (Visual and/or Performing). Schools have been advised and 
encouraged to use Art as a medium to explain difficult concepts of various subjects like 
Mathematics, Science etc. Specific guidelines for Principals and Teachers for 
implementing/using Art as the basis for learning have been given in this Handbook.  
 CSBE organizes Expression Series in which students submit their Drawings/Paintings/ Creative 
Writing on various topics. 
 CBSE has mandated Art Integrated Project for classes 1 to 10, as part of Subject Enrichment and 
Internal assessment. Indigenous art forms are to be used while doing the project. CBSE has also 
advocated that ‘Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat’ pairing is to be followed for the Art Integrated 
project. This enables students to research and learn about all art forms and culture of the Indian 
states and Union Territories.   
 An online Art Integrated Exemplar Lessons Competition was organized for CBSE Teachers.  
 In order to develop capacity of teachers to undertake Art Integrated learning, 401 training 
sessions have been conducted during the session 2020-21. 
 CBSE organizes online Storytelling Competition. Syllabus-based concepts/ Topics are narrated 
by students as stories and the best stories are uploaded on DIKSHA platform.  
 CBSE is preparing a Handbook on Storytelling for using the art of Storytelling for teaching-
learning. 
 
2.2.3 In view of the mandate of the NEP, 2020, the following Implementation/Action Points and 
development of Resources have been laid down:  
 NCERT may prepare position papers, one on integration of arts education in school, and another 
Knowledge of India. Working papers on these two themes have been prepared and will be 
finalized soon, as part of the NCFSE. 
 NCERT may prepare guidelines on age/class/stage-wise pedagogical interventions to be adopted 
by different agencies on how to promote arts and culture among learners.   
 Various academic and vocational courses of different traditional arts and crafts targeting 
potential sectors like tourism and culture, handicrafts, etc. need to be introduced at the secondary 
stage to expose the students with their  world. 
 Subjects like Performing Arts of Music, Dance, Drama, Film, Visual Arts, introduced at 
different stages/classes.  

13 
 
 Guidelines for Project Based multi-disciplinary and experiential learning in groups, to promote 
local languages, arts and culture will also be prepared. This can also be a part of the training 
module.  
 Fun Based Learning (Student Appropriate) Tools in Multiple Languages to Promote and 
Popularize Indian Languages, Arts and Culture will be developed. 
 Series of monographs on Indian art forms, architecture, crafts (both in print as well as electronic 
version), training module, films, other textual and visual materials, etc. to be prepared.  
 Guidelines, Teachers’ Handbooks and Exemplars on Art Integrated Learning for Foundational as 
well as Secondary stage (on the lines of primary and upper primary) to be prepared. 
 Capacity building of all teachers of all stages on Art Integrated Learning for experiential and 
competency-based learning. 
 Capacity building of all teacher educators of all DIETs and SCERTs on Art Integrated Learning 
can be done.  
 Kala Utsav and India Toy Fair can be organized annually for giving teachers and students an 
opportunity to explore and experience indigenous art and craft forms of India and to promote 
EBSB. 
 
2.2.4 NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING (NCERT): It 
has been informed that NCERT has been working in the area of Arts Education since the beginning. 
Every National Education Policy and the National Curriculum Framework has recommended Arts 
Education as an essential aspect of School Education from Class I to Class XII. Keeping in view the 
importance of arts in education, in 1967 K.G. Sadayeen Committee was set up to review the status of 
arts education in the country. A major recommendation of the Committee was to set up a separate unit in 
NCERT for promotion of arts and culture in schools. In 2005, a separate Department of Education in 
Arts & Aesthetics had been created in NCERT “to promote all forms of arts in schools by bringing it 
into the mainstream of country’s education system through various activities as development, training, 
research, orientation and to unfold the aesthetic potentialities of children for enabling them to become 
contributing citizens.” 
2.2.4.1In school education there have been three approaches to teaching-learning of Arts which NCERT 
promotes, namely Art as a Curricular area (as a subject) to learn skills of different Visual and 
Performing Arts, as pedagogy to learn different subjects/concepts more effectively through music, 
dance/movement, drama, painting, sculpture, traditional crafts, etc. and to sensitize students about 
various traditional arts as art forms. It has been informed that the efforts of NCERT towards promotion 

14 
 
of art and culture have brought an enormous impact upon the school education and teacher education 
scenario of the country and now the NEP, 2020 has laid a well-defined path to meet the challenge.  
2.2.4.1 NCERT has informed that the following materials have been developed towards Art education:  
 Textbooks: The following textbooks have been prepared for Classes XI and XII. 
 Visual/Fine Arts: An Introduction of Indian Art – Part 1 & 2 (Textbook for Classes XI and 
XII). The Textbooks are prepared with a number of visuals (with QR code) to provide an 
idea about the country’s rich and diverse heritage of around 5000 years.  
 Heritage crafts: i. Living Craft Traditions of India, Textbook for Class XI, ii. Exploring the 
Craft Traditions of India, Field Study and Application in Heritage Crafts for Classes XI 
&XII,  and, iii. Craft Traditions of India: Past, Present and Future, Textbook for Class XII. 
 Graphic Design:i.Story of Graphic Design, Class XI, and, ii. Towards a New Age Graphic 
Design, Textbook for Class XII. 
 Music:(under preparation) i. Hindustani Music, ii. Karnatak/Carnatic Music, iii. 
Tabla/Pakhawaj, and, iv. Mridangam. 
 Teachers’ Handbooks: A series of Handbooks for Primary Classes, Classes VI, VII & VIII, In 
Theatre and Music for Classes VI-VIII, Teachers’ Resource Book, Class IX Multi-media CD on 
Indian Arts (in collaboration with IGNCA), E-contents in all areas of arts/education. 
 Content on Art as Pedagogy - Training Modules/Package: A training package for 
Elementary school teachers (2 Volumes) for Art Integrated Learning, Art Integrated Learning 
Guidelines for Elementary School Education, Art Integrated Learning module for the training 
programme NISHTHA, Training package for Continuous In-service Teacher Professional 
Development in Arts Education for secondary stage under RMSA. Learning Outcomes in Arts 
Education (Classes IX-XII). 
 
 Training: 
 Capacity Building programmes of the Master Tra iners in Art Integrated Learning(AIL) in 
different parts of the country; a pool of Master Trainers (more than 200) has been created so 
far who have been engaged by the States for training of teachers on AIL and many states 
have replicated NCERT model. 
 Professional Development programmes for Master Trainers of KendriyaVidyalayas and 
Navodaya Vidyalaya, NIOS in Arts Education – Music and Visual Arts, and, in different 
states as per their requirement.  

15 
 
 Training all primary teachers of Demonstration Multi -purpose Schools, Regional Institutes 
of Education, NCERT on Art Integrated Learning.  
 Extension Programmes : National Seminars on ‘Status of Arts Education in India: Practices, 
Issues and Challenges’, ‘Practices of Art Integrated Learning’ and a  number of works hops 
were held in collaboration with organizations of Ministry of Culture, National Bal Bhavan 
and other private organizations working in areas of art, education and culture to sensitize 
students, teachers and teacher educators of the country under the Res ource Centre for Arts 
and Crafts, Department of Education in Arts & Aesthetics, NCERT.    
 Kala Utsav:  Kala Utsav is a flagship programme of the Ministry to promote arts in 
education, by nurturing and showcasing the artistic talents of school students in the country, 
recognizing the importance of aesthetics and artistic experiences for secondary-level students 
which plays a major role in creating awareness about India’s rich cultural heritage and its 
vibrant diversity. Kala Utsav is a festival of India’s diverse cultural heritage celebrated as Ek 
Bharat Shreshtha Bharat.  
2.2.5 KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN(KVS): KVS has informed that it has taken 
following steps to Promote  Fine Arts, Performing Arts and Culture Education in KendriyaVidyalayas :- 
 Each Kendriya Vidyalaya has a regular post of trained graduate teacher in Arts Education to 
hone the skills of students in Fine Arts. Competitions in drawing and painting are organized at 
Vidyalayas, Regional and National level to promote the skills of the students.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
 There is provision of engaging services of Vocational Teachers on Contractual Basis for 
imparting skills in craft, dance, music during school hours and after school hours as per need of 
the Vidyalaya. Further, in order to utilize services of the regular TGT Arts Education is 
positioned in the Vidyalaya optimally, vocational instructors with specialization in areas/fields 
other than those of regular teachers are engaged. Emphasis is laid on identification of the interest 
of students and sensitizing them to the local Art, Craft, Culture and to train them to make use of 
locally available material for creative expression.  
 It encourages the institutions and Foundations like CCERT, SPIC MACAY and Routes 2 Roots 
to impart awareness, education and knowledge on Indian culture and Performing Arts including 
classical music, dance and drama among students. Inter school art exhibitions are organized to 
widen the interaction and horizon among students. Students are encouraged to participate in 
study visits to museums, art galleries and art institutions, etc., for greater awareness of the 
environment and cultural variations.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Various days and festivals are observed in Kendriya Vidyalayas to develop appreciation for 
customs and traditions of different States.  

16 
 
 Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat: The concept of KVS Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat is an extensive 
platform for the students to display their creativity, originality, artistic skills, etc. It gives 
students an opportunity to know about the culture, traditions, art and heritage of other States of 
India. All the 25 regions of KVS are paired with a State different from their own State and the 
students prepare projects/exhibits on the culture, customs, dress, agriculture, industry, economy, 
climate & topography, etc. of the State allotted to them. This gives them an opportunity to 
understand the Art & Culture of the paired States, thus imbibing mutual respect towards different 
cultures.  
2.2.6 NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OPEN SCHOOLING (NIOS): It has been informed that NIOS is 
continuously promoting Fine Arts, Performing Arts and Culture Education in different ways. Painting 
Course is being offered at Secondary and Senior Secondary level and Hindustani music and Carnatic 
music at Secondary level. Folk Art course at Secondary level is under development. All courses are 
available in both English and Hindi mediums. Indian Folk Art course is being developed. NIOS is also 
promoting Indian Culture and Heritage for which this subject has already been developed at Secondary 
level and it will help learners to appreciate our glorious and rich cultural heritage. This course consists 
of various aspects of culture like - Language and Literature, Religion and Philosophy, Arts, 
Architecture, Science and Technology, Education and Spread of Indian Culture Abroad. The course at 
Senior Secondary level is under development. 
2.2.6.1 NIOS has started a new stream i.e., Bhartiya Gyan Parampara at Open Basic Education, 
Secondary and Senior Secondary levels for reviving Indian Knowledge Traditions. 15 courses of Indian 
Knowledge Tradition at all three levels of OBE Program have been introduced and this initiation will 
benefit a large section of the society. 
 
 
2.2.6.2 Apart from the abovementioned initiatives, some of the future activities that NIOS has informed 
will be as follows: 
 Promotion of Certificate Courses for Music and Dance under the Vocational Education Program. 
NIOS is having certificate courses like, Sahaj Sangeet Vidya - (Hindustani Music Certificate 
Course); Saral Sangeet Shiksha - (Carnatic Music Certificate course); Dance course    
 Increase in the strength of learners in each course. 
 Increase in the Accredited Institutions and Accredited Vocational Institutes (AVIs), for all 
courses especially for Fine arts and IKT. 
 Promotion of courses through different social media platforms. 

17 
 
 Development of new courses under Indian Knowledge Traditions at Secondary and Secondary 
levels. 
 
2.2.7 As regards the importance of Fine Arts and Performing Arts in making education at all levels more 
enriching, enjoyable and value -oriented and the role envisaged for teachers for promoting such arts in 
education, it has been informed that this has been embedded by NCERT in all textual materials for 
students, training materials and other resources for teachers to use them. Every teacher has to practice 
integration of arts and culture and relate it  to their own subjects and disciplines. CBSE has prescribed 
that a school must plan out in detail the Arts education to be imparted at various levels, and how that Art 
can be integrated with classroom learning of various subjects.  
 
2.2.7.1 The Department has submitted that, in a nutshell, the following initiatives that have been/ are 
being taken in promoting Arts education, in tune with NEP, 2020 objectives:  
 Art Integrated Learning (AIL) teaching-learning model 
 Development of the need-based training package  
 Capacity building of teachers teaching at foundational and secondary stages 
 Art Integrated Learning module being made a mandatory part of NISHTHA initiative  
 Developing ‘Art Integrated Learning -Guidelines for foundational and secondary stages, 
 Making AIL part of LOs in all subjects 
 Conducted qualitative research to study the effectiveness of AIL model on the learning 
environment of a school 
 Conducted online sessions on Art Integrated learning for classes I–V through 
SWAYAMPRABHA 
 Preparation of ‘AIL Exemplars’ and ‘Teachers’ Handbooks’ for teachers of different subjects 
and stages  
 Inclusion of AIL in textbook writing and training materials of all subjects of all stages  
 Periodical seminars and conferences for the practitioners to share their success stories for the 
benefit of others, 
 Follow up with states for its effective implementation (through their textbooks, training of 
teachers and classroom practices) etc. 
 
2.2.8 The Department has also informed that the process of implementing NEP 2020 has been i nitiated 
at NCERT with the strategy of preparing new National Curriculum Framework (NCF) for school 
education. During the deliberations of NCF and its consequent activities, the concerns of NEP, 2020 in 
this regard will be kept in focus. There are 25 theme s identified for the National Curriculum 

18 
 
Frameworks, in light of the concerns of NEP related with school education and two of the themes 
directly address the concerns of promoting arts and culture education in the school; i. Art Education and 
ii. Knowledge of India. 
2.2.9 In respect of measures taken/are proposed to be taken for developing course content for school 
students which are in alignment with University level courses for Fine arts and Performing arts, as 
envisaged in NEP, 2020, the Department has informed that the syllabus in different areas of Visual and 
Performing arts at the Senior Secondary level have been developed in view of upward mobility. The 
courses are discipline based and prepare students with appropriate competence for higher education / 
professional courses (4 years) such as Bachelors in Visual Arts, Design, Fashion Design, Graphic 
Design, Music, Dance etc. in various universities and institutions. However, the courses will be revisited 
and reviewed as one of the post NCF activity and w ill be in light of the NEP 2020 keeping in view the 
linkages between school and higher education. 
 
2.2.10 As regards measures taken to train and develop requisite number of subject teachers in this field 
the Department has informed that a National Mission to improve learning outcomes at the Elementary 
level through an Integrated Teacher Training Programme called NISHTHA – National Initiative for 
School Heads’ and Teachers’ Holistic Advancement has been launched. The aim of this integrated 
teacher training programme is to build the capacities of around 42 lakh teachers and Heads of Schools, 
faculty members of SCERTs and DIETs and Block Resource Coordinators and Cluster Resource 
Coordinators. One of these modules specifically focuses on Art Integrated Learning  with the aim to 
develop: understanding of ‘Arts’ as pedagogical tool and of its impact on the holistic learning and 
development of every child; familiarity with art experiences (different art forms) as medium of 
exploring his/her creative expression; and skill of planning and organizing age -appropriate art 
experiences to make learning of different subjects appealing. A total of 23,137 KRPs and SRPs and 
16,99,931 School Heads and Teachers of elementary schools have been trained under NISHTHA in 
2019-20 in t he pre -lockdown period.  In the wake of the COVID -19 pandemic, the NISHTHA 
programme has been contextualised to the needs of teaching and learning during the pandemic and made 
100% online. NISHTHA Online for elementary teachers was launched on 6 th October, 2020.There are 
18 modules in this programme including a specific module on Art.  
 
2.2.11  On the steps being taken to ensure that courses in Fine arts and Performing arts are seen as a 
viable career option and as a means of providing sustainable and gainful employment by the 
students/society, the Department informed that Career counselling is p rovided to the students to make 
them aware of the career options in the field of Fine Arts and Performing Arts, Art & Music teachers 
provide the guidance to students regarding opportunities and higher education institutes in the field of 

19 
 
Fine Arts and Performing Arts, coordination with various departments of Govt. of India & other NGOs 
to create awareness, encourage participation and promotion of performing and Fine arts through 
different programmes like Kala Utsav, Routes 2 Root, SPIC MACAY, Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat etc, as 
well as competitions being conducted by Govt. of India, State Govts., District Administration, etc. to 
excel in Performing and Fine arts. It has also been informed that more than 25000 schools currently 
affiliated to CBSE offer Art Educ ation as a compulsory subject till class X as well as integrate Arts in 
their pedagogy to teach other main subjects in all classes.  
 
2.2.12 On the issue of the curriculum framework being redesigned in the light of NEP,2020  to 
implement the recommendation s on education of arts, the Department informed that t he Ministry of 
Education has formed the National Steering Committee for the development of National Curriculum 
Frameworks on 21 -9-2021.As per the perspectives of the NEP 2020, the Committee will develop  four 
National Curriculum Frameworks - i.e., the National Curriculum Framework for School Education, 
National Curriculum for Early Childhood Care and Education, National Curriculum Framework for 
Teacher Education and National Curriculum Framework for Adult Education. The Committee will 
finalise National Curriculum Frameworks after incorporating suggestions received from various 
stakeholders. Tenure of the National Steering Committee will be three years from the date of its 
notification. 
 
2.3 DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION, MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
2.3.1 The Department has informed that Universities and colleges are key higher education institutions 
for their preparation and professional development. They are concerned with arts education in general 
and arts teaching in particular. On the basis of the information available on All India Survey on Higher 
Education (AISHE), there are eight(8)specialized Fine Arts universities (both deemed and state public), 
125 public and private universities and117 exclusive colleges and 313 colleges offering programs in the 
discipline of Fine Arts and Performing Arts across the country. The eight exclusive universities (both 
deemed and state public) offering programs in the discipline of Fine Arts which includes Music, 
Performing Arts and Visual Arts are as below:  
List of Exclusive Universities offering Programmes in the Discipline of Fine 
Arts(includes Music, Performing Arts & Visual Arts)  
Sl.
No 
State Name University Name 
University 
Type 
1 Telangana Jawaharlal Nehru Architecture and Fine Arts University 
State 
Public 

20 
 
2 Uttar Pradesh 
Bhatkhande Music Institute 
Deemed 
(Aided) 
3 Karnataka 
Karnataka State Dr. GangubaiHangal Music and 
Performing Arts University 
State 
Public 
4 
Madhya 
Pradesh Raja MansinghTomar Music Arts University 
State 
Public 
5 Tamil Nadu 
The Tamil Nadu Dr. J. Jayalalitha Music and Fine Arts 
University 
State 
Public 
6 Chhattisgarh Indira Kala Sangit Vishwavidyalaya, Khairagarh 
State 
Public 
7 Haryana 
Pandit Lakhmi Chand State University of Performing and 
Visual Arts 
State 
Public 
8 Delhi 
 National Museum Institute of Art History, Conservation 
and Museum of Science 
Deemed 
(Govt) 
 
2.3.2 Also, the universities and colleges offer students myriad education programmes classified into 8  
levels viz. – Ph.D., M.Phil., Post Graduate, Under Graduate, PG Diploma, Diploma, Certificate and 
Integrated. The structure of professional courses in the various disciplines is as below:  
Specified Degrees for the purpose of Section 22 of UGC, Act, 1956 
Fine Arts/Performing Arts/Visual Arts/Applied Arts  
S Abbreviated  Expanded  Level  Minimum 
Duration 
(Years) 
Entry 
Qualification 
1.  BFA Bachelor of Fine arts Bachelor’s 
 
4 10+2 
2.  MFA Master of Fine arts Bachelor’s 2 Bachelor 
3.  BVA Bachelor of Visual 
Arts 
Bachelor’s 4 10+2 
4.  MVA Master of Visual Arts Master’s 2 Bachelor 
5.  BPA Bachelor of 
Performing Arts 
Bachelor 4 10+2 
6.  MPA Master of Performing 
Arts 
Master’s 2 Bachelor 
 

21 
 
2.3.3 University Grants Commission (UGC): It has been informed that t o undertake innovative 
academic programmes on the principles of diversification, relevance and flexibility in relation to the 
local, regional and national needs, UGC has been assisting the universities and colleges in academic and 
curricular reforms in the field of Performing and Fine Arts education.  
2.3.3.1The key initiatives undertaken by UGC which have been informed are: 
 UGC NET Examination: NET examination is conducted in the subject of Visual Arts- drawing 
& painting, Performing Arts-dance/drama/theatre and music, since the inception of UGC-NET, 
1989.The field of music being vast, encompasses Hindustani, Classical, Carnatic, Rabindra 
Sangeet and Percussion, the syllabus of NET includes all these branches. Substantial increase in 
arts educational experience has remarkable impacts on students’ academic, social and emotional 
outcomes. Also, curricular reforms on learning outcome-based approach in Visual and 
Performing Arts have been outlined with an aim to equip the students with knowledge, skill, 
values and attitude. 
 e-PG Pathshala: It is an initiative under National Mission on Education through Information 
and Communication Technology (NME-ICT) and is being executed by UGC to develop high 
quality, curriculum based interactive e-content. Nearly 560 e-Content (e-text/video/learn 
more/self-assessment) modules for the students/teachers have been developed in accordance to 
Indian University syllabus under the subject Performing Arts (Dance/Drama/Theatre).This         
e-content is freely available at the UGC e-PG Pathshala website at https://epgp.inflibnet.ac.in/. 
 Learning Outcome based Curriculum Framework (LOCF):The quality mandate of the UGC 
has given thrust on curriculum reforms on learning outcome-based approach with an aim to 
equip the students with knowledge, skill values and attitude. The Learning Outcome based 
Curriculum Framework for Bachelor of Fine Arts (Painting, Applied Arts and Sculpture, etc.) 
and Bachelor of Performing Arts (Music, Dance and Theatre) are 4year degree programmes 
designed to impart arts education to be specific, systematic and on par with professional courses. 
Thus, the curriculum emphasizes the need to revitalize existing courses in various institutions 
and open areas of non-developed possibilities. 
 Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) for SWAYAM: It has been informed that 
SWAYAM has been initiated to bridge the digital divide for students who have hitherto 
remained untouched by the digital revolution and have not been able to join the mainstream of 
the knowledge economy.UGC as a National Coordinator for the Non-Technology MOOCs, 
repurposed the existing e-Content into MOOCs for the Course Natya Shastra under the 
subject Performing Arts, and it was offered on the SWAYAM Platform by the Consortium of 

22 
 
Educational Communication (CEC), an Inter-University Centre of UGC, during the January-
May-2020 Semester.  
 STRIDE: UGC has introduced Scheme for Trans-Disciplinary Research for India’s Developing 
Economy (STRIDE) which will strengthen research culture and innovation in Higher Education 
Institutions and help students and faculty to contribute for the national development. The thrust 
areas of research are Performing Arts, Visual Arts and Cultural Studies. 
2.3.3.2The Department has informed that the central purpose of setting up of exclusive Art and Culture 
Universities/Colleges is for the education of art professionals with full mastery of their field, and the 
orientation of its teaching and research activities towards creative arts production, which contributes to 
the expansion of knowledge, the promotion of culture and the development of creative economies in the 
national context. 
2.3.3.3On the role of UGC in granting recognition to Arts/crafts courses in Colleges/Universities and 
developing the course content, it has been informed that UGC does not grant approval or recognition to 
the courses. UGC has specified the nomenclature of degrees under Section 22 of UGC Act, 1956.In 
order to maintain uniform policy in Art education at national level, make curriculum more flexible and 
to promote mobilization of students in other universities for the sake of connectivity, UGC has framed 
Learning Outcomes based Curricular Framework (LOCF) for undergraduate programmes in Visual and 
Performing Arts. The essential guidelines for setting up of a course curriculum is to provide flexibility 
and innovation for faculty members in terms of course delivery and the Dep artment/University/Institute 
may encourage its faculty to make suitable pedagogical innovations, in addition to teaching/learning 
processes suggested in the LOCF recommendation. The objectives and organizing principles should be 
finalized keeping in view t he local, regional, national, and global contexts of creation, appreciation, and 
evaluation without modifying the spirit of CBCS and LOCF prepared by UGC. The outcomes will be 
determined in terms of skills, knowledge, understanding, employability, graduate  attributes, attitudes, 
values, etc., gained by students upon the completion of the course of Visual and Fine Arts. 
2.3.3.4 The Department has also informed that no study/survey has been conducted by UGC regarding 
Art integrated studies of other countries and presently, there is no such proposal to carry out such study 
at UGC level before rolling out NEP, 2020. However, several empirical studies and research conducted 
establishes strong evidence of an exciting convergence between the developmental values of  art long 
recognized by indigenous traditions with the findings of modern child development and education 
pedagogies. Further, there exists relationship between sound/music, movement/dance, 
space/architecture, values/stories, symbols/identity from traditional art practices and modern educational 
theories on the value of the Arts as a way of learning and development. Implementation plan for NEP, 

23 
 
2020 emphasizes the change of Art integrated Studies in the university curriculum to provide standard 
education across the country. Arts education in the university should be that of students and teachers 
entering the institutions of learning have exposure to Performing Arts either for cultural pursuit or 
professional competence. Opportunities for appreciating Music, Dance and Theatre Arts are to be 
provided at every stage of human development and the general education philosophy should recognize 
this requirement for leading a creative life. It is felt that education in Arts should provide for different 
disciplines as well as opportunities of learning by itself. 
2.3.3.5 It has been submitted that UGC is at the forefront in chalking out a path for developing 
curriculum in all arts disciplines, and provide  benchmarks for what students should know, understand, 
and be able to do in dance, music, theatre, and visual arts at critical junctures in their intellectual, 
physical, and emotional development. Implementation Plan of NEP is being finalized. The teaching and 
learning in the arts on the following aspects needs consideration: 
 Supporting the Arts Curriculum  
 Enhancing Educator Quality, Preparation, and Professional Learning in the Arts Producing High-
Quality Arts Assessment, Research, and Evidence   
 Ensuring Equity and Access  
 Strengthening Collaborative Relationships  
 Expanding the Role of Business and Industry in the Creative Workforce  
 Providing Funding for the Arts 
2.3.4 National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE): NCTE has informed that vide its Notification 
dated 28 th November 2014, it has notified the Norms and Standards of  Diploma in Arts Education 
(Visual Arts) Programme leading to Diploma in Arts Education (Visual Arts) (Appendix -
11) and Diploma in Arts Education (Performing Arts) Programme leading to Diploma in Arts Education 
(Performing arts) (Appendix -12).  The Diploma in Arts Education (Visual Arts)  is a professional pre -
service Teacher education programme which aims to prepare teachers to teach Visual Arts upto Class 8. 
The Diploma in Arts Education (Performing Arts)  is a professional pre -service teacher e ducation 
programme which aims to prepare teachers to teach Performing Arts upto Class 8. Also, NCTE has 
granted recognition to 10 Institutions for running Diploma in Arts Education (Visual Arts)  and 18 
institutions for running Diploma in Arts Education (Performing Arts). 
2.3.5 Regarding its proposals to integrate Arts, music, theatre, dance etc. with other subjects/streams in 
the holistic and multi-disciplinary education system, particularly in the Multidisciplinary Education and 
Research Universities (MERU s), as envisaged in NEP 2020 , the Department of Higher Education has 
informed that N EP 2020 envisages separate Departments in universities/colleges in fields such as 

24 
 
Music, Art, Dance, Theatre, Sports, Translation and Interpretation, and other such subjects needed for a 
multidisciplinary, stimulating Indian education and environment, which will be established and 
strengthened at all HEIs. Further, Model public universi ties for holistic and multidisciplinary education, 
at par with IITs, IIMs, etc., called MERUs (Multidisciplinary Education and Research Universities) will 
be set up and will aim to attain the highest global standards in quality education. They will also he lp set 
the highest standards for multidisciplinary education across India. Implementation Plan of NEP is being 
prepared on Multidisciplinary and Holistic Education, which will layout the roadmap to fulfil this 
objective. Several State Universities, Central Universities, deemed to be universities and Colleges which 
have departments of Performing Arts and Fine Arts have Documentation and Research Centres, Centres 
of Visual Arts, Fine Arts and Performing Arts to conduct research, recording studios for recordin g 
Music, Video Films and Photography Labs/Digital Labs.  
2.3.6   In respect of measures being taken to train and develop requisite number of faculty in the field of 
Arts and crafts, it has been informed that UGC has been making proactive efforts to upgrade  the 
knowledge and skills of teachers of Performing Arts and Visual Arts in higher education institutions. 
Orientation and refresher courses are organised periodically for in service faculty members. So far, the 
UGC has established, and funds a network of  66 Human Resource Development Centres across the 
country. As regards faculty positions in the discipline of Fine Arts, it has been informed that as per 
information available on AISHE Portal 2019 -20, there are a total (All Discipline) 1352679 Sanctioned 
Strength of Teachers & 1207204 Teachers are in Position, i.e., 89.25% Teachers in Position in 
Universities and Colleges. 
2.4   Film and Television Institute of India, Pune, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(FTII): With regard to disseminating cultural  education through Performing Arts, FTII has informed 
that t he 2 -year Screen Acting Course is offered, which falls under the category of Performing Arts. 
Under Centre for Open Learning (CFOL), which is the outreach arm of FTII, in the past 4 years, FTII 
has conducted 41 Online & Offline Short Courses on Acting, which includes 14 courses for Children 
and 4 further specialized courses on Comic Acting. These courses were conducted in big cities and 
metros and more than 900 learners have benefited from them. It  has also been informed that FTII falls 
under Professional Education in the “stand -alone institutions in other fields” mentioned in Part III, that 
is, ‘Other Key areas of focus’ in the  National Educational Policy (NEP), 2020 and  FTII offers 3 -2-1 
year academic programmes, all at Post Graduate level. In the present structure, FTII awards either a 
Certificate or a Diploma to its students.  FTII submits that the possibility of an undergraduate 3 -year 
Course in VFX and Animation in collaboration with a University is being explored.  
2.4.1 FTII has also informed that it is willing to provide technical and academic support to States, Union 
Territories, Academic Institutions, Universities, etc. towards starting courses in various disciplines of 

25 
 
Films and Television. Further, short courses are being conducted throughout the country in association 
with State Governments/Universities/Educational Institutes, Indian Army, etc. It has also been informed 
that t here is no placement cell at FTII. However, during th e course of study, students are trained to 
become freelance professionals. Also, students are introduced to a casual network of alumni and 
industry professionals that enable them to find a suitable work environment in the industry. Moreover, 
some departments/specializations do invite production houses to interview students for their projects. 
 
3. DEPOSITION OF WITNESSES  
3.1. MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
3.1.1 Secretary, Ministry of Culture addressed the main concern of the Committee for integration of 
art and culture into the formal educational system of the country to spread awareness about their 
importance amongst the youth, particularly the student community . He expressed that the cultural 
heritage of a country is the creative potential for the building of a creative economy. In last few years , 
many successful steps have been taken in this regard, but a lot remains to be completed. Against this 
backdrop, some suggestions were put forth whereby cultural values could be integrated into the formal 
educational system through which art and cultural values could be introduced to the new generation. 
3.1.2 He underlined the need for investing in propagation of Indian Culture by way of building more 
Museums and other centres through enhanced funding . Comparing with the budgetary provisions 
allocated for this purpose in China, Secretary highlighted that whereas China spends 5% of its GDP on 
such activities, India spends only 0.5% of its GDP, although our culture and civilization is much older 
than China. China opens 100 Museums every year as compared to 10 Museums opened by India.   
3.1.3 Emphasizing upon the importance of the subject, he mentioned that the role of Fine a rts and 
Performing arts education should be to create an awareness of local cultural manifestations and integrate 
it with curriculum and pedagogical practices in schools and colleges.  Also, the study of the 
environment and its influence on creativity shou ld form part of art education and the syllabus. He also 
apprised the Committee that the role of arts education should be to provide school students an 
opportunity to develop sensitivity and creativity through learning of Fine arts  and Performing arts to 
prepare the youth not only for participation in the cultural life, but it is a recognized fact by 
educationists that creative activities sharpen the intellect and lengthen the concentration span of the 
child thus improving all-round standards, including academics.  
3.1.4 The Secretary lauded the National Education Policy (NEP), 2020 as a path breaking effort in this 
regard. He emphasized that the vision of Arts Education outlined by the National Education Policy, 

26 
 
2020 , if implemented with due coordination be tween all the Stakeholder Ministries, with a clear 
roadmap , can bring about a remarkable change in the scenario of arts Education at all levels. 
3.1.5 He also mentioned as how various bodies/ organizations under the Ministry of Culture like 
Centre for Cul tural Resources and Training (CCRT), Kalakshetra Foundation, Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for Arts, Buddhist/Tibetan Institutions, etc. are promoting cultural education through their 
Schemes/ Fellowships.  He stressed that a composite Education policy, wi th adequate stress on 
Performing and Fine arts will be able to take these initiatives much further.   
3.1.6 Secretary mentioned that promotion of skilling courses for cultural workers on the pattern of 
those available for masons, carpenters, electricians, plumbers, etc. can help develop skilled manpower in 
the field of Arts. He informed that CCRT has undertaken research in this field and has worked out 
methodologies also which can be included in a formal educational structure. He also apprised the 
Committee about some of the hurdles being faced in this area, e.g. after receiving training from the 
CCRT on Fine Arts, when CCRT trained teachers wish to implement the teaching – learning activities in 
the school, they face administrative problems such as non -cooperation and permission of the school 
heads. He also highlighted the fact that since a unified syllabus inclu sive of art, is not recommended by 
the Education Departments to schools, consequently, availability of resource materials at grass root level 
is also a genuine problem in Fine Arts Education. 
3.1.7 Secretary apprised the Committee that the Ministry of Cult ure is working on the protection, 
development and promotion of the country’s tangible and intangible cultural heritage and all the 
autonomous institutions under the aegis of Ministry have opined that there is a need of inclusive 
curriculum even from the pr imary level schooling as the ability to appreciate arts and aesthetics would 
indirectly transform the growth of a student positively in the long run. He opined that it is important to 
extend opportunity to the students to get trained in gaining qualities o f ‘appreciation, critique, analysis, 
creativity, discussion and dissemination’ especially in the field of art and culture and curriculum of 
school and college education should reflect such a qualitative turn. Kalakshetra Foundation , Indira 
Gandhi National Centre for Arts  and Buddhist, Tibetan institutions  which run several schemes like 
scholarship, fellowships,grantsto encourage the education of Fine Arts andPerforming Arts.  However, it 
is a miniscule effort and unless it is amplified under the National Education Policy, it will remain a part 
of Ministry of Culture and the end objective will remain elusive.  
3.1.8 Lastly, Secretary raised the pertinent question of the availability of financial resources. There is 
lack of financial resources or resource pe rsons or basic amenities or infrastructure available for 
education of Art s. In this era of IT, educational pedagogy mechanisms are also not fully developed. 
Finally, owing to the lack of adequate teachers, schools may refuse to share them for the education of art 

27 
 
and culture. In such a scenario, digital technology may be extensively used for imparting teaching of the 
arts. Secretary laid emphasis on the need to build a strong will to promote the education of arts. 
3.2 Organizations under Ministry of Culture 
3.2.1 Lalit Kala Akademi:The Secretary-in-charge, Lalit Kala Akademi explained to the Committee 
how Lalit Kala Akademi is different from other visual art organizations. They have studio facilities 
where students can get a hands-on experience as well as provision for community studios and individual 
studios where artists of professional category can work. They also provide internship programme for 
one or two months to students in various art forms. He, then, replied to some of the queries raised by the 
Members. A video based on Mithila artist was also played. 
3.2.2 Sangeet Natak Akademi: The Director, Sangeet NatakAkademi apprised the Committee about 
the scheme wherein they undertake survey, research, documentation and publication of various songs 
and dance forms. She mentioned about the Museum of Musical Instruments where students are invited 
for tours. She explained to the Committee about the workshops being organised for manufacturing 
musical instruments and the training programmes run under the Guru Shishya Parampara for Arts that 
are becoming extinct. The Director also informed about “ Deshaj”, which is a festival series conducted 
zone-wise including all folk arts and traditional arts, and this could be extended to schools and colleges 
as well.  
3.3 MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
3.3.1 Department of School Education and Literacy : The Additional Secretary, Department of 
School Education and Literacy apprised the Committee that t he N ational Education Policy (2020)  
emphasizes the importance of promoting Indian languages, arts and culture. Therefore, a  chapter 
exclusively focuses on this aspect (chapter 22) along withthe chapter on Curriculum and Pedagogy in 
Schools (Chapter 4) highlighting the integration of these a spects throughout the curriculum. He also 
mentioned that in school educat ion, there are three approaches to teaching, learning of arts which 
NCERT promotes; (i) art as a curricular area (as a subject), to learn skills of different visual and 
Performing art s, (ii) arts as pedagogy, to learn different subjects/concepts more effectively through 
music, dance/movement, drama, painting, sculpture, traditional crafts, etc. and (iii) to sensitize students 
about various traditional arts as art forms.  
3.3.2 NCERT/NIOS: The representatives from NCERT apprised the Committee of the education 
policy and curricular materials prepared for integration of arts in visual/ lesson and exercise form. They 
threw light upon the Art Integrated Learning (AIL) programme for capacity building of master trainers 
and for training of teachers of music and Fine arts of KVS, NVS, NIOS etc.  Kala Utsav Programme for 

28 
 
promoting arts education and to showcase the artistic talent of secondary students was also emphasized 
upon.  Data relating to school-student participation in arts, music and dance was also presented before 
the Committee. Certain issues faced by NCERT/ NIOS relating to the above subject were also 
mentioned. Implementation status of NEP 2020 and initiatives undertaken therein were also deliberated 
upon. 
3.3.4 Department of Higher Education 
3.3.4.1 The Additional Secretary, Department of Higher Education apprised the Committee of the 
salient features of NEP 2020 and also gave a definition of Fine arts including music, dance, painting, 
sculpture, architecture, poetry and literature. He also threw light upon the festivals in Universities/ 
Colleges and some key results/ features of the All India Survey of Higher Education State-wise. 
3.3.4.2 He also state d that efforts are being made to provide education with a combination of 
knowledge, traditions and Indian practices in coordination with UGC and NCERT. Also, AICTE is 
providing facilities for education of Fine arts in Universities/Colleges. Further, to bet ter “Using Arts in 
Teaching”, education is being made contractual through arts and culture. Activities such as ‘Azadi ka 
Amrit Mahotsava’, ‘Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat’ etc. are also being focused upon to motivate students 
at higher levels of education. It was also informed that in 10 States having 19 colleges of art education, 
education in 6 regional languages is also being imparted to the students for which related material is also 
being provided to them. 
3.3.4.3 The Additional Secretary, Department of Hig her Education also informed that NCERT has 
developed an Artificial Intelligence based tool which has a unique feature of translating 8 different 
regional languages with 80% accuracy. It was also informed that SWAYAM platform has MOOCS 
(Massive Open Online Courses) relating to each and every field including fine art education in 13 
different languages.  
3.4 Indira  Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) 
3.4.1 Director of School of Performing and Visual Arts  (SOVPA), IGNOU highlighted the fact that 
the vision and philosophy of School is the all -round development of knowledge in arts education and 
Fine arts  and which should get importance at par with theoretical and practical dimensions of the 
discipline with integration at undergraduate and post -graduate level, possibilities of research, leading to 
the degrees of Ph.D. and D.Litt.  It was also informed that  in spite of a number of undergraduate level 
art institutions in the country that impart technical skills and training in arts, these do not provide 
opportunities to a large number of students who aspire to be artists. He also threw light upon the 
mandate of SOPVA which offers specialized Certificate, Diploma, Under Graduate, Post Graduate, M. 

29 
 
Phil and Ph.D. level programmes in Performing and Visual Arts for which the school is also developing 
its programmes through ODL, an Online mode and is being offered from established Programme Study 
Centres across the Country.  
3.4.2 Director, SOPVA also informed that at present the School is offering the programmes such as 
Ph.D. in Performing and Visual Arts (Dance, Drama, Music, Fine arts ), Masters in Drawing and 
Painting, Certificate Programme in Theatre Arts, Certificate Programme in Applied Art etc. He also 
apprised the Committee that the School is in the process of initiating various new programmes in 
performing and visual arts with innovative methods of teaching,  learning, pedagogy with an aim to 
reach more and more learners in the field. 
3.5 Jamia Millia Islamia University 
3.5.1 The representatives from the Faculty of Fine arts, Jamia Millia Islamia while deposing before the 
Committee stated that Reforms in the Education of Fine arts is an ongoing process and in India, Fine 
arts education has incorporated the Indian knowledge of art and contemporary art practices. It was also 
informed that the concept of “ Learning by Doing Education” in Fine arts stresses the studio practice as 
an essential aspect wherein the students learn from the teacher and the art practice of their fellow 
students.  Well -equipped studios need to be upgraded according to environmental requirements. 
Therefore, reforms in the design of studios according to eco-friendly demands are urgently needed. 
3.5.2They also highlighted the need to reform the Fine Arts curriculum beyond the aesthetic and cultural 
activity along with need to accept it as a professional course to provide wider research -oriented, market-
friendly cultural activity. It was also emphasized that uniformity in curriculum, syllabus and art 
practices is needed to upgrade it to secondary education. In addition, the syllabus needs to incorporate 
the role of museums, galleries, archives in art education. As universities are the places of high learning, 
each Fine arts  faculty should have an art galler y, archives, and documentation centres to develop art 
historical research. Thus, universities can also create new courses like art administration, art 
management, and curatorial practices.  
4. In order to have a firsthand assessment/ get feedback on the is sues that are being confronted by 
the Organizations/ Institutes, which have been at the forefront of providing Performing and Fine Arts 
education in the country and  the student community, the Committee had visited them and the 
submissions of such organizations are as under:  
4.1 Kalakshetra Foundation, Chennai 
4.1.1 The Committee was informed that it was established by Rukmini Devi Arundale in 1936 and 
taken over by the Government of India in 1993 vide an Act of Parliament and as on date it had been 

30 
 
declared an Institution of National Importance. The Committee was informed that Kalakshetra 
Foundation had institutionalized the training of Bharatnatyam in the country and today consists of 
Rukmini Devi College of Fine arts , Crafts Education and Research Centre, Besant Arundale Senior 
Secondary School, Besant Theosophical Higher Secondary School and Besant Cultural Centre Hostel. 
4.1.2 The Committee was informed that a colonial hangover in the field of Performing arts persists in 
the country and Kalakshetr a Foundation was making all efforts to revive and preserve the traditional 
Indian art forms. It was informed that folk art and artistes need to be given recognition to preserve their 
art forms and to give them financial support. Further, the education of Performing arts  needs to be 
included at school level to help generate a level of interest and knowledge in the students. 
4.1.3 The Committee was informed that a proposal to amend the Act of Parliament was under 
consideration to grant permission to Kalakshet ra Foundation to award Graduate and Post -
Graduate/Doctorate degrees. 
4.2 Film and Television Institute of India (FTII), Pune 
4.3.1 The Director and faculty of Film and Television Institute of India, senior artistes and technicians 
informed the Committee th at FTII falls under Professional Education in the “stand-alone institutions in 
other fields” mentioned in Part III of the NEP 2020, that is, ‘Other Key areas of focus', and in the 
present structure, FTII awards either a Certificate or a Diploma to its stud ents. FTII awaits Institute of 
National Importance status to award degrees for implementing the National Education Policy in a 
similar fashion to that of degree awarding Higher Education Institutions. It was further informed that 
FTII conducts courses in p artnership with State Governments (Maharashtra, Uttarakhand etc.), Union 
Territories (J&K, Ladakh, A&N Islands) and the Indian Army.   
4.3.2 The Committee was further informed that Film making, apart from its entertainment value is also 
an educational tool, and it should be included in the school curriculum as has been done by several 
countries like USA, France, Australia etc. It was further informed that the technology needed in this 
field was very costly and required constant upgradation. Therefore, a  lot of research was required to 
develop low-cost solutions for this field, and this was only possible with adequate budgetary support. 
4.3 Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (BORI), Pune  
4.3.1 The Chairman and faculty of Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute apprised the Committee on 
the steps to be taken for promotion of Indology & Oriental studies and for the promotion of research and 
preservation of manuscripts. The Committee was informed that the Institute was established in the year 
1917 and was  today home to more than 153,000 rare books and 28,000 manuscripts. BORI has also 
taken initiative to facilitate vast original research for over a century. Indology was gradually becoming 

31 
 
multidisciplinary, and investigation of the ancient Indian systems w as now being done using modern 
tools. The Institute in its centenary year decided to focus on evolving itself in a new direction with 
world class digital eco -system based on the three pillars of digital library, digital learning, and digital 
humanities. Thereafter, the steps taken by the Institute based on the digital eco -system were briefed to 
the Committee. It was informed that the Institute operates mostly through private grants and would want 
to continue doing the same. However, they had approached the government for a one -time endowment 
grant to enlarge the scope of its operations and strengthen infrastructure.  
4.3.2 Further, the Committee was briefed on the steps needed to promote Indology &Orientology  
education, which should be based upon developing the requisite infrastructure, promotion of research 
through adequate funding, and communication with the world at large using digital modes of 
information dissemination. In fact, BORI followed this very model and resultantly its courses were 
highly sought after by people living in different parts of the country and abroad.  
4.4 Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya Mandal, Vashi campus, Navi Mumbai 
4.4.1 The management and faculty of the institution established by Pt. Vishnu Digambar Paluskar,  
briefed about its glorious history of 80 years and informed that Gandharva  Mahavidyalaya Mandal 
works for the promotion and propagation of Indian Classical Music and Dances with its main Sangeet 
Vidyalaya in Vashi, Navi Mumbai and has nearly 1200 affiliat ed institutions and nearly 800 
Examination Centres all over the country from Assam to interiors of South Kerala and more than one 
lakh students take examinations every year from Prarambhik (Beginners level) to Sangeet Acharya  
(Ph.D. level). 
4.4.2 On the su bject of promotion of Performing arts education in the country, the faculty of Akhil 
BharatiyaGandharvaMahavidyalaya emphasised on the following points --  
 Children should be imparted the knowledge of Indian Performing arts like dance, music, 
instruments etc. from an early age and continue throughout their school life i.e. from Class 
I to XII. This will not only help them appreciate and understand Performing arts but also 
motivate them to take it up as a vocation; 
 Music cannot be taught like other subjects with hourly period system. Gurukul system 
should be introduced; 
 There should be provision of flexible syllabus, which is otherwise focused only on 
completion of the course. The Syllabus should include components such as Sadhana, 
Practical, Guided Listening, Discussion, Library work, Appreciation, Interaction with 
artists, Presentation, Verbal Expression, Language ability. 

32 
 
 Essential/desirable educational qualifications for recruitment as teachers to different 
universities/colleges/schools should be more liberal by giving more weightage to the 
accomplishments in the field of Performing arts; 
 The traditional system of evaluation must be replaced with a new system; 
 Western and other influences in the Indian classical art should be minimized to preserve its 
sanctity;  
 Classical music appreciation by trained listeners is gradually on the wane. This will need 
to be addressed to promote Indian music; and  
 Setting up of Research Institute and World Music Learning Centre in Pune, a Kathak 
University in either Varanasi or Lucknow on similar lines as Visva Bharati at Shanti 
Niketan in West Bengal, and Indian Institutes of Music on similar lines of IITs.  
4.4.3 The Committee was further informed that Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya Mandal was 
yet be recognized by the University Grants Commission, although a number of legal pronouncements by 
different courts, and even by the Supreme Court of India, had been made in favour of it. Non -
recognition by UGC was  causing great hardships to the students as they are rendered ineligible for 
appointment to government jobs. 
4.5 Sir J.J. School of Arts, Mumbai University 
4.5.1 The Dean and faculty of Sir J.J. School of Arts informed the Committee that the school had com e 
into being in 1857 under the name J.J. School of Art and Industry influenced by the need to preserve 
Indian craft practices, and made possible by the munificence of the Sir Jamshetjee Jeejeebhoy. Today , 
the Institution comprises of Sir J.J. School of Art, Sir J.J. College of Architecture and Sir J.J. Institute of 
Applied Art.  
4.5.2 Dwelling further, it was informed that in the present system Art, Architecture and Design 
pedagogy have all been clubbed under the purview of 'Technical Education' whereas these fields of 
knowledge were the outcome of both technology and social sciences. Therefore, 
Art/Architecture/Design Education should each have its own stand -alone vertical stream, and not be 
placed under the current technical stream. The Committee was also briefed about the steps taken by the 
Institution for the preservation of local art and handicrafts.  
4.5.3 Explaining the difference between art and craft and the need for granting recognition to local 
artists, it was clarified that there was an urgent need to address this issue as the field of Indian art was 

33 
 
still to overcome the colonial effect and institutional efforts in this direction towards its correction were 
being made. 
4.5.4  The Committee was informed that the 'De -novo Deemed to be University' status to the Institution 
had been proposed by the State Government of Maharashtra  to UGC and the proposal was under 
consideration of the Ministry of Education. 
4.6 Vrindaban Gurukul, (Institute established by Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia), Mumbai 
4.6.1 The Institute impressed upon the Committee the need for increase in performances by artistes to 
help them showcase their art to the people. It was submitted that this would consequently increase the 
awareness of the people towards Indian classical art and heritage. The faculty of the institution cited the 
example of ‘Festivals of India’ organised by the Indian Council for Cultural Relations in other countries 
which was a great initiative to promote Indian Performing arts abroad. There should be a number of 
youth festivals, zonal, state and national level music competitions for true talents to be harnessed. 
 
4.6.2 The Committee was further briefed on the need to include lessons on Indian art and heritage in the 
school textbooks which will help inculcate the desired values in the students at an early age. The efforts 
made by institutes involved in imparting Performing Arts education through specialized old standards 
for teaching with emphasis on practical training, and where Industry experts & Maestros are teachers 
and mentors, and not just academicians, must be recognized by the Government. Institutes like 
Vrindaban Gurukul are unique in this endeavour and should be wholeheartedly supported as they have 
demonstrated effective pedagogy towards becoming performing artistes, not just degree holders.  
 
4.6.3 Likewise, efforts should be made to ensure a level of job and financial security for the artistes to 
motivate the students and parents to take up Performing arts as a viable career option. Such 
opportunities can be created directly for them to work as performing artists (through organizing more 
festivals and concerts) or as mentors (teaching in Performing Arts schools and Institutes), or indirectly 
to pursue alternative careers which can support the music learning process. The musical instruments 
manufacturing industry requires financial support from the Government to further its cause as well as 
facilitate students of Music for purchasing them at a reasonable cost. The use of digital platforms for 
imparting education in Indian music as well as showcasing performances needs to be incentivized to 
generate more footfalls and promote its cause. 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
4.7 Whistling Woods International (Film School), Mumbai 
4.7.1 The representative of the organization briefed the Committee on the issues that need to be 
addressed for the growth of Performing arts, media and entertainment education in the country. The lack 
of a proper framework for media and entertainment education in the country under the government 
structure was lamented, as well as the lack of proper research and d evelopment in the field, inadequate 
media labs, improper publicity of our traditional arts and wrongful categorization of creative visual arts 
disciplines under 'Technical Education'. 
4.7.2  On the issue of high cost of film education, it was noted that as this field was very much 
technology driven, the cost of film education is largely dependent on the cost of technology and digital 
means of education.  
4.8 National Gallery of Modern Art (NGMA), New Delhi 
4.8.1 The Director General, NGMA conveyed to the Committee that there is no negative in art and art 
education should focus on creation of positive vibrations in society. He mentioned that art is integral to 
education under Indian culture and cited the example of the ancient university of Nalanda where many 
international students came to learn art education. Western norms are so deeply entrenched in the art 
history taught in art colleges that they are taken to be universally applicable. This needs to be changed. 
The revamped curriculum for Indian Fine Arts education must include the study of classical literature 
and ancient texts on Indian painting. He expressed his view that the thought process of younger 
generation is quite different from that of the older generation and the environment and the viewpoint 
have changed with visit to art centres coming to be associated with elitism and there appears to be a 
detachment between common people and art. Therefore, study trips to sites like Ajanta, Ellora, Bagh, 
Badami, and several other historical places must be a compulsory part of the curriculum. 
 
4.8.2The Kala Bhavana blueprint must guide the teaching -methodology. The importance of being close 
to nature, of fostering strong inter -personal relationships, and a sense of community between teachers 
and students cannot be overstated. Students must be encouraged to exchange their ideas in freewheeling 
conversations, in an open environment that encourages ingenuity, innovation, and imagination. The 
experiment of Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore, is an example of the possibility of inculcating various 
aspects of art through nature and its ever changing and creative innovations. Art college teachers must 
be encouraged not only to foster talent, but also spot poten tial artists and nurture them, much in the 
same way as the Special Areas Games Programme conducted by the Sports Authority of India. 
 

35 
 
4.8.3 The necessity of communing with nature for independent, creative learning cannot be overstated. 
Aranya Shiksha, or a meditative internship of six months deep in the heart of a forest should be another 
important component of the curriculum. During this period students would be encouraged to develop an 
organic relationship with the natural world, experiment with forest resources, and use unconventional 
material for their art-projects. The final assessment should be based on the successful completion of the 
internship. 
 
4.8.4 A student at the Art College must be trained in a wide range of subjects: architecture, sculpture, 
painting, printmaking, miniatures, photography and curation and installation -work. Architecture, a 
spatial art, must be accorded due importance. The study of traditional Indian architecture and its use of a 
wide variety of materials, such as wood, brick, t erracotta, and a variety of stones, ranging from pale 
yellow to red sandstone, grey and black granite, black schist, green chlorite, and white marble is equally 
relevant today. An aspiring sculptor must learn the stonemason's art of cutting stone slabs tha t led to the 
creation of magnificent rock-cut sculptures. 
 
4.8.5 He mentioned that the role of good teachers in art education cannot be discounted and the 
creative alchemy of theory and practice would receive a game-changing push in the right direction if 
students could be mentored by a senior artist for a minimum period of six months.  
 
4.8.6 He lamented that no proper respect is being given to the indigenous artists and it is high time 
they should be included in the mainstream education system. It must be remembered that most great 
artists learnt the basics of their art-form from the village potter and other artisans. He also suggested the 
need for children’s focus to be driven towards Fine arts and promotion of art created by womenfolk in 
villages mentioning that these women have no career prospect as they are not properly educated. He also 
submitted that sustained efforts are required to develop indigenous art and to promote such artists from 
the grassroots level by incorporating artists in modern art education.  
4.8.7 It was also conveyed that creation of a museum space, where important works of its own alumni 
could be displayed, is the need of the hour, and wherever possible, an open air space for art installations 
could also be created. A deeper engagement with cutting edge curatorial practices is the need of the 
hour, and could be taught through museum residencies and attachments.  
 
4.8.8 The envisioning of modernity in a specifically Indian context should be the mission of every art -
college. Nationalist artists like Nandalal Bose used art as a medium of visual communication during the 
struggle for freedom. In contemporary India, the role of art in nation -building must be acknowledged 

36 
 
and promoted. Developing a transformational curriculum for art -colleges that aligns itself with national 
goals and aspirations must be accorded utmost priority. 
 
 
4.9 Kathak Kendra, Delhi 
  
4.9.1 Representatives of Kathak Kendra informed the Committee about its functioning and its various 
academic/ other activities, the possibility of integration of the classical dance form with modern forms 
of art, steps taken to teach Kathak in different parts o f the country, steps taken by the dance community 
to engage children, promotion of small dance centres, exploring the possibility of telling of stories on 
national heroes through Kathak. 
 
4.9.2 The e x-Chairperson, Advisory Committee, Kathak Kendra submitte d that Kathak dancers are 
‘Sadhaks’ and do not view Kathak dance as a form of entertainment. However, in modern times, in 
order to promote the dance form, the Kathak dance form has also evolved as a form of entertainment. 
Vidushi Nalini Asthana, Senior Kat hak Artist informed the Committee that Art, Literature and Culture 
are essential parts of our society and emphasized that Kathak dance is a great cultural ambassador. She 
also mentioned that Kathak dance helps in enhancing memory power and hence, it should be included as 
a subject in schools.  
 
4.10 National School of Drama(NSD), New Delhi 
4.10.1The Committee interacted with the officials and artistes/students of NSD from three perspectives--
Content of Courses, Education in Theatre Art and Reforms required to promote such activities.  The 
artistes of the TIE (Theatre in Education) Company informed that they work with and perform for 
children with primary focus on creative, curriculum based and participative plays and conducting theatre 
workshops in Delhi and other parts of the country. They informed that they also conduct summer camps 
and Sunday clubs for children. They mentioned that these theatre workshops are based mainly on the 
socio-psychological issues related to children like loneliness, fear, performanc e stress, etc. Artistes of 
Repertory Company mentioned that more centres of NSD should be opened in other parts of the country 
so that students from different parts are not required to come only to Delhi for theatre training. Besides, 
increase in the numbe r of ‘Rangmanch’ spaces is required so that talent from different parts of the 
country can be nurtured and promoted.  
4.10.2On other issues related to theatre education, the Committee was informed that NSD p rovides 
fellowship of one year to the students passing out for establishing themselves. Other issues such as lack 

37 
 
of respect given to theatre artistes, unavailability of proper infrastructure for theatre performance (lack 
of properly constructed theatres), mental health issues of theatre artistes, as the y work under huge 
amount of pressure and exploring the possibility of incorporation of modern technology in theatre arts 
were also highlighted before the Committee. One of the faculty members also submitted to the 
Committee that in order to increase the ou treach of theatre, the NSD pass -outs conduct workshops 
through their extension programmes in villages. Further, the officials of NSD mentioned that the 
institution needs to be empowered.  
4.10.3The officials of NSD submitted that NSD should be made an Inst itute of National Importance and 
there should be more NSD -like institutions in other parts of the country. They also informed the 
Committee that a proposal for inclusion of theatre curriculum in the syllabi from classes I to XII was 
sent to the CBSE, however, CBSE withdrew the proposal. It was also informed that the offer of the 
status of Deemed University by the University Grants Commission to NSD in the past had been rejected 
by the institution on the pretext that NSD was not equipped at that point in tim e to take on the 
responsibilities of a University. However, they emphasized their demand for granting the status of 
Institute of National Importance to the NSD.  
4.11 Dr. Padma Subrahmanyam, President, Nrityodaya, Chennai 
4.11.1 Dr. Subrahmanyam stressed upon the need for providing an enabling environment where 
students see Performing arts as a viable career option. She strongly advocated making Performing arts a 
part of regular curriculum in schools and colleges. She emphasised t hat some recent changes by 
University Grants Commission in the norms and requirements for appointment of teachers and research 
scholars in this field, has adversely affected the development of faculty for the teaching posts. As an 
example, she cited that f or getting a doctorate in Performing arts, a research student needs to pass an 
examination comprising of very unrelated subjects like research methodology, statistical analysis etc. 
These subjects are not related to the Performing arts  and resultantly the students get demotivated to 
continue higher studies. She requested the Committee to deliberate upon the issue so that the regulations 
can be suitably relaxed to encourage the students. 
4.11.2 Dr. Subrahmanyam further stressed upon the need for folk and tri bal artistes not only to be 
recognised, but also to ensure that they get some form of diploma or certificates from 
Universities/Institutions so that they can be eligible for occupying faculty positions in colleges/schools. 
Speaking about the financial assistance to the students pursuing Performing arts and for training the next 
generation, she suggested that the Banks should consider giving them grants and not education loans. It 
was further stated that Banks can give grants (not loans) to folk artistes for  training the next generation. 
There is no school or college for them. The true masters of these folk  Performing arts  can be 
economically supported to train poor students. The folk performing troupes may also be supported to 

38 
 
maintain the artistes for their  contributions to culture. They are generally farmers or the like belonging 
to the backward classes/ most backward classes’ strata of the society. Their commitment has been to 
perform in temples, thus maintaining heritage values at grass root level. This support is urgent, for there 
is a danger of their being lured by foreign attractions, leading to a loss for the soft power of our country 
which is intangible. A detailed plan for such grants can be worked out if it is agreed upon. Banks can 
support maintenance of private museums on performing arts. 
4.11.3 She further suggested that cross cultural connect with South -East Asian countries may be started 
to strengthen the bond. She stated that research and interactive productions of Indian researchers with 
artistes of South East Asian countries need to be encouraged with financial backing. The ICCR may  
collaborate with the education department on such projects in the cultural field. These may not be 
degree courses or Ph.D projects but productions of music and dance at a Pan South East Asian level. 
This would be a novel way of reviving permanent cultural contacts like our forefathers  did without 
colonisation.  
4.11.4 Dr. Subrahmanyam impressed upon the need for giving due importance to Sangeetha Vadyalaya 
i.e., the study of musical instruments along with other Performing arts , as they also constituted an 
important part of classical In dian cultural tradition. She pointed out that a collection of musical 
instruments, which were part of the “Sangeetha Vadyalaya”, are now dumped in the basement of a 
building occupied by the Handicrafts department. These musical instruments were reconstructed through 
the research of the pioneer musicologist, Prof. P.Sambamurthy. Two thousand year old percussion, wind 
and string instruments which were reconstructed about 50 years ago are rotting. They belong to 
Handicrafts department of Government of India. T hese need to be resurrected. She advocated the 
creation of a museum of Sangeetha vadyas. 
5. OBSERVATIONS 
 
5.1 The Committee observes that, though Art has found a place in the education system, the lens 
through which it is still perceived needs to go beyond it being learnt only for the sake of learning or as a 
simple creative expression, and thus efforts for designing a more wholesome Art Experience in tune 
with the real world are required. In this endeavour, the value of a more in-touch Art education must be 
stressed especially through use of visual mediums. Also, Art education needs to be aligned as a medium 
to understand other concepts since Art education has a direct impact on creative thinking and also on 
skills of critical thinking, communicating and collaborating.  
5.2 The Committee notes that Art education has the immense possibility to develop creative and 
vibrant learning environments in schools; however there has been a lack of clear vision and 

39 
 
inadequacies in the way Art education policies, curriculum guidelines, and teaching strategies have been 
framed and implemented so far. The Committee observes that for Art education to occupy a significant 
place in contemporary curriculum and offer opportunities to encourage imagination, innovation, 
creativity, develop curiosity, criticality and experimentation in the child, the curriculum and policies 
need reorientation to reflect the realities of our times and also anticipate the educational and existential 
requirements of the future. 
5.3 The Committee is of the view that a change in curriculum is required to dispel the colonial 
framing of Art education in India, which has in a way normalized understanding and appreciation of art 
or artwork by a student which is primarily imitative instead of being creative and original. Generally, 
instead of appreciating the experiments, the ideas and thoughts behind the Art, at school level emphasis 
is laid on the perfection of skills. This has led to a situation where art education becomes more 
performance centric than understanding centric. 
5.4 The Committee observes that Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) has chosen to 
implement an integrated learning system to integrate Art with the teaching and learning process of all 
academic subjects from classes I to XII, which is an appreciable move and will certainly help in 
redefining the earlier rote-learning experience. However, more awareness needs to be generated among 
parents about the importance of such integrated learning, and with the availability of a well-integrated 
practical curriculum and dedicated stakeholders, Arts will surely find a more pivotal role in the 
education system.  
5.5 The Committee observes that though the ethos of teaching disciplines of Performing Arts/ Fine 
Arts, derives from and thrives on being taught in the Guru-Shishya parampara, in order to enable the 
field of Performing/Fine Arts to find  broad based calling and growth, through the established university 
education system, this type of education needs to incorporate innovative ways like a learner-centric 
approach and flexibility in entry qualifications, time taken for completion of a programme and place of 
study. 
5.6 Any new vision for Arts education which understands its community better and seeks to build its 
foundations from the roots, should recognize that the role of teachers and the students is paramount. 
However, the Committee observes that there is a lack of adequately qualified, skilled and trained 
teaching staff in this area, that hampers the education of arts. It is alsoimperative that teachers engaged 
in Art education , need to do a lot of unlearning and reorient themselves in the manner in which they 
assess and mentor the students, as this has a bearing on the future of Arts education and the concerned 
students. Thus, the Committee feels that a sustained focus is required towards radically redefining these 

40 
 
core areas of involvement and empowering the teachers through meaningful intensive training 
programmes, exposures to art, cultural resources and avenues for research and study.   
5.7 The Committee observes that with the advent of the Internet and ICT, a lot of learning and 
access to resources has shifted to the online space and a teacher has much better availability of resources 
today than earlier. It also observes that, across the world, museums have opened up their resources and 
collections, offer virtual walkthroughs and varied educational kits for students have been developed.  
Therefore, teachers need to be trained to use these new resources and filter the information which they 
access, so that they can benefit from quality content. 
5.8 The Committee observes that despite several undergraduate level art institutions in the country, 
that impart technical skills and training in arts, there are still a large number of students who aspire to be 
artistes but are not able to get learning opportunities as the existing government or private institutions 
are insufficient with limited seats, particularly in Visual Arts, to admit a large number of prospective 
students.  
5.9 After having in-depth discussion with various prominent institutes and eminent artistes, it has 
been noted by the Committee that there is a lack of an informed audience who could critically appreciate 
various art forms. As a result, performing artistes get disheartened and do not feel enthused to perform 
in front of such disinterested audience, thus harming the cause of various art forms. Thus, reforms in 
Arts education must address this lack of art appreciation to champion the cause of art and culture. 
5.10 The Committee notes the special relationship of Performing arts/ Artistes (especially Musicians) 
with musical instruments. Also, the demand for musical instruments has been rising in India especially 
of western musical instruments.  However, the musical instruments played in India traditionally and in 
rural areas, are as diverse as our country. The Committee observes that most such musical instruments 
are handmade by highly-skilled crafts persons carrying forward a legacy of generations – like the 
Nadaswaram makers of Narasingapettai, the Mridangam makers of Mylapore, the creators of Bamboo 
Drums in Kasargod and of percussion instruments in Peruvemba and many others. Many such 
traditional master craftsmen are facing hard times and in absence of any structured methodology of 
passing on the skill imbibed through generations, many of them are struggling with the result that slowly 
these skilled traditions are declining. The Committee observes that there are hardly any structured 
courses through which students can learn such skills for making musical instruments. 
5.11 The Committee observes that there is a need to develop Performing Arts and Fine Arts as a 
viable career option and to attract more students to this field. There is also a need to find avenues for 
due recognition of folk artists, who though skilled, do not have any recognized certification reflecting 

41 
 
their knowledge or skill, which acts as a hindrance in furthering their career prospects and 
consequentially their upward social mobility. 
5.12 The Committee notes that NEP, 2020 emphasizes the ‘Promotion of Indian Languages, Arts and 
Culture’ (Policy 22, Page 53 of NEP), and is probably the first policy document to clearly visualize the 
importance of interaction between education and crafts, with one of the formulations stating that 
“Outstanding local artists and craftspersons will be hired as guest faculty to promote local music, art, 
languages, and handicraft, and to ensure that students are aware of the culture and local knowledge 
where they study.” 
5.13 The Committee observes that the concept of ‘Learning by Doing’in education in Fine Arts 
stresses on the studio practice as an essential aspect, as in the studio, students learn from the teacher and 
by observing the art practice of their fellow students. Thus, Fine Arts studios need to be well equipped 
to provide an interactive and personal space for each student. Furthermore, well-equipped studios need 
to be upgraded to be in sync with their environmental requirements.  
 
5.14 The Committee observes that there is a lack of a proper framework for media and entertainment 
education in the country and any formal institutionalized multi-level educational structure/framework 
(from High School through PhD) is  missing for Media & Entertainment education, making it difficult 
for the private sector to participate; also there have been very few globally recognized Media 
Development labs in the country besides lack of research and development in the field of Media and 
Entertainment.  
 
 
5.15 The Committee notes that Fragmentation of Media & Entertainment Education –Animation, 
VFX & Gaming-- have been classified under ‘Technical Education’ under AICTE definition , while 
being creative fields. Also, a lot of such education has taken place under the traditional Bachelor of Arts 
umbrella, which has hampered the teaching of applied aspects of these subjects. 
 
5.16 The Committee observes that Film making, apart from its entertainment value is also an 
educational tool, and it can be considered for inclusion in the school curriculum as has been done by 
several countries like USA, France, Australia etc.  
 
5.17 The Committee observes that the Film and Television Institute of India, Pune falls under 
Professional Education in the “stand-alone institutions in other fields” mentioned in Part III of the NEP, 
2020, that is, ‘Other Key areas of focus', and in the present structure, FTII awards either a Certificate or 
a Diploma to its students. The Committee also observes that FTII awaits fulfillment of its demand of 

42 
 
granting it “Institute of National Importance” status to award degrees,   in a similar fashion to that of 
degrees awarded by Higher Education Institutions.  
 
 
5.18 The Committee notes that the short-term courses offered by FTII , which were introduced under 
the ‘Skilling India in Film and Television’ (SKIFT) programme, in various disciplines of filmmaking, 
have been receiving an overwhelming response and these courses, ranging in duration from five days to 
three weeks, are conducted in association with State Governments, Universities, educational institutes 
and other bodies.  
5.19 The Committee notes that Kalakshetra Foundation, Chennai had been declared an Institution of 
National Importance and has institutionalized the training of Bharatnatyam in the country. However, a 
proposal to amend the relevant Act of Parliament to grant permission to Kalakshetra Foundation to 
award Graduate Degrees and Post-Graduate/Doctorate degrees is under consideration and the decision in 
this regard is yet to be taken. 
 
5.20 The Committee observes that Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (BORI), Pune which was 
established in the year 1917, is  today home to more than 153,000 rare books and 28,000 manuscripts 
and has been taking initiatives to facilitate  original research for promotion of Indology & Oriental 
studies, and for the promotion of research and preservation of manuscripts. The Institute has also taken 
steps towards creating a digital eco-system based on digital library, digital learning, and digital 
humanities. The Committee notes that the Institute operates mostly through private grants and would 
want to continue doing the same. However the Institute had approached the government for a one-time 
endowment grant to enlarge the scope of its operations and strengthen infrastructure.  
 
5.21 The Committee observes that Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya Mandal works for the 
promotion and propagation of Indian Classical Music and Dances with its Sangeet Vidyalaya in Vashi, 
Navi Mumbai and has nearly 1200 affiliated institutions and nearly 800 Examination Centres all over 
the country and more than one lakh students take examinations every year from Prarambhik (Beginner’s 
level) to Sangeet Acharya (Ph.D. level). However, this eminent institution is yet be recognized by the 
University Grants Commission, and such non-recognition by UGC was causing hardship to the students 
as they are rendered ineligible for appointment to government jobs.  
 
5.22 From the interactions at Sir J.J. School of Arts, Mumbai, the Committee observes that in the 
present system, Art, Architecture and Design pedagogy have all been clubbed under the purview of 
'Technical Education' under AICTE formulation , whereas these fields of knowledge were the outcome 
of both technology and social sciences. The Committee feels that Art/Architecture/Design Education 

43 
 
should each have its own stand-alone vertical stream, and not be placed under one technical stream as 
done currently. The Committee also notes that the 'De-novo Deemed to be University' status to the 
Institution has been proposed by the State Government of Maharashtra to UGC and the proposal was 
under consideration of the Ministry of Education.  
 
5.23 The Committee notes that the matters of giving the Institute of National Importance tag to the 
National School of Drama (NSD), as well as re-developing its campus in Delhi are under consideration 
of the Government and are pending for approval.  
 
5.24 The Committee observes that the artistes of TIE Company in NSD work with and perform for 
children with primary focus on creative, curriculum based and participative plays and conduct theatre 
workshops in Delhi and other parts of the country. These theatre workshops are based mainly on the 
socio-psychological issues related to children like loneliness, fear, performance stress, etc. Therefore, it 
is felt that such initiatives may be enhanced by association of schools with NSD, as this will not only 
generate interest of students in such Performing Arts but will also help them in coping with the 
social/emotional difficulties faced by them in their young age. 
6.  RECOMMENDATIONS 
After careful analysis of the inputs gathered from experts and practitioners as also taking stock of 
the ground situation in various art institutions, the Committee recommends that: 
6.1 A massive public campaign and advocacy to promote the Arts in the educational system be 
undertaken forthwith in the light of the provisions in the National Education Policy 2020 (NEP). 
This would help change the mindset of parents, guardians, school authorities and even policy 
makers and will help evolve an enlightened consensus about the need for inclusion of arts in any of 
its forms in the curriculum and will enrich the development of young minds and its benefits in 
general.  
6.2 A robust policy framework and a sustained methodology be evolved to bring about a 
radical change in the colonial orientation in the understanding of Arts education and the practice 
of the arts. This is critical as the colonial orientation and the resultant attitude/mindset is 
producing a non-reflective mechanical workforce which is only capable of routine design and 
production, and is afraid to indulge in bold and creative experimentation. 
6.3 At the current stage of evolving a National/State Curriculum Framework, a mechanism be 
created to impart basic knowledge of Indian Performing arts like dance, music, instrumental 
music  etc. from an early age, as this will help children    to appreciate and understand the arts 

44 
 
better and will also motivate them to take it up as a vocation. It is felt that this would help give 
adequate thrust to the promotion of Performing Arts education in the country and this would also 
help in early identification and honing of real talent.  
6.4  A serious exercise of National Consultation on incorporating Arts in School Education, be 
undertaken with the involvement of bodies like NCERT, SCERT, NCTE and various University 
Departments of Performing and Visual Arts. This would help evolve common understanding and 
perfect synergy in approaches. Designing of Performing and Fine Arts educational curriculum 
should be undertaken considering regional and language sensibilities. 
6.5 The Ministry must address the issue of lack of qualified teaching staff and make requisite 
efforts to induct and fill up the vacancies of Art teachers at the earliest, especially in the light of 
the thrust of the NEP 2020 on such education. Considering the important role of teachers in laying 
the strong foundation of Arts education and building upon it thereafter, it is important to appoint 
experienced teachers and experts in the field to create the necessary human resources required. 
As an immediate redressal measure, the Ministry of Education take a relook at essential/desirable 
educational qualifications for recruitment of teachers to different universities/colleges/schools, 
making them more liberal by giving more weightage to the accomplishments in the field of 
Performing Arts. Also, the present policy of hiring ad hoc teachers by Universities for Arts, 
especially Music teachers, against existing vacancies and keeping them vacant needs to be 
reviewed by either posting of permanent teachers against such existing vacancies or by 
regularizing the ad hoc teachers. 
6.6 Adequate measures be taken for evolving requisite understanding of Performing, Fine and 
Visual Arts amongst the teaching community. This should also form an essential part of teacher 
training, and it should be included in the curriculum of teacher training institutions across the 
country. Formulation of a defined policy and a fixed Calendar for conducting various training 
programmes, on regular basis, towards sensitizing in-service teachers for promotion and 
preservation of Indian Arts, Culture and Heritage with sessions on various Classical Dances and 
Music is essential. Creation of Resource Centers for Performing and Visual Arts in terms of 
making printed as well as audio-visual material available for both learners and teachers is 
necessary. Also, in light of the increasing use of the digital space for access to resource material, 
and reorientation of the functioning of museums and art galleries to keep pace with the changing 
times,efforts need to be made to make such resources available to Art teachers and students to 
understand, appreciate and expand their vision of Art. Further, in order to reap the benefits of 
technology in Arts education, institutions of art may explore the possibility associating with 
Technology Innovation Hubs for capacity building activities.  

45 
 
6.7 Art education should be made a compulsory subject up to Class X, as NEP 2020 has called 
for Integration of Art in Education and that infrastructure and facilities be provided for the same 
in every school. Art education should cover four main streams, namely music, dance, visual arts 
and theatre with special emphasis on Indian traditional and folk arts. It should also include local 
traditions like episodes from folk tales, stories, plays, paintings, etc. so that its learning generates 
interest and becomes appreciable. A village-attachment component, associated with that form of 
art, should be a vital part of the curriculum. Another area of Arts is film making, which has been 
accepted as an educational tool besides having its entertainment value. Therefore, following the 
practice of some other countries, the possibility of inclusion of film making in the school 
curriculum may be explored, considering its long-term benefit. 
6.8 In order to effectively implement the suggestion under NEP, 2020 towards hiring of artists 
and crafts persons, especially from local communities, as guest faculty to promote music, art, 
languages, and handicraft and to ensure that the guest faculty thus employed make students privy 
to local culture and pool of knowledge, clear instructions  must be issued by CBSE/Ministry of 
Education to Schools, along with definite criteria and parameters laid down for  such hiring. 
Similarly, suitable guidelines for schools to follow to take forward the proposal of Artists -in-
Residence in schools or schools complexes, to expose students to art and creativity is required to 
be formulated. 
6.9 An independent All India Cou ncil for Creative Arts Education on the lines of AICTE be  
created to take care of  the need for a regulatory mechanism for higher education as well as 
research in Performing, Fine and Visual Arts. Setting up of such an Apex body for the promotion, 
coordination and maintenance of standards in Arts education, through continuous monitoring, 
assessment and accreditation of the various institutions, as well as the allocation of and 
development of resources for research and training, and preparation of course ma terial for Art 
education will be able to radically alter the current scenario of Art education in 
Colleges/Universities across the country.  For the present, AICTE needs to address the issue of 
misclassification of clubbing creative areas of art education,  such as media and entertainment,  
under the ‘Technical Education’ or under the overarching umbrella of Bachelor of Arts  and 
critically evaluate its classification methodology. 
6.10 Opening of Performing, Visual and Fine Arts Departments with adequate infrastructure 
may be encouraged / incentivized in Universities across the country. This would help 
universities/institutions design and implement their programmes following a multi-disciplinary 
approach and multiple exit options as envisioned in the NEP 2020.  

46 
 
6.11 The possibility of establishing a Central University like Rashtriya Kala Vishwa Vidyalaya 
(National University of Arts) through an Act of Parliament, with regional Centres at prominent 
Art/ cultural locations, to become a benchmark institution in all areas of Arts can be explored 
forthwith. In this context, the efforts being made for the establishment of the Indian Institute of 
Heritage and Conservation (IIH) under Ministry of Culture with the status of a deemed 
University, have been noted. The Committee recommends that for the IIH to fulfill its envisaged 
aim and emerge as a reality, a specific action plan delineating all the preparatory activities for 
setting up of the Institute should be drawn up by the Ministry of Culture in coordination with 
Ministry of Education and University Grants Commission (UGC) with clearly defined timelines 
for each activity. 
6.12 Possibility of introducing a Creative Arts Quota like Sports Quota be explored to add value 
to arts education as an elective subject at school level and recognition to the budding talents. Also, 
in order to offer more avenues for interested individuals to learn about art and appreciate its 
creativity, premier Art institutions should reach out to wider community by opening their doors 
to interested curious minds and make available their teachers and Masters students, as resource 
persons, when schoolchildren visit the heritage sites or museums. Also, the institutions can 
conduct Certificate courses on Art appreciation for schoolteachers which will help bring 
innovative changes in the school curriculum, incorporating the suggestions of NEP 2020 and thus 
help in making desired changes in sync with the new Education Policy. 
6.13 A Task Force may be appointed jointly by the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of 
Culture to identify sectors and institutions where Graduates/ Diploma holders in the field of 
Performing and Fine arts can find viable career opportunities. Also, new courses in different 
fields of Arts, with application in modern world, such as translation and interpretation, art and 
museum administration, art management, curatorial practices, artifact conservation, graphic 
design, and web design etc. for students who take Performing/ Fine Arts subjects in Classes XI-
XII, should be started in more Colleges/ Universities to enable the students find more viable 
career choices. 
6.14 Methodologies and mechanisms be actively explored/developed to recognize and 
incorporate the home-cultivated or traditionally acquired talent of indigenous/folk artistes in the 
education system, to offer them career choices and help get mobility. As emphasized earlier too, 
endorsement of local tradition and culture through arts education is a very important 
requirement, while exploring/developing such avenues/methods. Sustained efforts for further 
diversification of the crafts sector and its progress are required since many craft clusters are 
entirely dependent on the governmental and non-governmental schemes for their sustenance. 

47 
 
Also, in order to promote folk and tribal artists and give recognition to them, a skill capability 
measuring mechanism, based on defined parameters as evaluated by experts/ institutions in the 
respective fields, needs to be developed which can help such artists getting some form of diploma 
or certificates from the University/Institutions, so that they become eligible for occupying 
teaching/faculty positions in schools/ colleges. 
6.15 As the availability of proper infrastructure for the education and practice of Fine Arts 
cannot be discounted and students need to be facilitated with well -equipped studios where they 
can interact and learn from the artists, such well-equipped studios with the latest facilities must be 
developed in adequate numbers in Colleges/ Universities across the country. Also al l the studios 
must be open 24x 7 to give complete artistic freedom to students.  
6.16 Efforts be made towards Craft documentation, compilation and publishing of data through 
online and physical directories and books as this will benefit the crafts sector a s well as higher 
educational institutions. Also, to create awareness of crafts among the young generation, design 
institutes should conduct workshops for school children and their teachers, which will go a long 
way in sensitizing them to these traditions a nd inspire them to introduce such traditions in their 
academic practice. The fundamental need is to do away with the binary of Arts and Crafts. Every 
traditional art like Madhuban i, Warli, Patt achitra or sand-art is also equally respectable form of 
Art like the modern art or abstract paintings. Hence, they need not be categorized separately as 
craft as it would amount to value judgement. This denotes a certain kind of c olonial mindset and 
hence, is unacceptable. 
6.17 Education loan as granted for various other courses may also be considered for Students/ 
Artistes of Performing/ Fine Arts at very liberal rates of interest. Also, Schemes need to be 
formulated so that those who already have experience in the field may also be given loan like that 
given to sta rt-ups, so that they can spread their wings. Banks/financial institutions should also 
devise policies for providing financial assistance to the students not only through educational 
loans but also through grants. 
6.18 As the traditional crafts persons who are engaged in making of musical instruments are 
afflicted by poverty, as well as the lack of any structured means for passing on their knowledge to 
the future generations, there is a pressing need for developing courses, incorporating aspects of 
marketing, finance and technology ,  to be offered to students through which such skills can be 
taught. The knowledge of master craftsmen who have decades of experience in such traditional 
instrument making should be preserved by taking them onboard while developing such courses. 
This will serve the twin purpose of preservation of traditional knowledge and financial upliftment 

48 
 
of the craftsmen who are repositories of this knowledge, besides aiding in development of such 
acoustic instrument manufacturing hubs like Varanasi, Kolkata and Miraj and others. Also, 
Banks/ financial institutions can explore the possibility to provide grants to folk artistes for 
organizing training programmes/workshops to serve the purpose of transfer of traditional skills 
down the generations. Reconsideration or abolition of Taxes on buying of Musical Instruments, 
which are mostly handmade, and are generally bought by artisans, musicians and students will 
also help in spread and showcasing of these skills. 
6.19 The Government needs to address, on priority, the requirement of conferring the status of 
Institute of National Importance (INI) on premier higher education institutions set up / working 
in the field of furthering Performing, Fine and Visual Arts education and culture in the country 
and meeting the defined tag as institutions “serving as a pivotal player in developing highly skilled 
personnel within the specified region of the country/state". Some of the prominent Institutes 
which can be considered for INI status are Film and Television Institute of India (FTTI), Pune 
and National School of Drama (NSD), New Delhi besides other public institutions.  Also the 
possibility of conferring such a status or helping such pioneering bodies/ institutes like 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune; Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, 
Mumbai and  Sir J.J. School of Arts, Mumbai  needs to be explored with a positive approach. 
Such accreditation/ recognition to these reputed institutes/ bodies will help them immensely in 
expanding their work and vision and to validate and document their learning. It will also address 
the issues of award of Graduate/ Post-Graduate/Doctorate degrees, allocation of Grants for 
enhancement of physical infrastructure and human resources, and ameliorate the difficulties 
being faced by their students in availing opportunities for appointment in positions of faculty in 
Government institutions.  
6.20 In order to expand its reach, as a premier institution, FTII should open more regional 
centres to associate more students, start courses based on emerging technologies like artificial 
intelligence, augmented reality and mobile telephony, set up a wing to provide subtitles in foreign 
languages for Indian movies for export to different countries, set up a music department and 
courses on film management. Also, FTII’s ‘Skilling India in Film and Television’ (SKIFT) 
programme in various disciplines of filmmaking may be extended at the school level to enthuse 
students about learning about the various facets of film craft. For the purpose, FTII should 
endeavour to engage itself with schools across the country to offer its courses to interested 
students, who may choose this career path in future. 
6.21 In order to give a fillip to the promotion and sustainability of arts education in 
schools/colleges/universities/institutions and to carry out the necessary reforms, the Budgetary 

49 
 
allocations be reviewed and enhanced, if required, to help in setting up of more infrastructure, 
proper appointment of teaching staff and other logistics. 
6.22 The Ministry must make efforts to work out partnerships with reputed Private/ Public 
Institutions/ Trusts working in the field of various arts and take them onboard for developing a 
roadmap for promoting various facets of Art education, its teaching and for helping evolve a 
refined cultural ethos in the country. 

50 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
      The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 
11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd June, 2021 in Committee Room No. 4, 
Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
         MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
6. Shri G.K. Vasan 
 
 LOK SABHA 
7. Shri D.M. Kathir Anand 
8. Shri Dhal Singh Bisen 
9. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
10. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
11. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13. Shri Balak Nath 
14. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
15. Shri T.N. Prathapan 
16. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
17. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
18. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
19. Shri Dharambir Singh 
20. Shri S. Venkatesan 

51 
 
SECRETARIAT 
    Dr.   Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
  Ms. Chitra G., Deputy Secretary 
Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
  Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer    
  Witnesses 
 
 * * *   
* * * 
 Ministry of Culture 
7. Shri Raghvendra Singh, Secretary 
8. Ms. Lily Pandeya, Joint Secretary 
9. Ms. Amita Prasad Sarabhai, Joint Secretary 
 
Lalit Kala Akademi 
10. Shri Rama Krishna Vedala, Secretary-in-charge 
 
 Sangeet Natak Akademi 
11. Ms. Rita S. Chaudhary, Director 
 
 National School of Drama (NSD) 
12. Shri Suresh Sharma, Director-in-charge 
 
 National Gallery of Modern Art (NGMA) 
13. Ms. Temsunaro Jamir, Director 
 
 Centre for Culture Resources and Training (CCRT) 
14. Shri Rishi Vashisth, Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee convened to examine the subjects “*   * *” and “Reforms in the 
Education of Fine Arts, Performing Arts and Culture”.    * * * 
3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5.  * * * 
6. * * * 
(The witnesses then withdrew). 
 
 * Pertains to other matter 

52 
 
7. The Chairman, then, welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Culture and the 
representatives of Lalit Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi, National School 
of Drama (NSD), National Gallery of Modern Art (NGMA), Centre for Culture 
Resources and training (CCRT) to the afternoon session of the Committee on the 
subject “Reforms in the Education of Fine Arts, Performing Arts and Culture”. The 
Secretary, Ministry of Culture gave a presentation on the various initiatives taken 
to develop and modernize museums and other culturally significant buildings and 
institutions and achievements thereof. The Chairman felt that the presentation 
made by the Secretary was not focused on the subject “Reforms in the Education 
of Fine Arts, Performing Arts and Culture”. He reiterated that the agenda before 
the Committee was limited to arts and culture education only whereas the mandate 
of the Ministry is extensive. Hence, the Ministry should focus only on the reforms 
with reference to education at their respective institutions. He further advised the 
Secretary to apply his mind thoroughly and convey to the Committee, the 
recommendations about education which they would expect from the Committee 
which will empower their work. 
8. The Chairman raised queries on the status of Sangeet, Nritya and theatre 
education, steps that can be taken to bring some reform in such education and the 
role of the States in bringing about these reforms. The Secretary, Ministry of 
Culture explained to the Committee about the Indian Institute of Heritage where 
certain courses would be started from the month of August and the initiatives to be 
taken along with National School of Drama on a digital platform at the primary 
and middle level schools. He also explained the initiatives such as ‘Mera Gaon, 
Meri Dharohar’ taken to promote culture in villages wherein school children are 
being asked to document their villages and upload them on a platform and 
formation of a Section 8 Company with experts in the field and enhance public-
private partnership to build vibrant heritage sites. 
9. The Members raised several queries on the integration of Culture, 
Performing Arts, Fine Arts with the main education system, creation of job 
opportunities for artists passing out from various cultural institutions, promotion of 

53 
 
folk music and dance forms across the country, showcasing and promotion of our 
rich and vibrant cultural heritage in the world arena, availability of career options 
to those students who opt for education in arts, conducting of detailed study of 
ancient architectural design and style in order to revive lost arts and crafts, 
incorporating National Education Policy in the fine arts, performing arts and 
culture education, availability of various courses on fine arts, performing arts and 
culture education in other Institutes either through online or offline mode and 
promotion of people running cultural organizations by giving incentives or by 
organizing cultural festivals/programmes across the country by the Government. 
10. The Chairman mentioned that the discrimination between fine arts and folk 
arts needs to be eliminated. He explained to the Committee the need to assess the 
quality of education of fine arts, performing arts and culture and in this regard, he 
suggested that three sub-Committees of the main Committee - one each on Fine 
Arts, Performing Arts and Culture may be constituted for detailed examination and 
give recommendations based on the detailed study. 
11. The Secretary-in-charge, Lalit Kala Akademi explained to the Committee 
how Lalit Kala Akademi is different from other visual art organizations. They have 
studio facilities where students can get a hands-on experience as well as provision 
for community studios and individual studios where artists of professional 
category can work. They also provide internship programme for one or two 
months to students in various art forms. He, then, replied to some of the queries 
raised by the Members. A video based on Mithila artist was also played. 
12. The Director, Sangeet Natak Akademi apprised the Committee about the 
scheme wherein they undertake survey, research, documentation and publication 
of various songs and dance forms. She mentioned about the Museum of Musical 
Instruments where students are invited for tours. She explained to the Committee 
about the workshops being organised for manufacturing musical instruments and 
the training programmes run under the Guru Shishya Parampara for Arts that are 
becoming extinct. She further explained about “Deshaj”, which is a festival series 

54 
 
conducted zone-wise including all folk arts and traditional arts and this could be 
extended to schools and colleges as well. She replied to some of the queries raised 
by the Members. 
13. The Director-in-charge, National School of Drama (NSD), mentioned about 
the Centre opened in Benaras based on Natya Shastra which they plan to convert it 
into an International Centre. He explained to the Committee the various activities 
taken up by NSD to incorporate theatre in education in order to promote and 
develop cultural heritage. He also drew the attention of the Committee towards the 
lack of teachers for theatre in schools. He also mentioned that theatres should be 
included while planning and creating urban spaces and smart cities. 
14. The Director, Centre for Culture Resources and Training (CCRT) informed 
the Committee that as per the National Education Policy, 1986, CCRT was made 
the Nodal Agency and various special courses on puppetry, traditional folk arts 
were designed by them. With respect to the recommendations of New National 
Education Policy, they are constantly trying to re-design and revamp the 
curriculum so that they could reach maximum number of teachers and participants. 
15. The Verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
16. The meeting adjourned at 3.53 PM. 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                  CHITRA G. 
22ND JUNE, 2021.                                                        DEPUTY SECRETARY  
  
 
 

55 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, 
WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 11:00 A.M on 
Friday, the 5th January, 2022 in Committee Room- ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe Ground Floor, 
New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
4. Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
3. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
5. Shri D.M. Kathir Anand 
6.  Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
7. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
8. Shri Balak Nath 
9. Shri T.N. Prathapan 
10. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
11. Shri Dharambir Singh 
12. Shri S. Venkatesan 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3.  Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
5. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
  
I.  MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
1. Shri Govind Mohan, Secretary  
2. Ms. Amita Prasad Sarbhai, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Aneish P. Rajan, Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. T. Jamir, Secretary, Sangeet Natak Akademi 
5. Shri Ramakrishna Vedala, Secretary, Lalit Kala Akademi 
6. Shri K. Sreenivasarao, Secretary, Sahitya Akademi 
7. Shri Dinesh Khanna, Director, National School of Drama 
8. Shri Jwala Prasad, Registrar, National School of Drama 
 
II. DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
  1. Shri Vineet Joshi, Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri Vipin Kumar, Joint Secretary 

56 
 
  3. Mrs. Rashi Sharma, Director 
  4. Prof. M. P. Poonia, Vice-Chairman, AICTE 
  5. Shri Rajeev Kumar, Member Secretary, AICTE  
  6. Prof. Ranjana Arora, NCERT 
  7. Prof. Jyotsana Tiwari, NCERT 
  8. Prof. Pawan Sudhir, NCERT 
  9. Shri Jyanendra Kumar, Joint Commissioner, NVS 
  10. Ms. Piya Thakur, Joint Commissioner, KVS 
  11. Ms. Sandhya Kumari, Deputy Director, NIOS 
 
III UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION 
 
1. Shri P.K. Thakur, Financial Adviser 
   
IV. DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY 
  1. Shri Santosh Kumar Yadav, Secretary 
  2.  Ms. Ritu Sain, Director, DoSE&L 
3. Ms. Saroj Sharma, Chairperson, NIOS 
4. Dr. Joseph Emmanuel, Director, Academic, CBSE 
5. Shri Rajiv Kumar Singh, Director, Academic, NIOS 
6. Ms. Piya Thakur, Joint Commissioner, Academic, KVS 
7. Shri Gyanendra Kumar, Director, Academic, NVS 
 
 
V. REPRESENTATIVES FROM:- 
 
 (i) FACULTY OF FINE ARTS, JAMIA MILLIA ISLAMIA 
 1. Prof. Mamoon Nomani, Dean, Faculty of Fine Arts 
 2. Prof. Bindulika Sharma, Head, Department of Art Education 
 3. Dr. Bhupesh Chandra Little, Head, Department of Applied Arts 
 
(ii) SCHOOL OF PERFORMING AND VISUAL ARTS (IGNOU) 
 Dr. Govindaraju Bharadwaja, Director, SOVPA (IGNOU) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of 
the Committee and recalled that the Committee has been examining the subject of 
“Reforms in the Education of Performing and Fine Arts” towards which the 
Committee had also undertaken a study visit to Chennai, Pune and Mumbai and 
visited several art institutes and organizations and heard their views on the subject. 
He informed that in continuation of the examination of the subject, Secretary, 
Ministry of Culture and Officers from the Department of Higher Education and 
Department of School Education & Literacy have been invited to express their 
views on the subject. He also informed that representatives from School of 

57 
 
Performing & Visual Arts, IGNOU and Faculty of Fine Arts, Jamia Millia Islamia 
have also been called to present their views on the above mentioned subject. 
Chairman then asked Secretary, Culture to give his deposition before the 
Committee followed by Officials from respective Ministries/ Institutes. 
Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Culture 
3. The Secretary (Culture) initiated his deposition by informing about the need 
for investing in propagation of Indian Culture by way of more Museums and other 
centres through enhanced funding. He stated that as compared to China which is 
allocating around 5 percent of its GDP in such activities, we are allocating only 
around .5 percent of our GDP.  Emphasizing upon the importance of the subject, he 
mentioned that the role of fine arts and performing arts education should be to 
create an awareness of local cultural manifestations and integrate it with 
curriculum and pedagogical practices in schools and colleges.  Also, the study of 
the environment and its influence on creativity should form part of art education 
and the syllabus. He also apprised the Committee that the role of arts education 
should be to provide school students an opportunity to develop sensitivity and 
creativity through learning of fine arts and performing arts to prepare the youth not 
only for participation in the cultural life, but as is a recognized fact by 
educationists that creative activities sharpen the intellect and lengthen the 
concentration span of the child thus improving all-round standards, including in 
academics. He emphasized that the vision of Arts Education outlined by the 
National Education Policy, 2020 , if implemented with due coordination between 
all the Stakeholder Ministries, with a clear roadmap , can bring about a remarkable 
change in the scenario of arts Education at all levels. 
4. He also mentioned as how various bodies/ organizations under the Ministry 
like Centre for Cultural Resources and Training(CCRT) , Kalakshetra Foundation, 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts, Buddhist/ Tibetan Institutions, etc. are 

58 
 
promoting cultural education through their Schemes/ Fellowships.  He stressed that 
a composite Education policy, with adequate stress on Performing and Fine Arts 
will be able to take these initiatives much further.  Secretary, Culture mentioned 
that promotion of skilling courses for cultural workers on the pattern of those 
available for masons, carpenters, electricians, plumbers, etc. can help develop 
skilled manpower in the field of Arts. He informed that CCRT has undertaken 
research in this field and has worked out methodologies also which can be included 
in a formal educational structure. He also apprised the Committee that after 
receiving training from the CCRT on Fine Art, when CCRT trained teachers wish 
to implement the teaching – learning activities in the school, they face 
administrative problems such as non cooperation and permission of the school 
heads. He also highlighted the fact that since unified syllabus inclusive of art is not 
recommended by the Education Departments to schools, consequently, availability 
of resource materials at grass root level is also a genuine problem in Fine Art 
Education. 
5. He concluded his deposition by apprising the Committee that the Ministry is 
working on the protection, development and promotion of the country’s tangible 
and intangible heritage and all the autonomous institutions under the aegis of 
Ministry have opined that there is a need of inclusive curriculum even from the 
primary level schooling as the ability to appreciate arts and aesthetics would 
indirectly transform the growth of a student positively in the long run. He opined 
that it is important to extend opportunity to the students to get trained in gaining 
qualities of ‘appreciation, critique, analysis, creativity, discussion and 
dissemination’ especially in the field of art and culture and curriculum of school 
and college education should reflect such a qualitative turn.  
6. The Members raised various queries and expressed their views on the 
subject.  

59 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
Oral Evidence of representatives of Ministry of Education( Department of 
School Education & Literacy and Department of Higher Education) 
7. The Additional Secretary, Department of School Education apprised the 
Committee that the National Education Policy (2020) emphasizes the importance 
of promoting Indian languages, arts and culture. Therefore, a chapter exclusively 
focuses on this aspect (chapter 22) alongwith the chapter on Curriculum and 
Pedagogy in Schools (Chapter 4) highlighting the integration of these aspects 
throughout the curriculum. He also mentioned that in school education, there are 
three approaches to teaching, learning of arts which NCERT promotes; (i) art as a 
curricular area (as a subject), to learn skills of different visual and performing arts, 
(ii) arts as pedagogy, to learn different subjects/concepts more effectively through 
music, dance/movement, drama, painting, sculpture, traditional crafts, etc. and (iii) 
to sensitize students about various traditional arts as art forms.  
8. The representatives from NCERT then apprised the Committee of the 
education policy and curricular materials prepared for integration of arts in visual/ 
lesson and exercise form. They threw light upon the Art Integrated Learning (AIL) 
programme for capacity building of master trainers and for training of teachers of 
music and fine arts of KVS, NVS and NIOS etc.  Kala Utsav Programme for 
promoting arts education and to showcase the artistic talent of secondary students 
was also emphasized upon.  Data relating to school-student participation in arts, 
music and dance was also presented before the Committee. Certain issues faced by 
NCERT/ NIOS relating to the above subject were also mentioned. Implementation 
status of NEP 2020 and initiatives undertaken therein were also deliberated upon. 
9. The Additional Secretary, Department of Higher Education apprised the 
Committee of the salient features of NEP 2020 and also gave a definition of fine 
arts including music, dance, painting, sculpture, architecture, poetry and literature. 

60 
 
He also threw light upon the festivals in Universities/ Colleges and some key 
results/ features of the All India Survey of Higher Education State-wise. 
10. He also stated that efforts are being made to provide education with a 
combination of knowledge, traditions and Indian practices in coordination with 
UGC and NCERT. Also, AICTE is providing facilities for education of fine arts in 
Universities/Colleges. Further, to better “Using Arts in Teaching”, education is 
being made contractual through arts and culture. Activities such as ‘Azadi ka 
Amrit Mahotsava’, ‘Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat’ etc. are also being focused upon 
to motivate students at higher levels of education. It was also informed that in 10 
States having 19 colleges of art education, education in 6 regional languages is also 
being imparted to the students for which related material is also being provided to 
them. 
11. The Additional Secretary, Department of Higher Education also informed 
that NCERT has developed an Artificial Intelligence based tool which has a unique 
feature of translating 8 different regional languages with 80% accuracy. It was also 
informed that SWAYAM platform has MOOCS (Massive Open Online Courses) 
relating to each and every field including fine art education in 13 different 
languages.  
12. Chairman and Members highlighted the need for a mechanism to offer 
recognition by UGC to Institutions/ Organizations and their courses so that the 
students get requisite benefits. In this regard, non recognition to Gandharva 
Mahavidyalaya as an institution of higher learning even after 75-80 of its existence 
in this field and some other reputed institutions was also mentioned.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 

61 
 
Oral Evidence of representatives of SOPVA (IGNOU) and Jamia Millia 
Islamia 
13. Director, SOPVA highlighted the fact that the vision and philosophy of 
School is the all-round development of knowledge in arts education and fine arts 
and which should get importance at par with theoretical and practical dimensions 
of the discipline with integration at undergraduate and post-graduate level,  
possibilities of research, leading to the degrees of Ph.D. and D.Litt.  It was also 
informed that in spite of a number of undergraduate level art institutions in the 
country that impart technical skills and training in arts, these do not provide 
opportunities to a large number of students who aspire to be artists. He also threw 
light upon the mandate of SOPVA which offers specialized Certificate, Diploma, 
Under Graduate, Post Graduate, M. Phil and Ph.D. level programmes in 
Performing and Visual Arts for which the school is also developing its 
programmes through ODL, an Online mode and is being offered from established 
Programme Study Centres across the Country.  
14. He also informed that at present the School is offering the programmes such 
as Ph.D. in Performing and Visual Arts (Dance, Drama, Music, Fine Arts), Masters 
in Drawing and Painting, Certificate Programme in Theatre Arts, Certificate 
Programme in Applied Art etc. He also apprised the Committee that the School is 
in the process of initiating various new programmes in performing and visual arts 
with innovative methods of teaching, learning, pedagogy with an aim to reach 
more and more learners in the field. 
15. The representatives from the Faculty of Fine Arts, Jamia Millia Islamia 
while deposing before the Committee stated that Reforms in the Education of Fine 
Arts is an ongoing process and in India, Fine arts education has incorporated the 
Indian knowledge of art and contemporary art practices. It was also informed that 
the concept of “Learning by Doing Education” in Fine Arts stresses the studio 

62 
 
practice as an essential aspect wherein the students learn from the teacher and the 
art practice of their fellow students.  Well-equipped studios need to be upgraded 
according to environmental requirements. Therefore, reforms in the design of 
studios according to eco-friendly demands are urgently needed. 
16. They also highlighted the need to reform the fine arts curriculum beyond the 
aesthetical and cultural activity along with need to accept it as a professional 
course to provide wider research-oriented, market-friendly cultural activity. It was 
also emphasized upon that uniformity in curriculum, syllabus and art practices is 
needed to upgrade it to secondary education. In addition, the syllabus needs to 
incorporate the role of museums, galleries, archives in art education. As 
universities are the places of high learning, each fine arts faculty should have an art 
gallery, archives, and documentation centres to develop art historical research. 
Thus, universities can also create new courses like art administration, art 
management, and curatorial practices.  
17. The Chairman concluded the meeting stating that education in field of 
Performing and Fine Arts should be accorded due recognition at the school level 
and at the level of Universities/ Colleges. Trained faculties with a permanent status 
should be recruited to impart quality education in this field and generate interest of 
students by motivating them. Members of the Committee also raised various 
queries which were replied by the representatives deposing before the Committee 
regarding infrastructure status of schools and colleges in this field and various 
upcoming schemes/ programmes of the Ministries/ Departments. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
18. * * * 
19. * * * 
 * Pertains to other matter  

63 
 
 
20.   The meeting adjourned at 1:46 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,           A.K. Mallick         
5th January, 2022                Director 
                                                                                                

64 
 
  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, 
CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 3:00 P.M. on 
Monday, the 7th February, 2022 in Room Number ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2.  Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3. Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
7. Shri Dhal Singh Bisen 
8. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
9.  Shri S. Venkatesan 
10. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11. Shri Balak Nath 
12. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
13. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
14. Shri Dharambir Singh 
15. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.D. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3.  Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
7. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee 
and stated that the agenda for the meeting is the consideration and adoption of the draft Report 
on the "Reforms in the Education of Performing and Fine Arts". He recalled that the Committee 
has been examining this subject and had also undertaken a study visit to Chennai, Pune and 
Mumbai and visited several art Institutes/Organizations in New Delhi and also interacted with 
prominent personalities and heard their views on the subject. He further mentioned that the 

65 
 
Committee in the meeting held on 5th January, 2022 had heard the views of the Secretary, 
Ministry of Culture; Department of Higher Education and Department of School Education & 
Literacy on the issue along with representatives from School of Performing & Visual Arts, Indira 
Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) and Faculty of Fine Arts, Jamia Millia Islamia. He 
informed the Members that based on the suggestions/inputs received from several stakeholders 
including Government Ministries/ Departments, a draft Report on the subject has been prepared 
which was circulated to them for their inputs/ suggestions. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Report and after deliberating on 
the observations/recommendations contained therein adopted the same with minor 
modifications.. 
4. The Committee also decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament 
on 9th February, 2022 during the first part of the ongoing Budget Session of the Parliament. The 
Committee, accordingly, authorized Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
Gopal Narayan Singh, M.P. to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh 
Rathod, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Jagannath Sarkar, M.P. were authorized to lay the above 
mentioned Report on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5.    The meeting adjourned at 3:12 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                      A.K. Mallick  
7th February, 2022                                                                                                Director 