 
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATIION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
      February, 2021 /Magha, 1942, (Saka)  
  
Report 
No.321 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Notes on 314th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports on Demand 
for Grants (2020-21) of Ministry of Women and Child Development 
 
  (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02nd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 02nd February, 2021) 
 


 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Notes on 314th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports on Demand for Grants (2020-21) of Ministry of 
Women and Child Development 
 
  (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02nd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 02nd February, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
       February, 2021 /Magha,1942, (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …........................................................... (i) – (ii)  
2.        PREFACE................................................................................................................              (iii)  
3.  *ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................... 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…............................     (iv) 
Chapter-I  -   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government .............................................................................        1-4 
Chapter -II  -  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...............          5-9  
Chapter-III -  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee.......   .10-18  
 Chapter-IV Observation/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government is still awaited…………………………………………… -19 
   
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE…. 20-22  
6. MINUTES.............................................................................................................................     23-29 
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________ 
* will be appended later 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Arpita Ghosh  
3. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
6. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
7. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
8. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
10. Shri G.K. Vasan 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. * Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
17. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21 Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
29. Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
 
____________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f. 30.12.2020. 
 
(i)

    
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri Ashok K.Sahoo, Director 
      Ms. Chitra G., Deputy Secretary 
Shri. Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
Smt. Meera Nair, Assistant Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and  Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Twenty First Report of the 
Committee on the Action Taken b y the Government on t he Observat ions/Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred and Fourteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (2020-21) of 
the Ministry of Women and Child Development . The Action Taken Notes were received from the 
Department of Women and Child Development on 7th July, 2020.   
2.  Three Hundred and Fourteenth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on  6th March, 2020 
and simultaneously laid on the Table of Lok Sabha  on 6th March, 2020 .  Replies of the 
Government to the observations/recommendations contained in the Report were considered by the 
Committee at its meeting held on the  21st January, 2021. 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on  
21st January, 2021 .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
21st January, 2021 
Magha/1942 (Saka) 
  
 
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on  Education, Women, 
Children,Youth and Sports  

 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and  Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in its 314  Report on the Demands for G rants 2020-21 of 
the Ministry of Women and Child Development, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid 
on the table of Lok Sabha on 6th March, 2020. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of observations/recommendations contained in above 
mentioned Report were received from the Ministry of Women and Child Development on 7th July, 
2020.  These have been categorized as follows.  
 Chapter  I  : Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras-2.7, 2.8, 3.5, 9.4 
Total- 4 
Chapter  II : Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of Government's replies:- 
Paras-  2.17, 3.8, 3.10, 3.19, 4.9, 6.4, 8.5, 11.5, 14.5 
Total-  9 
Chapter  III : Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:-  
Paras- 2.14, 3.13, 3.16, 3.17, 4.7, 4.8, 5.5, 7.5, 8.4, 10.5, 12.4, 13.6,  
Total-   12 
       Chapter-IV:  Observation/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government is 
still awaited:- 
Paras- Nil  
Total-   Nil  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

    
 
CHAPTER-I 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Observation/recommendation 
1. That there is an urgent need to increase the percentage share of budget of the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development in the GOI budget to meet the needs and requirements of growing 
population of women and children, so that schemes and programmes being run for them do not 
suffer any shortfall in resources. 
(Para-2.7) 
Action Taken 
Budget 
The recommendation is noted. The Ministry has been pursuing the issue with Ministry of  
Finance 
Poshan 
So far POSHAN Abhiyaan is concerned, budget allocation for this scheme is as under:-
(amount in ₹ lakh) 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21  
1500.00 3000.00 3400.00 3700.00 
Therefore, allocation for POSHAN Abhiyaan has been increased every year. 
ICDS 
The financial allocations to the States/UTs are made on the basis of Annual Programme 
Implementation Plan (APIP) submitted by them, keeping the growing population of women and 
children registered under the scheme. The APIPs are considered and approved by the Empowered 
Programme Committee headed by Secretary, MWCD. 
Child welfare 
Under Child Protection Services sufficient funds have been provided during 2020 -21. 
Crèche 
Expenditure for 2019 -20 under Budget Head of National Creche Scheme was Rs.47.77 
crores i.e. 95.54% of BE (Rs 50.00 Cr.) and B.E. 2020-21 for National Creche Scheme is Rs.75.00 
crore which is in compliance with these observations. 
 Beti Bachao Beti Padhao (BBBP) 
The scheme is being implemented in all India   covering   640   districts   (as   per Census 
2011), Of these 405 districts are covered under multi - sectoral i ntervention along with Media 
Advocacy under direct supervision of DMs/DCs and all 640 districts are covered through 
advocacy & media campaign. BBBP Scheme is 100 percent funded by the Central Government 
and funds are directly transferred to designated BBBP account. 
 

2 
 
 
BE allocated for BBBP for the year 2020 - 21 is sufficient looking at the trend of 
expenditure by the districts in previous year & also due to media campaigns/creative, as far as 
possible, being disseminated on pro -bono basis and through new age  social media platforms with 
minimum expenditure. 
 
Media 
Expenditure for 2019 -20 under Media Head was Rs.72.68 crores and accordingly, B.E. 
2020-21 for Media Head is Rs.100.00 crore which is in compliance with these comments in so far 
as Media Division is concerned. 
Gender Budgeting, Research, Publication and Monitoring.  
As far as the Scheme is concerned, the scheme is demand driven and depends upon the 
quality of the proposals and its usefulness for the programmes and policy formulation of the 
Ministry. Under the scheme, sufficient funds have been provided during 2020-21. 
Working Women Hostel (WWH) 
At present, financial resources provided under the Working Women Hostel Scheme are 
adequate to meet the needs and requirements raised under the Scheme. 
Ujjawala & Swadhar 
The budget is prepared according to prospective number of beneficiaries under the target 
group. Report/recommendation of the state govt. is sought to ensure that 
there no short falls in resources 
SAG 
There is no shortfall in resources under Scheme for Adolescent Girls (SAG). 
 
NATIONAL NUTRITION MISSION (NNM) 
Observation/recommendation 
2.   That gap between the projected demand of the Ministry for each of its programmes and 
the actual allocations needs to be bridged completely. As any gap would mean either targets are 
being compromised or intended beneficiaries are not being covered. Both the things would defeat 
the purpose of the schemes meant for the benefit of the most vulnerable section of the society i.e. 
women and children. In  this background, the Committee recommends the Ministry to make 
realistic demands and convince the Ministry of Finance to get its projected demands met. 
(Para-2.8) 
Action Taken 
Budget 
The Ministry has been making realistic demands based on the actual needs  as 
communicated by various States and UT Governments. However, as recommended by the 
Committee, the proposal will be fine tuned further in consultation with other stakeholders in 
future. 
 

3 
 
 
Poshan 
In so far as POSHAN Abhiyaan is concerned, there is no gap between projected    demand    
and    its allocations . Allocation   of   budgets   has   been   done judiciously and optimally. 
ICDS 
The demands are made as per the cost norms of the Scheme, approved by cabinet 
committee and final funds are released as per  the actual number of beneficiaries benefited under 
the scheme. 
Hence, an increase in demand is justifying keeping in view the growing population. 
 
Child Welfare-II 
Under Child Protection Services, sufficient funds have been provided during 2020-21 
Crèche 
Expenditure for 2019 -20 under Budget Head of National Creche Scheme  was Rs.47.77 
crores i.e. 95.54% of BE (Rs 50.00 Cr.) and B.E. 2020 -21 for National Creche Scheme is Rs.75.00 
crore which is in compliance with these observations. 
Beti Bachao Beti Padhao (BBBP) 
 The B.E. for 2020 -21 is as per the observations regarding implementation of the scheme 
during previous years and are more in tune with the implementation on ground and  also due to 
dissemination of media campaigns/creative, as far as possible, on pro-bono basis and through new 
age social media platforms with minimum expenditure. 
Media 
Expenditure for 2019 -20 under Media Head was Rs.72.68 crores  and accordingly, B.E. 
2020-21 for Media Head is Rs.100.00 crore which is in compliance with these commen ts in so far 
as Media Division is concerned. 
Gender Budgeting, Research, Publication and Monitoring. 
In so far as the scheme is concerned, there is no gap between projected demand and its 
allocations. Allocation of budgets has been done judiciously and optimally. 
Working Women Hostel (WWH) 
To bridge the gap between the fund allocation and release continuous measures are taken 
by holding regular  meeting, video conferences, written/telephonic communication with the State 
officials for timely dispatch of the requisite documents for release of funds for New projects and 
on-going projects under Working Women Hostel Scheme. 
Ujjawala & Swadhar 
In so far as Swadhar and Ujjawala schemes  are concerned, there is no gap between 
projected demand and its allocations. All ocation of budgets has been done judiciously and 
optimally. 
 
 

4 
 
 
SAG 
The projected demand and allocation under SAG is same. There is no further financial 
demand under SAG. 
 
Observations/Recommendations 
3.   That the Ministry to be more vigilant in preparing their Annual Action Plan and presenting 
their proposals before the Ministry of Finance in a structured manner so that variations in budget 
allocations are observed. 
(Para-3.5) 
Action Taken 
Budget 
Due care shall be taken in future while preparing the Annual  Action Plan and presenting 
the proposal before the Ministry of Finance in a structured manner so that the variations in budget 
allocation are not observed 
 
WOMEN WELFARE SCHEMES 
Observations/Recommendations 
4. “ The Committee while noting the reply of the  Ministry observes that safety and security o f 
women is of utmost importance and there is a need for effective implementation of the schemes 
meant for providing immediate institutional relief to women in distress. It would be a complete 
irony that on the one hand crime against women is rising and on the other hand fund allocated to 
enhance the safety and security of women remaining underutilized. The Committee, recommends 
optimum utilization of funds under both the schemes and better implementation by State s/UTs in 
coordination with Ministry of Women and Child Development.” 
(Para-9.4) 
Action Taken 
Women Welfare 
MWCD has noted the observations of the PSC for  compliance. Further, the Women 
Welfare Division has been undertaking multifarious methods for procuring Utilisation Certificates 
(UC) and Statements of Expenditure (SOE) from Districts for the One Stop Centre (OSC) and 
Women Helpline Schemes for expediting  release of funds. Review meetings have been held from 
time to time on   10.10.2019,   02.01.2020,  03.01.2020, 24.01.2020 and 28.01.2020 for procuring 
UC-SOEs from districts. Meetings with officers of individual States and UTs have been held from 
time to time on regular basis to pursue for UC -SoEs and other implementation issues of these 
Schemes. OSC visits have been conducted across the country by MWCD officials from time to 
time at the level of Under Secretary and above. Apart from this State Women Helpl ines have also 
been requested telephonic support for following up with all remaining districts where UC -SOEs 
have not been received. Video conferences are held on regular basis with State, UT and district 
officers for this purpose. Nine Rounds of Video Con ferences have been undertaken with District 
Nodal Officers covering over 225 districts for review of submission of UCs and SOEs in May,  
2020 and the remaining are in process. Apart from all the above, frequent telephonic follow up is 
done from WW Division  of MWCD with District Nodal Officers  for this purpose, as well as to 
sort out issues and guide and handhold them in preparation of UCs & SOEs. 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
BUDEGATORY ALLOCATION  
Observation/recommendation 
1.  That the Ministry to exercise financial prudence and make endeavour to utilize the allocated 
funds optimallyand judiciously. The Ministry may devise a framework for cent percent utilization 
of funds and fix responsibilities for any lapse at any level. The Ministry may re- appropriate under 
utilised funds for other schemes facing shortage of fund after taking orders of the appropriate 
authorities at revised stage. 
(Para-2.17) 
Action Taken 
Budget 
Utmost care is taken to observe fiscal discipline while imple menting the schemes and 
programmes of the Ministry. The Ministry aims to invest carefully in social expenditure and fully 
utilize the funds allocated for a specific purpose. The excess or savings of budget is required to be 
explained. Detailed review of re quirement under various schemes and programmes vis -a-vis the 
rate of expenditure is conducted at the RE stage and funds are re -appropriated as and when 
required. 
ICDS 
The Government of India, under Anganwadi Services of umbrella  ICDS 
provides grants in aid  to the States/UTs in the prescribed cost sharing ratio as per the guidelines 
approved by the Cabinet. The scheme is implemented by States/UTs and funds are released on the 
basis of SoEs and UCs submitted by them. 
SAG 
The Division takes exercise for optima l use of resources through revised estimate and re -
appropriation as and when necessary 
 
Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)  
Observations/Recommendations 
2.   That since the Anganwadi Services  aim at improving the nutritional and health status of 
children and women Anganwadi services be delivered to the targeted beneficiaries in rural an d 
remote areas in a mission mode and sustainable manner. 
(Para-3.8) 
Action Taken 
States/UTs have been advised to re -assess their requirement of Ang anwadi Centres 
(AWCs) and relocate AWCs considering the need. While relocating, the aspect of availability of 
adequate land, building, water facilities, ease of access of pregnant women and children besides 
maximum travel distance not being more than 5 km  in case of urban areas, 3 km in rural areas and 

6 
 
1.5 km in tribal areas for the AWWs is to be kept in view. Besides, improved water and sanitation 
facilities, Pre-school education and Medicine Kits are provided at the AWCs. 
Most of the habitats across the country have been covered under the Anganwadi Services. 
If there is any habitat left without Anganwadi Centers, those will be covered in due course of time. 
 
Observations/Recommendations 
3.   That the Ministry to take up the matter of gap between sanctioned and operational 
Anganwadi centres in some States with the respective State Governments and make concerted 
efforts in removing the bottlen ecks hindering the operationalis ation of sanctioned AWCs/Mini 
AWCs in these States and also assess the need to have more Anganwadi centres in the urban areas 
and take steps to sanction and operationalize them. 
(Para-3.10) 
Action Taken 
ICDS 
From time to  time, this Ministry issues advisories to State Governments/UT 
Administrations to operationalize the non - operational Anganwadi Centres. This has been 
discussed in various National Level Review meetings as well. Currently, there are approximately 
13.81 lakh operational AWCs across the country out of the total  of around 14 lakh sanctioned  
AWCs. 
States/UTs have  been advised to re -assess their requirement of Anganwadi Centres 
(AWCs) and relocate AWCs considering the need. While relocating, the aspect of availability of 
adequate land, building, water facilities, ease of access of pregnant women and children beside s 
maximum travel distance not being more than 5 km  in case of urban areas, 3 km in rural areas and 
1.5 km in tribal areas for the AWWs is to be kept in view. Besides, improved water and sanitation 
facilities, Pre-school education and Medicine Kits are pro vided at the AWCs. Most of the habitats 
across the country have been covered under the Anganwadi Services. If there is any habitat left 
without Anganwadi Centers, those will be covered in due course of time. 
 
Observations/Recommendations 
4.  That more remu neration is paid to the AWWs/AWHs and Union Government to impress upon 
the States/UTs, which are paying nominal amounts to the AWWs and AWHs, to increase 
remunerations  of AWWs/AWHs adequately. 
(Para-3.19) 
Action Taken 
Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) &Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs), being honorary workers, are 
paid a monthly honoraria as decided by the Government from time to time. The Government has, 
recently, enhanced honorarium to AWWs from ₹ 3,000/ - to ₹ 4,500/- per month; AWWs at mini -
AWCs from ₹ 2,250/ - to ₹ 3,50 0/- per month; AWHs from ₹ 1,500/ - to ₹ 2,250/ - per month; and 
introduced performance linked incentive of ₹ 250/ - per month to AWHs effective from 1st 
October, 2018. Further, the AWWs are allowed performance linked incentive of ₹  500/ - per 
month for using ICDS-CAS under POSHAN Abhiyaan. 
 

7 
 
 
In addition to the honoraria paid  by the Government of India, most of the  States/UTs are 
also giving monetary incentives to these workers out of their own resources. 
 
National Nutrition Mission (NNM) 
Observations/Recommendations 
5.  That wide-spread publicity must be given to POSHAN Abhiyaan so that beneficiaries may avail 
the benefits of the scheme. 
(Para-4.9) 
Action Taken 
Jan Andolan is the core component of the POSHAN Abhiyaan and Jan Andolan activities 
are being o rganized with great enthusiasm. IEC Campaigns are conducted both by the Central  
Government and State Governments. Community Based Events (CBEs) are conducted twice in a 
month at Anganwadi Centres involving community and local leaders.  During the “Poshan Maah -
2019”, 3.66 crore activities were organized in a period of 30 days. In addition to the Poshan  Maah, 
3.29 crore Community Based Events (CBEs)  have been organized so far under the POSHAN 
Abhiyaan at the Anganwadis. “Poshan Maah -2019”echoed well in the social media platforms. 
More than 34 lakh impressions were generated on Twitter  and 8.6 lakh impressions were 
generated on Facebook. Informative messages were also circulated among groups on WhatsApp. 
To give a further push to the Jan -Andolan, the Ministry has got a “Poshan Anthem” 
prepared which has been written by noted lyricist Shri Prasoon Joshi and composed by Shri 
Shanker Mahadevan. The Anthem was launched on 3 rd December, 2019 by the Hon’ble Vice 
President of India and was rolled out for awareness. 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI MATRITVA VANDAN YOJNA (PMMVY) 
Observations/Recommendations  
6.  The scheme is picking up the pace slowly and States/UTs have started taking benefits of the 
scheme. However, there are States/UTs which have not been taking advantage of the Scheme in 
true letter and spirit. The details reveal that in case of Arunachal Pradesh and Bihar no disbursal 
of fund has taken place as on 31.12.2019 even though a number of beneficiaries have been listed 
in these States under the scheme.  Telangana show zero fund disbursal and not even a single 
beneficiary is listed under the scheme. Odisha also has zero fund disbursal and shows five 
beneficiaries. Further, in respect of some other States such as Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, K arnataka, Gujarat, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu etc. 
where reported number of beneficiaries are huge, reported fund disbursal in comparison appears 
to be quite low.  The Committee would like to know from the Ministry the reasons for  such slow 
pace of implementation in these States/UTs. The Committee feels that it is the implementation of 
the scheme which is lacki ng and there is need to plug  in the loopholes in implementation process. 
The Committee, accordingly , recommend that loopholes in the implementation of the scheme be 
removed in coordination with the States/UTs to make the scheme result oriented and more 
awareness programme to be conducted in far flung and rural areas so that the benefits of the 
scheme     percolate     down     to   the intended beneficiaries. 
(Para-6.4) 

8 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
Pradhan Mantri Matritva Vandan Yojna (PMMVY) 
It is true that the no fund was released to the State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh and 
Bihar during the year 2019 -20 (as on 31.12.2019). However, the beneficiaries were being paid by 
these States during the aforesaid period from the unspent balance of previous years available with 
them. Similarly, in other cases also where the reported number of beneficiaries are huge in 
comparison to the funds released during 2019 -20 (as on 31.12.2019) is due to the beneficiaries 
being paid from the unspent balance of previous years. The details of total number of beneficiaries 
paid and funds released to various States/UTs during the year 2019 - 20 are Annexed. As far as 
implementation of Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana (PMMVY) in the States of Odisha and 
Telangana is concerned, both these States are implementing their own Maternity Benefit 
Programmes and have not yet started implementation of PMMVY in their respective States. 
The Ministry reviewing the implementation of the scheme periodically through Video 
Conferences with States/UTs and through National and Regional level workshops. Consequently, 
the uptake of the scheme has increased and more and more beneficiaries are brought under the 
ambit of the scheme. 
The Ministry is also providing financial assistance to all States/UTs for carrying out Information, 
Education and Communication (IEC) activities in their respective State/UT. 
WOMEN EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION SCHEMES 
Observations/Recommendations  
7.  That more efforts are required to be  made in the States/UTs having lower SRB than the 
National average of 931. The Ministry to conduct socio economic study at District level in this 
States/UTs to understand the cause of low SRB and frame suitable strategies to get effective 
results. Best practices of well performing States/UTs may also be replicated in low performing  
States/UTs. 
(Para-8.5) 
Action Taken 
SRB data is received on annual basis from MoH&FW. Currently out of 405 multi -sectoral 
intervention Districts 214 Districts from 26 States/UTs are below the National average of 931 
(2018-19). After receiving the latest data of SRB of F.Y. 2019 -20 from MoH&FW, the same will 
be analysed to identify Districts having SRB below National average. 
A letter will be sent to Districts having low SRB for conducting a study to identify District 
specific gaps and plan strategies for addressing the same, using budget under evaluation, 
monitoring and Documentation head. 
Ministry has already carried out a third party evaluation of BBBP, recommendations and 
findings of which will be shared with the Districts for better planning.  
Districts will also be requested to engage other line Departments for devel oping 
comprehensive District Action Plan to address the issue.  
Ministry has also developed a compendium of best practices to encourage Districts to 
take innovative actions pertaining to their local need, which could be replicated. 

9 
 
UJJAWALA SCHEME 
Observation/recommendation 
8.  That besides optimum utilization of funds there should be effective monitoring mechanism to 
ensure that concerned NGOs are implementing  the Ujjawala scheme effectively and the scheme is 
implemented in the border, rural and re mote areas which are more prone to trafficking of women 
and children in a focused manner. 
(Para-11.5) 
Action Taken 
Ujjawala 
There is a 3 tier monitoring mechanism at District, State and Central level. In addition to 
this, separate periodic evaluations of the projects are also undertaken by reputed institutions, 
Panchayati Raj institutions, Block level institutions at district level. At central level several 
meetings, video conferences, communication  with State officials/Stakeholders take place for 
monitoring and effective implementation of the scheme and to pursue new proposals from the 
State/UT so that all the area/ region is covered. 
CENTRAL ADOPTION RESOURCE AGENCY (CARA) 
Observation/recommendation 
12.   The Ministry to look into the issues of post adoption well-being of the children especially in 
case of children adopted by parents living abroad so that the Children’s safety can be ensured. 
(Para-14.5) 
Action Taken 
Child Welfare 
Section 59(11) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children ) Act, 2015 
provides for the Authorised Foreign Adoption Agency (AFAA), or Central Authority, or the 
concerned Government department, as the case may be, to ensure that the progress report about 
the child in the adoptive family are submitted on a timely basis. 
Apart from this, Regulation 19 of the Adoption Regulations , 2017 stipulates that the 
AFAA or the Central Authority or Indian Diplomatic Mission or Government Department 
concerned, as the case may be, shall report the progress of the adopted child for two years from 
the date of arrival of the adopted child in the receiving country, on a quarterly basis during the 
first year and on six monthly basis in the second year. 
Furthermore, Regulation 40 of the Adoption Regulations, 2017 mandates the Indian 
Diplomatic Mission to liaise with Central Authorities concerned to en sure safeguards   of   
children of Indian origin adopted by NRIs, OCIs and foreign parents against neglect maltreatment, 
exploitation or abuse and organise or participate in get - togethers of the adopted children and their 
parents. 
  

10 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
NATIONAL MISSION FOR EMPOWERNMENT OF WOMEN (NMEW) 
Observation/recommendation 
1. That women empowerment and protection schemes also given equal attention and priority, 
greater allocation, full utilization and focused implementation of various schemes related to 
women and their universalisation. 
(Para-2.14) 
Action Taken 
Creche  
Not concerned with National Creche Scheme directly since the main objective of this 
scheme is to provide day care facilities to children (age group of 6 months - 6 years) of working 
mothers including an integrated package of the following services: 
i. Daycare Facilities including Sleeping Facilities. 
ii. Early Stimulation for  children below 3 years and Pre -school Education for 3 to 6 
years old children. 
iii. Supplementary Nutrition (to be locally sourced) 
iv. Growth Monitoring. 
v. Health Check-up and Immunization. 
MSK 
Regular follow -up with States/UTs (telephonic and email/letters) undertaken to expedite 
recruitment of contractual staff wherever pending.  
Format developed & circulated to all States/UTs to enable monthly monitoring of scheme 
implementation. 
 State/district level structures under MSK directed to book funds for activities undertaken 
from MSK Budget head. 
Special efforts in States having larger number of aspirational districts taken through regular 
Whatsapp/Video Conferencing and letters to respective distri ct nodal officers to facilitate 
engagement and awareness generation through student volunteers 
Research, Publication and Monitoring.  
The Research Scheme under the women empowerment and protection schemes is given 
equal attention and priority. The scheme tries to utilize the fund by sponsoring good projects that 
are useful for the programmes and policy formulation of the Ministry. 
 

11 
 
 
Working Women Hostel (WWH) 
The Scheme is being implemented with full attention and utmost priority. 
Swadhar and Ujjawala 
The Schemes are being implemented with full attention and utmost priority. 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
The C ommittee would like to be appr ised about the status  of the  District Level 
Centres for Women (DLCW) under the MSK Scheme. It is noted by the Committee that only 
24 districts have functional DLCWs so far. Of the most backward districts in India, ten 
which are situated in Bihar, not a single DLCW has been set up yet. Similarly, of the 19 
districts of Jharkhand and in Chhattisgarh no DLCW has been made operational. The status 
on the number of DLCWs set up and the number of women who benefitted from them shows 
that the scheme was not properly implemented.  Further, the Committee would like to know 
the status of the Central Sector Scheme  Support to Tr aining and Employment Programme 
for Women (STEP) and the list of NGOs involved in funding the scheme. 
INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (ICDS) 
Observations/Recommendations 
2.  That all the sanctioned Anganwadi centres must be run with proper infrastructure if quality 
services are to be rendered to the beneficiaries. 
(Para-3.13) 
Action Taken 
At present there are 14 l a k h (approx.) sanctioned AWCs of which approximately13.81  
lakh AWCs are operational as on 31.12.2019. Under the existing Anganwadi  Services Scheme, 
there is a provision for construction of AWC buildings in rural areas under convergence with 
MNGNREGS @ Rs. 7.00 lakh per AWC building. Under this component, Rs. 5.00 lakh are 
provided by MoRD under MGNREGS, Rs. 1.00 is provided by the re spective State/UT and Rs. 
1.00 lakh is provided by MWCD after completion of construction work of AWC building. 
Under the existing scheme, there is provision for up -gradation and maintenance of AWC 
buildings. Funds under both the components are released to States/UTs @ Rs. 2.00 lac per AWC 
building for up-gradation and Rs. 3,000/- per AWC for maintenance in the prescribed cost sharing  
ratio. 
Further Comments of the Committee  
The Committee notes that the Anganwadis are quite deficient in supplies and 
infrastructure for education  and as a result, they tend to contain fewer children from 4 -6 
years of age range. Further, there are still shortage of toilet facilities and drinking water 
facilities in AWCs  across the country. The Committee therefore would like to b e apprised 
about the specific interventions made by the Ministry in this regard. 
Observation/recommendation 
 
 

12 
 
 
3. That the Ministry must take up the recruitment of Anganwadi functionaries with the 
States/UTs in a mission mode manner so that vacant positions are filled up expeditiously and 
quality services are rendered to the beneficiaries.                                             
    (Para-3.16) 
Action Taken 
States/UTs have been advised from time to time for filling up the vacant posts of 
Anganwadi Services functionaries for proper implementation of the scheme and to ensure 
functioning of scheme without any hindrance. The State Governments/UT Administrations have 
also been requested to consider services rendered as AWWs as additional qualification s for being 
recruited as Primary School Teachers, ANMs & other such village based posts; and to recruit at 
least 50% of supervisors under ICDS Scheme from matriculate AWWs with 10 years’ experience. 
Further, the revised guidelines issued by this Ministry p rovide for filling up of 50% vacancies in 
the posts of Supervisors from amongst AWWs with requisite qualifications and ten years’ service 
as AWWs. 
 
Observations/Recommendations 
4.  That the Ministry to ensure that its advisory of exercising the diligence is followed by the States 
and the UTs and registration and final selection of the Anganwadi functionaries alongwith their 
qualifications and experience is made digital so as to include an element of fairplay in the 
selection of Anganwadi functionaries. 
(Para-3.17) 
Action Taken 
The administration, management & monitoring including recruitment/ selection of 
anganwadi functionaries for implementation of the Anganwadi Services Scheme are being done by 
the concerned State Government/UT Administration. In case any grievance/complaint is received 
for corruption in recruitment of Anganwadi Services’ functionaries, the same is forwarded to the 
concerned State Government/UT Administration for ne cessary action.  Further, the State 
Governments/UT Administrations have been requested to recruit at least 50% of supervisors under 
ICDS Scheme from matriculate AWWs with 10 years’ experience. 
As regards promotion of AWWs to the post of Supervisors, the revised guidelines issued 
by this Ministry provide for filling up of 50% vacancies in the posts of Supervisors from amongst 
AWWs with requisite qualifications and ten years’ service as AWWs. 
Further Comments of the Committee (Paras 3.16 & 3.17) 
The Committ ee, would like to know about the outcome of delegating the power to 
recruit AWWs/AWHs and Supervisors (against promotion quota) to the District  
Magistrates/District Collectors in 115 districts of the country for filling up of  vacancies of 
Anganwadi functio naries. The Committee may also be appraised about the status of such 
recruitments and the number of vacancies filled so far. The Committee feels that it is of 
utmost importance to redress t he shortage of adequate manpower so as to maintain the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the scheme. 
 
 

13 
 
 
NATIONAL NUTRITION MISSION (NNM) 
Observation/recommendation 
5.   That there is optimum utilization of funds under the POSHAN  Scheme and better co -
ordination between the Centre and the States/UTs for its effective impleme ntation. The Members 
of Parliament should also be included in the implementation of the scheme. 
(Para-4.7) 
Action Taken 
Top   leadership   in   the   States   has  been associated with the POSHAN Abhiyaan. In the 
last one year, Hon’ble Minister, Women & Child Development has reviewed the progress of 
POSHAN Abhiyaan with the Chief Ministers of 16 States. She has also written letters to the 
Governors, Chief Ministers, Lt. Governors and Administrators of all States/UTs to join 
PoshanMaah activities. Responding to her  call, Governors/ Lt. Governors/Administrators and 
Chief Ministers of 23 States /UTs joined Poshan  Maah activities. Subsequently, Hon’ble Minister 
also wrote let ters to them to continue their association with the POSHAN Abhiyaan. Regular 
Video Conferencing with States/UTs is being carried out by Secretary, MWCD to review the 
progress of the Abhiyaan 
 
Observation/recommendation 
6.   That focused implementation of P OSHAN Abhiyaan is ensured in the remote and 
inaccessible areas where the presence of SC, ST, Minority Communities and other disadvantaged 
communities is relatively high and which need institutional support from the Government. 
Availability of regional food  items and cultural preferences may also be integrated with this 
abhiyaan to make it inclusive. 
(Para-4.8) 
Action Taken 
POSHAN Abhiyaan is implemented in all the States/UTs and includes the remote and 
inaccessible areas where the presence of SC, ST, Minori ty Communities and otherdisadvantaged 
communities is relatively high. West Bengal is yet to implement the Abhiyaan. 
 
The Ministry in partnership with Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) is 
documenting traditional dietary practises and traditional Social Behaviour Change Communication 
(SBCC) strategies across the states. The best states practices and strategies will be disseminated 
through national, regional and State workshops and through the media. 
 
Further Comments of the Committee (Paras 4.7 & 4.8) 
The Committee observes that although in Financial Year 2020 -21 Budget Estimates 
(BEs), allocated 3,700 crore for the Mission, which is a 9 per cent increase from previ ous 
year's Revised Estimates (RE s), the utilization of funds under the scheme has  been 
consistently low. On average, only 34 per cent of fund was spent over the cumulative period 
from FY 2017 -18 to FY 2019 -20. Further, there are differences in the quan tum of funds 
received by S tates. The variance in utilisation of funds is also serious  concern, specifically 
due to stunting of children less than 5 years in 267 districts across 22 states  which is higher 
than the national average.  

14 
 
 
 
 
ICT-RTM is one of the largest activities within Poshan Abhiyaan. However, 74 per 
cent of the total expendi ture incurred under ICT -RTM was on the procurement of mobile 
phones. This was followed by 11 per cent for recharge and maintenance of mobile phones 
and 7 per cent for training. In this context, the Committee strongly feels that the mission 
calls for an evi dence-based research and planning at a grassroots level in order to employ 
resources on a need-based framework. 
SABLA 
Observations/Recommendations 
7. That there is a need to strengthen the non nutrition component of  the scheme especially 
integrating out of school adolescent girls into the schooling fold and vocational skill based 
training given to them which will help them integrate with the society and enable them to work for 
their livelihood. 
(Para-5.5) 
Action Taken 
Sabla 
 It is the non nutrition component of the scheme which may prove to be helpful to the 
adolescent girls in mainstreaming their lives in society. Concerned efforts are being made for 
effective convergence with line departments/state governments for proper  
implementation of Non-Nutrition component of the scheme. 
The monitoring and supervision mechanism set up under the ICDS Scheme at  National 
level,  State level and Community level is used for the Scheme. The Monitoring Committees at all 
levels are set up to check and take stock of the progress of the Scheme and also for strengthen
 the coordination and convergence between concerned departments.  In 
addition to  Review meetings/Field visits are undertaken by  the senior officers of the Ministry. 
Analysis of the Progress Report given by the States/UTs is undertaken in the Ministry to identify 
gaps and for follow up action. 
 Non Nutrition services under SAG are provided @ Rs. 1.1 lakh per project per annum. 
Non-nutrition component of  the Scheme involves converge nce with Heath Departments for 
various health related services viz. IFA supplementation, deworming,  Nutrition and Health 
Education and with mainstreaming  the out of school  girls to formal education. In a ddition, 
effective convergence with other ministries such as Panchayati Raj, Youth Affairs & Sports etc.  
has strengthened the activities under the non- nutrition component of  the scheme resulting in 
array of services coverage of adolescent girls benefited by the scheme. 
The Scheme for Adolescent Girls covers only out of school girls between 11-14 years. As 
per the provision of The Child and Adolescent Labour Prohibition and Regulation Amendment 
Act 2016 under Section 2 Clause 3 (I) No Child shall be employed or permitted to work in any 
occupation or process. As per the  Section 2 of the principal Act (b) for clause (ii) of The Child 
and Adolescent Labour Prohibition and Regulation Amendment Act 2016 shall be substituted 
namely:- 
 

15 
 
 
 
‘(ii)”child” means a person who has not completed his fourteenth ye ar of age or such age as 
may be specified in the right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, 
which is more; 
So Vocational training for Adolescent Girls in the age group of 11-14 is not applicable. 
Further Comments of the Committee  
The Committee doesn’t accept the reply stated by the  Ministry regarding the 
Vocational Training for adolescent girls in the age group of 11-14 years, that it is not feasible 
due to the provisions under the Child and Adolescent Labour Prohibition and Regula tion 
Amendment Act 2016 . The vocational training programmes are constituted to help the 
young girls to build a wide set of soft skills, such as conflict resolution, team building, and 
communication, which they can use in a variety of jobs. The Committee’s specific 
recommendation is mainly integrating out of school adolescent girls into the schooling fold 
and vocational skill based training for enabling them to work for their livelihood in future. 
The Committee strongly feels that vocational training can  change the life of an adolescent 
girl by helping them to gain financial independence, establish good saving habits, and 
improve their future job prospects for participation in the labour force . Therefore the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that there is a need to strengthen the non-nutrition 
component of the scheme to prepare adolescent girls in the age group of 11-14 years. 
 
INTGRATED CHILD PROTECTION SCHEME (ICPS) 
Observation/recommendation 
8. That Ministry to impress upon the States/UTs to ensure that living conditions of juvenile 
homes improve. 
(Para-7.5) 
Action Taken 
 Child Welfare-II 
The Central Government is administering the Child Protection Services (CPS) Scheme to 
implement the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (JJ 
Act), in which State Governments/UT Administrations have major role to play. The Ministry has 
been requesting the State Governments/UT Administrations from time to time to identify and 
register all Child Care Institutions (including  Juvenile Homes) under relevant provisions of JJ Act 
and set up functional inspection  and other Committees to ensure that children in all the CCIs 
receive the best of care, and are not subject to any kind of abuse and neglect. The JJ Rules inter -
alia speci fy standards for  physical infrastructure, clothing, bedding, nutrition & diet, as well as 
rehabilitation measures such as education, vocational training, counseling etc. The State
 Governments/UT Administrations have been requested to ensure, through regula r 
inspection and monitoring, that the institutions are run as per the provisions of the Act and the 
Rules framed there-under. 
 
 

16 
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
During any crisis situation, be natural disaster or pandemic, children, especially those 
who belong to socio -economically backward and marginalised communities, end up 
becoming the most vulnerable demographic. Amongst them, the c hildren in the conflict 
settings are at considerable risk. The Committee feels that there are persistent problems of 
inadequate and trained staff, cramped space, lack of basic amenities etc. that make the living 
conditions in the child care  institutions miserable. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates 
that besides strengthening  institutional framework, the Ministry should provide for proper 
space with basic amenities and  training and counselling to the staff to handle children in 
such homes with care and cautions so that the aim of mainstreaming these children to society 
may be achieved.  The Committee also desires to be briefed about the measures taken to 
tackle the challenges that children are facing or likely to face amidst the current pandemic of 
novel corona virus. 
 
BET BACHAO BETI PADHAO (BBBP) 
Observation/recommendation 
9.   The cause  for under utilization of funds under BBBP may be identified  and remedial 
measures undertaken immediately. 
(Para-8.4) 
Action Taken 
Cause: The Beti Bachao Beti Padhao Scheme’s  budgetary allocation at revised 
estimatestage is Rs. 200 Crore, out of this, Rs.85.78 Crore, 42.89 % of funds has been spent during 
the F.Y. 2019 -20. This is  due to lesser demand from districts under  BBBP during 2019 -20 and 
promotion of BBBP with zero budget/minimum expenditure for media awareness generation 
campaign, besides promoting BBBP by co-branding with other programmes and 
initiatives of the Government. 
Measure taken:  Strengthen the monitoring mechanism (rigorous) and track Districts 
especially those have with low utilization. Video conferences with the districts (category wise) to 
ensure timely demand of budg et (both installments) and optimum utilization of funds.DCs 
persuaded for timely submission of financial and physical report. Review meeting at State level 
with identified Districts with low fund utilization and not seeking second installment) 
Further Comments of the Committee 
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to assess the status of delay 
while it consider next year's Demands for Grants. 
NATIONAL MISSION FOR EMPOWERNMENT OF WOMEN (NMEW) 
Observation/recommendation 
10.  That obstacles that inhibit States/UTs in making their proposals for working women hostels 
are removed and more publicity to the scheme is given so that women can avail this facility. 
(Para-10.5) 
 

17 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
Working Women Hostel ( WWH) 
Since the current pattern of funding does not encourage many States for submitting 
proposals for the same; hence it has been proposed to convert the scheme from a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme to Central Sector Scheme. Further, this Ministry has been requesti ng time and 
again all the State Governments/UTs to encourage their agencies, local bodies, Universities etc. for 
construction of more and  more buildings for working women and also encourage the State 
Commissions for Women to take part in this endeavour. 
 
Observation/recommendation 
11.    That the Ministry to take steps to increase the number of Swadhar  Greh and also increase 
their capacity gradually as per the need. The inmates of Swadhar Greh may be trained for 
livelihood earning under the skill India mission. 
(Para-12.4) 
Action Taken 
Swadhar 
Meeting/video conferences with States/UTs officials were held to promote the importance 
of the scheme and pursue new proposals. There is provision for skill development training for the 
beneficiaries under the scheme. These trained beneficiaries can earn their livelihood.  
Further Comments of the Committee (Paras 10.5 &12.4) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry  should pursue the matter with the 
States/Union Territory Administrations vigorously so that financial timelines are adhered to. 
The Committee may also be appraised about the scope and possibilities of running  of 
Working Women Hostels in rented premises for facilitating accommodation to the working 
women. 
 
Observation/recommendation 
12.    That the Ministry to take up the matter of approval of Mahila Shakti Kendra Scheme with 
the States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and West Bengal having a large number of backward 
and rural districts for its implementation. That Mahila Shakti Kendra (MSK) scheme to be 
integrated with skill India scheme for empowering the rural women economically. 
(Para-13.6) 
Action Taken 
Mahila Shakti Kendra (MSK) 
Efforts at the highest level being undertaken in these States. Bihar Government has 
recently (February 2020) given approval for MSK Scheme implementation. Inter -sectoral 
convergence efforts to empower rural women through awareness generation and linkage as per 
entitlement through community participation of college student volunteers is being undertaken. 

18 
 
 
 
Further, National Conference on Policy Framework for Skilling of Women and Children organised 
on 14th February, 2020 to strategize future course of action. 
Further Comments of the Committee 
The Committee would like to be apprised about  the roadmap for implementing the Mahila 
Shakti Kendra (MSK) Scheme in the States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and West 
Bengal. It is noted by the Committee that amogst the most backward districts in India, ten 
which are situated in Bihar, not a single DLCW has been set up yet.  Further, the Committee 
would like to be briefed about inculcation of community engagement in the wake of the 
COVID-19 Pandemic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED. 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
 
NATIONAL MISSION FOR EMPOWERNMENT OF WOMEN (NMEW) 
 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the status of the District Level 
Centres for Women (DLCW) under the MSK  Scheme It is noted by the Committee that only 
24 districts have functional DLCWs so far. Of the most backward districts in India, ten 
which are situated in Bihar, not a single DLCW has been set up yet. Similarly, of the 19 
districts o f Jharkhand and in Ch hattisgarh, no DLCW has been made operational. The 
status on the number of DLCWs set up and the number of women who benefitted from them 
shows that the scheme was not properly implemented. Further, the Committee would like to 
know the status of the Central  Sector Scheme Support to Training and Employment 
Programme for Women (STEP) and the list of NGOs involved in funding the scheme. 
(Para-2.14) 
INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (ICDS) 
The Committee notes that the Anganwadis are quite deficient in  supplies and 
infrastructure for education  and as a result, they tend to contain fewer children from 4 -6 
years of age range. Further, there are still shortage of toilet facilities and drinking water 
facilities in AWCs  across the country. The Committee ther efore would like to be apprised 
about the specific interventions made by the Ministry in this regard.  
 (Para 3.13) 
The Committee, would like to know about the outcome of delegating the power to 
recruit AWWs/AWHs and Supervisors (against promotion quota) to the District  
Magistrates/District Collectors in 115 districts of the country for filling up of  vacancies of 
Anganwadi functionaries. The Committee may also be appraised about the status of such 
recruitments and the number of vacancies filled so far. The  Committee feels that it is of 
utmost importance to redress t he shortage of adequate manpower so as to maintain the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the scheme.  
(Paras 3.16 & 3.17) 
NATIONAL NUTRITION MISSION (NNM) 
 
The Committee observes that although in Financial Year 2020 -21 Budget Estimates 
(BEs), allocated 3,700 crore for the Mission, which is a 9 per cent increase from previous 
year's Revised Estimates (Res), the utilization of funds under the scheme has been 
consistently low. On average, only 34 per cent of fund was spent over the cumulative period 
from FY 2017 -18 to FY 2019 -20. Further, there There are differences in the quan tum of 
funds received by states. The variance in utilisation of funds is also serious c oncern, 
specifically due to stunting of children less than 5 years in 267 districts across 22 states which 
is higher than the national average.  
 
 

21 
 
 
 
ICT-RTM is one of the largest activities within Poshan Abhiyaan. However, 74 per 
cent of the total expendit ure incurred under ICT -RTM was on the procurement of mobile 
phones. This was followed by 11 per cent for recharge and maintenance of mobile phones 
and 7 per cent for training. In this context, the Committee strongly feels that the mission 
calls for an evid ence-based research and planning at a grassroots level in order to employ 
resources on a need-based framework. 
 
SABLA 
The Committee doesn’t accept the reply stated by the  Ministry regarding the 
Vocational Training for adolescent girls in the age group of 11 -14 years, that it is not feasible 
due to the provisions under the Child and Adolescent Labour Prohibition and Regulation 
Amendment Act 2016 . The vocational training programmes are constituted to help the 
young girls to build a wide set of soft skills, such as conflict resolution, team building, and 
communication, which they can use in a variety of jobs. The Committee’s specific 
recommendation is mainly integrating out of school a dolescent girls into the schooling fold 
and vocational skill based training for enabling them to work for their livelihood in future. 
The Committee strongly feels that vocational training can  change the life of an adolescent 
girl by helping them to gain fi nancial independence, establish good saving habits, and 
improve their future job prospects for participation in the labour force . Therefore the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that there is a need to strengthen the non-nutrition 
component of the scheme to prepare adolescent girls in the age group of 11-14 years. 
(Para-5.5) 
INTGRATED CHILD PROTECTION SCHEME (ICPS) 
During any crisis situation, be natural disaster or pandemic, children, especially those 
who belong to socio -economically backward and mar ginalised communities, end up 
becoming the most vulnerable demographic. Amongst them, the c hildren in conflict settings 
are at considerable risk.  The Committee feels that there are persistent problems of 
inadequate and trained staff, cramped space, lack of basic amenities etc. that make the living 
conditions in the child care  institutions miserable. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates 
that besides strengthening  institutional framework, the Ministry should provide for proper 
space with basic amenities and  training and counselling to the staff to handle children in 
such homes with care and cautions so that the aim of mainstreaming these children to society 
may be achieved. The Committee also desires to be brief about the measures taken to tackle 
the challenges that children are facing or likely to face amidst the pandemic. 
(Para-7.5) 
BET BACHAO BETI PADHAO (BBBP) 
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to assess the status of delay 
while it consider next year's Demands for Grants. 
(Para-8.4) 
  

22 
 
 
NATIONAL MISSION FOR EMPOWERNMENT OF WOMEN (NMEW) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry  pursue the matter with the States/Union 
Territory Administrations vigorously so that financial  timelines are adhered to.  The 
Committee may also be appraised about the scope and possibilities of running  of Working 
Women Hostels in rented premises for facilitating accommodation to the working women.  
         (Paras 10.5 &12.4) 
The Committee would like to be apprised about  the roadmap for implementing the 
Mahila Shakti Kendra (MSK) Scheme in the States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and 
West Bengal. It is noted by the Committee that amogst the most backward districts in India, 
ten which are situated in Bihar, not a single DLCW has been set up yet.  Further, the 
Committee would like to be briefed about inculcation of community engagement in the wake 
of the COVID-19 Pandemic. 
(Para-13.6) 
 
 
  

23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

24 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
      The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports  met at 2.00 P.M. on 
Thursday, the 21st January, 2021 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
         MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Smt. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
6. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
7. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 
 LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Rajendra Agarwal 
9. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
10. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
11. Shri Balak Nath 
12. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
13. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
14. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
16. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
17. Shri S. Venkatesan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
    Dr.   Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
  Shri   Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
  Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
  Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
   
  

26 
 
 
 Witnesses 
  Jnana Prabodhini, Pune  
 
 1. Shri Prashant Diveknar 
 2. Ms. Madhura Lunkade 
 3. Mr. Nachiket Nisture  
 4. AVM KP Palsule (Retd.) 
 
  Pratham Education Foundation, New Delhi 
 
 5. Shri Shailendra Sharma 
 6. Dr. Faiyas Ahmed  
   
  Central Square Foundation, New Delhi  
 
 7. Shri Ashish Dhawan, Chairman 
 8. Smt. Romonika D Sharan, Director 
 
  Vidya Bharti Akhil Bhartiya Shiksha Sansthan, New Delhi. 
  
 9. Shri D. Ramakrishna Rao, President 
 10. Shri Shiv Kumar Sharma, Secretary 
 11. Shri Gobinda Chandra Mohanta, Joint Organization Secretary 
  
  Department of School Education and Literacy  
 
 12. Smt. L.S. Changsan, Joint Secretary 
 13. Dr. Sridhar Srivastava, Director, NCERT 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members present in the sitting and informed about 
notification of Subjects identified by the Committee in Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha Bulletins on 
18th January, 2021. He apprised that four orga nizations have been invited for consultations on the 
Subject – “Reforms in Contents and Designs in School Textbooks”. The Committee thereafter 
took up for consideration three draft Reports relating to Action Taken Notes of Department of 
School Education and Literacy and Department of Higher Education and Ministry of Women and 
Child Development on their respective Demand for Grants (2020 -21). The Committee adopted 
those Reports without any modifications. The Committee then decided to present those Reports 

27 
 
along with three other Reports which were presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 24 th 
December, 2020 on virtual mode, to both the Houses of Parliament on Tuesday, 2 nd February, 
2021. 
3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Dr. Sasm it Patra to present 
those Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma and in his absence, Shri Lavu Sri 
Krishna Devarayalu to present those Reports to the Lok Sabha. 
4. Thereafter, Jnana Prabodhini, Pune was invited to submit their views. Commen cing their 
presentation that organization highlighted that the virtues of tolerance, open and fair mindedness, 
peaceful co-existence, nation building need to be inculcated in the minds of the students for their 
attitude formation. Students should be taught  history in such a manner that they should be able to 
appreciate the underlying values behind the ideals of ‘unity in diversity’ and other constitutional 
values for the sake of the national integration and social harmony. Continuing further they 
mentioned that current contents of history textbooks happen to be distorted leading to confusion in 
the young minds; those are also deficient about ancient india and warriors and heroes, women 
achievers from different parts of the Country. They advocated reforms in the history textbook to 
give proportionate presentation of ancient indian knowledge in medicine, mathematics and 
architecture, etc. and  remove regional imbalances. They also emphasized the need for 
comprehensive continuous teaching training programme with focus on innovative pedagogy with 
project/activity and technology based learning. 
5. Elucidating their presentation, they suggested that special digital platform like DISHA may 
be created for dissemination of supplementary reading material on history which  is not covered in 
the main textbook. Artificial intelligence and related technology may be utilized for 
evalution/assessment of educational achievement of the students. For the purpose of reform of 
textbooks domain experts may be involved for deciding con tents load and framework and 
expertise of software engineers and artists from film and art and culture may be utilized for reform 
in design of the textbook, they emphasized.     
6. Some Members pointed out that discourse of regional history are not covered  properly in 
the textbooks developed by NCERT; many facets of regional history including ‘Paika  Rebellion’ 
and their contribution to freedom struggle is not known to many people in the country. It was also 
suggested that course content of history should engender critical thinking and inquisitiveness in the 
young minds besides providing information about facts of war and invasion. Some Members were 
of the view that pictorial presentation of course content is required to make it more appealing.  

28 
 
7. Thereafter the Pratham Education Foundation was invited to make their presentation. They 
in their deposition referred to the target of New Education Policy, 2020 to achieve universal 
foundational literacy and numeracy in primary school by 2025 for which reading, wri ting and 
arithmetic are fundamental requirements to achieve the target but their survey conducted in some 
of the States found that students in primary level have deficiency in the ability of reading 
textbooks particularly in Government schools. Therefore, they emphasized that the curriculum 
design should be made in such a way that it becomes interesting for a child to read and learn. In 
that context graded learning programme adopted by some of the States was referred to.   
8. While clarifying certain points raised by Members on the issue of methodology adopted for 
conducting nation wide survey, they mentioned that the methodology is widely accepted and 
globally recognized and they have agreed to sent a copy of the report for perusal of Members 
which contains the description of methodology adopted by them to reach the findings. On the issue 
of curriculum they refer to a study conducted on negative consequences of over ambitious 
curriculum conducted by Harvard Kennedy School which has examined six countries inc luding 
India. That study mentioned that lengthy curriculum hampers the learning process of the child in 
that context comparative analysis of learning ability of children of India and Vietnam was 
adduced. 
9. At that point, some Members held that emphasis mi ght be laid on the pedagogical process 
with focus on learning by experiment rather than learning by rote; There should be continuous 
assessment of learning losses/gains; proportionate representation of issues from global to local and 
continuous updation of  facts and figures in textbooks particularly Economics and Geography 
textbooks were stressed upon by them.  
10. Thereafter Vidya Bharti Akhil Bhartiya Shiksha Sansthan put forth their views on the 
subject and pointed out certain factual distortions about vedic tradition, incompatibility of certain 
facts with constitutional ideals and values in the textbook. To the query of Committee about their 
teachers training programmes they informed the Committee  that their programme has been 
assimilated in the traini ng programme for teachers in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, 
Odisha by their respective SCERTs. The Committee was unanimous that the stakeholder may be 
consulted by NCERT while framing National Curriculum Framework under New Education 
Policy, 2020. 
11. Central Square Foundation, New Delhi was the last stakeholder of the day and made their 
presentations covering the issues of learning poverty amongst the children in primary schools, 

29 
 
structured pedagogy, quality Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) . He appreciated the 
Nipun Bharat Scheme envisioned under new National Education Policy 2020.  
12. Clarifications about the outcome of Amma Vodi Scheme in Andhra Pradesh, quantum of 
learning loss and ways to recover that loss; problems of students having D yslexia, Autism, and 
other disabilities to cope up with online learning; comparison of school education in the U.K., 
Australia, Peru and Chile with ours were sought by Chairman and Members of the Committee.   
13. Clarifying those queries they submitted tha t their organization have not developed any 
scientific methodology to gauge learning loss, however, intense and focused teaching for three to 
four months could recover the loss of nine to ten months. 
14. The Chairman requested the stakeholders to submit th eir queries together with additional 
points to the Committee within a period of seven days. The Chairman apprised the Committee that 
Hon’ble Chairman has allowed Committees to undertake study visits. He suggested that the 
Committee may visit some of the sc hools in tribal areas, slum areas and urban areas to interact 
with the students and their parents to get their feedback about the curriculum and other related 
problems. The Chairman announced the dates for consideration of Demand for Grants (2021 -22) 
of related Ministries/Departments under its purview during forthcoming Budget Recess from 13 th 
February to 7th March, 2021. 
15. The Verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
16. The meeting adjourned at 4.30 PM. 
 
 