 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2023/Bhadra, 1945 (Saka)  
 
 
Report No 
356 
THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
Implementation of the National Education Policy, 2020 in 
Higher Education  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  21st September, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st September, 2023) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
 
Implementation of the National Education Policy, 2020 in  
 
Higher Education  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st  September, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st September, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2023 / Bhadra, 1945 (Saka)  
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.................................................................................................. (iii)-(v) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................  1-44 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE................... 44-53 
6. MINUTES.................................................................................................      54-82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. **** 
5. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
7. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Dr. T.R.Paarivendhar 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Gangasandra Siddappa Basavaraj 
15. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
16. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
17. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri BalakNath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
28. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
29.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
31. Shri S. Venkatesan 
  
**** Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Ms. Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
(i) 

 
 
 
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Fifty Sixth Report of 
the Committee on "Implementation of the National Education Policy, 2020 in Higher Education". 
 
2. The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports, has been examining the implementation National Education Policy 
(NEP) 2020  and the current Report is on aspects of the NEP and the vision it lays out vis-a- vis its 
rollout during the years since its launch in the Higher Education Sector. The Committee wishes to 
place on record its gratitude to the representatives of the Department of Higher Education , 
Ministry of Education for furnishing necessary information/documents and rendering valuable 
assistance to the Committee in its deliberations.  The Committee also exp resses its gratitude to 
two of the country’s esteemed Institutions -Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai (TISS) and 
Institute of Rural Management, Anand (IRMA) for presenting their views to the Committee in its 
deliberations.  
 
3. The Committee would a lso like to appreciate the cooperation and inputs given by 
representatives of Department of Financial services, Ministry of Finance; various Public Sector 
Banks; State Governments/ UTs during its study visits.  
 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations of the Committee have 
been presented in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
5. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the sam e in its meeting held on 
the 20th September, 2023.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
20th September, 2023                                                                                                               
Bhadra, 29, 1945 (Saka)  
 
  
Shri Vivek Thakur 
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
 
 
ACRONMYS 
 
ABC Academic Bank of Credit 
AI Artificial Intelligence  
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AISHE All India Survey on Higher Education. 
ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, 
Siddha and Homeopathy 
CBCS Choice Based Credit System 
CFTIs Centrally Funded Technical Institutes 
CGPA Cumulative Grade Point Average 
CIT Center for Information Technology 
CU Central Universities 
CUET Common University Entrance Test 
GCE Global Citizenship Education 
GDC Government Degree College 
GER Gross Enrolment Ratio 
GIAN Global Initiative for Academic Networks 
GoI Government of India 
GPI Gender Parity Index 
HECI Higher Education Commission of India 
HEFA Higher Education Financing Agency 
HEGC Higher Education Grants Council 
HEIs Higher Educational Institutions 
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
IDEA Idea Development, Evaluation & Application 
IICs Institution’s Innovation Councils 
  

 
 
IIM Indian Institute of Management 
IISc Indian Institute of Science 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IoT Internet of Things 
IRMA Institute of Rural Management 
IQAC Internal Quality Assurance Cell 
JEE Joint Entrance Examination 
JKHEC J&K Higher Education Council 
MERU Multidisciplinary Education and Research 
Universities 
MEME Multi Entry and Multiple Exit 
MHRD Ministry of Human Resource Development 
MoE Ministry of Education 
MOOCs Massive Open Online Courses 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
NAC National Accreditation Council 
NCTE National Council for Teacher Education 
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and 
Training 
NCrF National Credit Framework 
NEP National Education Policy 
NEET National Eligibility cum Entrance Test 
NHERC National Higher Education Regulatory Council 
NHEQF National Higher Education Qualification 
Framework 
NIELIT National Institute of Electronics and 
Information Technology 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NKN National Knowledge Network 
NMEICT National Mission on Education through 
Information and Communication Technology 

 
 
NPST National Professional Standards for Teachers 
NRF National Research Foundation 
NRIs Non-resident Indians 
NTA National Testing Agency 
NSQF National Skill Qualification Framework 
ODL Open and Distance Learning 
PARAKH Performance Assessment, Review, and 
Analysis of Knowledge for Holistic 
Development 
PG Post-Graduation 
PIOs Persons of Indian Origin 
PMU Project Monitoring Unit 
PTR Pupil Teacher Ratio 
RAF Revised Accreditation Framework 
R&D Research and Development 
RDC Research and Development Cell 
RISE Revitalizing Infrastructure and Systems in 
Education 
SC Scheduled Caste 
SCERT State Council of Educational Research and 
Training 
SEDGs Socially and Economically Disadvantaged 
Groups 
SPARC Scheme for Promotion of Academic and 
Research Collaborations 
ST Scheduled Tribes 
SWAYAM Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young 
Aspiring Minds 
TISS Tata Institute of Social Sciences 
UG Under Graduate 
UGC University Grants Commission 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and 

 
 
Cultural Organization 
UT Union Territory 
 

1  
REPORT 
 
1. National Education Policy 2020 
1.1  The National Education Policy ( NEP) 2020  states that this “ education Policy lays 
particular emphasis on the development of the creative potential of each individual. It is based on 
the principle that education must develop not only cognitive capacities - both the „foundationa l 
capacities‟ of literacy and numeracy and „higher -order‟ cognitive capacities, such as critical 
thinking and proble m solving – but also social, ethical, and emotional capacities and 
dispositions.” 
 Further while elucidating  the principles of the Policy, it has been highlighted as under:  
“Principles of this Policy 
The purpose of the education system is to develop good  human beings capable of rational 
thought and action, possessing compassion and empathy, courage and resilience, scientific 
temper and creative imagination, with sound ethical moorings and values. It aims at producing 
engaged, productive, and contributing citizens for building an equitable, inclusive, and plural 
society as envisaged by our Constitution. A good education institution is one in which every 
student feels welcomed and cared for, where a safe and stimulating learning environment exists, 
where a w ide range of learning experiences are offered, and where good physical infrastructure 
and appropriate resources conducive to learning are available to all students. Attaining these 
qualities must be the goal of every educational institution. However, at th e same time, there must 
also be seamless integration and coordination across institutions and across all stages of 
education. 
The fundamental principles that will guide both the education system at large, as well as the 
individual institutions within it are: 
• recognizing, identifying, and fostering the unique capabilities of each student, by 
sensitizing teachers as well as parents to promote each student‟s holistic development in both 
academic and non-academic spheres; 
• according the highest priority to achieving Foundational Literacy and Numeracy by all 
students by Grade 3; 
• flexibility, so that learners have the ability to choose their learning trajectories and 
programmes, and thereby choose their own paths in life according to their talents and 
interests; 
• no hard separations between arts and sciences, between curricular and extra-curricular 

2  
activities, between vocational and academic streams, etc. in order to eliminate harmful 
hierarchies among, and silos between different areas of learning; 
• multi-disciplinarity and a holistic education across the sciences, social sciences, arts, 
humanities, and sports for a multidisciplinary world in order to ensure the unity and integrity 
of all knowledge; 
• emphasis on conceptual understanding rather than rote learning and learning-for-exams; 
• creativity and critical thinking to encourage logical decision-making and innovation; 
• ethics and human & Constitutional values like empathy, respect for others, cleanliness, 
courtesy, democratic spirit, spirit of service, respect for public property, scientific temper, 
liberty, responsibility, pluralism, equality, and justice; 
• promoting multilingualism and the power of language in teaching and learning; 
• life skills such as communication, cooperation, teamwork, and resilience; 
• focus on regular formative assessment for learning rather than the summative assessment 
that encourages today‟s „coaching culture‟; 
• extensive use of technology in teaching and learning, removing language barriers, 
increasing access for Divyang students, and educational planning and management; 
• respect for diversity and respect for the local context in all curriculum, pedagogy, and 
policy, always keeping in mind that education is a concurrent subject; 
• full equity and inclusion as the cornerstone of all educational decisions to ensure that all 
students are able to thrive in the education system; 
• synergy in curriculum across all levels of education from early childhood care and 
education to school education to higher education; 
• teachers and faculty as the heart of the learning process – their recruitment, continuous 
professional development, positive working environments and service conditions; 
• a „light but tight‟ regulatory framework to ensure integrity, transparency, and resource 
efficiency of the educational system through audit and public disclosure while encouraging 
innovation and out-of-the-box ideas through autonomy, good governance, and empowerment; 
• outstanding research as a co requisite for outstanding education and development; 
• continuous review of progress based on sustained research and regular assessment by 
educational experts; 
• a rootedness and pride in India, and its rich, diverse, ancient and modern culture and 
knowledge systems and traditions; 
• education is a public service; access to quality education must be considered a basic right of 

3  
every child; 
• substantial investment in a strong, vibrant public education system as well as the 
encouragement and facilitation of true philanthropic private and community participation. 
1.2 NEP 2020 is the first education policy of the 21 st  century and replaces the thirty-four year old 
National Policy on Education (NPE), 1986. Built on the foundational pillars of Access, Equity, 
Quality, Affordability and Accountability, this policy is aligned to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development a nd aims to transform India into a vibrant knowledge society and global knowledge 
superpower by making both school and college education more holistic, flexible, m ultidisciplinary, 
suited to 21 st  century needs and aimed at bringing out the unique capabilit ies of each student. The 
policy has been formulated after a very detailed consultative process, unprecedented in depth and 
scale. Consultation involved over 2 lakh suggestions from 2.5 lakhs Gram Panchayats, 6600 Blocks, 
6000 ULBs, 676 Districts. The MHRD had initiated a collaborative, inclusive, and highly 
participatory consultation process from January 2015. In May 2016, „ Committee for Evolution of the 
New Education Policy ‟ under the Chairmanship of Late Shri T.S.R. Subramanian, Former Cabinet 
Secretary, submitted its report. Based on this, the Ministry prepared „ Some Inputs for the Draft 
National Education Policy, 2016‟ . In June 2017 a „Committee for the Draft National Education 
Policy‟ was constituted under the Chairmanship of eminent scientist Padma Vib hushan, Dr. K. 
Kasturirangan, which submitted the Draft National Education Policy, 2019 to the Hon‟ble Human 
Resource Development Minister on 31 st  May, 2019.  The Draft National Education Policy 2019 was 
uploaded on MHRD‟s website and at „My Gov Innovate‟ portal eliciting views/suggestions/comments 
of stakeholders, including public.  
1.3 National Education Policy 2020 was announced on 29.07.2020. The National Education 
Policy 2020 proposes various reforms in school education as well as higher education inc luding 
technical education. A number of action points/activities for implementation in school education as 
well as higher education are mentioned in the National Education Policy 2020 which inter-alia include 
following:- 
(i) Ensuring Universal Access at All Levels of schooling from pre-primary school to Grade 12;  
(ii) Ensuring quality early childhood care and education for all children between 3-6 years;  
(iii) Introducing New Curricular and Pedagogical Structure (5+3+3+4);  
(iv) Ensuring no hard separatio ns between arts and sciences, between curricular and extra -curricular 
activities, between vocational and academic streams;  
(v) Establishing National Mission on Foundational Literacy and Numeracy;  

4  
(vi) Emphasis on promoting multilingualism and Indian languages; The medium of instruction until at 
least Grade 5, but preferably till Grade 8 and beyond, will be the home language/mother tongue/local 
language/regional language.  
(vii) Assessment reforms –Introducing Board Exams on up to two occasions during any given school 
year, one main examination and one for improvement, if desired;  
(viii) Setting up of a new National Assessment Centre, PARAKH (Performance Assessment, Review, 
and Analysis of Knowledge for Holistic Development);  
(ix) Equitable and inclusive education –Ensuring special emphasis to be given on Socially and 
Economically Disadvantaged Groups (SEDGs);  
(x) Establishing a separate Gender Inclusion fund and Special Education Zones for disadvantaged 
regions and groups;  
(xi) Robust and transparent processes for recruitment of teachers and merit based performance;  
(xii) Ensuring availability of all resources through school complexes and clusters;  
(xiii) Setting up of State School Standards Authority (SSSA);  
(xiv) Providing Exposure of vocational education in school and higher education system;  
 (xv) Increasing GER in higher education to 50%;  
(xvi) Introducing Holistic Multidisciplinary Education with multiple entry/exit options;  
(xvii) Introducing Common Entrance Exam for Admission to HEIs to be offered by NTA;  
(xviii) Establishment of Academic Bank of Credit;  
(xix) Setting up of Multidisciplinary Education and Research Universities (MERUs);  
(xx) Setting up of National Research Foundation (NRF);  
(xxi) Framing „Light but Tight‟ regulation;  
(xxii) Setting up of single overarching umbrella body for promotion of  higher education sector 
including teacher education and excluding medical and legal education- the Higher Education 
Commission of India (HECI)-with independent bodies for standard setting- the General Education 
Council; funding-Higher Education Grants Council (HEGC); accreditation- National Accreditation 
Council (NAC); and regulation- National Higher Education Regulatory Council (NHERC);  
(xxiii) Expansion of open and distance learning to increase GER.  
(xxiv) Internationalization of Education.  
(xxv) Professional Education will be an integral part of the higher education system. Stand-alone 
technical universities, health science universities, legal and agricultural universities, or institutions in 
these or other fields, will aim to become multi-disciplinary institutions.  

5  
(xxvi) Teacher Education –Introduction of 4-year integrated stage-specific, subject- specific Bachelor 
of Education.  
(xxvii) Establishing a National Mission for Mentoring.  
(xxviii)Creation of an autonomous body,  the National Educational Technology Forum (NETF) to 
provide a platform for the free exchange of ideas on the use of technology to enhance learning, 
assessment, planning, administration.  Appropriate  integration of technology into all levels of 
education.  
(xxix) Achieving 100% youth and adult literacy.  
(xxx) Introducing multiple mechanisms with checks and balances to combat and stop the  
commercialization of higher education.  
(xxxi) All education institutions will be held to similar standards of audit and disclosure as a „not for 
profit‟ entity.  
(xxxii) The Centre and the States will work together to increase the public investment in Education 
sector to reach 6% of GDP at the earliest.  
(xxxiii) In order to bring the focus back on education and learning, it may be desirable to re-designate 
MHRD as the Ministry of Education (MoE).  
 
1.4 NEP, 2020 stipulates that the implementation will require multiple initiatives and actions, 
which will have to be taken by multiple bodies, in a synchronised and systemic manner. The 
implementation will be led by various bodies including Ministry of Educat ion, Union and State 
Governments, education-related Ministries, State Departments of Education, Boards, National Testing 
Agency, the regulatory bodies of school and higher education, National Council of Educational 
Research and Training (NCERT), State Coun cil of Educational Research and Training (SCERT), 
schools, and HEIs, along with timelines and a plan for review, in order to ensure that the policy is 
implemented in its spirit and intent, through coherence in planning and synergy across all these bodies 
involved in education. Since education is a concurrent subject, it will also need careful planning, joint 
monitoring, and collaborative implementation between the Centre and States.  
 
1.5 The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 is a groundbreaking educatio nal reform policy in 
India, loaded with the goal of revolutionizing the country's education system . It is not only 
progressive and visionary, but is also in keeping with the emerging needs and requirements of 21st  
century India. NEP 2020 aims to transform the Indian education system by focusing on promoting 
equal educational opportunities, inclusivity, fostering skills and innovation. It places particular 

6  
emphasis on reforming school education and introduces significant changes th at have the potential to 
reshape the entire educational landscape of the country. The NEP 2020 advocates for promoting 
multi-lingualism in educational institutions, aiming to enhance language diversity and equip students 
with proficiency in multiple langua ges. This approach facilitates effective communication in an 
interconnected world, fosters cultural appreciation, and encourages a broader perspective. Another 
significant reform proposed by the NEP 2020 involves the integration of technology into educatio n. 
The policy seeks to leverage technology's power to enhance the accessibility and quality of education, 
especially in remote and rural areas. This enables educators to deliver interactive and stimulating 
lessons, while students gain access to a vast arra y of educational resources, enriching their learning 
experiences. The NEP 2020 also introduces substantial transformations in teacher education and 
professional development initiatives to enhance the competence and effectiveness of educators in 
delivering high-quality education. It recommends the introduction of National Professional Standards 
for Teachers (NPST) and the establishment of the National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) as 
a governing body responsible for implementing these reforms and ensu ring adherence to them. These 
measures aim to elevate the standards of teacher education, promote continuous professional growth, 
and ultimately improve the overall quality of education provided by teachers. The NEP 2020 
emphasizes multi-disciplinary and all-inclusive higher education, a flexible curriculum with multiple 
exit options, research, and innovation, academic autonomy, technology integration, quality assurance, 
internationalization, promotion of the Indian knowledge system, language, culture, and values, as well 
as inclusive education, teacher education, and professional development. Collectively, these measures 
aim to transform the higher education landscape in India, promoting excellence, innovation, and 
inclusivity, along with a substantial focus on skill building in a rapidly evolving global context. 
 
1.6 The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, therefore, intends to bring an ambitious and 
comprehensive framework for the reforms in the Indian education system. It envisions a future where 
education is inclusive, student -centric, and geared towards holistic development. The policy places 
importance on multidisciplinary learning, flexibility, research, technology integration, and quality 
assurance. It aims to create a vibrant ecosystem that p romotes innovation, internationalization, and 
inclusive education. By empowering teachers, providing academic autonomy and ensuring adequate 
funding, the NEP 2020 establishes the foundation for a transformed education landscape by equipping 
students for th e modern-day needs and challenges. The successful implementation of the NEP 2020 
holds the potential to shape a generation of learners equipped with the skills, knowledge, and values 
necessary to contribute to the progress and prosperity of India. 

7  
2. The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, Children, 
Youth and Sports has selected “Review of preparedness for implementation of the National Education 
Policy, 2020” as one of the subjects for examination and in this pursuit th e Committee has been 
examining various aspects of the NEP and the vision it lays out vis-a- vis its rollout during the years 
since its launch. The present Report of the Committee looks at the salient features concerning the 
Higher Education sector and the progress made so far concerning it as per salient features of NEP.  
 
2.1 Higher Education Ecosystem: The Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education 
has informed that there are total 1043 Universities in the country at present. Out of which 70% are 
governed under the State Acts, 18% are governed by the Central Government. It has further been 
informed that 94% students are enrolled in State/private Institutions while 6% are enrolled in Central 
Institutions. The details of break-up of Universities are given as under:- 
The Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education has  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1043 Universities 
 70% under State Act 
 94% students in State / Private Institutions  
 6% students  in Central Institutions 
 
2.1 Salient Features of National Education Policy 2020  in the Higher Education 
Sector 


8  
 
2.1.1 Quality Universities and colleges: A new and forward looking vision for India’s Higher 
Education system 
 
 Quality higher education must aim to develop good, thoughtful, well -rounded, and creative 
individuals. It must enable an individual to study one or more specialized areas of interest at a 
deep level, and also develop character, ethical and Constitutional values, intellectual curiosity, 
scientific temper, creativ ity, spirit of service, and 21 st century capabilities across a range of 
disciplines including sciences, social sciences, arts, humanities, languages, as well as 
professional, technical, and vocational subjects. 
 A quality higher education must enable personal accomplishment and enlightenmen t, 
constructive public engagement, and productive contribution to the society. It must prepare 
students for more meaningful and satisfying lives and work roles and enable economic 
independence. 
 Address some of the major problems currently faced by the high er education system in India 
like a severely fragmented higher educational ecosystem; less emphasis on the development of 
cognitive skills and learning outcomes; a rigid separation of disciplines, with early 
specialization and streaming of students into na rrow areas of study; limited access particularly 
in socio-economically disadvantaged areas, with few HEIs that teach in local languages with 
limited teacher and institutional autonomy; inadequate mechanisms for merit -based career 
management and progression  of faculty and institutional leaders; lesser emphasis on research 
at most universities and colleges, and lack of competitive peer -reviewed research funding 
across disciplines; suboptimal governance and leadership of HEIs; an ineffective regulatory 
system; and large affiliating universities resulting in low standards of undergraduate 
education. 
 envisions key changes to the current system like moving towards multidisciplinary universities 
and colleges, with more HEIs across India that offer medium of instruc tion in local/Indian 
languages; moving towards a more multidisciplinary undergraduate education; moving 
towards faculty and institutional autonomy;  revamping curriculum, pedagogy, assessment, 
and student support reaffirming the integrity of faculty and institutional leadership positions 
establishment of a National Research Foundation governance of HEIs by independent boards 
having academic and administrative autonomy; “light but tight” regulation by a single 
regulator for higher education; increased access, equity, and inclusion. 

9  
 
2.1.2 Institutional Restructuring and consolidation 
 
 By 2040, all higher education institutions (HEIs) shall aim to become multidisciplinary 
institutions, each of which will aim to have 3,000 or more students. There shall, by 2030, be at 
least one large multidisciplinary HEI in or near every district. The aim will be to increase the 
Gross Enrolment Ratio in higher education including vocational education from 26.3% (2018) 
to 50% by 2035. 
 Growth will be in both public and privat e institutions, with a strong emphasis on developing a 
large number of outstanding public institutions. A university will mean a multidisciplinary 
institution of higher learning that offers undergraduate and graduate programmes, with high 
quality teaching, research, and community engagement. The definition of university will thus 
allow a spectrum of institutions that range from those that place equal emphasis on teaching 
and research i.e., Research -intensive Universities. Those that place greater emphasis o n 
teaching but still conduct significant research i.e. Teaching -intensive Universities. 
Autonomous degree-granting College (AC) will refer to a large multidisciplinary that grants 
undergraduate degrees and is primarily focused on undergraduate teaching though it would not 
be restricted to that. 
 A stage -wise mechanism for granting graded autonomy to colleges, through a transparent 
system of graded accreditation, will be established. HEIs will have the autonomy and freedom 
to move gradually from one category to another, based on their plans, actions, and 
effectiveness. These three broad types of institutions are not in any natural way a rigid, 
exclusionary categorization, but are along a continuum. 
 HEIs will support other HEIs in their development, community e ngagement and service, 
contribution to various fields of practice, faculty development for the higher education system, 
and support to school education.  
 Institutions will have the option to run Open Distance Learning (ODL) and online 
programmes, provided they are accredited to do so. Single -stream HEIs will be phased out 
over time, and all will move towards becoming vibrant multidisciplinary institutions or parts 
of vibrant multidisciplinary HEI clusters. The system of „affiliated colleges‟ will be gradual ly 
phased out over a period of fifteen years through a system of graded autonomy, and to be 
carried out in a challenge mode. 

10  
 The overall higher education sector will aim to be an integrated higher education system, 
including professional and vocational edu cation. The present complex nomenclature of HEIs 
in the country such as „deemed to be university‟, „affiliating university‟, „affiliating technical 
university', „unitary university‟ shall be replaced simply by 'university' on fulfilling the criteria 
as per norms. 
 
2.1.3 Towards a more holistic and multidisciplinary education 
 
 A holistic and multidisciplinary education would aim to develop all capacities of human 
beings -intellectual, aesthetic, social, physical, emotional, and moral in an integrated manner.  
Such a holistic education shall be, in the long term, the approach of all undergraduate 
programmes, including those in professional, technical, and vocational disciplines. Even 
engineering institutions, such as IITs, will move towards more holistic and mu ltidisciplinary 
education with more arts and humanities. Students of arts and humanities will aim to learn 
more science and all will make an effort to incorporate more vocational subjects and soft 
skills. Imaginative and flexible curricular structures will  enable creative combinations of 
disciplines for study, and would offer multiple entry and exit points. 
 Departments in Languages, Literature, Music, Philosophy, Indology, Art, Dance, Theatre, 
Education, Mathematics, Statistics, Pure and Applied Sciences, Sociology, Economics, Sports, 
Translation and Interpretation, etc. will be established and strengthened at all HEIs. Curricula 
of all HEIs shall include credit -based courses and projects in the areas of community 
engagement and service, environmental education, and value-based education. 
 The undergraduate degree will be of either 3 or 4 -year duration, with multiple exit options 
within this period, with appropriate certifications, e.g., a certificate after completing 1 year in  
a discipline or field including vocational and professional areas, or a diploma after 2 years of 
study, or a Bachelor‟s degree after a 3 -year programme. The 4 -year multidisciplinary  
Bachelor's programme, however, shall be the preferred option. 
 An Academic Bank of Credit (ABC) shall be es tablished which would digitally store the 
academic credits earned from various recognized HEIs so that the degrees from an HEI can be 
awarded taking into account credits earned. The 4-year programme may also lead to a degree 
„with Research‟ if the student completes a rigorous research project in their major area(s) of 
study as specified by the HEI. 

11  
 Model public universities for holistic and multidisciplinary education, at par with IITs, IIMs,  
etc., called MERUs (Multidisciplinary Education and Research Universities) will be set up 
 and will aim to attain the highest global standards in quality education.   HEIs will focus on 
research and innovation by setting up start -up incubation centres,  technology development 
centres, centres in frontier areas of resea rch, greater industry academic  linkages, and 
interdisciplinary research including humanities and social sciences research. 
 
2.1.4 Optimal learning environments and support for students 
 
 Institutions and faculty will have the autonomy to innovate on matters of curriculum, 
pedagogy, and assessment within a broad framework of higher education qualifications All  
assessment systems shall also be decided by the HEI, including those that lead to  final 
certification. The Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) will be revised for instilling innovation 
and flexibility.   HEIs shall move to a criterion -based grading system that assesses student 
achievement based on the learning goals for each programme HEIs shall also move away from 
high-stakes examinations towards more continuous and comprehensive evaluation. Institution 
will integrate its academic plans ranging from curricular improvement to quality of classroom 
transaction - into its larger Institutional  Development Plan (IDP) High-quality support centres 
and professional academic and career counseling will be made available to all students. 
 Norms, standards, and guidelines for systemic development, regulation, and accreditation of  
ODL will be prepared, and a framework for quality of ODL that will be recommendatory for 
 all HEIs will be developed. All programmes, courses, curricula, and pedagogy across subjects, 
including those in -class, online , and in ODL modes as well as student support will aim to 
achieve global standards of quality. 
 
2.1.5 Internationalization 
 
 Larger numbers of international students studying in India, and greater mobility to students in 
India visit, study at, transfer cred its to, or carry out research at institutions abroad, and vice 
versa.  India will be promoted as a global study destination providing premium education at 
affordable costs .n International Students Office at each HEI hosting foreign students will be 
set up to coordinate all matters relating to welcoming and supporting students arriving from 
abroad. 

12  
 Research/teaching collaborations and faculty/student exchanges with high-quality foreign 
institutions will be facilitated High performing Indian universities will be encouraged to set up 
campuses in other countries. Similarly, selected universities e.g., those from among the top 
100 universities in the world will be facilitated to operate in India. 
 A legislative framework facilitating such entry will be put in place, and such universities will  
be given special dispensation regarding regulatory, governance, and content norms on par with 
other autonomous institutions of India. 
 
2.1.6 Student activity and participation 
 
 Plenty of opportunities for participation in sports, culture/arts clubs, eco -clubs, activity clubs,  
community service projects, etc.   In every education institution, there shall be counseling systems for 
handling stress and emotional adjustments. Increasing hostel facilities as needed. All HEIs will ensure 
quality medical facilities for all students in their institutions. 
 
2.1.7 Financial support for students 
 Efforts will be made to incentivize the merit of students belonging to SC, ST, OBC, and  other SEDGs. 
Private HEIs will be encouraged to offer la rger numbers of free ships and scholarships to  their 
students. 
 
2.1.8 Motivated, energized, and capable faculty 
 All HEIs will be equipped with the basic infrastructure and facilities, including clean drinking water, 
clean working toilets, blackboards, offices, teaching supplies, libraries, labs, and pleasant classroom 
spaces and campuses. Every  classroom shall have access to the latest educational technology that 
enables better learning experiences. 
 Faculty will be given the freedom to design their own curricular and pedagogical approaches within the 
approved frame  work.  HEIs will have clearly defined, independent, and transparent processes and 
criteria for faculty recruitment. 
 
2.1.9 Equity and inclusion in Higher Education 
 Actions that are specific to higher education shall be adopted by all Governments and HEIs. Steps to be 
taken by Governments like Earmark suitable Government funds for the education of SEDGs , Set clear 
targets for higher GER for SEDGs, Enhance gender balance in admissions to HEIs, Enhance access by 
establishing more high -quality HEIs in as  pirational districts and  Special Education Zones , Develop 
and support high -quality HEIs that teach in local/Indian languages or bilingually , Provide more 

13  
financial assistance and scholarships to SEDGs in both public and private  HEIs, c onduct outreach 
programs on higher education opportunities and scholarships among  SEDGs, Develop and support 
technology tools for better participation and learning outcomes. 
 Steps to be taken by all HEIs  like m itigate opportunity costs and fees for pursuing higher 
education, provide more financial assistance and scholarships , conduct outreach on higher education 
opportunities and scholarships , m ake admissions processes m ore inclusive  , m ake curriculum more 
inclusive, Increase employability potential of higher education programmes , d evelop more degree 
courses taught in Indian languages and bilingually , ensure all buildings and facilities are wheelchair -
accessible and disabled friendly, (i) Develop bridge courses for students that come from disadvantaged 
educational backgrounds , Provide socio -emotional and academic support and mentoring  , Ensure 
sensitization of faculty, counsellor, and students on gender-identity issue and its inclusion in all aspects 
of the HEI, including curricula  , Strictly enforce all no -discrimination and anti -harassment rules  , 
Develop Institutional Development Plans that contain specific plans for action on increasing  
participation from SEDGs. 
 
2.1.10 Reimagining Vocational Education 
 Vocational education will be integrated into all school and higher education institutions in aphased 
manner over the next decade. By  2025, at least 50% of learners through the school and higher 
education system shall have exposure to vocational education, for which a clear action plan with 
targets and timelines will be developed. Higher education institutions will offer vocational education 
either on their own or in 
 Partnership with industry and NGOs. The B.Voc. degrees introduced in 2013 will continue to exist, but 
vocational courses will  also be available to students enrolled in all other Bachelor‟s degree 
programmes, including the  4-year multidisciplinary Bachelor‟s programmes.  „LokVidya‟, i.e., 
important vocational knowl edge developed in India, will be made accessible  to students through 
integration into vocational education courses. The possibility of offering vocational courses through 
ODL mode will also be explored.   MHRD will constitute a National Committee for the In tegration of 
Vocational Education (NCIVE), consisting of experts in vocational education and representatives from 
across Ministries, in collaboration with industry, to oversee this effort. 
 Incubation centres will be set up in higher education institutions in partnership with industries.  Indian 
standards will be aligned with the International Standard Classification of Occupations maintained by 
the International Labour Organization. The credit-based Framework will also facilitate mobility across 
„general‟ and vocational education. 
 
2.1.11 Catalyzing quality academic research in all fields through a new National Research Foundation 
 Establishment of a National Research Foundation (NRF). The overarching goal of the NRF will be 

14  
to enable a culture of research to permeate through our  universities. The  NRF will be governed, 
independently of the government, by a rotating Board of Governors  consisting of the very best 
researchers and innovators across fields. The primary activities of the NRF will be to fund competitive, 
peer-reviewed grant proposals of all types and across all disciplines; seed, grow, and facilitate research 
at academic institutions ; act as a liaison between researchers and r elevant branches of government as 
well as industry ; so as to allow breakthroughs to be optimally brought into policy and/ or 
implementation; and recognise outstanding research and progress 
 
2.1.12 Transforming the regulatory system of Higher Education 
 Regulatory system of higher education will ensure that the distinct functions of regulation, 
accreditation, funding, and academic standard setting will be performed by distinct, independent, and 
empowered bodies. 
 These four structures will be set up as fou r independent verticals within one umbrella institution, the 
Higher Education Commission of India (HECI).The first vertical of HECI will be the National Higher 
Education Regulatory Council (NHERC). It will function as the common, single point regulator for the 
higher education sector including teacher education and excluding medical and legal  education. The 
second vertical of HECI will, be a „meta -accrediting body‟, called the National Accreditation Council 
(NAC). Accreditation of institutions will be based  primarily on  basic norms, public self -disclosure, 
good governance, and outcomes, and it will be carried out by an independent ecosystem of accrediting 
institutions supervised and overseen by NAC. The third vertical of HECI will be the Higher Education 
Grants Council (HEGC),  which will carry out funding and financing of higher education based on 
transparent criteria. The fourth vertical of HECI will be the General Education Council (GEC), which 
will frame expected learning outcomes for higher education prog rammes, also referred to as „graduate 
attributes‟.  A National Higher Education Qualification Framework (NHEQF) will be formulated by 
the GEC. 
 The functioning of all the independent verticals for Regulation (NHERC), Accreditation ( NAC), 
Funding (HEGC), and  Academic Standard Setting (GEC) and the overarching autonomous umbrella 
body (HECI) itself will be based on transparent public disclosure, and use technology extensively to 
reduce human interface to ensure efficiency and transparency in their work. 
 The professional councils, such as the Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR),Veterinary 
Council of India (VCI), National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE), Council of  Architecture 
(CoA), National Council for Vocational Education and Training (NCVET) etc., will act as Professional 
Standard Setting Bodies (PSSBs).The separation of functions would mean that each vertical within 
HECI would take on a new, single  role which is relevant, meaningful, and important in the new 
regulatory scheme. 
 

15  
2.1.13 Curbing commercialization of Education 
 All education institutions will be held to similar standards of audit and disclosure as a „ not for profit‟ 
entity. Surpluses, if any, will be reinvested in the educational sector. There will be transparent public 
disclosure of all these financial matters with recourse to grievance-handling mechanisms to the general 
public. 
 The accreditation system developed by NAC will provide a complementary check on this system, and 
NHERC will consider this as one of the key dimensions of its regulatory objective. 
 All fees and charges set by private HEIs will be transparently and fully disclosed, and there shall be no 
arbitrary increases in these fees/charges during the period of enrolment of any student . This fee 
determining mechanism will ensure reasonable recovery of cost while ensuring that HEIs discharge 
their social obligations. 
 
2.1.14 Effective Governance and Leadership for Higher Education Institutions 
 Through a suitable system of graded accreditation and graded autonomy, and in a phased manner over 
a period of 15 years, all HEIs in India will aim to become independent self-governing institutions 
pursuing innovation and excellence. Upon receiving the app ropriate graded accreditations that deem 
the institution ready for such a  move, a Board of Governors (BoG) shall be established. Equity 
considerations will also be taken care of while selecting the members. 
 The BoG of an institution will be empowered to govern the institution free of any external interference. 
It is envisaged that all HEIs will be incentivized, supported, and mentored during this process, and 
shall aim to become autonomous and have such an empowered BoG  by 2035.The BoG shall be 
responsible and accountable to the stakeholders through transparent self disclosures of  all relevant 
records. It will be responsible for meeting all regulatory guidelines mandated by HECI through the 
National Higher Education Regulatory Council (NHERC). 
 
2.1.15 Professional Education 
 Stand-alone agricultural universities, legal universities, health science universities, technical 
universities, and stand -alone institutions in other fields, shall aim to become multidisciplinary  
institutions offering holistic and multidis ciplinary education. All  institutions offering either 
professional or general education will aim to organically evolve into institutions/clusters offering both 
seamlessly, and in an integrated manner by 2030. 
 Both capacity and quality of agriculture and allied disciplines must be improved in order to increase 
agricultural productivity through better skilled graduates and technicians, innovative research , and 
market-based extension linked to technologies and practices. 
 Institutions offering agricultural education must benefit the local community directly; one approach 
could be to set up Agricultural Technology Parks to promote technology incubation and dissemination 

16  
and promote sustainable methodologies. Legal education needs to be competitive globally, adopting 
best practices and embracing new technologies  for wider access to and timely delivery of justice. 
Healthcare education needs to be re-envisioned so that the duration, structure, and design of 
 The educational programmes need to match the role requirements that graduates will play. 
 Given that people exercise pluralistic choices in healthcare, our healthcare education system must be 
integrative meaning thereby that all students of allopathic medical educati on must have  a basic 
understanding of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy (AYUSH), and 
vice versa. 
 There shall also be a much greater emphasis on preventive healthcare and community  medicine in all 
forms of healthcare education. Technical education will also aim to be offered within multidisciplinary 
education institutions and programmes and have a renewed focus on opportunities to engage deeply 
with other disciplines. 
 India must also take the lead in preparing professionals in cut ting-edge areas that are fast gaining  
prominence, such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), 3 -D machining, big data analysis, and  machine 
learning, in addition to genomic studies, biotechnology, nanotechnology, neuroscience, with important 
applications to heal th, environment, and sustainable living that will  be woven into undergraduate 
education for enhancing employability of the youth. 
 
2.1.16  Promotion of Indian Languages, Arts and Culture 
 The promotion of Indian arts and culture is important not only for the nation but also for the 
individual. Cultural awareness and expression are among the major competencies considered 
important to develop in children, in order to provide them with a sense  of identity, belonging, 
as well as an appreciation of other cultures and identities. Indian  arts of all kinds must be 
offered to students at all levels of education, starting with early childhood care and education. 
 Teaching and learning of Indian languag es need to be integrated with school and higher 
education at every level. For languages to remain relevant and vibrant, there must be a steady 
stream of high-quality 
 learning and print materials in these languages including textbooks, workbooks, videos, plays, 
poems, novels, magazines, etc.  Languages must also have consistent official updates to their 
vocabularies and dictionaries, widely  disseminated, so that the most current issues and 
concepts can be effectively discussed in these languages. 
 A number of initiatives to foster languages, arts, and culture in school children: greater 
emphasis on music, arts, and crafts throughout all levels of school; early implementation of the 
three-language formula to promote multilingualism; teaching in the home/local language 

17  
wherever possible; conducting more experiential language learning; the hiring of outstanding 
local artists, writers, crafts persons, and other experts as master instructors; accurate inclusion 
of traditional Indian knowledge including tribal and oth er local knowledge throughout into the 
curriculum, across humanities, sciences, arts, crafts, and sports etc. 
 Strong departments and programmes in Indian languages, comparative literature, creative 
writing, arts, music, philosophy, etc. will be launched and developed across the country, and 
degrees including 4-year B.Ed. dual degrees will be developed in these subjects. Every higher 
education institution and even every school or school complex will aim to have Artist(s)-in-
Residence to expose students to art, creativity, and the rich treasures of the region/country. 
 More HEIs, and more programmes in higher education, will use the mother tongue/local  
language as a medium of instruction, and/or offer programme s bilingually. High -quality 
programmes and degrees in Translation and Interpretation, Art and Museum Administration, 
Archaeology, Arte  fact Conservation, Graphic Design, and Web Design within  the higher 
education system will also be created. 
 Touring by HEI students to different parts of the country, which will not only give a boost to 
tourism but will also lead to an understanding and appreciation of diversity, culture, traditions 
and knowledge of different parts of India. 
 Indian Institute of Translation an d Interpretation (IITI) will be established. The IITI shall also 
make extensive use of technology to aid in its translation and interpretation efforts. 
 Sanskrit will be mainstreamed with strong offerings in school - including as one of the 
language options in the three -language formula - as well as in higher education. Sanskrit 
Universities too will move towards becoming large multidisciplinary institutions of higher 
learning. India will similarly expand its institutes and universities studying all classica l 
languages and literature, with strong efforts to collect, preserve, translate, and study the tens of 
thousands of manuscripts that have not yet received their due attention. Sanskrit and all Indian 
language institutes and departments across the country w ill be significantly  strengthened 
Classical language institutes will aim to be merged with universities, while maintaining their 
autonomy, so that faculty may work, and students too may be trained as part of robust and 
rigorous multidisciplinary programmes .  Universities dedicated to languages will become 
multidisciplinary National Institute (or Institutes) for Pali, Persian and Prakrit will also be set 
up within a university campus. For each of the languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of 
the Constitu tion of India, Academies will be established consisting of some of the greatest 
scholars and native speakers . These Academies for Eighth Schedule languages will be 

18  
established by the Central Government  in consultation or collaboration with State 
Governments. Academies for other highly  spoken Indian languages may also be similarly 
established by the Centre and/or  States.  All languages in India, and their associated arts and 
culture will be documented through a web -based platform/portal/wiki, in order to preserve 
endangered and all Indian languages and their  associated rich local arts and culture. 
Scholarships for people of all ages to study Indian Languages, Arts, and Culture with local 
masters and/or within the higher education system will be established. 
3. IMPLEMENTATION OF NEP 2020 
 The Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education informed the Committee that 
a number of initiatives have been taken by the Department for effective implementation of 
NEP 2020 across the country, which have been grouped in five different categories as under:- 
A. Learner-Centric Education 
 
1. Guidelines for Transforming Higher Education Institutions in to Multidisciplinary 
Institutions” has been issued on 02.09.2022 - It will transform single -stream institutions 
into large multidisciplinary universities and strengthen 
theinstitutionalinfrastructurenecessaryformultidisciplinaryeducationandresearch. 
 
2. Guidelines for pursuing two Academic Programme simultaneously ha ve been issued 
on 13.04.2022 - It will facilitate multiple pathways to learning involving both  formalandnon-
formaleducation modes. 
 
3. Regulation on Academic Bank of Credit has been issued on 29.07.2021 and further 
amended on 28.12.2021 - ABC shall be a digital or virtual or  online store-house entity of 
academic credit data base of Higher Education Institution with student  sasitsstakeholder.  
ABC will ensure the opening, closure and validation of Academic Bank Accounts, credit 
verification, accumulation, and transfer or redem ption. As of now  674 Universities are on 
boarded and around 46 lakh students have been registered. 
 
4. Guidelines for Multiple Entry and Exit in Academic Programmes offered in the  
HEIs” has been issued on 29.07.2021 – It will pave the way for seamless student mobility, 
between or within degree -granting HEIs and facilitate students to choose their learning  
trajectory. This initiative shall stem the dropout rate, improve GER by offering flexibility in 

19  
curricula and novel course options to students in addition to  discipline-specific 
specializations, and by facilitating the encashment of credits earned when the learner resumes 
his/her programmes of study. 27 Central Universities have adopted it. 
 
5. Guidelines for Accessibility and Standards for Higher Education Institutions and  
Universities notified on 12 th July, 2022 – It ensures buildings and infrastructure  facilities 
are accessible and disabled-friendly for all. 
 
6. Curriculum and credit Frame work for Undergraduate Programs has been issued on 
12.12.2022-It in corporate a flexible choice-based credit system, multidisciplinary approach, 
and multiple entry and exit options. This will facilitate flexibility to move from one discipline 
of study to another, one institution to another, switch  to alternative modes of learning 
(offline, ODL, and Online learning, and hybrid  modes of learning), multiple entry and exit 
options with UG (certificate/diploma/degree) and to choose the courses of their interest in all 
disciplines. 
 
7. Minimum standards and procedures for award of Ph. D. degree regulations, 2022 
has been issued on 07.11.2022 - These regulations will encourage research  scholars to 
become well-trained researchers and inquisitive explorers . Women  candidates and persons 
with disability will be given extra time to finish their research.  Candidates, who have scored 
above a CGPA of 7.5, can  now apply for a PhD after completing a four-year Bachelor's 
degree.  HEIs may decide their own selection procedure for Ph.D. admission of international 
students.  It also provides for discontinuance of M. Phil programme. 
 
B. Digital Learning and Leveraging Technology 
1. Open & Distance Learning Programmes and Online Programmes) Regulation,2020 
has been issued on 4.09.2020 and the same was subsequently amended notified  on 
01.07.2022/18.07.2022 - This initiative will augment the accessibility of higher  education 
thereby contributing to the increase in the GER and also facilitate HEIs  to offer multi -
disciplinary courses and also enable life-long learning. At present 95 HEIs (71recognised and 
24 Category-IHEIs) are recognized/entitled to offer 1149 ODL programmes. Similarly, 66 
Higher Educational Institutions are recognized/entitled to offer 371online programmes. 

20  
 
2. UGC (Credit Framework for Online Learning Courses through Study Webs of 
Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds) Regulation 2021 has been issued on  
26.03.2021 -Under this regulation percentage of courses of MOOCs from the SWAYAM  
platform towards credit transfer is enhanced from 20 % to 40%.It provides flexibility and  
opportunity for lifelong learning. It also enables Institutions HEIS to offer multi-disciplinarity 
in their course.  At present 288 Universities (Central- 33, Deemed- 59,Private- 106 and State- 
90) have adopted SWAYAM Courses for Credit Transfer. Also around  52 lakhs learners 
across the country are registered in the January 2022 and July2022Semester.. 
 
3. Technology enabled Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) based Solutio ns for  
Governance of HEIs starting from Admission to Grant of Degree–Smarter Automation 
Engine for Universities (SAMARTH) is an ICT initiative sponsored by the Ministry  of 
Education to revolutionize the current education management system by  implementing an 
automation engine for various universities and other Higher Education Institutes. It will 
facilitate HEIs in administration of HEIs and management of  students from admission to 
grant of degree.  Atpresent1249Univ. & HEIs are onboarded from 27 States and  4 UTs. 7 
State Higher Education departments are also on boarded. 
 
C. Industry-Institute Collaboration 
 
1. Guidelines for Higher Education Institutions to offer Apprenticeship/Internship 
embedded Degree Programme issued on 07.08.2020 – It aims to focus  on outcome-based 
learning in degree program and will enable students to demonstrate workforce professional 
abilities for potential employment. It will enable bridging gap between industries and 
academics by exposing students to various opportunities available on campus. It  will also 
enable Link age of higher education with the requirements of the industry. 94 Institutions are 
offering Apprenticeship/Internship-embedded degree programmes. 
 
2. Guidelines for engaging Professors of Practice in Universities and Colleges has been 
issued on 30.09.2022–It aims bringing industry and other professional expertise in the 
academic institutions through a new category of positions called “Professor of Practice”. It 
will enable developing courses and curriculum to meet the industry and societal needs and 

21  
enable the HEIs to work with industry experts on joint  research projects.  It will also bring in 
distinguished experts from various fields. 
 
3. Guidelines for the establishment of RDC in universities and colleges has been issued 
on 14.03.2022 - The establishment of Research and Development Cell (RDC) in  HEIs will 
enable attainment of targets of Atma -Nirbhar Bharat and is expected to play a pivotal role in 
catalyzing multidisciplinary/ trans  disciplinary and translational research culture . It will 
enable liaison between researchers & relevant research funding agencies, extend guidance in 
preparation & submission of project proposals and post -sanctioning of the grants to oversee 
adherence to timelines. It will also develop an Institutional Research Information System for 
sharing the status of ongoing/ completed  research projects/Programmes, expertise & 
resources, etc., making effective use of Information & Communication Technology (ICT) for 
preparing the database of in-house experts to provide industrial consultancy and services. 542 
HEIs (244 universities + 298colleges) have established R&D Cells at their campuses. 
 
4. Single Unified internship portal launched - 10,399 HEIs and 69,713 industries 
registered. AICTE has come up with new internship policy that mandates internship as a  part 
of curriculum f or technical institutions  across India.  AICTE Internship Portal 
(http://www.internship.aicte-india.org/) has been developed to provide internship 
opportunities.  A large number of internships/apprenticeships are available at this portal. All 
AICTE approved institutions have been asked to sign MoU with 5 Industries. More than 6000 
institutes have signed. So far approx. 23000 MoUs with industries have been  signed for 
coordinating Internship, Placements etc. Around 26 lakh have been offered internships. 
 
D. Academic Research and Internationalisation 
1. Academic Collaboration between Indian and Foreign Higher Educational Institutions 
to offer Twinning, Joint Degree and Dual Degree Programmes Regulations on 02.05.2022 
- It inter -alia promotes enhanced academic collaboration with  foreign higher educational 
institutions leading towards academic and research  excellence in the Indian higher education 
institutions.  It aims to provide global exposure to students, internationalization at home, and 
multi-disciplinary education with an  internationally relevant curriculum and enhance 
employability. It will also attract foreign students and improve the standing of Indian 
universities as Internationalisation is an important parameter in rankings. 49 HEIs are offering 

22  
programme out of 230 eligible Indian Universities. 
 
2. Educational Framework for Global Citizenship In Higher Education has been  issued 
on 07.12.2021-Global Citizenship Education(GCED), is a response to contemporary global 
challenges, will be provided to empower learners to become aware of and understand global 
issues and to become active promoters of more peaceful, tolerant, inclusive, secure , and 
sustainable societies.  It provides deep knowledge of global issues and universal values such 
as justice, equality, dignity and respect, social skills such as empathy and conflict resolution, 
and communicative skills and  aptitudes for  networking and interacting with people of 
different backgrounds, origins, cultures and perspectives. 
 
3. Guidelines for admission and supernumerary seats of international students in 
undergraduate and postgraduate programmes in higher educational institutions in  
India has been issued on 30.9.2022 – It enable harnessing of opportunities  to attract  
international students, academics and funding and to increase their international outreach. It 
will facilitate smooth and simple admission of international students, create  a favourable 
environment for attracting international students to in Indian HEIs, thereby making India a 
preferred destination for international students. 
 
4. Accreditation - Revised Accreditation Framework (RAF) with 70% quantitative &30% 
qualitative assessment. Number of metrics in the college manual from has been reduced from 
96 to 55. 418 Univ. (100 in 2022) and 8921 HEIs (1153 in 2022) are accredited. 
 
5. Institution’s Innovation Councils – In line with the recommendations of NEP, 2020  one 
of the recommendations is establishment of Institution‟s Innovation Councils (IICs)  to 
systematically foster the culture of innovation and start-up ecosystem . Applied research, 
innovation and entrepreneurship are integral to IICs. At present 6503 IICs  have been setup in 
28 States and 8UTs. 
 
6. IDEA (Idea Development, Evaluation &  Application) Labs - AICTE-IDEA (Idea  
Development, Evaluation & Application) Labs have been set up in the technical institutions 
promoting multidisciplinary education & research, strong societal and industry linkage, 
support the new age learning and encouraging STEM experiential learning among faculty 

23  
members and students.  AICTE co-funded round the clock operational IDEA Labs. A 
network among all AICTE IDEA labs has been created for knowledge sharing among faculty 
members and researchers. 49 IDEA labs have been setup in HEIs. 
 
E. Indian Knowledge System 
 
(i) AICTE has permitted 41 Engineering Courses across 10 States in 8 regional 
languages 
(ii) MBBS Course has been started in Hindi. 
(iii) Common University Entrance Test conducted in 13 Languages and participated  by 90 
Universities. 
(iv) JEE(Mains) and NEET(UG) conducted in 13 languages involving about more than 30 
lakhs students 
(v) Provision of awarding minor degree to students who completes 18 to 20 credits  in 
IKS has been made. 
(vi) Funded 36 high end interdisciplinary research projects (Calls for up to 70  research 
projects in 9 thematic areas are out now and results will be declared on  30th 
November, 2022). 
(vii) 25 IKS Centres have been established 
(viii) 64 high end interdisciplinary research projects are undergoing 
(ix) Around 2000 internship on IKS have been offered. 
(x) More than 8000 HEIs have started adopting IKS into their curriculum and digitization 
of 1.5 Lakhs book. 
 
For the first time in Higher Education, National Credit Framework/ National Higher Education  
Qualification Framework (NHEQF) is ready for release after finalization of  National Credit 
Framework (NCrF).This will enable unfettered movement between Institutions & different Streams; 
earning credits from different institutions and learning courses through different delivery modes; and 
facilitate comparability and equivalence of degrees (including with foreign degree) thereby enabling 
mobility.  
 
4. During the course of review of NEP 2020, t he Committee held several meeting s with the 

24  
representatives of Department of Higher Education and various other organizations/Institutions 
concerned on the subject, summery points which emerged from the depositions are as under:  
4.1 Secretary, Department of Higher Education  apprised the Committee  on the "Review of 
preparedness for implementation of the National Education Policy ( NEP), 2020"  especially relating 
to Higher Education Sector and overview of the action that has been initiated by the Department in 
respect of the various features of NEP and their implementati on status, during its meeting held on 3rd 
November, 2022.  Hit was stated that the thrust areas of Higher Education sector are access, equity, 
quality, employability, research and innovation and internationalization of education. He touched 
upon target of achieving Gross Enrolment Ration in higher Education to 50% imparting holistic and 
multi-disciplinary education with flexibility of subject and multiple entry/exit points; setting up of a 
Model Multi-disciplinary Education and Research University (MERU) in every district, establishment 
of Academic Bank of Credit; establishing a National Mission for Mentor ing; National Research 
Foundation to be set up for financing research in Higher Educational Institutions; graded autonomy in 
academic, administrative and financial aspects; independent Board of Governors and setting up of a 
Single Regulator for Higher Educ ation (excluding legal and medical education) with reference to 
National Education Policy, 2020. 
 
4.2 During another meeting of the Committee held on 18th November, 2022, the Committee heard 
the representatives from two of the country‟s esteemed Institutio ns:  Tata Institute of Social Sciences, 
Mumbai (TISS) and Institute of Rural Management, Anand (IRMA) on preparedness towards 
implementation of NEP 2020.The representatives of Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai (TISS) 
informed the Committee of the patterns captured from data pertinent to the theme and al so shared 
some of the insights that TISS had gathered from the research. The Committee was also informed that 
TISS is currently working with Government agencies and industries a nd is offering Bachelor of 
Vocational Education to 6,300 students with 3000+ industry partners across 95 locations in India in 
37 B.Voc. programmes across 18 skill sectors in Life Sciences, Creative Industry, Social Research, 
Community Development and variety of other sectors, while the Government of India has a variety of 
channels and nearly 28 different skill verticals to engage with skilling. 
4.3 During interaction with representatives of Institute of Rural Management, Anand (IRMA) the 
Committee was apprised of the Vocational Education and Skill Development in NEP 2020 aiming for 
exposure to vocational education to at least 50% of learners through the school and higher education 
system by 2025; however it needs to be further expanded to meet the needs of girls between age group 

25  
of 18-21 year s. It was also  informed that equal focus should be given to job -based skills and 
entrepreneurial skills in the vocational education, educational institutions should be encoura ged to 
open incubation centres which w ould become the foci of vocational education and would offer core 
and elective courses in the mainstream academic programs. It was  suggested that companies can 
collaborate with academic institutions and offer long -term trainings on their premises and academic 
institutions can certify the program and can offer the credits. 
4.4 Academic Bank of Credits:  The Department of Higher Education has informed the 
Committee that Academic Bank of Credit (ABC), as envisaged in the National Educational Policy 
(NEP) 2020 is a National-level facility to promote flexibility of curriculum framework and 
interdisciplinary/multidisciplinary academic mobility of students across the Higher Education 
Institutions in the country with appropriate "Credit Transfer" 39 mechanism. ABC platfo rm would 
digitally store the academic credits earned by students from various recognized HEIs and facilitates 
transfer of credit between HEIs on student‟s request. This will gradually cover all/most of the HEIs 
and become available for all students of Indi a. The scheme is implemented under the overall 
supervision of the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education. The technical 
implementation/support is given by NeGD (National e -Governance Division) of Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) as per UGC regulation for the same in line with 
NEP-2020. Credits obtained by undertaking Courses in Registered HEIs during or after the academic 
year 2021 -2022 alone are el igible for credit transfer, credit accrual and credit redemption through 
Academic Bank of Credits.  Institute of Rural Management, Anand (IRMA) in its  detailed study 
report on NEP 2020, has given some of their findings which are as under: 
Enrolment in Higher Education 
Figure 1(below) indicates the number of enrolments in higher educational institutions in the country. 
The enrolment has increased from 35.7 crore in 2016-17 to 41.4 crore in 2020-21 with an increase of 
about 16 percent compared to what it was in 2016-17. 
Figure 1: Growth of student enrolment (in crore) India, 2016-2021 

26  
 
Source: Department of Higher Education, GOI, AISHE report 2020-21 page no: 44 
The table 1 and 2( below) showcase varying enrolment trends across different academic levels 
and across different social groups. While Ph.D., Post Graduate, PG Diploma, and Diploma programs 
have witnessed positive growth, there has been sizeable growth in integrated programs. NEP 2 020 
puts substantive emphasis on integrated programs with multiple entries and exit. Similarly, there has 
been growth in enrolment among SCs and STs, indicating orientation of youth from these social 
groups towards higher education. These trends provide in sights into students' changing preferences 
and demands different academic levels. The data shows encouraging signs for implementing the 
policy. 
Table 1: Level-wise Enrolment and its Compound Annual Growth Rate 
 
 
Year 
Student Enrolment 
Ph.D. M.Phi
l. 
Post 
Graduat
e 
Under 
Graduat
e 
PG 
Diplom
a 
Diplom
a 
Certific
ate 
Integrate
d 
Grand Total 
2016-17 141037 43267 4007570 28348197 213051 2612209 166617 173957 35705905 
2017-18 161412 34109 4114310 29016350 235263 2707934 177223 195777 36642378 
2018-19 169170 30692 4042522 29829075 224711 2699395 162697 241126 37399388 
 
Enrolment(In Crore) 
 
 
 
41.
4 
38.
5 37.
4 36.
6 35.
7 
2016-
17 
2017-
18 
2018-
19 
2019-
20 
2020-
21 

27  
2019-20 202550 23934 4312535 30647287 217249 2672562 159869 300373 38536359 
2020-21 211852 16744 4716649 32657509 257187 2979320 155911 385541 41380713 
CAGR 10.7 -21.1 4.2 3.6 4.8 3.3 -1.6 22.0 3.8 
Source: Department of Higher Education, GOI, AISHE report 2020-21 page no: 44 
Table 2: Social group-wise enrolment 
Year All ST SC 
2016-17 24.1 20.3 14.8 
2017-18 24.6 21.0 15.3 
`2018-19 24.9 22.0 16.4 
2019-20 25.6 22.3 17.0 
2020-21 27.3 23.1 18.9 
Source: Department of Higher Education, GOI, AISHE report 2020-21 page no: 53 
These ratios indicate the proportion of  students enrolled in educational institutions relative to the total 
population within each respective category (all students, ST, and SC) during that academic year. 
(i) Overall Increase in GER: Over the years, there has been a gradual increase in the Gross 
Enrolment Ratio (GER) for all students. It has risen from 24.1% in 2016 -17 to 27.3% in 2020-
21. This indicates a positive trend in terms of enrolment rates across all categories. 
(ii) Consistent Improvement for ST and SC Students: The GER for ST and SC students has 
also shown an upward trend. From 2016 -17 to 2020 -21, the GER for ST students increased 
from 20.3% to 23.1%, while the GER for SC studen ts increased from 14.8% to 18.9%. These 
improvements suggest efforts to enhance access to education for marginalized communities. 
(iii) Gradual Convergence: While the GER for ST and SC students has increased, there is still a 
slight gap compared to the GER for a ll students. However, the gap has been narrowing over 
the years. This indicates progress in reducing disparities in educational enrolment among 
different social group. 
Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) 

28  
The data suggests that the PTR in universities and colleges has remained relatively consistent over the 
specified years; however, it is lower than the prescribed PTR in higher education. The regulatory 
bodies (UGC and AICTE) advise to maintain 1:15 faculty -student ratio, which is far lower than the 
average PTR indi cated in Table 8. Institutions need to recruit faculty to maintain the minimum 
prescribed ratio. This requirement is necessary condition for the implementation of NEP 2020. 
Table 8: Pupil-Teacher Ratio in higher education 
Year University and colleges 
2016-17 25 
2017-18 30 
2018-19 29 
2019-20 28 
2020-21 24 
Source: Department of Higher Education, GOI, AISHE report 2020-21 page no. 55 
Multidisciplinary Curriculum and Learning Material 
The current Indian higher education system caters to curriculum that are developed and taught in 
silos. NEP envisions of a multidisciplinary and integrated curriculum that cuts across multiple 
disciplines, making the education truly interdisciplinary. However, the prevalent idea of 
multidisciplinary and interdisciplina ry in the Indian higher education system is to borrow certain 
aspects from other discipline and integrate it with the host discipline. However, NEP‟s idea of 
multidisciplinary education is to understand a problem in such a way that its solution is achieved  by 
using the knowledge of various disciplines. NEP stresses upon various pedagogical avenues such as 
critical thinking, role play, simulation, problem solving approach, and experiential learning. This 
approach takes away the superiority of alpha disciplin e. The contemporary practice of curriculum 
building is devoid of such thinking. In case higher education institutions are able to devise such 
curriculum, evaluation system emerges as another problem area. NEP necessitates continuous and 
formative evaluatio n system. Secondly, learning material, particularly textbooks, must be 
modified/rewritten accordingly. It is a big task, and institutions are not equipped to augment such 
skills. The current capacities of faculty do not gel well with the requirements stated above. 
Multi Entry and Multiple Exit (MEME) Options 

29  
NEP proposes multi -entry and multi -exit options for the students. While it looks like a flexible 
system, which is being operated by Western education institutions quite effectively, Indian institutions 
are likely to face several issues in implementing this system. Due to high population, the estimated 
intake of students in higher education every year is quite high. If institutions allow MEME, it would 
be very difficult for the institutions to predict how  many students would exit and how many would 
join midway. Since institutions would not know the in - and out-traffic, it  will certainly disturb the 
PTR. Uneven geographical distribution of higher education institutions would create hurdles in 
managing MEME in several areas, mostly countryside. The institutions have not thought very clearly 
about this problem and how they will resolve it when it is at their doorstep. 
4.5 Higher Education Financing Agency (HEFA) 
4.5.1 While undertaking its review of NEP 2020, the Committee had also heard Secretary, 
Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education  on loan offering processes by Higher 
Education Financing Agency (HEFA) to educational institutions for infrastructure development and 
initiatives taken to include  more Public Sector Banks under HEFA which is a joint venture company 
of Canara Bank and Ministry of Education, Government of India  during its meeting held on 19th 
January, 2023. 
4.5.2 It was also noted that in 2018 -19 Budget , major initiative, „Revitalizi ng Infrastructure and 
Systems in Education‟ (RISE), was initiated with an investment of Rs.1,00,000 crores for the next 
four years. The Committee  also informed about the vision, mission and objectives of the Higher 
Education Financial Agency (HEFA) and about five different windows for payment of educational 
loan. It was  further informed the Committee about the loan approving process and apprised th e 
Committee that the paid-up capital of HEFA, as on date, is Rs.10,000 crores out of which the paid up 
capital that has been contributed by the Ministry of Education and Canara Bank is Rs.5,294 crores.   
4.5.3 The Committee was also apprised about the four  types of ESCROW account s maintained and 
monitored under HEFA for repayment of principal amount and interest amount. It was  further 
informed about the loans disbursed to various institutions like IITs/NITs/AIIMS/Central Institutions 
etc. as well as issues and challenges faced by Department during disbursement of loans. The 
Committee was informed that 22 out of 23 IITs, seven IIMs, seventeen NITs, 27 Central Universities 
and 12 AIIMS and other institutions of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that fa ll under 
Windows-4 and 5, have been sanctioned loans.  The Department also apprised that there is a proposal 
for expansion of scope and including State -funded institutions as majority of the students study in 
State institutions but the present scheme does not allow them to avail this facility.  It was proposed 

30  
that HEFA should also be able to accept philanthropic contribution by some alumni of these 
institutions. 
4.5.4 The Secretary  had further informed the Committee that it has been requested through the 
HEFA Board to Canara Bank also to have programme management unit inside the HEFA Board to 
ensure that there is a lot of handholding that they can do through that PMU to those institutions 
because these calculations, these IRG returns and preparing those pro ject reports require a little bit of 
expertise than the usual ones.   
4.6 Internationalization of Higher Education 
4.6.1 NEP 2020 aims to make our young generation of learners  aware and understand global issues 
and make them truly global citizens committed  to human rights, sustainable development and global 
well-being. The approaches to promot e the internationalization of higher education in NEP 2020 
involves “facilitating student and faculty mobility, establishing international partnerships for research 
and cross -border delivery of higher education programmes, easing the processes through which 
institutions can enroll students from around the world, as well a s the feasibility of carrying credits 
across institutions in multiple countries, and other such measures”. 
12.7 NEP 2020 provides, “The various initiatives mentioned in the NEP, 2020 will help in having 
larger numbers of international students studying in India, and provide greater mobility to students in 
India who may wish to visit, study at, transfer credits to, or carry out research at institutions abroad, 
and vice versa. Courses and programmes in subjects, such as Indology, Indian languages, AYUSH 
systems of medicine, yoga, arts, music, history, culture, and modern India, internationally relevant 
curricula in the sciences, social sciences, and beyond, meaningful opportunities for social 
engagement, quality residential facilities and on -campus support, et c. will be fostered to attain this 
goal of global quality standards, attract greater numbers of international students, and achieve the 
goal of „internationalization at home.”  
12.8 NEP 2020 also provides “India will be promoted as a global study destinatio n providing 
premium education at affordable costs thereby helping to restore its role as a Vishwa Guru. An 
International Students Office at each HEI hosting foreign students will be set up to coordinate all 
matters relating to welcoming and supporting stud ents arriving from abroad. Research/teaching 
collaborations and faculty/student exchanges with high -quality foreign institutions will be facilitated, 
and relevant mutually beneficial MOUs with foreign countries will be signed. High performing Indian 
universities will be encouraged to set up campuses in other countries, and similarly, selected 
universities e.g., those from among the top 100 universities in the world will be facilitated to operate 

31  
in India. A legislative framework facilitating such entry will be put in place, and such universities will 
be given special dispensation regarding regulatory, governance, and content norms on par with other 
autonomous institutions of India. Furthermore, research collaboration and student exchanges 
between Indian inst itutions and global institutions will be promoted through special efforts. Credits 
acquired in foreign universities will be permitted, where appropriate as per the requirements of each 
HEI, to be counted for the award of a degree.” 
4.6.2 In order to review  internationalization of higher education under NEP 2020 , the Committee 
had heard the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on "Internationalization of Higher 
Education" during its meeting held on 20th April, 2023 as the NEP 2020 extensively focuses on 
attaining the highest global standards in the quality of higher education. Emphasis was placed  upon 
the need to attract a greater number of international students and achieve the goal of 
“Internationalization at Home” as t his policy appreciates the critical need to promote India as a 
“global study destination providing premium education at affordable costs thereby helping to restore 
its role as Vishwa Guru”. 
4.6.3 The Secretary had informed that internationalization of higher education has been taken as one 
of the major priorities in NEP 2020 to promote India as a global study destination with quality  
education at affordable prices. It was also informed that strategy  to promote internationalization had 
broadly been divided into five categories. First is initiatives and schemes to directly attract students to 
India; second is to enhance international collaboration between institutions in India and abroad; third 
is to  facilitate the set -up of foreign institutions in India; fourth is to  encourage and facilitate 
institutions to go abroad; and fifth is how to increase overall quality and ranking of Indian institutions 
in the international arena . The Committee was further apprised that students from all over the world 
comes to India, but there are about 45 focus countries , where potential of students that may come is 
high for which rebate on fees varying from 25 per cent to 100 per cent  is being provided according to 
student‟s merit  under the scheme -  Champion Services Sector Scheme  of Ministry of Commerce. 
Also, budgetary allocation to support „Study in India' through scholarships under the above mentioned 
scheme is being provided for 5 years which would end this year. 
4.6.4 Further information about the programme "Direct Admission of Students Abroad" under 
which seats are reserved for admission in technical institutions like NITs  and CFTIs excluding IITs 
for PIOs and NRIs through JEE Main exam conducted by NTA foreign countries was apprised. It was 
also informed that short courses on Indian Knowledge Systems such as Yoga, Indian Languages etc. 
are also being designed to attract students. The Committee was further informed of the fact that UGC 
guidelines states that upto 25 per cent supernume rary seats should be reserved in universities for 

32  
foreign students and International Affairs Offices must be set up in campuses of such Universities  to 
deal with their visa issues and cultural adjustments . It was then informed that till now, 167 
universities have opened International Affairs Offices in the country. 
4.6.5 The Committee was also apprised about the Scheme for Promotion of Academic and Research 
Collaborations (SPARC), under which collaboration with28 countries has been done, so far with IIT 
Kharagpur being the implementing agency with five other lead institutions  namely IIT Kanpur, ISI 
Kolkata, IIT Delhi, BHU and IIT Madras . The Committee was also informed about the Global 
Initiative for Academic Networks (GIAN)  scheme, under which  faculty from global institutions is 
invited to conduct courses in India. It was noted till date,  about 1,763 courses have been conducted 
under GIAN scheme.  
4.6.7 Thereafter, the Committee had noted the regulations for setting up of campuses of foreign 
higher educational institutions in India, for which the guidelines are issued by UGC. It was also 
informed that d raft guidelines are under finalization for stakeholder consultation . It was noted that 
various international Hackathons  are being  organized with countries like Singapore, ASEAN 
countries and UNESCO Hackathon  with Africa in which  students from 25 African countries 
participated. The Committee was also apprised of the fact that because of the above mentioned 
efforts, ranking of Indian higher educational institutions had seen an improvementi.e.in the year 2015, 
14 institutions of India were in world ranking while now 41 institutions and also9 institutions are in 
top 400 institutions of the world. 
 
4.7 Study Visits to assess NEP 2020 
4.7.1 The Committee also undertook study visits, to make an on spot assessment , and to hear the 
perspective of State Governments and Higher Educational Institutions to the State of West Bengal and 
Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands from 4 th to 7 th January, 2023; to State of  Tamil 
Nadu from 5 th to 8 th July, 2023; and to Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 1 st to 2 nd 
September, 2023 , in which NEP implementation in higher educational institutions was one of the 
chosen subjects. During these study visits, the Committee held meetings with the representatives of 
the State Governments, Administration/Governments of Union Territory concerned along with other 
organizations/Institutions concerned on status of implementation of NEP  2020, the details of which 
are given as under. 
4.7.2 During its visit to State of West Bengal, the Committee was informed by the representatives of 
Department of Higher Education, Government of West Bengal that f or internationalization activities, 
21 Universities and 52 colleges offered information and assistance to International Students.  Also, 

33  
more than 46 MoUs have been signed with institutions from 46 countries.  For E -Governance initiates 
for information at doorstep, a portal named, Banglar  Uchcha Siksha portal and online admission 
portal at HEI level has been introduced for the students.  For curriculum for Multidisciplinary and 
Holistic Education, involving industry media, art and other professionals, all S tate aided and Private 
Universities (48) and Autonomous Colleges (18) are eligible to design their own curriculum framed 
by the affiliated university.  Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) have been implemented in the HEIs 
in the State.  For framing of Instit utional Development Plan, 31 Universities and 380 Colleges have 
prepared their future development plan and the rest are encouraged to prepare Institutional 
Development Plan.  For introduction of programmes in Indian knowledge system, all eligible 
Institutions (1570), having more than one language programme, offer courses related to Indian 
Knowledge System.  Sanskrit College and University imparts education in traditional modes of 
learning.  A research centre dedicated to Sanskrit and Indian knowledge is com ing up at Nabadwip, 
Nadia.  Institute of Language Studies and Research has been set up to promote teaching and learning 
of English and regional languages, and translational studies.  Arrangement for digital achieving of 
ancient manuscripts and other texts is being made for the students to get access to the ancient books 
and manuscripts for their study and research purpose.  For re -imaging the Vocational Education, 
Industry specific Course with Live Project and Internship (On Job Training) is offered as elec tive 
subject with additional level – 5 Skill Certificate.  Advance Laboratories in areas such as EV, Solar 
Energy, AI, Machine Learning, Big Data, Cloud computing, IoT etc. for trainees have been set up. 
For Internship -embedded degree programmes, 27 Univer sities and 267 colleges offer internship 
embedded degree programme.  All HEIs are encouraged, subject to availability of infrastructure and 
human resources in this aspect. Further, 23 Universities and 672 Colleges have R & D Cell.  21 HEIs 
have established incubation centres as per AICTE norms.  Other HEIs are also encouraged to set up 
R&D Cells with Industry Academia partnership/Research Institution. 16 Universities and 325  
Colleges in the State are accredited by NAAC.  Remaining HEIs are encouraged throug h workshop/ 
seminars to go for NAAC accreditation. The remaining HEIs are encouraged through workshop, 
seminars to go  for NAAC accreditation.  Universities/Colleges with a good score in NAAC mentor 
other institutions within catchment area.  For Scholarship s, Fellowships, Interest Subsidy/Credit 
Guarantees, more than 75,000 students have become beneficiaries under Kanyashree -3 Scholarship.  
Likewise, 39,470 loans have been sanctioned under the Student Credit Card Scheme, 42.30 
beneficiaries are benefitted un der the Minority Scholarship, 56.03 lakh beneficiaries have been 
awarded SC Scholarship and 7.52 lakh with ST Scholarship. OBC Scholarship (Post Matric) has also 
been granted to 22.08 lakh beneficiaries. For new infrastructures, the Government has taken in itiative 

34  
to set up 2 State -aided Universities for Women and 4 Government Colleges for Women set up.  3 
Universities set up in Jungal  Mahal area and 1 in Darjeeling Hills is also upcoming.  
Government/Government aided colleges set up in Jungal  Mahal area (1 2), Darjeeling Hills (02) and 
Sundarban areas (01) is also likely to be established.  Due to the impact of initiatives on Higher 
Education, 16Universities and 325 colleges are NAAC accredited.  3 Universities and 7 colleges 
featured in the Top 100 institutions in the NIRF ranking, 2002.  Stanford University published a study 
listing the Top 2% of world-renowned scientists, in which West Bengal had the haggiest proportion of 
Scientists from India.   
4.7.3 The Committee had heard the representatives of Madurai Kamaraj University (MKU) who 
presented some of the significant activities of the University contributing for the growth of higher 
education at regional, national and global levels. Mentioning that this University is responsible for the 
growth and development of the southern Tamil Nadu through its phenomenal contribution in teaching, 
innovative research and extension activities, it was informed that MKU has a composite of 116 
affiliated colleges, 5 evening Colleges, and 16 recognized institutions acr oss Madurai and the 
University is holding the accreditation with “A++” status (CGPA Score of 3.54) by NAAC in the 4 th 
cycle during March 2021 and holding the Category – I status amongst the University of India with 
added tag of „University with Potential f or Excellence‟. It was submitted that considering the present 
need of higher education, MKU primarily targets on outcome based education (OBE), value -based 
education, skill India programme, media, tourism and gender equity. The empower the youth and also 
to make them societal responsible, several other programmes introduced at national level are being 
implemented effectively and these courses associated with Ayushman Bharat, Swatchh Bharat, 
Atmanirbhar Bharat, Digital India initiatives and Empower the youth  as National Builder are the 
significant and viable programs of MKU. To expose the student community globally, foreign 
language courses such as English and French are offered. To empower the student community in the 
field of Science and Technology, courses  such as Genomics, Biochemistry, Microbiology, Microbial 
Gene Technology and Biotechnology are being offered. It was informed that national funding for 
enhancing the infrastructure at MKU is one of the significant contributions for quality education and 
research. A huge amount of financial support is being extended to MKU by various funding agencies 
such as UGC -SSAP, UGC -NRCBS, DST -PURSE, DST -FIST, RUSA and UGC -Sports Science 
Center. A total of 115 crores was received for various development activities from  2014 to 2021. 
Currently, RUSA is actively involving n implementing various need -based research and extension 
projects in addition to entrepreneurship activities and develop Human Resource in various field of 

35  
Arts and science. MKU has specific and more tar geted future perspectives. This includes global 
education, entrepreneurship development, interdisciplinary research etc. MKU is moving towards to 
eminence through rendering quality education to future generation with greater sustainability.  
 
4.8 Status of Implementation of NEP 2020 in Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
 
4.8.1 During its visit to Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir,  the Committee was informed by 
the Principal Secretary, Department of Higher and School Education, UT of J&K that J&K is one of 
the first in the country to implement NEP 2020 from the academic session 2022 in all the Higher 
Education Institutions  and it  was possible only because of complete synergy between different 
stakeholders viz: HED, Universities, Colleges and other allied agencies. The Committee was informed 
of the courses & curriculum initiated in line with NEP 2020, which are as under: 
● Restructuring of academic programmes from 3 to Four Year UG Programme – FYUG 
(Honsand Research Degrees)  
● Revamping of curriculum: A prodigious exercise was taken up by all the academic bodies to 
frame the syllabus as per NEP 2020. 1st to 4th Semester syllabus has been finalized by the concerned 
Board of Studies, and the syllabus preparation for other semesters is in progress. 
 ● Integration of NSQF/Non-NSQF based skill courses.  
● Skill courses are run in an embedded mode and form a part of the main degree under NEP 
2020.  
● NSQF course contains 12 credits (Theory & Internal Practical) + 18 credits(Industry Training) 
with registered training partner of the concerned skill sector council.  
● Expanding the range of academic, vocational and professional programmese.g Agriculture 
Technology, Horticulture Technology, Veterinary Technology, AI & Machine Learning, Hospitality 
& Catering, Fine Arts, Music and Languages, Pharmacy, Paramedical etc. ● Flexible multiple 
exit/entry options to facilitate Lifelong learning opportunities: In this regard, policy restructuring is 
under process to update eligibility criteria viz -a-viz Certificate, Diploma,,  Hon‟s Degree and Degree 
with Research.  
 
4.8.2 With regard to Financial & Human Resource  Management, the Committee was informed of 
the course details given as under: 
● HED provided huge financial support to build the requisite infrastructure in the Colleges and 
Universities under Capex(Total allocation 410.66 crores for FY 2023-24 ) 

36  
● RUSA (RUSA 1.0 & RUSA 2.0) Approved : 553.01 CroresReleased : 410.0 0 Crores Utilized 
:373.31 Crores 
● PMDP (45 crores for 6 girl‟s hostels at Govt. College for Women Pul wama, GCW Kupwara, 
GDC Bemina, GDC Paloura, GDC Rajouri, GDC Bhaderwah)  
● Languishing projects (79.61 crores)  
● Rationalization of posts and faculty: Allocation of Major/Minor subjects under NEP 2020 
based on infrastructure, human resource, access to dif ferent Govt. Degree Colleges. Accordingly, 
posts were rationalized and required staff was deployed.  
● HED has also taken up exercise of transfers and posting under Annual Transfer Drive portal to 
fill and rationalize faculty positions.  
● MOUs with IIT Ja mmu, IIM Jammu, KU, JU, SMVDU, IUST, SKIMS, SKUAST, NIT for 
handholding and trainings of GDCs.  
● Huge impetus in student support services provided by the HED for the operationalization of 
the Academic Bank of Credits, Digi locker account in the form of in ternet bandwidth, browsing 
centres, e-content studios.  
● On boarding  of all the HEIs on the e -Samarth portal – An ERP solution, a single window 
solution to manage staff in GDCs.  
The Committee was also informed of the Policy Intervention with regard to J&K, the details of which 
are given as under: 
● Jammu & Kashmir Public Universities Bill, 2023: The bill has been sent to Gov ernment of 
India for placing it in Parliament to get its approval as legislation.  
● Uniform Academic Calendar from academic session 2022.  
● Reconstitution of J&K Higher Education Council (JKHEC) vide Govt. Order No: 219 -JK(HE) 
of 2022 Dated: 30-09-2022.  
● Constitution of executive committee under JKHEC with the mandate to render all the 
necessary assistance to Higher Education Depart ment on formulation of policy for a comprehensive 
and holistic, transformation of Higher Education Sector in tune with NEP 2020.  
 
4.8.3 The Committee was also informed of the initiatives undertaken by JKHEC which are as under: 
● College on the wheels: 1,100 women students from J&K to go on educational tour across India 
and will work on their self-chosen projects during the train journey. The journey will commence from 
Jammu and will visit Delhi, Ahmadabad, Mumbai, Goa, B engaluru, Wardha and back to Jammu. The 
tentative dates of journey are from 15thNov. to 30thNov. 2023  

37  
● Engineering Kitchen: Setting a paradigm shift in learning process by following “Engineering 
Kitchen” for applying classroom knowledge to create prototypes. This innovative concept gives 
freedom to work on various problems and projects under the guidance of mentors.  
● Design your Degree: Launched by Jammu University under which students will be offered an 
opportunity to craft a personalized, interdisciplinary learning experience. From next  academic session 
DYD will also be introduced in Kashmir University, IUST Awantipora, ICSC Srinagar, GCW Parade 
Jammu.  
● Training Programs for Industry 4.0: IT domain with emphasis on skills driving industry 4.0 
revolution in (i) Machine Learning, (ii) AI , (III) IOT, (iv) 5G, (v) VR, (vi) Design (vii) Block Chain 
(viii) ERP etc.  
Initiatives for Faculty Development & Research: 
● Faculty Development Programs (Refresher Courses, General Orientation Courses, FDPs) in 
collaboration with different training partners (UGC -HRDC, NIELIT, IIT Jammu, Jammu University, 
Kashmir University, Entrepreneurship Development Institute, Institute of M anagement & Public 
Administration)  
● Promoting the   faculty   for   research   projects   and collaborative research by providing 
ample autonomy to the Principal Investigators.  
● HED established MOUs with IIT/IIM Jammu for capacity building of faculty.  
● Faculty of Govt. Degree Colleges to act as co- supervisors in PhD programmes.  
● Faculty in GDCs are supported & encouraged to participate in international/national 
conferences.  
• Universities in J&K have been awarded many international research projec ts such as, Indo -
US, Indo - Canadian, Indo -German, Indo -Australian, Indo -Polish, Indo -French, Project in 
collaboration with Cambridge University, Royal Society of London.  
• SMVDU is the Nodal Centre in J&K, for jointly awarded ICMR Center for Advance Research  
• BGSBU    is running a Network Mission Project on „Pediatrics Rare Disorders‟. 
Initiatives for Innovation, Incubation & Startup: 
 • In collaboration with MOEs Innovation Cell, JKHED established Institution‟s Innovation 
Councils (IICs) in all NAAC accredited GDCs.  
• Invention, Innovation and Training (CIIITs) has been established in the following 14 GDCs of 
J&K GCET Jammu, GGM Science College Jammu, GDC R.S Pora, GDC Kathua, GDC Udhampur, 
GDC Bhaderwah, GDC Rajouri, A.S College Sgr, GDC Bemina, GCW So pore, GDC(Boys) 
Baramulla, GDC(Boys) Anantnag, GDC(Boys) Kupwara, GDC Pampore.  

38  
• Intership/Apprenticeship embedded in FYUG UG Program.  
Initiatives for Quality Enhancement in HEIs: 
● NAAC/PAC accreditation to improve the institution on all the 7 NAAC criterions. • Out 
of 142 colleges 65 are NAAC accredited with following breakup: Grade A+ = 2, Grade A = 6, Grade 
B++ = 2 Grade B+ = 14, Grade B = 23, Grade C = 18  
● Target to achieve NAAC/PAC accreditation of all 142 colleges • By 2025, 10 colleges to be 
made Autonomous Degree granting institutes. 18 Institutional Restructuring and Consolidation  
● Three autonomous colleges (ICSC Srinagar, GCW Parade Jammu & GDC Baramulla) to be 
made Multidisciplinary Education and Research University (MERU) by 2025-26.  
● Rs. 100 crore project submitted to MOE for converting KU and JU as MERU Universities.  
● Preparation of Institutional Development Plans to enumerate short -term and long -term goals. 
Increasing Gross Enrolment Ratio to 50 percent by 2030  
● HEIs capacity will be increased to allow full access, equity, and inclusion. The Gross 
Enrolment Ratio in higher education (including vocational education) shall increase to 50% by 2030. 
Current GER in J&K is 30.9% which is more than national average of 27..3%  
● All types of institutions will have the option to run Open Distance Learning (ODL) and online 
programmes, provided they are specifically accredited to do so, to enhance their offerings, improve 
access and GER. 20 Towards a More Holistic Education  
● HEIs will have th e flexibility to offer different designs of Masters programmes, (a) there may 
be a two -year programme with the second year devoted entirely to research for those who have 
completed the three -year Bachelors programme; (b) for students completing a four year  Bachelors 
programme with Research there could be a one-year Masters programme.    
      
4.8.4 The representatives of University of Jammu while deliberating upon the subject of NEP 2020 
apprised the Committee of the following key initiatives that are to be  launched/have been launched in 
line with NEP 2020: 
i. The University of Jammu introduces the "Design Your Degree" program, a four -year 
undergraduate initiative designed to adapt to the evolving needs of society and higher 
education. Grounded in the principle  that " Knowledge without action is meaningless ," it is 
inspired by the Mimansa School of Philosophy. The motto of the program embodies its core 
values: Teach to Transform, Educate to Empower, and Learn to Lead . Aligned with the goals 
of NEP 2020, the program aims to create an environment of self -discovery, fostering 
exploration for learners to uncover their true calling and build a fulfilling career. It emphasizes 

39  
upon developing skills by employing interdiscip linary approach and societal integration, 
enabling graduates to not only understand their environment but tackle real -world challenges, 
excel in diverse settings, utilize emerging technologies, and explore entrepreneurial 
opportunities for self-reliance. 
ii. The Committee was also informed that t he demand for this program arises from the fact that 
present-day graduates should encompass not just specialized knowledge but also a diverse 
skill set. The swift pace of technological progress mandates flexible profess ionals capable of 
transitioning between various fields. "Design Your Degree" meets this requirement by 
cultivating essential competencies including critical thinking, effective communication, 
mathematical ability, creativity, analytical prowess, teamwork, leadership qualities, effective 
problem-solving, and collaborative aptitude – all of which are indispensable in today's global 
landscape. The educational methodology employed by "Design Your Degree" diverges from 
conventional teaching learning approaches, as the educators assume the role of mentors, 
fostering learning rather than imposing it. The focal point lies in hands -on, experiential 
learning through projects, allowing students to translate abstract knowledge into practical, 
real-life situations. It wa s also informed that d uring the 1 sttwo years of the program, the 
students shall be exposed to foundation courses across the disciplines in hands on mode to 
build an understanding of their surroundings and application of the theoretical concepts in 
various situations. Various courses that shall be experienced by the students include: 
Semester 1: IT in Every Day Life, Mathematics without Phobia, Understanding the World 
through Data Lens, Expressing Creativity, Exploring the Surroundings, Life Skills 
Semester 2:Coding through GPT4, Decoding the world through  AI, World of Start Ups 
through Real Life Studies, Discovering the Self , Art & Aesthetics  of Designing, Responsible 
Citizenship through Experimentation 
Semester 3:Does the World revolve around Economics,  Art and Science of Communication, 
Social Innovations, Understanding the Challenges of Climate Change, Technologies of the 
Future, Developing Equipoise of Mind and Body 
Semester 4:  Digital Humanities, Food as Medicine: Traditional and Modern Practices, 
Demystifying Human Behavior, Exploring Tourism in J&K: An Entrepreneurial perspective, 
Exploring the World of Cinema with smart-phones, Marvels of the World 
 
4.8.5 It was also informed that i n the final two years, the students will get an opportunity to 
understand and experience the domain knowledge with complete flexibility to choose Majors and 

40  
Minors from the disciplines of their choice. Moving away from the traditional approach of 
compartmentalized education, the students shall be allowed t o design their degrees 
BA/B.Sc/B.Com/BBA/B.Tech in IT as per their passion in accordance with the UGC standards. The 
distinctive feature i.e. pedagogy for teaching learning process i.e. Experiential Project Based Learning 
shall remain same in these two years also. The program's expected outcomes encompass equipping 
students with experiential learning for effective problem -solving on both local and global scales, 
fostering their ability to collaborate within  diverse interdisciplinary teams for sustainable solutions, 
promoting a culture of incubation, innovation, and startups, conducting valuable research, and 
enhancing analytical, creative, and critical thinking skills to offer a holistic education. Aiming  to 
produce graduates who are not only well -prepared for the job market but also capable of contributing 
to the entrepreneurial landscape, thus shifting the focus fro m job-seeking to job -providing graduates 
the program has a potential to be a game changer in education sector contributing immensely towards 
making India a Knowledge Economy. 
 
4.8.6 The representatives of Central University of Kashmir while deliberating upon the subject of 
NEP 2020 apprised the Committee of the following  key initiatives that are to be launched/have been 
launched in line with NEP 2020: 
• Learner Focused Education 
• Holistic Multidisciplinary approach under CCFUP is adopted through various domains of General,  
Professional, Technical and Vocational Education  streams are offered at the CUKashmir.  
• Flexibility to chose the specified courses up to 40% from online / other institutions offering through  
CBCS / LOCF and establish equivalence, recognize and transfer the credits through ABC.  
• Provision for „Design Your Own Course‟ under Multiple Entry and Multiple Exit Model. 
• Create an Environment for Effecting Learning 
• Focus on infrastructure creation (Physical, Academic, ICT, Skill Development and Sports & 
Recreation) 
• Formulating a Protocol for e -Content Material Development by incorporating the all five Learning  
Principles and making the Students as „Partners of Knowledge Creation‟. 
• Proposes „Earn while You Learn‟ with a 10 Hours Per Week Work Experiential Learning through  
„Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan‟ (6 Hrs) and „Swachh Bharat Abhiyan‟ (4 Hrs) internship model. 
• Fostering the Holistic Education 
• Award of Non -CGPA Credits for active participation in Co and Extra Curricular Activities.  
NEP-2020 Implementation – Research at CU Kashmir 

41  
• Existing R & D Cell will be strengthened by redefining its functions and roles in tune with the NEP -
2020 by creating Research Ecosystem (Provisions, Persons and Processes), ensuring Research Quality 
(Publications, Projects, Patents, Partnerships and Practices) and promoting Res earch Culture (Thrust  
Areas, Clusters, Capacity, Integrity, Recognition, Incentives, Mentoring and Monitoring).  
• Preparing the Faculty to Submit Research Proposals under Extra Mural Grants to various Funding 
Agencies. 
• Planned to create Research Corpus F und of 10 Crores to create fellowships and maintenance of 
instruments  
• University intends to use effectively the SAMARTH Portal provided by the Ministry of  
Education, GoI under NME -ICT project for e -Governance through ERP solutions for HEIs.  
• The automa tion engine has 9 core modules (University Base Configuration includes  
Academics, Administration, Accounts & Finance, Establishment (HR), Recruitment, Student  
Services and Core Communication) and 40+ sub modules to automate the functioning of  
university pr ocesses. However, CU  Kashmir is using the e -Office solutions for file movement  
and approvals provided by the J& K UT Government for internal operations.  
• Since March, 2022 the CU  Kashmir effectively using following four modules of SAMARTH for  
Recruitment, Payroll, Student Admission (CUKAT, CUET UG, PG etc.) and Examination. It is  
yet to customize for total solutions. In view of the above CU Kashmir is creating Center for  
Information Technology (CIT) for effective use of all modules provided by the SAMARTH. 
 
4.9 Involvement of Banking Sector to ensure successful implementation of the National 
Education Policy, 2020 
4.9.1 During the study visit of the Committee to State of West Bengal and Union Territory of 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands from 4 th to 7th January, 2023, the representatives of SBI informed the 
Committee in this regard  that SBI has aided 74 ,063 students amounting to Rs. 10 ,600 Cr to pursue 
higher education loan during the current Financial Year. SBI has already disbursed education loans to 
the tune of Rs. 6297 Cr for FY 22 - 23 (up to Nov‟22) and aims to surpass disbursement target (Rs. 
7710 Cr) assigned by DFS, GOI. The representatives of Canara Bank deposed before the Committee 
that the bank plays the major role viz., infrastructure finance for the Educational loan institutions, 
infrastructure funding through Higher Education Funding Agency (HEFA) for National importance 
institutions such as IIMs and IITs. Public sector bank also plays a vital role in Education Loan 
assistance to the needy me ritorious students which ensure higher enrolment ratio. Our Bank offers 

42  
collateral free education loans to the students who pursue education in the premier institutions where 
the fees are on higher side. While relying to a query regarding on how are banks,  besides providing 
funding to educational institutions, also help them in aligning their available resources with the goals 
envisaged under NEP 2020, identifying any sources of inefficiency, and strengthening their financial 
management systems to plan, budget, use of resources and efficient funding, representatives of Canara 
Bank replied that the Banks are having own project appraisal groups for assessing infrastructure 
projects and viability of project which ensures proper funding pattern for effective operations. Besides 
funding to projects, Banks are also sponsoring infrastructure and equipment to educational institutions 
under Corporate social responsibility. Recently, our bank has entered tie up with IISc  and National 
Law School of India University and other university for preferred Bank to avail Educational loan for 
the students. While replying to the same query, representatives  of State Bank of India apprised the 
Committee that the bank provides funding to educational institutions, to the students and has always 
been a partner as far as education system and education policy are concerned. Besides providing 
funds, the bank also helps the educational institutions in aligning their available resources with the 
goals envisaged under NEP 2020. While assessin g the credit needs for an educational institution, the 
bank does a detailed analysis of sources of inefficiency, if any and helps them in strengthening their 
financial management system to plan, budget, use of resources and efficient funding. Apart from 
guiding, the bank strives to ensure that these guidance to the borrowing educational institutes are 
followed well by way of putting these as covenants or terms and conditions of the loan extended. 
Periodic visits, meetings with the management and overall rev iew of the borrowing educational 
institutes are also done at certain periodicity. At the time of interactions with the management team, 
these aspects are invariably brought into the knowledge of the management and efficient use of 
internal sources and efficient funding is being taken care of at the maximum possible extent. 
4.9.2 During the study visit of the Committee to Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir from 1 st to 
2nd September, 2023 , t he representatives of J&K Bank informed the Committee regarding 
involvement of banking sector to ensure successful implementation of NEP 2020 , that the bank 
accords top priority in providing hassle -free financial assistance to the students across the country in 
general and students of J&K &  Ladakh in particular to purs ue Higher Education in India & abroad.  
Further, as on 31stJuly, 2023, Bank has an exposure of Rs.250 crores to various Universities, Colleges 
(including professional Colleges) comprising of term loans/project loans granted for augmentation/ up 
gradation o f their educational infrastructure. It was also informed that u nder the Education loan 
scheme of the Bank, Bank has a total exposure of around Rs.700 Crore spread over 11,000 students 

43  
who are pursuing higher education in India and abroad. During FY 2022 -23, bank has provided the 
educational loan assistance to over 2,000 students involving an amount of Rs.162 Crore. Also, n o 
margin and security is required for loans up to Rs.4 lac. Loans up to Rs.7.50 lakhs can be availed 
against CGFSL  (Credit Guarantee Fund  Scheme for Education Loans) cover. Competitive interest 
rates are charged on Education Loans extended by our bank. Servicing of interest during study period 
and the moratorium period till commencement of repayment has been made optional for students.  It 
was also emphasized that i nterest concession of 1.00 % is provided for entire tenure of the loan, if 
interest is serviced by the borrower during the course period an d subsequent moratorium period. 
Provision of extension in Moratorium period is being given t aking into account spells of 
unemployment/ underemployment as per the scheme . The representatives of Bank of India informed 
the Committee that during the Financial Year 2022 -23, the bank has  sanctioned 24 ,520 accounts 
amounting to Rs.1 ,222.50 Crores (YOY i ncrease of 179%) and disbursement of Rs.760.35 Crores 
(YOY increase of 174%) up to 31.03.2023.  The Committee was also informed of the education loan 
schemes of Bank of India which are as under: 
 Star Progressive Education Loan scheme: Education  Loan to Parents/ court appointed 
Guardians as Loan applicants on behalf of student pursuing education from Pre -school to 
Senior Secondary school.  
 Star Education Loan scheme - Studies in India: For Students who have secured admission in 
higher Education course in India through Entrance Test/Merit based selection process.  
 Star Education Loan scheme – Studies Abroad: For Students who have secured admission in 
higher Education course abroad through Entrance Test/Merit based selection process.  
 Star Vidya Loan  scheme – For premier Institutions : Special Education Loan scheme to cater 
the Education Loan requirements of students studying in India‟s Premier Institutes e.g. IIT‟s, 
IIM‟s etc.  
 Star Pradhan Mantri Kaushal RinYojana (Skill Loan) scheme: Loan facility to Individuals who 
intend to take up Skill Development courses e.g. ITI, Polytechnics    
 Star Education Loan to Working Professionals scheme: Special  Education Loan to working 
professionals for part time or Distance learning courses in India.  
4.9.3 The representatives of Punjab National Bank informed the Committee that the b ank has 
approved well-defined policy for imparting finance to Educational Institutes. Bank finances include 
construction of building, purchase of instruments required for educational institutions, finance for 
purchase of land along with construction of buildings thereon, etc. Besides above overdraft facility is 
also provided to Educational Institutions for meeting day to day working capital requirements/ 

44  
renovation of buildings/ small capital expenditure. The Committee was also apprised of the challenges 
faced by Bank while financing to educational institutes  such as s tatutory approvals of the proposed 
institutes are subsequent to the loan approval by bank, t here is no mechanism at present to guarantee 
the loan amount in case accreditation of the institute is cancelled in-between for any of the reason and  
since college/university are operational, Bank can -not enforce SARFAESI Action in case of default 
by borrower as same may jeopardize the careers of students and s ince properties offered are generally 
agriculture land, in case of default by borrower, Bank cannot initiate SARFAESI Action. 
 
4.10 Observations and Recommendations:  
1. The Committee observes that through various appreciable activities, the implementation 
of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 is progressing on course which would surely 
fructify its vision to transform the higher education system to be more inclusive, flexible, and 
aligned with global standar ds. The Committee notes that one of the primary keys to ensure 
successful implementation of NEP  would be synergized collaboration between Government 
bodies, universities, industry partners, and civil society.  
2. The Committee appreciates the manner in whi ch the implementation of NEP and the 
vision it espouses is being taken forward by the UT of Jammu and Kashmir.  The Committee 
notes that the UT of J&K is one of the first in the country to implement NEP 2020 from the 
academic session 2022 in all the Higher  Education Institutions. It also notes that it has been at 
the forefront in implementing NEP by bringing significant changes in the assessment system 
from rote learning to a competency based learning. Also, a paradigm shift in the methods of 
teaching in class room to learn from surroundings in order to give holistic and lifelong learning 
opportunities to students is being witnessed across J&K which will ensure sustained training of 
students as global citizens with 21st century skills and create a vibrant, i nnovative, practical 
and vocational skill set and research-oriented, learner-centric education system in our country.  
3. The Committee is pleased to note that the University of Jammu has recently been 
designated as the nodal University by the University G rants Commission (UGC) to spearhead 
the implementation of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 in the Union Territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir as this distinction brings great pride and honour to the institution. Noting 
that the University of Jammu has been entrusted with the pivotal responsibility of executing the 
mandates set forth in the NEP, along with various recommendations and regulations outlined 

45  
by the UGC, the Committee hopes that with this new role, the University of Jammu will be able 
play a central role in creating awareness, arranging programs, and offering guidance to higher 
education institutions within Jammu and Kashmir to effectively implement NEP, thereby 
providing a platform to exchange and adopt best practices.  
4. The Committee takes note and appreciates the introduction of "Design Your Degree"  
based on Choice Based Credit System(CBCS)  launched by Jammu University under which 
students will be offered an opportunity to craft a personalized, interdisciplinary learning 
experience. The Committee further observes that "Design Your Degree" will also be introduced 
in Kashmir University, IUST Awantipora, ICSC Srinagar, GCW Parade Jammu, which is 
commendable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take 
initiatives for in troduction of "Design Your Degree" programme in various other HEIs  in the 
country, as a model contemporary and futuristic in the interest of the student community and 
nation readiness. It will to enable the students to craft a personalized, interdisciplina ry learning 
experience. 
 
5. The Committee is of the view that under the Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
(RUSA) Scheme, strategic funding to higher educational institutions based on critical appraisal 
of State’s higher educational plans which describe e ach State’s strategy to address issues of 
equity, access and excellence in higher education can go a long way in pushing NEP ’s aims. Key 
features of the Scheme like up -gradation of existing autonomous colleges to universities, 
conversion of colleges to cluster colleges with revamping the curriculum, skill development, 
examination reform, upgrading institutions to higher level and strategic funding should be the 
special focus of the UGC. 
6. The Committee hopes that the steps that the Department is taking as per NEP will be 
able to actively enhance engagement  and find a connect with the industry and Higher 
Educational Institutions (HEIs), through which they can experiment, pitch ideas and deploy 
them bringing a close alignment in the practices of academia  thereby synchronizing innovation 
research with the need of the time and industry to achieve objective of real change. 
7. The Committee appreciates the steady progress in the field of higher education. The 
committee recommends that the specific impetus is required to be assigned to factors which can 
help the country’s ranking in patent filing  though the overall patent filing has improved 

46  
significantly but more needs to be done by enhanced allocation for Anusandhan (Research).  
8. The Committee appreciates the  manner in which the NEP 2020 places thrust on 
developing a student’s ‘Creative Potential’ based on higher -order cognitive capacities and to 
cultivate innovation and creativity in learners through industry -institution linkages and 
collaborative programme. Noting that the NEP prioritizes research and innovation with 
financial commitment to academic research , the Committee observes that promoting thought -
provoking research is a pre -requisite for outstanding education and will surely transform India 
into a vibrant knowledge society.  
9. The Committee appreciates that the freedom being given to Indian universities to set up 
campuses in other countries and initiate start -up incubation centers, technology development 
centers and centers in frontier areas of research helps foster knowledge creation and innovation 
which will contribute to the growing national economy. In this regard the Committee also takes 
note of G20 New Delhi declaration that supported promoting open, equitable, and secure 
scientific collaborat ion and encouraging mobility of students, scholars, researchers 
and scientists across research and higher education institutions. The Declaration also 
emphasized on expanding access to high -quality technical and vocational education 
and training. The Committee is of the view that the expected benefits through these initiatives 
call for commitment of all stakeholders, be it the Department, regulatory bodies or Universities , 
educationists, and industries,  so that , these innovative strategies in the areas of s kill 
development, upskilling and entrepreneurship bring the expected boost to create a knowledge 
society that contributes to global education , hence global good.  The Committee further 
recommends that efforts, in unison, by both the Central and S tate Governments, would be 
necessary for successful implementation and sustenance of these policies and schemes.  
10. Noting that the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020initiates several significant 
reforms to transform higher education in the country by promoting q uality, relevance, and 
innovation in higher education, the Committee appreciates the various steps to promote the use 
of digital technologies in education, including the development of digital libraries & SWAYAM 
PRABHA portal . It is of the view that the recommendation for the creation of a National 
Educational Technology Forum (NETF) to equip students with the skills and knowledge 
necessary to contribute to the nation’s development and compete in the global job market can 

47  
go a long way in e xpansion of digital infrastructure to make the country a Global Knowledge 
Hub thereby enhancing domain area of digital infrastructure, content and capacity building. 
11. The Committee observes that there is going to be significant i mpact of Digital Libraries 
on Knowledge Ecosystem  as part of the NEP’s digitization agenda, digital libraries will play a 
crucial role in providing online access to an extensive range of digital resources, such as e -
books, journals, articles, and multimedia content.  These online platforms will enable students 
and educators to conveniently connect with educational materials at any time and from any 
location, while also offering a cost -effective means of providing the permit to top -notch 
educational content.  The commit tee recommends that the department must ensure that the 
content on digital library should also be available in regional languages for better reach out and 
learning outcome.   
12. The Committee recommends that the Department and related stakeholders should 
prioritize the implementation of digital initiatives to ensure that every student, regardless of 
their background or location, has reach to quality education. In addition, policies that 
encourage the adoption of digital technologies in education should be framed, and both students 
and teachers should be provided adequate training for their use.  
 13. The Committee also recommends that requisite efforts be made  so that these knowledge 
ecosystems carry flexibility so that it can  be tailored to fit the unique learning requirements of 
individual students, allowing them to learn at their own pace and in a style that suits them best , 
so that , Digital libraries offer a cost -effective means of accessing high -quality educational 
content, which can help to lower the o verall cost of education and make it more accessible and 
affordable to a wider range of students.  
14.  The Committee is of the view that proper involvement of the student community, 
incorporation of their feedback and suggestions towards the changes propo sed in NEP will help 
institutions in orienting students faster and in a more effective way which will be helpful in 
creating institutional mechanisms to handle student ’s  queries on issues such as Academic Bank 
of Credits (ABC), Multiple Entry and Exit sys tem and generate beneficial results in terms of 
acceptance and smoother implementation.  In the early stages the learning has to be a both way 
process for a substantive evolution and successful implementation. 
15. The Committee is of the view that t echnology can play a pivotal role in accelerating the 

48  
implementation of initiatives outlined in NEP 2020 in higher education institutions in India. The 
Committee recommends that by adopting and harnessing the power of modern cloud based 
technologies with a malgamation of data,  higher education institutions can create a more 
efficient, transparent, and student -centric ecosystem. These technologies have the potential to 
revolutionize credentialing, personalize learning, improve student outcomes, streamline 
administrative processes, enhance research capabilities, and foster innovation. Integrating 
technology aligns with the vision of NEP 2020, promoting a future -ready education system that 
equips students with the skills and knowledge needed in the 21st century. 
16. The Committee notes and appreciates the emphasis that the National Education Policy 
2020 (NEP) places on internationalisation stating that ‘High performing Indian universities will 
be encouraged to set up campuses in other countries, and similarly, se lected universities e.g., 
those from among the top 100 universities in the world will be facilitated to operate in India’. 
Further the Committee appreciates that the UGC’s draft regulations on ‘Setting up and 
Operation of Foreign Higher Educational Institutions in India’ have been issued which is a good 
step forward in the entire reform process.  
18. Taking note of some of the observations of IRMA, the Committee is of the view that the 
successful implementation of initiatives to enhance access to education for marginalized 
communities is not only a moral imperative but also essenti al for the inclusive and sustainable 
development so that education becomes a powerful tool for uplifting all segments of society, 
regardless of their socio -economic status or background. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends for implementation of certain sp ecific initiatives aimed at enhancing access to 
education for marginalized communities in accordance with the National Education Policy 
(NEP) 2020 so that its thrust on inclusivity and equitability for all segments of society gets 
requisite boost:  . 
i. Comprehensive Awareness Campaigns: Launch comprehensive awareness campaigns 
targeting marginalized communities to inform them about the importance of education 
and the opportunities provided by the NEP 2020. These campaigns should be conducted 
in local languages and dialects, utilizing various media channels including television, 
radio, print, and social media. Collaboration with local community leaders and 
organizations to maximize outreach would also be helpful. 
ii. Infrastructure Development : Invest in build ings and upgrading educational 

49  
infrastructure in underserved areas, with  particular focus on remote villages and urban 
slums. Ensure that schools are accessible, safe, and well -equipped to provide quality 
education. Allocate sufficient funds to address th e specific needs of schools catering to 
marginalized communities. 
iii. Teacher Training and Recruitment : Develop specialized training programs for teachers 
who work in marginalized communities. These programs should emphasize inclusive and 
culturally sensitive teaching methods, as well as provide incentives to attract qualified 
educators to these areas. Implement a transparent and efficient teacher recruitment 
process that prioritizes diversity. 
iv. Scholarship and Financial Support: Establish a robust scholarship and financial support 
system to mitigate economic barriers to education. Scholarships should be designed to 
address the unique needs of marginalized communities, including those from 
economically disadvantaged backgrounds, scheduled castes, scheduled tribe s, and other 
vulnerable groups. Streamline the application process to make it user -friendly and 
accessible. 
v. Digital Inclusivity: Recognize the importance of digital education in the current context 
and work towards providing marginalized communities with a ccess to digital resources. 
Equip schools with computer labs and ensure affordable internet connectivity in these 
area 
vi. Develop and distribute educational content tailored to local needs and languages. 
vii. Community Engagement : Encourage active involvement of t he local community in the 
education process. Establish Parent -Teacher Associations (PTAs) and involve them in 
institution decision-making. Promote community-driven initiatives to support education, 
such as adult literacy programs and community libraries. 
viii. Monitoring and Evaluation : Implement a robust monitoring and evaluation system to 
track the progress and impact of initiatives aimed at enhancing access to education for 
marginalized communities. Regularly collect data on enrollment, attendance, and 
learning outcomes, disaggregated by demographic factors,  and disseminate it to identify 
areas needing improvement. 
ix. Policy Adaptation: Continuously review and adapt policies to address the evolving needs 
and challenges faced by marginalized communities. Establish a feedback mechanism that 
allows stakeholders from these communities to provide input and suggestions for policy 
improvements. 

50  
x. Collaboration and Partnerships : Foster collaborations with Non-Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs), civil society organizations, an d international agencies that have 
expertise in promoting education for marginalized communities. Leverage their 
resources and knowledge to enhance the effectiveness of education initiatives. 
xi. Research and Innovation: Encourage research and innovation in the field of education 
for marginalized communities. Support studies that identify best practices and 
innovative approaches to address the unique challenges faced by these communities in 
accessing quality education. 
19. The Committee notes that addressing the issue of technological readiness and digital 
infrastructure is necessary for complying with the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020's 
requirements related to credit transfer, multidisciplinary learning, and ensuring inclusive 
education, especially for  differently-abled children. As NEP 2020 envisions a digitally 
empowered society through education, it is imperative that technology plays a pivotal role in 
facilitating these goals. In order to address the issue, the Committee recommends that the 
Department should set up a monitoring group, drawing experts from all stakeholders to 
conduct a comprehensive assessment of the current technological infrastructure in higher 
education institutions across the country, identify gaps in terms of hardware, software, internet 
connectivity, digital literacy among students and faculty and suggest solution to bridge any issue 
relating to  Technological Gaps , Investment in Digital Infrastructure , , faculty  Training and 
Development, Learning Resources, Tech Integration etc.  
20. The Committee observes that implementation of the Multi Entry and Multiple Exit 
(MEME) options within the framework of the National Education Policy (NEP) is a vital 
component of NEP 2020, offering students greater flexibility and choice in their edu cational 
pathways. In order to ensure its smooth operation, the Committee recommends that the 
Department should develop comprehensive guidelines and a well -defined framework for 
MEME options including specific eligibility criteria, credit transfer mechanisms providing clear 
roadmap for students pursuing different exit points. Also, implementation of a standardized 
Credit Accumulation and Transfer (CAT) system that allows students to earn and transfer 
credits seamlessly across institutions would facilitate smooth transitions between different levels 
of education, from certificate courses to doctoral programs.  In this regard the Committee 
appreciates the introduction of Academic Bank of Credit(ABC) in the higher education system . 
It is commendable that already more than 50% of the Universities in the country are now on -

51  
board. The Committee recommends the Department to strive for bringing on -board the 
remaining Universities and other Higher Education Institutions of the country under Academic 
Bank of Credit. 
21. The Committee is of the view that efforts towards improving the effectiveness and 
impact of the Higher Education Financing Agency (HEFA) in playing a crucial role in funding 
and supporting higher education institutions would prove beneficial. Towa rds this aim, the 
Committee recommends that HEFA can consider diversifying its funding sources beyond 
Government allocations, explore partnerships with private sector organizations, philanthropic 
foundations, and international financial institutions to inc rease the available funds. Also,  
collaboration with higher education institutions to create long -term investment plans that align 
with their strategic goals and national educational priorities besides ensuring that investments 
are directed toward areas tha t enhance academic quality, research capabilities, and student 
outcomes can be promoted.  
22. The Committee also recommends  reviewing and adjusting the interest rates on loans 
provided by HEFA to make them more competitive and affordable for institutions s o that grace 
periods or lower interest rates can be offered for institutions facing financial challenges.The 
Committee further suggests for allocating a portion of HEFA funds specifically for research and 
innovation grants to incentivize institutions to un dertake cutting -edge research and 
development projects and foster a culture of innovation within higher education. 
23. The Committee recommends the Department and UGC to expedite the process of 
engagement of "Professor of Practice" in HEIs as envisaged in the National Education Policy 
2020 to ensure greater collaboration between academia and industry for promoting holistic and 
multidisciplinary education with focus on creativity, innovation and employability. 
 
24.The Committee appreciates the following effo rts taken by department to introduce Indian 
Knowledge System(IKS) in higher education as envisaged by NEP 2020. 
(i) AICTE has permitted 41 Engineering Courses in 8 regional languages 
(ii) MBBS Course has been started in Hindi 
(iii) Common University Entrance Test conducted in 13 Languages and participated 
by 90 Universities. 

52  
(iv) JEE(Mains) and NEET(UG) conducted in 13 languages across the country. 
(v) Provision of awarding minor degree to students who completes 18 to 20 credits in 
IKS has been made. 
(vi) Funded 36 high end inte rdisciplinary research projects (Calls for up to 70 
research projects in 9 thematic areas are out now and results will be declared 
on30th November, 2022). 
(vii) More than 25 IKS Centers have been established 
(viii) 64 high end interdisciplinary research projects are undergoing 
(ix) More than 8000 HEIs have started adopting IKS into their curriculum and 
digitization of 1.5Lakhsbooks. 
 
25. The Committee observes that in order to attain the targets of Atma Nirbhar Bharat and 
to develop an Institutional Research Information Sy stem for sharing the status of 
ongoing/completed projects/programmes, expertise and resources etc.  making effective use of 
Information and Communication Technology for preparing the database of in -house experts to 
provide industrial consultancy and service s, 542 Higher Education Institutions including 244 
Universities and 298 colleges have established R&D cells at their campuses.  The Committee 
recommends the Department to take special efforts and provide budgetary and infrastructure 
support to set up R&D ce lls in all Universities of the country and other Higher Education 
Institutions(HEIs) in a time -bound manner to contribute in the making of  Atma Nirbhar  
Bharat. 
 
26. The Committee observes and appreciates that there has been a gradual increase in the 
Gross Enrollment Ratio (GER) for all students and it has risen from 24.1% in 2016-17 to 27.3% 
in 2020-21. The Committee further observes that GER for ST and SC students has also risen 
from 2016-17 to 2020 -21.The GER for ST students also increased from 20.3% to 2 3.1%, while 
the GER for SC students increased from 14.8% to 18.9% . The committee also appreciates the 
efforts of the department like SWAYAM PRABHA &Massive Open Online Courses(MOOCs) 
in order to achieve a robust GER.   
 
27. The Committee observes that 42 p ercent of universities, 36 percent of colleges and 22 
percent of stand -alone institutions have connectivity with National Mission on Education 
through Information and Communication Technology (NMEICT)  and their connectivity with 

53  
National Knowledge Network (NKN) is 56, 89, and 24percent respectively. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that efforts should be made to ensure connectivity with the NKM and 
NMEICT for all remaining Universities& Higher Education Institutes(HEIs) in the country. 
 
28. As per the N EP 2020, regulatory bodies i.e. UGC and AICTE, the Pupil Teacher Ratio 
(PTR) in higher education is required to be kept at healthy level . The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the department should fulfill the vacancies in a time bound manner to 
maintain the prescribed PTR. 
 
29. The Committee takes note of the issues and difficulties in implementing the Multi Entry 
and Multiple Exit (MEME) Options. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to 
have wider consultation with various Universities/Institutions, their regulatory bodies and other 
stakeholders to devise out way in view of the difficulties being faced in implementing Multi 
Entry and Multiple Exit (MEME) Options and apprise the Committee of the same. 
 
30. The Committee takes note of the fact that banks can-not enforce SARFAESI Act in case 
of default by borrower as same may jeopardize the careers of students  (As per the submission 
given by the banks) . The Committee, recommends that banks must take note of the Credit 
Guarantee Fund Scheme for Education Loan (CGFSEL) launched by the Department of Higher 
Education, Govt. of India in 2015 which provides a guarantee of education loan up to INR 7.5 
Lakhs. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Education in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance should look into a proposal to increase the guarantee amount under this 
scheme.  
 

54 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, 
WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS (EWCY&S)  
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) 
met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, 3rd November, 2022 in Committee Room No.3, 
Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.         Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
2.   Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3.   Ms. Sushmita Dev  
4.   Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
5.   Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
6.   Dr. M. Thambidurai  
7.   Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA 
8.   Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
9.   Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
10. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
11. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13.  Shri Balak Nath 
14.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
15.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. D. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary  

55 
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
7. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
 
WITNESSES 
 
DEPARTMENT OF *           *          *. 
        Oral Evidence of *           *          *. 
2.  *           *          *. 
3. * * *   
4. *           *          *. 
5.   *           *          *. 
6. *           *          *. 
7. *           *          *. 
8. *           *          *. 
9.   Thereafter, the Chairman and Members sought certain clarifications. The 
Chairman asked the Secretary to reply to the queries raised by Members during the 
course of discussion in brief and to send written replies to the Secretariat later. 
 
(The representatives of the Department of School Education and Literacy, then, withdrew.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 * Pertains to other matter.  

56 
 (The Committee re-assembled at 1.50 P.M.) 
WITNESSES 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
1. Shri Sanjay K. Murthy, Secretary 
2. Dr. Vineet Joshi, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri P.K. Banerjee, Joint Secretary 
4. Ms. Saumya Gupta, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri R. Rajesh, DDG, (Stat.) 
6. Shri S.E. Rizwi, Joint Secretary 
7. Prof. Mamidala Jagadesh Kumar, Chairman, UGC 
8. Shri Vikash Gupta, Registrar, University of Delhi 
9. Prof. K. Ratnabali, Dean, Academic Affairs, University of Delhi 
10. Prof. Anil D. Sahasrabudhe, Chairman, NETF Cell 
11. Prof. M. P. Ponia, Vice-Chairman, AICTE 
12. Prof. Rangan Banerjee, Director, IIT Delhi 
  Oral Evidence of Secretary, Department of Higher Education 
10.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Higher 
Education and other officers and asked them to brief the Committee on the salient 
features of the National Education Policy, 2020 especially relating to Higher 
Education Sector and overview of the action that has been initiated by the 
Department in respect of the various features of NEP and implementation status 
thereof.   
11.  Additional Secretary, Department of Higher Education made a PowerPoint 
presentation in which he briefed the Committee about higher education eco-system 
prevalent in the country followed by the salient features of NEP-2020. It was 
underscored that some of the basic features of NEP-2020 are equitable access to 
the highest quality of education; multidisciplinary and holistic education; emphasis 
on Indian Knowledge System, use of technology, research, motivated, energised 

57 
and capable faculty, industry-academia linkage, governance, regulation and 
internationalisation.  He further informed the Committee about wide consultation 
done with stakeholders for finalisation and preparation of NEP- 2020, and the 
various initiatives taken by the Department for implementation of NEP - 2020 and 
impact of the same till date. 
12.  He emphasized the strong recommendation made by the NEP on integration 
of vocational, teacher and professional education and its recommendation that 
there would be a national higher education qualification framework in alignment 
with the national skill qualification framework. 
13. Thereafter, the Members, inter-alia, sought clarifications on the steps taken 
to check the quality of private higher education, deemed universities in the 
country, delay in conducting the NEET examination and the  need to impart 
medical education at affordable rates within the country. The Committee also 
raised the issue of dropouts among SCs/STs, at college level, bureaucratic 
interference and the issue of vacant faculty positions in the universities and Higher 
Education Institutions (HEIs). 
14.  The Chairman emphasized on the need to work on Indian Knowledge System, 
easy and multiple exit policy, academic bank of credit under NEP - 2020. He also 
asked the Secretary to shed some light on industry-academia linkage and problem 
of funds in higher research, leading to exodus of students abroad.  
15.  The Chairman, then, directed the Department to send written clarifications to 
the queries and questions of Members. The Secretary responded to some of the 
queries of the Members and assured to furnish written replies to the points emerged 
from discussion within two weeks.  
(The representatives of the Department of Higher Education, then, withdrew.) 
 

58 
WITNESSES    *  *  * 
 
Oral Evidence of the  * * *  
  
 
16. * * *  
 
17. * * *  
 
18. * * *  
 
19. * * *  
 
20. * * *  
 
(* * * ) 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 
1. Shri Atul Kumar Tiwari Secretary  
2. Smt. Trishaljit Sethi Director General, DGT 
3. Shri Krishna Kumar Dwivedi Joint Secretary  
4. Ms. G. Madhumita Das Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Sinha Joint Secretary 
6. Ms. Sandhya Salwan Deputy Director General, DGT 
 
 
 
 
*  Pertains to other matter 

59 
Oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship 
21. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship along with his team of officers. The Chairman 
asked him to brief the Committee on the salient features of the National Education 
Policy, 2020 in respect of Vocational Education, Skill Development and Schemes 
targeting Girls/ Women for economic upliftment/ empowerment, from the point of 
view of the convergence envisaged in NEP 2020 between different forms of 
education.    
22.    The Secretary, Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship made a 
presentation on NEP-2020 and explained the manner in which the Ministry of was 
collaborating with the Ministry of Education. The Secretary then explained in 
detail how Skill can be brought into education through the National Curriculum 
Framework with the provisions to introduce the appreciation of value and dignity 
of work done by hand from class VI itself by way of inclusion of compulsory 
subjects. Higher Education Institutions have already started functioning as per 
guidelines by respective regulatory bodies in this regard.  Secondly, he also 
explained how education can be brought into skilling through National Credit 
Framework, which was in finalization stage. Further, educational institutions 
would be facilitated with various skill based courses.  
23. The Committee was also informed of the creation of a common student and 
teacher registry, on which this Ministry was working in tandem with Department 
of School Education and Literacy and Department of Higher Education, so that 
once registered as students, they can seamlessly avail benefits of the system of 
academic bank of credit whether under education or skilling, and common identity 
is maintained.  

60 
24. The Secretary, then, explained in detail the initiatives taken in area of Skill 
development of Women and elaborated upon various schemes which were under 
implementation under the aegis of the Ministry, such as ITI training, Pradhan 
Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojna, Jan Shikshan Sansthan, National Apprenticeship 
Promotion Scheme, Entrepreneurship Development through MSME Ministry, 
SANKALP World Bank Project, etc. It was also submitted that the Ministry was in 
the process of revamping the Skill India programmes.     
25.   The Chairman and the Members of the Committee, then, raised some queries 
and concerns during the course of discussion.  
26.  The Chairman, then, directed the Secretary, Ministry of Skill Development 
and Entrepreneurship to send written replies/clarifications to the queries and 
questions of Members within two weeks. 
 (The representatives of the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship, then, withdrew.) 
27. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was 
kept. 
28. The meeting, then, adjourned at 4:47 P.M. 
 
 
A. K. Mallick 
3rd November, 2022                                                                                    Director 
 
 

61 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(EWCY&S)  
 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 11:00 A.M. on 
Tuesday, 18th November, 2022 in Committee Room No.4, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, 
New Delhi. 
 
      MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
5. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
6. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
7. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
8. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
9. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
10. . Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
11 Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S. D. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary   
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
TATA INSTITUTE OF SOCIAL SCIENCES, MUMBAI 
 
1 Prof. Bino Paul.  Deputy Director/Pro-Vice Chancellor 
2. Prof. Meena Gopal Professor  
3. Dr. P. Bindhulakshmi Associate Professor  
 
INSTITUTE OF RURAL MANAGEMENT, ANAND, GUJARAT 
1. Dr. Umakant Dash Director  
2. Prof. Shyam Singh Professor 
3. Prof. Dayashankar Maurya  Professor 
 

62 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
1. Sh. Anil Kumar Jha  Secretary  
2. Smt. R. Jaya  Additional Secretary 
3. Sh. Naval Jit Kapoor Joint Secretary  
4. Sh. Biswajit Das DDG  
 
* * * 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee and 
stated the agenda for the meeting. He informed the Members that representatives of Tata Institute of 
Social Sciences, Mumbai (TISS) and Institute of Rural Management, Anand (IRMA) have been invited in 
the forenoon session to present their views on * and also on National Education Policy (NEP) 2020  
alongwith the Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs for the same. *  * *  
After the representatives from TISS and IRMA take their respective seats 
 
3. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives from two of the country’s esteemed Institutions-
-- Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai (TISS) and Institute of Rural Management, Anand (IRMA) 
for being present before the Committee to present their views/perspective, based on their understandings 
on the subjects being taken up in today's meeting. 
4. The Deputy Director, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai (TISS) began his deposition by 
informing the Committee of the patterns captured from data pertinent to the theme being discussed here 
and also some of the insights TISS has gathered from the research The Committee was then informed that 
TISS is currently working with Government agencies and industries and is offering Bachelor of 
Vocational Education to 6,300 students with 3000+ industry partners across 95 locations in India in 37 
B.Voc. programmes across 18 skill sectors in Life Sciences, Creative Industry, Social Research, 
Community Development and variety of other sectors, while the Government of India has a variety of 
channels and nearly 28 different skill verticals to engage with skilling. 
5. The Professor, TISS while deliberating on the issue of *           *          *. 
6. *           *          *. 
  
* Pertains to other matter 

63 
 
7. The Director, Institute of Rural Management, Anand (IRMA) began his deposition by 
enlightening the Committee of the Vocational Education and Skill Development in NEP 2020 aiming for 
exposure to vocational education to at least 50% of learners through the school and higher education 
system by 2025, however it needs to be further expanded to meet the needs of 18-21 years age girls. He 
then informed the Committee that equal focus should be given to job-based skills and entrepreneurial 
skills in the vocational education, educational institutions should be encouraged to open incubation 
centres, incubation centres should become the foci of vocational education and should offer core and 
elective courses in the mainstream academic programs. He also suggested that companies can collaborate 
with academic institutions and offer long-term trainings on their premises and academic institutions can 
certify the program and can offer the credits.  
8. * * * 
9. * * * 
10. * * * 
11. The Members raised various queries and expressed their views on the subject. Some of the queries 
raised by the Members were responded to by the representatives. They also mentioned that both TISS and 
IRMA would send responses to the queries raised by the Members.   
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
After the representatives from *           *          *. 
 
12. The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary and other officials from *           *          *. 
13. * * * 
14. * * * 
15. *           *          *. 
16. *           *          *. 
* Pertains to other matter 

64 
 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
(The Committee re-assembled after lunch break) 
 
After the representatives from *           *          *. 
 
17. * * * 
18. * * * 
19. * * * 
20. * * * 
 21. * * * 
22. * * *  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
23. * * * 
24.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
25.    The meeting adjourned at 2:50 P.M. 
 
 
 New Delhi,                                                                                                                   A.K. Mallick                        
18th November, 2022                                                                                                            Director 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 

65 
 
 
RECORD OF DISCUSSION  
OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS (EWCY&S)  
 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 11:00 A.M.  
on Thursday, 19th January, 2023 in Committee Room No.4, A-Block, Parliament House  
Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Dr. M. Thambidurai  
 
LOK SABHA 
3.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
4.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
5.  Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
6.  Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
7.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary   
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
7. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
 
11:00 A.M 
 
DEPARTMENT OF  *           *          *. 
12:00 NOON  
 DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION, MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
1. Shri K. Sanjay Murthy    Secretary 
2. Dr. Vineet  Joshi     Additional Secretary 
3. Ms. Saumya Gupta     Joint Secretary 
 
 * Pertains to other matter 

66 
 
4. Shri P.K. Banerjee     Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Santosh Kumar Barik    Company Secretary, HEFA 
6. Shri C. Jayakumar     Managing Director & CEO 
7. Shri Vishwajeet Kumar    DS (Parliament) 
8. Shri M. K. Meena     Director 
9. Shri M. M. Singh     Director 
 
DEPARTMENT OF FINANANCIAL SERVICES, MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
10. Shri Surjith Karthikeyan    Deputy Secretary 
 
CANARA BANK 
11. Shri Brij Mohan Shrama    Executive Director 
 
2:00 P.M.  
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Inder Deep Singh Dhariwal   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shobhit Srivastava    Deputy Director  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the Members of the sudden and untimely passing 
away of Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary, MP, Lok Sabha from Jalandhar and a Member of this 
Committee on 14th January, 2023. The Committee observed two minute silence to pay its homage 
to the departed Member.  
3.           *            *           *  
4.           *            *           *  
5.           *            *           *  
After Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Education and other 
senior officials take their seats 
6. *            *           * 
7. *            *           * 
8.         *            *           * 
9.         *            *           * 
10. *           *          *. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
             * Pertains to other matter 

67 
 
 
After the Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education and other senior 
officials take their seats 
11. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives from Department of 
Higher Education, Ministry of Education along-with Executive Director, Canara Bank to the 
meeting of the Committee and asked them to present their views/perspective, based on their 
understandings on the subject being taken up in today's meeting. 
12. Additional Secretary, Department of Higher Education in his PowerPoint presentation 
apprised the Committee that in 2018-19 Budget major initiative, ‘Revitalizing Infrastructure and 
Systems in Education’ (RISE), was initiated with an investment of Rs.1,00,000 crores for the next 
four years. He also informed about the vision, mission and objectives of the Higher Education 
Financial Agency (HEFA) and about five different windows for payment of educational loan. He 
further informed the Committee about the loan approving process and apprised the Committee that 
the paid-up capital of HEFA, as on date, is Rs.10,000 crores out of which the paid up capital that 
has been contributed by the Ministry of Education and Canara Bank is Rs.5,294 crores.   
13.   The Committee was also apprised about the four types of ESCROW account maintained and 
monitored under HEFA for repayment of principal amount and interest amount. He further 
informed about the loans disbursed to various institutions like IITs/NITs/AIIMS/Central 
Institutions etc. as well as issues and challenges faced by Department during disbursement of 
loans. The Committee was informed that 22 out of 23 IITs, seven IIMs, seventeen NITs, 27 Central 
Universities and 12 AIIMS and other institutions of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that 
fall under Windows-4 and 5, have been sanctioned loans.  He also threw light upon the fact that 
there is a proposal for expansion of scope and including State-funded institutions as majority of the 
students study in State institutions but the present scheme does not allow them to avail this facility.  
It was proposed that HEFA should also be able to accept philanthropic contribution by some 
alumni of these institutions. 
14.    The Secretary further informed the Committee that it has been requested through the HEFA 
Board to Canara Bank also to have programme management unit inside the HEFA Board to ensure 
that there is a lot of handholding that they can do through that PMU to those institutions because 
these calculations, these IRG returns and preparing those project reports require a little bit of 
expertise than the usual ones.   
15. After deposition by the officials of the Department of Higher Education and Literacy, Members 

68 
 
raised queries regarding timeline and guidelines for repayment of loans by various educational 
institutions made under HEFA.  Members also desired to get apprised of the data regarding how 
many students are there in the State schools and how many faculty teachers are appointed by the 
State Government/UTs. Some of the queries raised by the Members were responded to by the 
representatives. They also mentioned that Department of School Education and Literacy would 
send written responses to the unanswered queries raised by the Members.   
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
After the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs and other officials take their seats 
16. The Chairman welcomed the Joint Secretary and other representatives of Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs to the meeting of the Committee and asked them to present their views on "Policy 
regarding CSR activities for promotion of sports and education in the country and initiatives taken/ 
being taken by certain Corporates". 
17.  Joint Secretary, in his PowerPoint presentation informed the Committee that in Schedule-VII 
of CSR Policy Amendment Rules, 2013, a broad list of activities have been covered including 
sports, women empowerment and education during deliberation of the Committee upon the subject 
on Policy regarding CSR activities for promotion of Sports and Education in the country. He also 
informed that the Ministry takes annual return filed by the company along with their Annual 
Reports and also files a CSR-2 form, which was earlier known as AOC-4 containing the details of 
the projects undertaken under CSR because CSR is spent through project mode. 
18.  He also informed the Committee about the role of Corporate Social Responsibilities (CSR), its 
activities and formation of CSR Committee etc. He further informed about the CSR activities in 
Sports. He highlighted that as per the Company Act definition, the activities undertaken by the 
companies outside India are not considered eligible for CSR but sports is an exception. Training 
for the purpose of sports is considered as a CSR expense of the Indian sports personnel 
representing any State or Union Territory at national level or India at international level.  He also 
apprised the Committee about the total CSR fund spent on the training to promote Education for 
the financial year 2020-21 was Rs 46,873 crores. 
19. *           *          *.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
           * Pertains to other matter 

69 
 
 
 
20.  The meeting then adjourned at 3:14 P.M. 
 
19.01.2023                                                                                                                       A. K.Mallick 
New Delhi                                                                                                                               Director 
 

70 
 
 
MINUTES 
OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS (EWCY&S)  
 
X 
TENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 11:00 A.M.  
on Thursday, 20th April, 2023 in Committee Room No.4, A-Block, Parliament House Annexe   
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Ms. Sushmita Dev 
3.  Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
4.  Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
5.  Dr. M. Thambidurai  
6.  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA 
7.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
8.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
9.  Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
10. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
11. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
12. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
13. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
14. Shri T.N Prathapan 
15. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
17. Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
2. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
5. Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director 
6. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
 
11:00 A.M. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION, MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
1. Shri K. Sanjay Murthy    Secretary 
2. Dr. Vineet  Joshi     Additional Secretary 
3. Ms. Saumya Gupta     Joint Secretary 
4. Ms. Neeta Prasad    Joint Secretary 
5. Ms. Rina Sonowal Kouli   Joint Secretary 
 
NATIONAL TESTING AGENCY (NTA) 
1. Dr. Sadhana Parashar   Sr. Director 
2. Shri Varun Bhardwaj   Director 
 
ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION (AICTE) 
1. Prof. T.G. Sitharam    Chairman 
2. Dr. Abhay Jere    Vice Chairman 
 
DELHI UNIVERSITY 
1. Prof. Yogesh Singh    Vice Chancellor 
2. Dr. Vikas Gupta    Registrar 
3. Dr. Rohan Rai    Joint Registrar (Desk) 
 
UNIVERSITY GRANT COMMISSION (UGC) 
1. Prof. Jagadesh Kumar   Chairman 
2. Prof. Manish R. Joshi   Secretary 
3. Dr. Manju Singh    Joint Secretary 
 
COUNCIL OF ARCHITECTURE (CoA) 
1. Prof. Ar. Abhay Vinayak Purohit  President 
2. Shri Raj Kumar Oberoi   Registrar 
 
CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY EDUCATION (CBSE) 
1. Smt. Nidhi Chibber    Chairperson 
2. Shri Anurag Tripathi    Secretary 
3. Shri Maneesh Agarwal    Joint Secretary (Coordination) 
4. Dr. Sanyam Bhardwaj    Controller of Examinations 
5. Dr. Joseph Emmanuel    Director (Academics) 
 
2:30 P.M. 
INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH (ICAR) 
1. Dr. Seema Jaggi     ADG (HRD) 
2. Dr. Bimlesh Mann     ADH (EP&HS) 
 
 
 

72 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (MoH&FW) 
1. Dr. Sachin Mittal     Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kumar Rahul     Director 
3. Ms. Kokila Jayaram    Joint Director 
 
NATIONAL BOARD OF EXAMINATIONS IN MEDICAL SCIENCES (NBEMS) 
1. Prof. Minu Bajpai     Executive Director 
2. Dr. Vinay Gupta     Addl. Director 
 
NATIONAL MEDICAL COUNCIL (NMC) 
1. Dr. Suresh Chandra Sharma   Chairman 
2. Shri Pankaj Aggarwal    Director 
 
DENTAL COUNCIL OF INDIA (DCI) 
1. Dr. Debashis Banerjee    Member 
2. Shri Vikas Chawda    Secretary Incharge 
 
INDIAN NURSING COUNCIL (INC) 
1. Dr. T. Dileep Kumar    President 
2. Dr. Sarvjeet Kaur     Secretary 
 
PHARMACY COUNCIL OF INDIA (PCI) 
1. Dr. Montu Kumar     President 
2. Shri Anil Mittal     Secretary cum Registrar (I/C) 
3. Dr. Rahul Kumar     OSD to President  
 
BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA (BCI) AND NATIONAL LAW SCHOOL OF INDIA UNIVERSITY 
(NLSIU), BENGALURE 
1. Prof. Sudhir Krishnaswamy   Vice-Chancellor, NLSIU 
2. Shri Apurba Kumar Sharma   Chairman, Executive Committee, BCI 
3. Shri Ved Prakash Sharma    Co-Chairman, Executive Committee, BCI 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He thereafter, 
informed that *           *          *. 
                                        After concurrence to *           *          *. 
3.  He then informed about agenda for today’s meeting and apprised the Members that the Committee has 
invited Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education to hear his views on 
"Internationalization of Higher Education". Thereafter, the Committee will hear the  
 
* Pertains to other matter   

73 
 
 
representatives of various Examination conducting bodies under Department of Higher Education namely 
National Testing Agency (NTA), University Grants Commission (UGC), All India Council for Technical 
Education (AICTE) and Council of Architecture (CoA) on "Process and timeline for conducting various 
entrance examinations for higher educational institutions and the present status of seats". The Committee 
will also hear *           *          *. 
4. Chairman further informed that during the post lunch session, the Committee has invited the 
representatives of Bar Council of India (BCI), National Law School of India University, Bengaluru, Medical 
Council of India (MCI), Dental Council of India (DCI), Indian Nursing Council (INC), Pharmacy Council of 
India (PCI) and Indian Council of Agriculture (ICAR) to hear their views on "Process and timeline for 
conducting various entrance examinations for higher educational institutions and the present status of seats". 
After the Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education; Chairman, UGC; Vice-
Chancellor of Delhi University and other senior officials take their seats 
5. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives from Department of Higher 
Education, Ministry of Education and Chairman, UGC to the meeting of the Committee. The Chairman also 
welcomed the Vice-Chancellor of Delhi University and invited to depose before the Committee on “Issue of 
safety of girl students in general and in hostels in particular" in light of recent incidents after oral evidence 
of Secretary, Department of Higher Education. 
6. The Secretary started his deposition by informing the Committee that internationalization of higher 
education has been taken as one of the major priorities in NEP 2020 to promote India as a global study 
destination with quality education at affordable prices. It was then informed that strategy to promote 
internationalization had broadly been divided into five categories. First is initiatives and schemes to directly 
attract students to India; second is to enhance international collaboration between institutions in India and 
abroad; third is to facilitate the set-up of foreign institutions in India; fourth is to encourage and facilitate 
institutions to go abroad; and fifth is how to increase overall quality and ranking of Indian institutions in the 
international arena. The Committee was apprised that students from all over the world comes to India, but 
there are about 45 focus countries, where potential of students that may come is high for which rebate on 
fees varying from 25 per cent to 100 per cent is being provided according to student's merit under the 
scheme - Champion Services Sector Scheme of Ministry of Commerce. Also, budgetary allocation to 
support 'Study in India' through scholarships under the above mentioned scheme is being provided for 5 
years which would end this year. 
* Pertains to other matter   

74 
 
7.   The Secretary in his PowerPoint presentation then apprised the Committee of the programme "Direct 
Admission of Students Abroad" under which  seats are reserved for admission in technical institutions like 
NITs and CFTIs excluding IITs for PIOs and NRIs through JEE Main exam conducted by NTA foreign 
countries. It was also informed that short courses on Indian Knowledge Systems such as Yoga, Indian 
Languages etc. are also being designed to attract students. The Committee was also informed of the fact that 
UGC guidelines states that upto 25 per cent supernumerary seats should be reserved in universities for 
foreign students and International Affairs Offices must be set up in campuses of such Universities to deal 
with their visa issues and cultural adjustments. It was then stated that till now, 167 universities have opened 
International Affairs Offices in the country. 
8.  The Committee was also apprised about the Scheme for Promotion of Academic and Research 
Collaborations (SPARC), under which collaboration with 28 countries has been done, so fa,r with IIT 
Kharagpur being the implementing agency with five other lead institutions namely IIT Kanpur, ISI Kolkata, 
IIT Delhi, BHU and IIT Madras. The Committee was also informed about the Global Initiative for 
Academic Networks (GIAN) scheme, under which faculty from global institutions is invited to conduct 
courses in India. It was noted till date, about 1,763 courses have been conducted under GIAN scheme.  
9. Thereafter, the Committee noted the regulations for setting up of campuses of foreign higher educational 
institutions in India, for which the guidelines are issued by UGC. It was also informed that draft guidelines 
are under finalization for stakeholder consultation. It was noted that various international Hackathons are 
being organized with countries like Singapore, ASEAN countries and UNESCO Hackathon with Africa in 
which students from 25 African countries participated. The Committee was also apprised of the fact that 
because of the above mentioned efforts, ranking of Indian higher educational institutions had seen an 
improvement i.e. in the year 2015, 14 institutions of India were in world ranking while now 41 institutions 
and also 9 institutions are in top 400 institutions of the world. 
10. After deposition by the representatives of the Department of Higher Education, the Committee raised 
queries regarding draft regulations for setting up foreign university in India, regularization of foreign 
institutions, facilities being provided to international students apart from scholarships and challenges being 
faced to achieve international standards. Some of the queries raised by the Members were responded to by 
the representatives. They also mentioned that Department of Higher Education would send written responses 
to the unanswered queries raised by the Members. 
11.  While relying to a query regarding how universities are selected for global rankings, the Chairman, 
UGC informed the Committee that UGC has tentatively fixed that these universities have to be amongst the 
top 500 globally, or, they have to be subject-wise within the top 500 and they will be permitted to open a 

75 
 
campus only in that particular subject.  He also added that there are many universities which do not 
participate in any global ranking system such as the Fraunhofer Research Institutes in Germany.  In reply to 
a query whether they regulate the tuition fee or not, he stated that even today, the UGC does not regulate the 
tuition fee structure of any university in the country.  He also added to it that of course, some States have 
their own tuition fee regulation committees and they regulate, but the UGC leaves it to the institutions 
because they are autonomous bodies. 
12. While deposing before the Committee *           *          *. 
 (The Witnesses from *           *          * then withdrew) 
After the representatives from NTA, AICTE, CoA, CBSE take their seats 
13. The Chairman welcomed the representatives from National Testing Agency (NTA), All India Council 
for Technical Education (AICTE) and Council of Architecture (CoA) and *           *          *  to the meeting 
of the Committee and invited them to present their views on "Process and timeline for conducting 
examinations for various courses". Representatives of Department of Higher Education and University 
Grants Commission (UGC) were also asked to apprise the Committee of the same during the course of the 
meeting. 
14. *           *          *. 
15. The Committee then heard the representatives of CoA. The representatives of Council of Architecture 
(CoA) submitted that National Aptitude Test in Architecture (NATA) was being conducted from 2006 
onwards.  It was informed that this is completely an online examination conducted at online centers which 
are located in India as well as in abroad.  Further, there are 150 centers in India and seven centers abroad in 
countries such as Qatar, Oman, Dubai, Kuwait, Baharain, Singapore, Nepal etc. It was further added that 
after conducting examinations, the results are declared within that seven day’s time. 
16. After deposition by the various officials, the Committee raised queries regarding admission process, 
reasons for delay in declaration of results and steps being taken to streamline the examination schedule. 
Some of the queries raised by the Members were responded to by the representatives. It was also mentioned 
that written responses to the unanswered queries raised by the Members would also be sent.   
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter   

76 
 
 
Afternoon Session  
After the representatives from BCI, National Law School of India University, Bengaluru, NMC, DCI, 
INC, PCI and ICAR take their seats 
17. The Chairman welcomed all the representatives from Bar Council of India (BCI), National Law School 
of India University (NLSIU), Bengaluru, Medical Council of India (MCI), Dental Council of India (DCI), 
Indian Nursing Council (INC), Pharmacy Council of India (PCI) and Indian Council of Agriculture (ICAR) 
to the meeting of the Committee and invited them to present their views on "Process and timeline for 
conducting examinations for various courses".  
18. Thereafter, the Chairman, NMC in his PowerPoint presentation submitted that NMC came into existence 
vide GOI notification on 24th September, 2020.  It was also informed that they have four autonomous 
boards, UG Medical Education Board, PG Medical Education Board, Medical Assessment and rating Board 
and Ethics and Medical Registration Board. It was further added that  NMC is responsible for conducting 
entrance and EXIT examinations, NEET UG is conducted by NTA, NEET PG and NEET Super Specialty is 
also being conducted by NBEMS. 
19. The representatives of NMC then gave the schedule for NFFT UG and submitted that it would be 
conducted in 3rd week of April and results would be declared by 3rd May, 2023.  They further added that 
counseling would be done by 1st June and course would start by 1st July, 2023.   They further submitted that 
total UG seats for MBBS are about 1,01,045 and a few more seats would be added this year after 
assessment.  The Committee was also informed that for PG as of now, there were 46,265 seats and for super 
specialty there are 5,077 seats. They further added that the MBBS panel out exam is also going to be 
conducted by NTA this year as per the schedule.  More than 20 lakh students would be going there exams.  
20. The Executive Director, NBEMS, apprised the Committee that in the last four decades, they have had 
certain activities in which the primary activity has been conducting NEET for the Post Graduates.  It was 
also informed that about two lakh students take the entrance examination and the number of seats is 56,000. 
He further added that NBEMS keep 13,000 Post Graduate seats under the National Board and the rest of 
them are given to the National Medical Commission for distribution to various medical colleges.  The 
Committee was also informed that the main activity of NBEMS is conduction of tests and accreditation of 
hospitals due to which they have got two-thirds of their entire accreditation in private hospitals and one-third 
in Government hospitals.  It was also informed that there are 31 super specialty skill enhancement 3-year 
courses and for the post MBBS diploma courses, there are eight courses.  The private hospitals are 8,915 in 

77 
 
number with 13,200 hospitals overall under the belt and the National Board, which NBEMS centrally 
monitor in terms of their formative assessment, distribution of students, monitoring them and conducting the 
exit examination also. 
21.  The Chairman of the Committee raised an issue regarding relevance of physics in medical entrance 
examinations. The representatives of NMC then informed the Committee that in cardiac physiology or 
respiratory physiology, there is a lot of Physics involved.   It was also informed that the most important 
thing is that a person’s analytical approach is tested by Physics.  Those who are good at analytical part, they 
score very good in Physics.   Also, for a doctor, decision making has to be fast because he has to decide 
when the patient is in front of him and clinical.   They also elaborated that in cardiac physiology, doctors are 
required to do ECG, conduction of electricity through nerves or muscles, ion balance, etc. which requires 
use of physics Also, in the treatment of eyes, light is involved which is based upon physics of light. 
Therefore, it was emphasized upon that in order to become a good, holistic and a knowledgeable doctor, 
physics plays an important part. 
22. The ADG, ICAR in her PowerPoint presentation apprised the Committee that there are 74 agricultural 
universities across the country and in all States, we have one or the other agricultural university. Also, there 
are 63 State agricultural universities which include the veterinary universities, the fisheries universities, the 
horticulture universities. Further, there are four deemed universities which are under the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research which are IARI, NDRI, the Central Institute of Fisheries Education, and, IVRI, 
Bareilly. The Committee was also informed that ICAR had made an arrangement with the agricultural 
universities in the year 1996-97 to keep 15 per cent in the undergraduate and 25 per cent in the post graduate 
seats to be filled up by the all-India entrance examination, which ICAR conducts. The purpose was to reduce 
the academic breeding and to encourage the students to move from one State to another and to have uniform 
examination standards.  It was also informed that since 2015-16, ICAR also started the exam for the Ph.D. 
which is conducted by the ICAR itself. Also, in 2017-18, the online counselling for admissions was started 
and in 2019, ICAR shifted to National Testing Agency. All exams are now being conducted by the NTA. 
23. They also apprised the Committee that from May 21st to 31st, the exam would be conducted for 
undergraduate and admission for 11 UG programmes in the agriculture stream would also take place. From 
this year, it will be through CUET.  In May-end, ICAR will have the exam where the students can take any 
of the three courses, Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Mathematics and Agriculture.  The result and scores 
would be given in June and by June-end ICAR would start the counselling.   By July, the session would 
start.  It was also informed that however, for PG, ICAR is still not joining CUET but from this year, for PG 
and Ph.D, ICAR is going to have a separate exam conducted by the NTA only.   

78 
 
24. The Co-Chairman, BCI informed the Committee, as far as, Bar Council of India is concerned, they are 
not conducting any law entrance examination but they have an idea to bring uniformity in law entrance 
examination.  The Committee was then informed by Vice-Chancellor, NLSIU that the Consortium was 
formed in a two-step process arising out of the Supreme Court of India's judgements in Varun Bhagat and 
Shamnath Bashir.  In the first instance, MoU was signed between the Government of India and eight law 
universities to conduct an admission test, the BCI as well as the UGC being present. Subsequently, the court, 
in 2014, said that this must be better institutionalized and a Consortium was set up, which is a registered 
society, based out of the National Law School of India University, Bangalore.  The Consortium conducts the 
CLAT.  The current status of the CLAT exam is that it is the exclusive mode of admission to 22 National 
Law Universities as well as more than 75 other institutions, which include private law colleges and various 
other institutions, including the Indian Army and various PSUs which use it as a selection exam.  It was then 
informed that it is the largest law examination in the country and has been growing year on year. In 2022, 
NLSIU conducted the exam for CLAT, 2023 and they have announced the results within one week and have 
begun the counseling.  Also, two rounds of counseling were over in January, 2023.   
25. The Committee was then informed that law post-graduates are about 1,300 and almost 99 per cent of 
these seats are already filled.  The last round of counseling would be in May, 2023, where NLSIU will close 
the final round and apart from the Common Law Admission Test, which is the largest exam, NLU, Delhi 
conducts a separate test.   
26. The representatives of DCI in their presentation submitted that examination for admission to dental 
courses, BDS is similar to NMC and is being conducted by NTA along with MBBS.  NEET-MDS is also 
conducted by National Board of Examination which was usually held by 10th May and the result is declared 
by 1st week of June, 2023.  
27. The representatives of Pharmacy Council of India apprised the Committee that this year GPAT and 
EXIT Exam would be held. Also, it was informed that GPAT till date is being conducted by AICTE but 
from next year, it would be conducted by Pharmacy Council of India. It was also informed that problem 
relating to stipend which is provided by AICTE as PCI has no such provision for providing stipend. It was 
also informed that previously 4,000 colleges were there but now 2,400 new colleges have been added. While 
replying to a query regarding entrance exams for PCI, it was informed that admission committee prepares a 
merit list according to percentage of twelfth class exams and initiates the admission process thereon. 
28. After deposition by the various representatives, the Committee raised queries regarding admission 
process, courses being offered and new courses being added, reasons for delay in declaration of results and 
steps being taken to streamline the examination schedule. Some of the queries raised by the Members were 

79 
 
responded to by the representatives. It was also mentioned that written responses to the unanswered queries 
raised by the Members would also be sent. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
29.  The meeting then adjourned at 4:06 P.M. 
30. A verbatim record of the meeting was also kept. 
 
20.04.2023                                                                                                                       A. K. Mallick 
New Delhi                                                                                                                                Director 

80 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, 
CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS (EWCY&S)  
 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met 
at 9:30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 20th September, 2023  in Committee Room 'D', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3.  Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
4.  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari  
 
LOK SABHA 
5.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
6.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
7.  Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
8. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
9. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
10. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
12.Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
13. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
14.Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 

81 
 
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms. Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
6. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
7. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of 
the Committee to the first meeting of the newly constituted Committee. He, then, 
informed the Committee that the meeting was called to discuss the future course of 
action of the present Committee. He informed the Committee that there were two 
important issues before the Committee to discuss: 
(i) * * * 
(ii) to consider and adopt one draft subject 356th Report on “Implementation of 
the National Education Policy, 2020 in Higher Education”.  
3. The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft subject Report, 
and adopted the same without any amendment. 
4. The Committee, however, authorized the Chairman, to correct any patent 
errors or make consequential changes, if any, in the Report. The Committee then 
decided to present/lay the Report in both the Houses of Parliament during its 
ongoing Session on 21st September, 2023 and authorized Shri Vivek Thakur, M.P. 
and Chairman of the Committee, in his absence, Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari, M.P. and 
in their absence, Shri  Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya, to present the Report in the 
Rajya Sabha Shri Jagannath Sarkar, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Sangamlal 
Kadedin Gupta, M.P. were authorized to lay the above mentioned Report on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on the said date. 
5. * * * 
 
  * Pertains to other matter  

82 
 
6.   The meeting adjourned at 10:25 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                        A.K. Mallick  
21st September, 2023                                                                        Director 
 