PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December 
TWO HUNDRED 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 
OF THE  
(MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL OPMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
December , 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD  REPORT 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-NINTH REPORT ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 -2016 (DEMAND NO. 109 
 DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS  
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS ) 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO. 
273  
REPORT  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
 
(DEMAND NO. 109 )  

PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 
OF THE 
(MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-NINTH REPORT ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 -2016 (DEMAND NO. 109 
OF THE  DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS  
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS ) 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22 nd  December, 2015) 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
December , 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
 
(DEMAND NO. 109 )  

C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................... .......................................  (i)-(ii) 
2.         PREFACE..................................................................................................................  (iii) 
3. ABBREVIATIONS....................................................................................................  (iv) 
4.  REPORT............................................ .............................................…............................         
5. *OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -  AT A GLANCE ...   
6. *MINUTES........................................ ...................................................... ................    
7. *ANNEXURES...................................... ............................................................ ..   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
*Appended on printing stage 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st  August, 2015) 
 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13.  Shri C.R. Chaudhary 
14.       Shrimati Bhawana Gawali Patil 
15.       Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16 .       Shri  Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.       Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.       Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.       Shri Chand Nath 
20.       Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.       Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.       Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.       Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.       Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
26.       Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.       Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.       Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
30.       Shri Ajay Tamta 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher  
  
 
 
 
 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri K.P. Singh, Additional Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director 
Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
  

P R E F A C E 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorised by the Committe e to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred Seventy-third Repor t on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Sixty-  ninth Report on Demands for Grants 
(Demand No. 109) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs a nd Sports, Department of Sports for the year 
2015-16.   
 
2. The Two Hundred Sixty-ninth Report of the Departmen t-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development was present ed to Rajya Sabha on 28 th  April, 2015 
and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 28 th  April, 2015.  Replies of the Government to the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Repor t, were considered by the Committee at its 
meeting held on the 18 th  December, 2015. 
 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopt ed the same at its meeting held on 
the 18 th  December, 2015. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
December 18, 2015 
Agrahayana 27,1937 (Saka) 
 
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development deals with the action taken by  the Government on the recommendations 
contained in its Two hundred sixty-ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(Demand No. 109) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs a nd Sports, Department of Sports, for the year 
2015-16. 
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the 269 
th  Report have been categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been a ccepted by the Government – 
paras – 12, 17, 53, 55, 61, 63, 64 and 68 
 (Chapter-I) Total – 9 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply – paras – 19, 20, 25 , 28, 30, 32, 41, 45, 49, 57, 58, 
59,60 and 62 
 (Chapter-II) Total – 12  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee – paras – 1 1, 21, 27, 35, 42, 43, 47, 52, 
54, 56 and 65 
 (Chapter-III) Total – 12 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch replies of the Government are 
still awaited. 
 (Chapter-IV) Total - Nil  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendations/observations  
12. In view of the winding up of the Planning Commissio n, which was an in intermediary 
agency between the Centre and the States, and also acted as monitoring agency, it is not clear what 
monitoring mechanism of the centrally sponsored or central sector schemes would be put in place. 
 The Committee shows its concern and desires the De partment to clarify this issue before it at the 
earliest. 
 
Action Taken  
Grants released to State Governments/UTs, Non-Gover nmental Organizations (NGOs), 
National Sports Federations (NSFs) by the Ministry under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes or 
Central Sector Schemes are released keeping in view  provisions of the General Financial Rules. 
Grantees are required to submit audited statement o f accounts and the utilization certificate in the 
prescribed format and the same are duly scrutinized  in the Ministry to ensure that the funds have 
been utilized in accordance with the provisions of the sanction order and have been utilized for the 
purpose for which the grants were released. Further , there is audit by the Comptroller & Auditor 
General.  
 
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI)  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
17.  The Committee notes that although of late there has  been slight improvement in the 
performance of India’s sportspersons at internation al events but it is incomparable with the 
performance of other developing/developed nations f or which a lot needs to be done.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that SAI should co me up with more concerted efforts so as to 
increase its medals tally substantially during Olym pic Games, 2016.  Improvement of nation’s 
performance in sports is the need of the time as it  would not only bring national pride and glory 
but also instills some of confidence amongst the people. 
 
Action Taken  
Based on present standard of the Indian sportsperso ns/teams, priority areas are being 
identified and maximum thrust is being given to tho se disciplines/events where Indian 
sportspersons stand a chance to win a medal or at l east give respectable performance at the 2016 
Rio Olympic Games. 
 
Indian sportspersons/teams are performing  better a t the international level as compared to 
similar earlier events held in the Olympic discipli nes like Archery, Athletics, Badminton, Boxing, 
Hockey, Shooting, Tennis and Wrestling.  Accordingl y, maximum financial assistance is being 
extended to these disciplines to target and win more medals in future international events. 
 
The qualifications for the 2016 Rio Olympic Games b egan last year (2014) and 
qualification process for various sports discipline s will go on  up to June/July, 2016 depending 

upon schedule and criteria laid down by the Interna tional Sports Federations of the respective 
sports discipline in consultation with the International Olympic Committee (IOC).   
 
Following quota places have been attained by the In dian Sportspersons/teams for participation 
in Rio Olympics 2016, as on 18.9.2015:-  
• Archery - 04  
• Athletics - 07  
• Shooting - 08  
• Hockey – 16 (Men team)  
• Hockey – 16 (Women Team)  
• Wrestling - 01  
 
Annual Calendar for Training and Competitions, (ACT Cs) focusing on preparations for the 
2016 Rio Olympic Games for all identified sports di sciplines have been finalised  and adequate 
budget provisions have been made to support the spo rtspersons, as projected by the concerned 
National Sports Federation (NSF).  
 
Furthermore, in order to supplement the efforts and  to cater the individual needs of the 
identified sportspersons for the 2016 Rio Olympic G ames, Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports has 
launched a new scheme ‘Target Olympic Podium’ (TOP) . Under this scheme specific requirement 
of sportspersons i.e. assistance towards individual tailor-made programme is provided.    
 
SPORTS UNIVERSITY IN NORTH-EAST  
 
 
PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG DISABLED  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
53.  The Committee has also gathered that the Paralympics Committee of India (PCI), owing to 
lackadaisical attitude and apathy towards its athle tes, has been suspended by the International 
Paralympics Committee (IPC).  The Committee also sh ows its concern for chaotic condition 
prevailing in PCI for several years mostly due to i ndividual conflicts and proper management, etc.  
    
Action Taken  
 
The Ministry suspended the recognition of Paralympi c Committee of India (PCI) on 22 
nd  
April 2015 till further orders. The decision to sus pend was taken in the wake of numerous serious 
complaints about poor management / conduct of the 1 5 th  National Para Athletics Championships, 
2015 held from 20th -22nd March, 2015 in Ghaziabad (U.P.) in all aspects viz. logistics, technical, 
administrative, etc. An enquiry conducted by Sports  Authority of India (SAI) has found that the 
complaints were largely well-founded. 
PCI has violated the terms and conditions of recogn ition as well as provisions of its own 
constitution. The Government has further noted that  PCI has not been functioning in the best 
interest of Para sport for which it was granted rec ognition as there has been large scale 
dissatisfaction among players and other stakeholder s thus resulting in adverse impact on both the 

development of the sport as well as future opportun ities and prospects of Para athletes in the 
country. The Ministry had earlier issued a ‘Show-cause’ notice to PCI on the subject. 
The International Paralympic Committee (the interna tional body responsible for promotion 
of sports among para athletes to which PCI is affiliated) has suspended PCI for unlimited period of 
time. 
After suspension of Paralympic Committee of India ( PCI) by the International Paralympic 
Committee and the Ministry of Youth Affair and Spor ts,  the Ministry has decided that all the 
matters relating to Para-athletes including selection of athletes for various sporting events, conduct  
of coaching camps, and submission of entries of par a-athletes in international tournaments shall be 
taken care of by Sports Authority of India till further orders. 
  
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT IN SPORTS 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
55.  However, the Committee is surprised to find that Rs . 10 crore was allocated in BE 2014-
15  and it got reduced to Rs. 0.35 crore in RE stag e of year 2014-15 owing to receipt of less 
number of viable names. The Committee hopes that th is scheme of the Department will achieve 
the desired result in the current fiscal for what it has been meant for.    
 
Action Taken  
Budgetary allocation of Rs. 5.00 crore has been mad e during the current financial year for 
the scheme of Human Resource Development in Sports. The Ministry is hopeful that the budgetary 
allocation will be utilized for achievement of objectives of the Scheme.  
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF SPORTS SCIENCE AND SPORTS MEDICINE 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
61.  The Committee hopes that this scheme of the Departm ent will become functional during 
the current fiscal. 
 
Action Taken  
 
The scheme for setting up of Indian Institute of Sp orts Science & Research is ready and 
awaiting clearance from the Department of Expenditu re, Ministry of Finance. EFC Memo was 
forwarded to the Department of Expenditure, Ministr y of Finance, on 24.11.2014 requesting for an 
early date of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EF C) Meeting. The meeting was scheduled on 
31.03.2015, subsequently postponed, and finally hel d on 04.06.2015. The scheme is being pursued 
on top priority. 
 
 
NATIONAL PHYSICAL FITNESS PROGRAMME-RESOURCE CENTRE  AT LNIPE 
GWALIOR  
 
Recommendations/observations  
 

63.  The Committee hopes that this scheme of the Departm ent will become functional during 
the current fiscal. 
 
Action Taken  
 
The issue of preparing National Physical Fitness Pr ogramme is under examination in 
consultation with the concerned stakeholders includ ing the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development.  
 
SCHEME FOR IDENTIFICATION AND NURTURING OF SPORTS TALENT  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
64.  The Committee hopes that this scheme of the Depart ment will become functional during 
the current fiscal. 
 
Action Taken  
 As the Department of Sports has formulated and lau nched new scheme viz., National 
Sports Talent Search Scheme (NSTSS) in February 201 5 with the objective of identification of 
sporting talent among students in the age group of 8–12 years (for admission in Class IV to Class 
VI) who possess inborn qualities such as anthropome tric, physical and physiological capabilities 
without any anatomical infirmities and nurturing of  the Sporting Potential / talent in District level 
Sports schools / Central Sports  Schools / National  Sports Academies etc., to make them 
excel at the National and international sports comp etitions, the Department now does not intend to 
formulate the Scheme for Identification and Nurturi ng of Sports Talent (INSTAL). Further, its 
other objectives would be dovetailed with other Sch emes of the Ministry such as Rajiv Gandhi 
Khel Abhiyan (RGKA) etc.  
 
CONCLUSION  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
68. The Committee feels that to revive sports culture, the government should revisit the 
sporting framework of India.  This is also the need  of the hour as India is reaping benefits of 
demographic dividend in the form of young populatio n which can easily be channelized to sports 
and games for achieving better results.  Otherwise,  achievement of goals by utilizing the available 
immense potential of the country in sports would be  difficult to realize.  For achieving improved 
performance in sports internationally the governmen t needs to play a proactive role in promoting 
sports in India to establish the country as a sport ing nation.  The Committee hopes that with 
improved sporting infrastructure and infusion of la test technology in training of sportspersons 
India would show better results at the next Olympics to be held at Rio in Brazil.     
 
Action Taken  
 
The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports is taking all possible steps for realization of twin 
objectives of National Sports Policy 2001 viz., mas s participation in sports and achieving 

excellence in sports. Apart from review and revisio n of existing Schemes and policies of the 
Ministry from time to time, the Department of Sport s has launched new schemes for achieving 
these two objectives of the National Sports Policy 2001.  
A new scheme, namely National Sports Talent Search Scheme (NSTSS) has been formulated for 
talent identification in the age group of 8-12 year s and nurturing of identified talented 
sportspersons with the objectives identification of  sporting talent among students in the age group 
of 8–12 years (for admission in Class IV to Class V I) who possess inborn qualities such as 
anthropometric, physical and physiological capabili ties without any anatomical infirmities and 
nurturing of the Sporting Potential / talent in Dis trict level Sports schools / Central Sports 
 Schools / National Sports Academies etc., to make them excel at the National and 
international sports competitions.  
2000 children (1000 boys and 1000 girls) who are fo und to be the best talented will be 
identified and admitted in the (a) National Sports Academies (b) State Sports Academies/Sports 
Hostels run by State Govts., (c) State Sports Schol arships, (d) State Sports Schools, (e) Central 
Sports Schools and (f) Sports Training Centre (STC) /Special Area Games (SAG) of Sports 
Authority of India (SAI).  
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports and the Sports A uthority of India are geared up for 
preparation and training of sportspersons/teams for India’s improved performance at Rio Olympics 
2016.  
A programme, namely TOP (Target Olympic Podium) Scheme, has been formulated within 
the overall ambit of National Sports Development Fu nd (NSDF) with the objective of identifying 
and supporting potential medal prospects for 2016 a nd 2020 Olympic Games.  Focused disciplines 
will be Athletics, Archery, Badminton, Boxing, Wres tling, Weightlifting and Shooting.  The 
selected athletes will be provided financial assist ance for their customized training at Institutes 
having world class facilities and other necessary s upport.  Benchmark for selection of athletes 
under the scheme will be in relation to internation al standards.  There will be annual/semi-annual 
review of performance of selected athletes.    
Customized training at Institutes having world clas s facilities and other necessary support is being 
provided to the elite athletes, which would result in improved performance and a higher position in 
medals tally for the country in international sports events and mega-sports events.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI) 
 
Recommendations/observations  
19.  The Committee notes with concern the reduced alloca tion for the SAI as compared to the 
last year.  SAI is the agency mainly responsible fo r maintaining and development of sports in the 
country.  Reducing its allocation instead of increa sing over the years does not augur well for the 
development of sports in our country. 
 
Action Taken  
Budgetary allocation for Sports Authority of India (SAI) during current financial year 
2015-16 is more than allocation made during previou s financial year 2014-15. Budgetary 
allocation for 2015-16 for SAI is Rs. 345.78 crore (Plan) and Rs. 58.61 crore (Non-Plan) as 
compared to Rs. 335.30 crore (Plan) and Rs. 51.55 c rore (Non-Plan) during 2014-15. Although it 
is true that budgetary allocation for SAI at BE sta ge for 2014-15 was Rs. 392 crore, but the same 
was reduced to Rs. 335.30 crore at RE stage.  
 
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME(NSS) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
20.  The Committee recommends that initiatives should be  taken to fill up vacant posts of 
Coaches urgently, required for every sports discipl ine and they get international training and 
exposure regularly.  The need for various levels of  Coaches Education and Certification System 
(CECS) structure, procedure for getting Internation al Federations Certification, etc. have to be 
adequately taken care of besides the initiatives re quired for filling up the vacancy of Coaches at 
the earliest.  The existence of large-scale vacanci es in respect of Coaches should be serious cause 
for concern and the Committee fails to understand a s to how we are preparing our sportspersons in 
the absence of Coaches to compete with the other nations at international sports events.     
 
Action Taken 
 
The recruitment process against the vacancies was s tarted in 2013 in phased manner and 
accordingly Assistant Coaches in various discipline s were recruited during theyear 2013-14 as 
per laid down / prescribed selection process compri sing written examination followed by 
interview / field test.  
Since, after recruitment of regular coaches last ye ar, a number of posts of Assistant 
coaches have fallen vacant due to retirement on sup erannuation / voluntary retirement etc. of 
incumbents, the process to  fulfil the immediate re quirement of all training centres including that 
of North-East and Andaman & Nicobar region, has bee n initiated and  116 coaches in the 
disciplines of Archery (4), Boxing (6), Cycling (4) , Fencing  (5), Football (10), Hockey (1), Judo 
(5),Karate (4), Gymnastic (6),Kayaking and Canoeing  (6),Kho-Kho &Kabaddi(2), Lawn Tennis 
(5), Rowing (3),Silambam (1),Sepaktakraw (1), Swimming (6), Water Polo (1), Diving (2), Table 

Tennis (1),Taekwondo (8), Weightlifting (6), Wrestl ing (12),Wushu (7) and  Yoga (10) are being 
recruited on contract basis. An advertisement to th is effect was published in newspapers& details 
were placed on website of SAI. 101 coaches have bee n selected and offers of appointment have 
been sent to them.  
So far as international exposure / training of coac hes is concerned the same is being 
further taken up by deputing them for training courses abroad. 
Education and Certification system for various leve ls of coaches has been provided in 
Recruitment Rules as eligibility criteria for promo tion of coaches to higher level in the coaching 
cadre.    
ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
25.  The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that th ere is a distinct lack of proper 
coordination and control mechanism among the NSFs o n the one hand between the Ministry/SAI 
and the NSFs on the other hand. The NSFs in the nam e of their autonomy, the Committee feels, 
that they are not accountable to anybody even thoug h they receive Government funds for their 
activities.  The NSFs, the Committee, feels have a definite role to play in promoting different 
sports disciplines in the country.  But their worki ng leaves much to be desired.  These bodies, 
unfortunately, devote much of their time and resour ces in the non-sporting activities.  Most of 
them have not been able to live upto the expectations.  No doubt, some of them have done or doing 
very good work in the promotion of sports in the co untry.  The Committee has been expressing its 
concern over this issue from time to time and calls upon the Ministry and the representatives of the 
NSFs to find out collectively a most efficient and workable solution that can bring our sports 
sector out of the present situations.  We may perha ps try to learn/adopt the best practices in this 
respect from the other countries such as China, Korea, Taiwan, etc. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Ministry has decided criteria to evaluate the p erformance of NSFs (Annexure-I) . 
Funding of NSFs  based on the said evaluation will bring more accountability in the system and 
motivate the NSFs to perform better.  
 
 Efforts are being made to make NSFs more responsib le and accountable for promoting 
their sports disciplines through regular interactio n. NSFs are encouraged to evolve a system based 
on International practices best suited to India and  involving ex-international sportspersons in their 
system. 
 
 The Government has also set up a committee headed by a former judge of Delhi High 
Court to   revise the sports code which incorporates principles of good governance in NSFs. 
 
AUDIT PARAS  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 

28. The Committee is at a loss to see that the audit ob servations made in the Commonwealth 
Games, 2010 by the CAG have not been cleared so far .  The Committee finds it objectionable and 
desires the Department to get this process completed at the very earliest. 
 
Action Taken  
 
It is submitted that the Comptroller and Auditor Ge neral of India ( CAG) conducted a post 
games audit of the Commonwealth Games 2010 and pres ented an Audit Report titled Union 
Government (Civil) – No. 6 of 2011-12 to Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 5 th  August, 2015.  
The aforesaid C&AG Audit Report No.6 of 2011-12 on CWG 2010 had been selected for 
examination by the PAC 2011-12. Hence, it was thoug ht that the concerned 
Ministries/Departments would be required to submit ATNs on the recommendations/observations 
made by the PAC in its Report rather than the Audit Report itself.  
The PAC 2011-12 and 2012-13 had lengthy deliberatio ns on the said Audit Report. This 
Ministry, besides oral evidence tendered before the  PAC 2011-12 & 2012-13 by two of the then 
Secretaries (Sports), furnished voluminous records as required by the PAC related to the Games 
for distribution to PAC Members.  In addition, ther e were two lengthy post evidence 
Questionnaires related to this Ministry/Organizing Committee, CWG 2010/Sports Authority of 
India containing a total of 332 questions which were also replied to and submitted to PAC together 
with vetting comments of the Audit and wherever fea sible with further replies on the vetting 
comments of the C&AG on our initial replies.   
The PAC 2011-12 and 2012-13 could not finalize the Report. The subject matter is 
presently under examination of the PAC 2015-16 (16 th Lok Sabha).  One Sitting of the PAC 2015-
16 on the subject matter has already taken place on  26.08.2015.  This Ministry is already 
attempting replies to additional PAC Questionnaire containing 56 questions and parts.   
In this view of the matter, the point is when subst antial work has already been done and 
inputs of the Ministry submitted before the PAC thr ough oral evidence and our replies to the 
lengthy PAC Questionnaires with the vetting comment s of the C&AG/Audit, there was any need 
to attempt the ATNs de novo.  The above position ha s been placed before the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance and  DG, Audit ( C entral Expenditure ) and  this Ministry would 
be guided by the advice of the Ministry of Finance and the Audit in this regard. However, this 
Ministry is open to question of attempting ATNs on the report, if so desired.  
This position is also being placed before the PAC (  2015-16) examining the CAG Report 
No. 6 of 2011-12 in reply to a question included in the Questionnaires for post evidence reply. 
 
LAKSHMIBAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION (LNIPE) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
30. The Committee notes that the budget allocations hav e been sufficiently utilized but feels 
that the allocations will not be enough for meeting  the projected activities and requirement of the 
Institute such as laying of squash court, tennis co urt, gymnasium, swimming pool, astro turf, boys 
hostels, girls hostels, etc.  The Committee, theref ore, recommends for the enhanced budget 
allocation to accomplish the proposed activities/works within the stipulated time frame. 
Action Taken  
 

An allocation of Rs. 45.00 crore under Plan in BE 2 015-16 to Lakshmibai National 
Institute of Physical Education (LNIPE) including i ts North Eastern Regional Centre (NERC), 
Guwahati has been made (Rs. 20.00 crore for LNIPE, Gwalior and Rs. 25.00 crore for NERC, 
Guwahati). 
 
 North East Regional Centre of the Institute at Guw ahati has been opened with a very 
limited infrastructure provided by the Assam Govern ment. For smooth functioning of the centre 
and to provide adequate facilities to the students for imparting quality teaching and residing 
facilities, the following constructions were projec ted in BE 2015-16 for LNIPE, Gwalior/NERC 
Guwahati. 
 
i. Construction of 400 meter Synthetic Athletic Track at NERC, Guwahati. 
ii. Construction of Synthetic Tennis Courts at LNIPE NERC, Guwahati/Gwalior. 
iii. Construction of Synthetic Basket Ball Courts at LNIPE NERC, Guwahati/Gwalior. 
iv. Construction of Auditorium Building at LNIPE, Gwalior. 
v. Construction of Auditorium Building at LNIPE NERC, Guwahati. 
vi. Construction of Gymnasium Hall at NERC, Guwahati. 
vii. Construction of Squash Court at LNIPE NERC, Guwahati. 
viii. Construction of Boys & Girls Training Hostel at LNIPE, Gwalior. 
 
Although the LNIPE has projected the demand for Rs.  40.13crore for LNIPE, Gwalior and 
Rs. 38.09 crore for NERC, Guwahati in BE- 2015-16, budgetary allocation of Rs. 20 crore for 
LNIPE, Gwalior and Rs. 25 crore for NERC, Guwahati was made keeping in view overall 
budgetary allocation for the Department of Sports. If required, the Ministry will seek enhanced 
allocation for LNIPE at RE stage for completion of activities/ projects  of LNIPE and NERC.   
 
  

SPECIAL CASH AWARDS  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
32.  The Committee while appreciating the enhanced alloc ation for cash awards for 
sportspersons hopes that the enhanced allocation ma de during the BE 2015-16 would be fully 
utilized to encourage and motivate outstanding spor tspersons for higher achievements and all 
backlogs are cleared in this regard.  The Committee  also observes that complete transparency 
should be maintained while giving cash awards and t hat the criteria be followed strictly in this 
regard. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Budgetary allocation of Rs. 30 crore has been made during current financial year 2015-16 
for cash awards to medal winners and their coaches.    As on 18.9.2013, cash awards worth Rs. 
13.60 crore have already been disbursed to the meda l winners in international sports events and 
their coaches. The remaining budgetary allocation f or cash awards will be utilized before 31 
st  
March 2016.  Cash awards are being paid to the meda l winners and their coaches strictly in 
accordance with the provisions of the Ministry’s Sc heme of Special Awards to medal winners in 
international sports events and their coaches.  Com plete transparency is being maintained in 
processing the cases of special cash awards.   
 
RAJIV GANDHI KHEL ABHIYAN (RGKA)  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
41.  The Committee appreciates the launching of RGKA a c entrally sponsored scheme in place 
of earlier PYKKA scheme for its novel objectives of  expanding and developing sports specifically 
in the rural areas.  This is a major Scheme to provide sports complexes for both outdoor and indoor 
disciplines in all the 6545 blocks 634 districts in phased manner over a period of five years.  But in 
view of such humongous objectives of the scheme, th e performance both physical and financial 
during the last year does not inspire any confidenc e that we will be able to achieve the objectives 
within the five years.    The problem of pending UC s should not be taken as an excuse in 
implementing such a flagship scheme.     
 
Action Taken  
 
The concerns raised by the Committee with regard to  slow implementation of the scheme 
are genuine. The slow implementation of the scheme can be attributed tonon allocation of funds 
for creation of infrastructure under Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan (RGKA) during 2014-15 as also to 
pendency of the UCs. However, the Department of Spo rts has been making concerted efforts to 
liquidate the outstanding UCs by persuading the Sta te Governments. Secretary (Sports) held two 
consecutive meetings with the Secretary (Sports) of  the State Governments/UTs in July and 
August, 2014 on liquidation of Outstanding UCs and as a result of his persuasion, UCs amounting 
to Rs.187.15 crore have been received and accepted during 2014-15. A State-wise list of UCs 
received and accepted during 2014-15 is attached as Annexure–III . Details of Outstanding UCs as 
on 28.05.2015 are also attached as Annexure–IV . As on 31.03.2015, UCs amounting to Rs.51.75 

crore were outstanding. After adding the amount of non-recurring grants of Rs.46.27 crore 
released during 2014-15, for which UCs became due o nly on 01.04.2015, the total amount of 
outstanding UCs works out to Rs.98.03 crore as on 2 8.05.2015 out of total grant  of Rs.1,031.47 
crore released since the inception of PYKKA Scheme from 2008-09 to 2013-14. The amount of 
outstanding UCs as on 28.05.2015 is just 9.5% of the total grant released. However, Department of 
Sports would make sincere efforts to get the outsta nding UCs liquidated by sending reminders at 
the appropriate level periodically. 
 
As regards achieving the target of covering 6545 Blocks of 634 Districts in a phased manner over a 
period of 5 years, the same can be achieved if adeq uate funds are made available for RGKA Scheme as 
projected in the Scheme document including funds fr om convergence scheme. In case of funds not 
forthcoming from them, matching allocation will be required under RGKA (MYAS). 
 
SPORTS UNIVERSITY IN NORTH EAST 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
45.  It has come to the notice of the Committee that til l date no expenditure has been incurred 
on account of National Sports University. The Commi ttee recommends that setting up of the 
proposed National Sports University is accomplished  within the stipulated time and the 
Department will go all out in this endeavour and make it a novel scheme. 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
The proposal for setting up of National Sports Univ ersity in Manipur was formally announced 
by the Hon’ble Finance Minister in his Budget Speec h (2014-15) on 10 th  July 2014 along with 
budgetary provisions of Rs. 100 Crores for the said  purpose. Location of the proposed University has 
been identified at 44-Yaithibi Khunou, Thoubal district of Manipur and a Notification to that effect has 
been issued by the Government of Manipur on 15.04.2 015. The site will be handed over to the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports shortly.   
The proposed University will be set up under an Act of Parliament. Draft Cabinet Note 
regarding Bill on Setting up of National Sports University in Manipur has been approved by the 
Hon’ble MOS (I/C) for MYAS. Response from the concerned Ministries/Departments on the Draft 
Cabinet Note has been obtained, commented upon and forwarded to the Ministry of Law & 
Justice/Legislative Department for examination/vetting. 
 
For incurring expenditure, the draft EFC Memo was f orwarded to the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance which, in turn, st ated that this Ministry can sanction pre-investment  
activities up to Rs. 50 Crore. After availability o f land, and after designs/specifications/estimates have 
been firmed up, the detailed proposal may be posed before the EFC/CCEA for final approval. As 
follow-up of the said directive, Hindustan Prefeb L imited (A Govt. of India Enterprise) was engaged 
for preparing a Detailed Project Report (DPR). Base d on the DPR, a Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) for 
selection of a Central Public Sector Undertaking (C PSU) as Project Management Consultant (PMC) 
for setting up of the proposed National Sports Univ ersity was issued and Hindustan Steelworks 
Construction Limited (HSCL) has been selected for t he said work. Also, based on the said DPR, the 
EFC Memo has been revised and circulated for comments. 
 
The Project will be implemented in five (5) years, spread over the balance two years of 12 th  
(2012-17) Five-Year Plan and first three year of 13 th  (2017-22) Five-Year Plan. Till date no 

expenditure could be incurred as transfer of land f or the proposed University to Ministry of Youth 
Affairs & Sports and the enactment of the National Sports University Bill are pending finalizing and 
these are time-consuming matters. However, a provis ion of Rs. 50 Crore has been made for the year 
2015-16 which will be utilized for pre-investment a ctivities as per directive of the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. From the sequence  of events narrated above, it will be evident that 
the case is being processed on top priority and all  effort will be made to complete the same on 
schedule. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
The Committee takes note of the reply and impresses  upon the Department of Sports to 
actively pursue with the Government of Manipur for possession of land so that the proposed action can 
be initiated without further delay. 
 
ENHANCEMENT IN SPORTS FACILITY OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
49. The Committee appreciates the allocations of funds for expanding and development of 
sports in Jammu & Kashmir which has been ridden wit h terror and insurgency for quite a long 
time.  The Committee hopes that improved sports cul ture in the region would provide better 
channels to the youth to show their talent. The Com mittee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department will work to get the proposed scheme imp lemented within the required time and all 
impediments are overcome adequately, making this a worth-while scheme. 
 
Action Taken  
Department of Sports has already initiated the proc ess of inviting open tenders from public 
sector undertakings. Notice inviting tenders has al ready been published in the newspapers and also 
uploaded on the website of the Ministry of Youth Af fairs & Sports and the tender portal 
(
www.tender.gov.in ). The last date for receipt of tenders is 08.05.20 15. Department of Sports is in 
constant touch with the State Government of J&K for implementation of the project. 
 
NATIONAL DOPE TESTING LABORATORY  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
57.  The Committee notes with satisfaction for the proje cted outcomes of achieving drug free 
sports environment to the extent possible. 
 
Action taken 
 
National Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL), entrusted with the task of testing of dope 
samples, is among the best laboratories in the worl d. All requirements of NDTL with regard to 
procurement of latest equipments, are taken care of  and NDTL keeps itself updated with the recent 
developments in the field of testing of dope samples of athletes and horses. NDTL will continue its 
endeavour of testing samples received in time.    
 
NATIONAL ANTI DOPING AGENCY (NADA)  

 
Recommendations/observations 
 
58.  The Committee appreciates that functioning of NADA and hopes that our sportspersons 
get complete information on the guidance regarding banned drugs in sports so that they are not 
misled in this regard. The Committee also hopes tha t this scheme of the Department will  achieve 
the desired result in the current fiscal only if it  gets gull support as the  by way of providing 
sufficient funds and required expertise. 
 
Action Taken 
 
NADA is committed to take stringent measures in con junction with sports stakeholders to 
rid sports of the menace of doping and create a cle an and healthy environment for sports in India 
by way of robust dope testing on sportspersons and conducting anti-doping awareness program all 
across the Country. 
 
WORLD DOPING AGENCY (WDA)  
 
Recommendations/observations  
59.  The Committee hopes that this scheme of the Departm ent will achieve the desired result in 
the current fiscal for what it has been meant for.    
 
 
Action Taken  
As India is member of the World Anti Doping Agency (WADA), it is required to 
contribute funds to WADA. At present, India is requ ired to contribute Rs. 60 lakh annually to 
WADA and the same is contributed to WADA before due date.   
 
SAI STADIA RENOVATION  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
60.  Such a meagre allocation for renovation, major and minor, of the SAI stadia does not 
inspire confidence that it will be sufficient for o ur huge stadia spread all over.  The Committee 
hopes that this scheme of the Department will achie ve the desired result in the current fiscal for 
what it has been meant for.    
 
Action Taken  
Allocation of Rs. 0.10 crore is made as token alloc ation under the Head of SAI  Stadia 
Renovation under the major head of Commonwealth Gam es 2010 to keep the head active for 
taking care of any allocations to be made in the ev ent of settlement of pending arbitration/court 
cases.    
 
62. The Committee is surprised to see that such a signi ficant scheme which is highly needed in 
the country could not be finalized for the last two  years.  It is not clear why the provisions are 
being made for this scheme in the Budget when schem e is under finalization; why not make 

allocation in the year when the scheme has been fin alized.  Blocking funds in such a way and then 
surrendering, is not a healthy fiscal practice at a ll.  The Committee does not understand why this 
scheme could not be finalized.  The Committee recom mends that finalization of this scheme 
should be expedited.     
 
Action Taken  
A committee was set up under the chairmanship of Dr . L.S. Ranawat, former Executive 
Director (Academics), National Institute of Sports,  Patiala, on the issue of setting up of National 
Institute of Sports Coaching at Patiala. The Commit tee has submitted its report, which is under 
examination in the Ministry.  
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendations/observations  
11. The Committee notes with concern that there has bee n a gap between the projected 
demands and the actual allocated funds during all t hese years. The Committee, therefore, keeping 
in view the major emphasis of the Department during 2015-16 for preparation of sportspersons and 
teams for Rio Olympics 2016 feels that the Departme nt should endeavour to get enhancement of 
the fund at the RE stage so that the gap in allocat ion is set off appropriately.  The Committee also 
recommends that Ministry of Finance should release more funds for the Department so that lack of 
funds should not come in the way of our preparation  as well as performance at the next Olympics 
and initiatives to be taken by the Department also to tap non-governmental sources. 
 
Action Taken  
Funds for preparation and training of the Indian sp ortspersons and teams for Rio Olympics 
2016 need to be supplemented through more allocatio n under Scheme of Assistance to National 
Sports Federations (NSFs) and further allocation fo r corpus to  National Sports Development Fund 
(NSDF) for meeting the expenses of the sportsperson s and teams on training, both within the 
country and abroad and competition exposure. The Mi nistry plans to approach the Ministry of 
Finance for allocating additional funds under the Scheme of Assistance to NSFs.    
 
For augmenting the funds position of the NSDF, the Ministry has written to corporate 
entities, both in public and private sector also, to contribute generously to NSDF.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee finds that there is need to focus for  the augmentation of matching 
contribution of Government of India in NSDF.  The c oncerted endeavours are required to be 

taken by the Department of Sports to get the matchi ng contribution of Government of India 
at par with the present level of contribution to NS DF by all other donors.  The impediments 
in achieving this target by the Department of Sport s are unacceptable to the Committee.  
Owing to the present initiatives taken by the Commi ttee it is felt that full blown efforts are 
needed by the Department of Sports to mobilise the contribution under Social Responsibility 
by PSBs/PSEs to National Sports Development Fund.  It is high time, that the augmentation 
of sports fund problem is tackled seriously and vig orous steps taken to remove the stumbling  
blocks which are likely to crop up. 
 
 
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
 
Recommendations/observations  
21.  The Committee was given to understand that in Andhr a Pradesh there is no dearth of sports 
talents in archery, particularly in interior tribal  areas.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that if 
the Budget allocation gets enhanced at the RE stage ,  the Department may consider developing an 
archery training centre for Andhra Pradesh so as to  tap the potential of exemplary talents that have 
been lying in the rural tribal areas who would contribute to the national sports talent.    
 
Action Taken 
 
Following bifurcation of the State of Andhra Prades h, most of the Sports Infrastructure has 
fallen in the newly created State of Telangana.  Th erefore, the State Government of Andhra Pradesh 
needs to approach SAI with proposals to develop new  SAI Centres in the State.  While SAI will 
consider their proposals, including setting up of T raining Centre for Tribals in Archery and other 
disciplines, under its Special Area games Scheme, a s per prescribed norms the State Government has 
to provide good infrastructure to SAI on long lease  which should include residential, administrative 
spaces as well as outdoor and indoor sports facilities. 
If suitable proposal is received from the State of Andhra Pradesh, SAI will seek necessary 
budget allocation (capital and recurring cost) and sanction of required manpower for opening of a 
centre from the Governing Body of SAI. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
It is sad to note that no initiatives have been tak en to establish any archery training 
centre in tribal areas of Andhra Pradesh. On one ha nd, SAI is waiting for the State 
Government to send its proposal, on the other hand, the State Government  approaching SAI 
for the said purpose is not within sight. Precious time and talents get wasted in the process. 
The Committee strongly feels that it becomes imperative on SAI to point out to the respective 
authorities of the State Government of Andhra Prade sh about the intricacies and 
conditionalities for assistance of the Department o f Sports for developing sports/ training 
centres  and consider establishing such centres so that maximum benefits can be reaped in 
time to come.  
 
ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS  
 
Recommendations/observations  

27.  The Committee finds it very disheartening on the is sue of non-compliance of the 
guidelines of the Department by the NSFs and recomm ends to evolve a suitable mechanism in this 
regard so that the preparation as well as participa tion of the sportspersons in important national 
and international events is not affected adversely. 
 
Action Taken 
 
NSFs are responsible and accountable for the overal l management, direction, control, 
regulation, promotion and development of the discip lines for which they are recognized by the 
concerned International Federations. They are expec ted to discharge these responsibilities in 
consonance with the principles laid down in the Oly mpic Charter or in the charter of the Indian 
Olympic Association or of the relevant Internationa l Federation as the case may be while being 
compliant with Government guidelines applicable to NSFs. In case of non-compliance, where any 
NSF has been suspended/de-recognised, the assistanc e as admissible is given to athletes to 
facilitate their participation in various events by  the Sports Authority of India.  National Sports 
Code is expected to provide for more specific guide lines to be followed by various sports 
federations. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
  
When National Sports Federations (NSFs) are suspend ed/derecognised on account of 
non-compliance of guidelines of the Department, it is the sportspersons who get affected the 
most. At a time when medal prospects in many intern ational events including Olympics, are 
increasing, it is unfortunate to know that these bo dies are not doing their part in promotion 
and development of sports. The extent to which the performance of sportspersons have been 
affected despite the assistance extended by SAI, th e Committee feels, is the looming spectre  
about which the information has not been provided.  The Committee would appreciate if 
concerted efforts are initiated to ensure that thes e problems are tackled earnestly and the 
excuses  for the fillip in the name of National Sports Code is unacceptable.  
 
URBAN SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
35.  The Committee came to know that Rs.40 crores was al located for the purpose in BE 2014-
15 and it was reduced to Rs.25 crores in RE 2014-15 .  The Committee shows its concern that the 
reduction in RE was on account of non-receipt of Ut ilisation Certificates by the implementing 
agencies.  The actual expenditure is amounting to R s. 23.14 crores till February 2015.  The 
Committee finds this as a very good scheme which is  for providing sports infrastructure in urban 
areas.  But the allocation and expenditure pattern in respect of this Scheme has been very 
discouraging.  Rs. 40 crores BE is reduced to Rs. 2 5 crores RE and even that could not be utilized 
fully.  It was perhaps on account of such a poor pa ttern that the allocation for BE 2015-16 has also 
been reduced to Rs. 25 crores.  The Committee, acco rdingly recommends that Department should 
take initiatives to expedite the submission of util ization certificates by the implementing agencies 
in time so that the allocation pattern is not affected adversely in future. 
 
Action Taken 

 
In deference to the wishes of the Committee, it is proposed to take up the matter with the 
Chief Secretaries/ LGs of the States/UTs at the lev el of Secretary (Sports) to expedite the 
Utilization Certificates on priority so as to ensure release of further grants by the department under  
its various schemes. A list of defaulting States/UTs as on 28.05.2015 is attached as Annexure –II.  
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
  
Non-submission of Utilisation Certificates by the i mplementing agencies seems to be a 
perennial problem where the Department of Sports ha ve failed to win over and get the same 
liquidated within required time. The Department of Sports should take up this matter on 
priority basis so that the implementation of this scheme does not get affected. The Committee 
finds it alarming that the initiatives undertaken b y the Department are not forthcoming in 
streamlining the three vital components viz. alloca tion of funds, execution of work and 
procurement of UCs.  The Committee can only recomme nd that the Department of Sports 
should explore additional viable mechanism so that at least the allocated budget should be 
utilized.  
 
RAJIV GANDHI KHEL ABHIYAN (RGKA)  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
42. Secondly, this Scheme has to work in convergence wi th different other schemes 
implemented by different Ministries, the Committee feels that there may be possibility of lack of 
adequate co-ordination and synergy in pooling the r esources and the efforts for implementing this 
Scheme effectively. The committee, therefore, is of  the view that a coordination mechanism 
especially for this scheme should be put in place to obviate any such possibility.      
 
Action Taken 
 
In addition to zero allocation of funds at RE stage  for creation of infrastructure under 
RGKA from the inception of the scheme, the scheme w as unable to fetch any money from 
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DO NER) as the entire allocation of Rs.72 
crore under Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) was made to another department 
and the requirement of RGKA of Rs.90 crore sought f rom the Ministry of Finance was not met. 
The funds expected from Ministry of Panchayati Raj under their scheme of BRGF stands 
transferred to the States. The role of NITI Ayog in allocation of funds under the Additional Central 
Assistance (ACA) Scheme for the Left Wing Extremism  (LWE) affected districts has also ceased. 
The funds available for material component under the MGNREGA Scheme are stated to have been 
fully committed for works under the Swachh Bharat Mission. 
 In view of the changed circumstances for receipt o f funds from various schemes as listed 
above, it is doubtful that the RGKA Scheme will be able to meet its targets, as envisaged in the 
scheme, out of meagre allocation. The changed scena rio calls for re-visiting of the scheme and re-
fixation of the targets as mode of fund flow, formi ng the foundation of concept of convergence of 
funds, has undergone a drastic change and the funds  expected by way of convergence are no 
longer available to the RGKA. Putting in place a co ordination mechanism as suggested by the 

Committee may not be of much help, as the Ministry of Rural Development may have its own 
priorities and targets to achieve. The other source s of funding have already dried up and the only 
source which can help in achieving the targets is t he adequate allocation of funds by the Ministry 
of Finance. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
  
It is a pitiable situation indeed, that enough funds are not available for promoting and 
developing sports talents in rural areas. As it has  been pointed out, the only source of funds 
for this scheme can come from the Ministry of Finan ce, the Committee is of the view that 
extensive efforts  are required to be made by the D epartment to pursue this matter with the 
Ministry of Finance.  
 
 
  

Recommendations/observations  
 
43.  Thirdly, the Committee is intrigued to note that Rs . 200 crore in the Plan allocation for 
RGKA during BE 2014-15 was reduced to Rs. 85 crores  in RE and even the reduced allocation 
could not be utilized fully.  The reason being give n non-receipt of Utilization Certificates by the 
implementing agencies.  The Committee finds this di sheartening.  Interestingly, in BE 2015-16, 
the Plan allocation for this scheme which was Rs. 2 00 crore in BE 2014-15 has been reduced to 
Rs.95 crores.  The Committee fails to understand with this meagre allocation how the objectives of 
the Department are going to achieved in time.  We h ave more than 50% reduced allocation for this 
Scheme and we are not able to spend even the highly  reduced allocation that too on technical 
procedural grounds as UCs.  The Committee finds that if this is the state of affairs in respect of this 
Scheme then future of this scheme remains highly bl eak.  The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Ministry to make all out efforts to implement t his scheme with the required zeal and 
dedication.     
 
Action Taken  
As regards observation of the Committee that Plan A llocation for RGKA during BE 2014-
15 was reduced to Rs.85 crore at RE stage, it appea rs that the drastic reduction in funds to RGKA 
took place because of inability of Department of Sports  to utilize at least 50% of the allotted funds 
within the first half of FY, 2014-15. The inability  of Department of Sports to utilize the funds 
proportionately was on account of non-commitment by  the State/UT Governments that they will 
develop the playfield out of funds earmarked under MGNREGA Scheme, which is a pre-requisite 
for release of funds under RGKA, nor was there any commitment of funds by the Ministry of 
Rural Development to Department of Sports. The othe r reason for not spending the allotted funds 
proportionately before the RE stage was that though  the Department of Sports had received 
proposals for release of funds for organizing vario us competitions at Block, District, State and 
National Levels, much of the same could not be rele ased for want of Utilization Certificates from 
the respective State/UT, which is mandatory as per provisions of General Financial Rules (GFR) 
and the instructions issued by the Ministry of Fina nce. It may thus be seen that the drastic 
reduction in funds to RGKA happened because of reas ons beyond the control of Department of 
Sports. 
 
 As regards observation of the Committee that even the reduced allocation of Rs. 85 crore 
could not be utilized fully, it is submitted that D epartment of Sports had released grants of Rs. 
83.84 crore during 2014-15 and the remaining amount  of Rs. 1.16 crore could not be utilized 
because of the restrictions imposed by the Ministry  of Finance during the last month of the 
financial year. The constraints in achieving the ta rgets have been brought out in the reply to para 
42 of the report. Department of Sports  will make a ll out efforts to implement the scheme with the 
desired zeal and dedication provided funds as proje cted in the scheme documents are made 
available and the constraints are remedied by way of re-visiting the scheme. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
  
 The Committee is unhappy to note that there have b een many reasons for the 
reduction of funds upon which the Department has no  control what so ever.  But this issue of 
improper implementation of this scheme cannot be le ft unattended. It is high time that the 
Department look for alternative means available to them to tackle all these hurdles. The 

Committee impress upon the Department of Sports to take up the matter with the Central 
Ministries like Ministry of Rural Development, Panc hayati Raj, DONER, etc. to ensure their 
commitment to Department of Sports are met without further delay. In regard to Utilisation 
Certificates, the Committee can only emphasise to g et ensured that funds are given with a 
condition that the State Government will send Utili sation Certificates to the Central Govt. 
after the development work positively within a specified time limit.  
 
NATIONAL SPORTS TALENT SEARCH SCHEME (NSTSS)  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
47.  The Committee recommends that the requisite initiat ives should be taken by the 
Department to accomplish NSTSS within the stipulate d time frame and all hurdles coming in the 
way of the execution of the scheme are taken care o f effectively so as to make it a note-worthy 
scheme. 
 
Action Taken  
 
Modalities are being worked out for effective implementation of the scheme. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
  
 The Committee is of the view that this new scheme is very important in promoting 
and developing sporting talent from the grass-root levels. Hence, the Department should 
ensure that steps are taken immediately for the proper execution of this scheme.  
 
PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG DISABLED  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
52.  The Committee gathered that a three days 15 
th  National Para-Athletics Meet was held at 
Ghaziabad (U.P.) in March 2015.  The Committee is s urprised that the complete apathy and 
negligence was shown towards the para-athletes duri ng this 15 th  National Para-Athletics 
Championship.  The last Para-Olympic national Champ ionship was held in 2013 at Bengaluru.  A 
win at this event of Ghaziabad would have ensured t hat athletes qualify to participate in upcoming 
Para-games to be held in May in Delhi and then make  a bid to Para-Olympic Games in 2016.   The 
Committee strongly recommends that a thorough inqui ry may be made to identify the persons 
responsible for this kind of fiasco and for taking appropriate action against the persons concerned 
and to ensure that this does not recur in future.  The Committee desires to have a status note on it 
at the earliest.   
 
Action Taken  
In-depth inquiry was conducted by SAI in the matter  relating to mismanagement and poor 
conduct of the 15 th  National Para Athletics Championships held from 20 th  to 22 nd  March, 2015 in 
Ghaziabad (UP) and detailed report along with recommendation was submitted to the Ministry.  
In the wake of complaints  of poor management in co nduct of National Para Athletics 
Championships 2015, the Ministry has issued guideli nes to all recognized National Sports 

Federations on 23 rd  April 2015 for providing and making arrangements f or requisite facilities 
  relating to playing arena, its accessibility, nea t and clean toilets, provision for drinking water, 
proper resting place, separate changing rooms for b oys and girls, neat and clean lodging facilities, 
adequately equipped with toilets including disabled friendly toilets,  proper transportation facilities 
for players and officials from the place of stay to the venue of championship etc.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 Based on the submission made by the Department of Sports in the Action Taken 
Notes, it can be inferred that the proper monitoring and coordination by SAI in holding such 
Championship failed miserably.  The Committee firml y recommends that this cannot be 
overlooked and accountability of concerned authorities of SAI has to be fixed for such lapses. 
The Committee also strongly advocates that before t he start of any event, the Department of 
Sports is required to undertake a thorough check of  all the facilities made available to these 
athletes. The Committee hopes that such unfortunate  incident should not be repeated in the 
time to come. Moreover, the Department should ensur e that all NSFs follow these guidelines 
seriously and non-compliance of guidelines by the NSFs should be dealt with sternly. 
  
PENSION TO MERITORIOUS SPORTS PERSONS 
 
Recommendations/observations  
54.  The Committee fails to get any reason for this redu ction in RE from the Department.  The 
Committee doubts whether this scheme of the Departm ent will achieve the desired result in the 
current fiscal.  The Committee, therefore, feels th at a review may be made of the scheme to 
include necessary ingredients in it to make it more comprehensive. 
 
Action Taken  
 
Budgetary allocation of Rs. 2.00 crore was made dur ing 2014-15 at BE stage for the 
Scheme of Pension to Meritorious Sportspersons. As sufficient applications for pension were not 
received, allocation was reduced to Rs. 1.50 crore at RE stage. Actual expenditure was Rs. 1.29 
crore. All eligible applications received were processed and pension was sanctioned.  
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 The Committee notes with dismay that enough applic ations for pension were not 
received by the Department. But there are a good nu mber of meritorious sportspersons in 
the country and non-receipt of sufficient applicati ons is a failure on the part of the 
Department to properly publisize  and disseminate i nformation concerning this scheme. The 
Committee would appreciate if the Department devise  ways so that maximum sportspersons 
are benefitted through this scheme and the scheme become more encouraging. 
 
NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND (NSDF) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 

56. The Committee finds it disheartening that the budge tary allocation was reduced to Rs.3.75 
crores at RE stage of year 2014-15 due to non-recei pt of U.Cs by implementing agencies and 
reiterates its earlier observations that U.Cs may b e liquidated at the earliest for the better 
utilization of funds. 
 
Action Taken  
 
Budgetary allocation made for National Sports Devel opment Fund (NSDF) is towards 
Government contribution to NSDF as Government’s sha re for the contributions received from 
donors to NSDF. Owing to overall budgetary constrai nts, budgetary allocation of Rs. 5 crore 
during 2014-15 at BE stage for contribution to NSDF  was reduced to Rs. 3.75 crore at RE stage 
and accordingly amount of Rs. 3.75 crore was releas ed for contribution to NSDF. Non-receipt of 
utilization certificate (UC) was not a factor at all, as no UC is pending in this regard.   
 
Comments of the Committee  
  
 The Committee observes that the promotion of speci fic sports discipline and 
improving the performance of Indian sports in major  International events is done through 
NSDF. Reduced allocation of funds by the Government  is a matter to be noted with serious 
concern. Indian sportspersons are doing very well a t international events. A good number of 
medals are expected to be won this time at the Rio Olympics, 2016. The Committee is of the 
serious view that such good prospect of winning med als at international events should not be 
hampered due to insufficient funds. Therefore, the Committee would like to emphasize that 
concerted efforts are required to be made by the De partment so that enhanced contribution 
is made by the Government to NSDF.  
 
NATIONAL WELFARE FUNDS FOR SPORTS PERSONS  
 
Recommendations/observations  
65. The Committee feels that this Scheme is a novel sch eme but the allocation of Rs. 1 crore 
appears to be insufficient in view of the large num ber of eminent sportspersons, having brought 
laurels to the country, are languishing in penury s elling tea, vegetables, etc. in the street.  This i s 
highly unbecoming to their status as well as to the  country's prestige.  This also demotivates our 
budding sportspersons and their parents to allow th eir children to take up sports.  Therefore, the 
Committee is of the considered opinion that all pos sible help should be extended to our eminent 
former sportspersons in all possible manner and the  allocation should be increased at least ten 
times to begin with. 
 
Action Taken  
 
Budgetary allocation of Rs. 1.00 crore has been mad e for National Welfare Fund for 
Sportspersons. The Ministry provides lumpsum ex-gra tia financial assistance uptoRs. 5 lakh to 
sportspersons of yesteryears, who are now living in  indigent circumstances that is whose annual 
income is less than Rs. 2 lakh, for their medical t reatment or ameliorating their financial condition. 
Financial assistance from National Welfare Fund for  Sportspersons is provided to family members 
of sportspersons who are not alive, but their famil ies are leading a life of financial distress. 
Financial assistance in cash or kind (sports equipm ents, kit, etc) to budding sportspersons, in their 

pursuit for achieving excellence in sports is also provided from the National Welfare Fund for 
Sportspersons.  
With the objective of giving incentives and providi ng financial security to sportspersons 
who win medals in international sports events inclu ding mega-sports events such as Olympic 
Games, Asian Games, Commonwealth Games, Paralympics , the Ministry is implementing the 
Scheme of Special Awards to Medal Winners in Intern ational Sports Events and their coaches and 
the Scheme of Pension to Meritorious Sportspersons.    Under the Scheme of Special Awards, 
amount of cash awards ranging from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs . 75 lakh are given to medal winning 
sportspersons. Under the Scheme of Pension to Merit orious Sportspersons, lifelong monthly 
pension is given to sportspersons who have won gold , silver and bronze medals in Olympic 
Games, World Cup/World Championships, Asian Games, Commonwealth Games and Paralympic 
games after their retirement from active sports or having attained the age of 30 years, whichever is 
later. 
Nonetheless the Ministry will ask for enhancement i n budgetary allocation for National 
Welfare Fund for Sportspersons, when the funds avai lable in National Welfare Fund for 
Sportspersons are exhausted.  
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 The Committee is surprised to note that such a nov el scheme has failed miserably to 
get encouraging result toward many of the sportsper sons who have given enough recognition 
with their contribution to sports.  The Committee feels that this scheme needs to be given due 
publicity and, if needed, the assistance of dedicat ed non-profit organizations may be sought 
to get such sportspersons and their families identi fied and reap the benefits of this scheme.  
The Committee can further reiterate for sizeable en hancement of the allocation of fund for 
this scheme.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
SPORTS UNIVERSITY IN NORTH-EAST 
 
The Committee takes note of the reply and impresses  upon the Department of Sports to 
actively pursue with the Government of Manipur for possession of land so that the proposed action can 
be initiated without further delay. 
(Para 45) 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
 The Committee finds that there is need to focus for  the augmentation of matching 
contribution of Government of India in NSDF.  The c oncerted endeavours are required to be 
taken by the Department of Sports to get the matchi ng contribution of Government of India 
at par with the present level of contribution to NS DF by all other donors.  The impediments 
in achieving this target by the Department of Sport s are unacceptable to the Committee.  
Owing to the present initiatives taken by the Commi ttee it is felt that full blown efforts are 
needed by the Department of Sports to mobilise the contribution under Social Responsibility 
by PSBs/PSEs to National Sports Development Fund.  It is high time, that the augmentation 
of sports fund problem is tackled seriously and vig orous steps taken to remove the stumbling  
blocks which are likely to crop up. 
(Para 11) 
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
  
It is sad to note that no initiatives have been tak en to establish any archery training 
centre in tribal areas of Andhra Pradesh. On one ha nd, SAI is waiting for the State 
Government to send its proposal, on the other hand, the State Government  approaching SAI 
for the said purpose is not within sight. Precious time and talents get wasted in the process. 
The Committee strongly feels that it becomes imperative on SAI to point out to the respective 
authorities of the State Government of Andhra Prade sh about the intricacies and 
conditionalities for assistance of the Department o f Sports for developing sports/ training 
centres  and consider establishing such centres so that maximum benefits can be reaped in 
time to come.  
(Para 21) 
  
When National Sports Federations (NSFs) are suspend ed/derecognised on account of 
non-compliance of guidelines of the Department, it is the sportspersons who get affected the 
most. At a time when medal prospects in many intern ational events including Olympics, are 
increasing, it is unfortunate to know that these bo dies are not doing their part in promotion 
and development of sports. The extent to which the performance of sportspersons have been 
affected despite the assistance extended by SAI, th e Committee feels, is the looming spectre  
about which the information has not been provided.  The Committee would appreciate if 
concerted efforts are initiated to ensure that thes e problems are tackled earnestly and the 
excuses  for the fillip in the name of National Sports Code is unacceptable. 
(Para 27)   
Non-submission of Utilisation Certificates by the i mplementing agencies seems to be a 
perennial problem where the Department of Sports ha ve failed to win over and get the same 
liquidated within required time. The Department of Sports should take up this matter on 

priority basis so that the implementation of this scheme does not get affected. The Committee 
finds it alarming that the initiatives undertaken b y the Department are not forthcoming in 
streamlining the three vital components viz. alloca tion of funds, execution of work and 
procurement of UCs.  The Committee can only recomme nd that the Department of Sports 
should explore additional viable mechanism so that at least the allocated budget should be 
utilized. 
(Para 35) 
 
RAJIV GANDHI KHEL ABHIYAN (RGKA)  
  
It is a pitiable situation indeed, that enough funds are not available for promoting and 
developing sports talents in rural areas. As it has  been pointed out, the only source of funds 
for this scheme can come from the Ministry of Finan ce, the Committee is of the view that 
extensive efforts  are required to be made by the D epartment to pursue this matter with the 
Ministry of Finance.  
(Para 42)   
 The Committee is unhappy to note that there have b een many reasons for the 
reduction of funds upon which the Department has no  control what so ever.  But this issue of 
improper implementation of this scheme cannot be le ft unattended. It is high time that the 
Department look for alternative means available to them to tackle all these hurdles. The 
Committee impress upon the Department of Sports to take up the matter with the Central 
Ministries like Ministry of Rural Development, Panc hayati Raj, DONER, etc. to ensure their 
commitment to Department of Sports are met without further delay. In regard to Utilisation 
Certificates, the Committee can only emphasise to g et ensured that funds are given with a 
condition that the State Government will send Utili sation Certificates to the Central Govt. 
after the development work positively within a specified time limit. 
(Para 43) 
NATIONAL SPORTS TALENT SEARCH SCHEME (NSTSS)  
 
 The Committee is of the view that this new scheme is very important in promoting 
and developing sporting talent from the grass-root levels. Hence, the Department should 
ensure that steps are taken immediately for the proper execution of this scheme.  
(Para 47) 
 
PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG DISABLED  
 
 Based on the submission made by the Department of Sports in the Action Taken 
Notes, it can be inferred that the proper monitoring and coordination by SAI in holding such 
Championship failed miserably.  The Committee firml y recommends that this cannot be 
overlooked and accountability of concerned authorities of SAI has to be fixed for such lapses. 
The Committee also strongly advocates that before t he start of any event, the Department of 
Sports is required to undertake a thorough check of  all the facilities made available to these 
athletes. The Committee hopes that such unfortunate  incident should not be repeated in the 
time to come. Moreover, the Department should ensur e that all NSFs follow these guidelines 
seriously and non-compliance of guidelines by the NSFs should be dealt with sternly.  
(Para 52) 
  

PENSION TO MERITORIOUS SPORTS PERSONS 
 
 The Committee notes with dismay that enough applic ations for pension were not 
received by the Department. But there are a good nu mber of meritorious sportspersons in 
the country and non-receipt of sufficient applicati ons is a failure on the part of the 
Department to properly publisize  and disseminate i nformation concerning this scheme. The 
Committee would appreciate if the Department devise  ways so that maximum sportspersons 
are benefitted through this scheme and the scheme become more encouraging. 
(Para 54) 
 
NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND (NSDF)  
  
 The Committee observes that the promotion of speci fic sports discipline and 
improving the performance of Indian sports in major  International events is done through 
NSDF. Reduced allocation of funds by the Government  is a matter to be noted with serious 
concern. Indian sportspersons are doing very well a t international events. A good number of 
medals are expected to be won this time at the Rio Olympics, 2016. The Committee is of the 
serious view that such good prospect of winning med als at international events should not be 
hampered due to insufficient funds. Therefore, the Committee would like to emphasize that 
concerted efforts are required to be made by the De partment so that enhanced contribution 
is made by the Government to NSDF. 
(Para 56) 
 
NATIONAL WELFARE FUNDS FOR SPORTS PERSONS  
 
 The Committee is surprised to note that such a nov el scheme has failed miserably to 
get encouraging result toward many of the sportsper sons who have given enough recognition 
with their contribution to sports.  The Committee feels that this scheme needs to be given due 
publicity and, if needed, the assistance of dedicat ed non-profit organizations may be sought 
to get such sportspersons and their families identi fied and reap the benefits of this scheme.  
The Committee can further reiterate for sizeable en hancement of the allocation of fund for 
this scheme.    
(Para 65) 
 
***** 