 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
June, 2014/Jyaishtha, 1936 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
263 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY THIRD REPORT 
Functioning of the Indira Gandhi National Open University 
 
(Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 6th May, 2014)  
(Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 6th May, 2014) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th June, 2014) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha 11th June, 2014) 

 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY THIRD REPORT 
 
Functioning of the Indira Gandhi National Open University 
 
(Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 6th May, 2014)  
(Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 6th May, 2014) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th June, 2014) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th June, 2014) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
June, 2014/Jyaishtha, 1936 (Saka) 

C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …...........................................................  (i) 
2.  LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ……….......…............................................................  (ii) 
3.       PREFACE........................................................................................................ ..........  (iii) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…... .........................       1 - 27  
5. *OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE  28 - 36  
6. *MINUTES .....................................................................................................................        37- 42 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________ 
*Will be appended at the printing stage. 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 31st August, 2013) 
 
1. Shri Birender Singh       Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard 
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
4. ^Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien 
7. Shri Baishnab Parida 
8. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem 
9. Shri Tarun Vijay 
10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Suresh Angadi 
12. Shri P.K. Biju 
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela 
14.       Shri Sivasami C. 
15.       Shrimati Helen Davidson 
16.       Dr. Charles Dias 
17.       Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya 
18.       Shri Virender Kashyap 
19. Shri Mahadeo Singh Khandela 
20.       Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
21.       Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
22.       Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena 
23.       Capt. Jai Naraian Prasad Nishad 
24.       Shri M.K. Raghavan 
25.       Shri K. Chandrashekar Rao 
26.       Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.       Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla 
28.       *Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
29.       Shri Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
30. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana 
31.       Shri Manicka Tagore 
SECRETARIAT  
Smt. Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri N.S. Walia, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director 
Smt. Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director 
 
(i) 
 
*Resigned from membership and Lok Sabha w.e.f. 13.12.2013 

A B B R E V I A T I O N 
 
 
 1. IGNOU Indira Gandhi National Open University 
 
2. ODL Open and Distance Learning 
 
3. GER Gross Enrolment Ratio 
 
4. AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
 
5. UGC University Grants Commission 
 
6. BoM Board of Management 
 
7. DEC Distance Education Council 
 
8. ODL Open and Distance Learning 
 
9. NCTE National Council for Teachers Education 
 
10. MOU Memorandum of Understanding 
 
11. HISCET Haryana IGNOU Society for Community Education and Training  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

P R E F A C E 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and Sixty Third Report 
of the Committee on Functioning of the Indira Gandhi National Open University. 
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee took  up the subject of the Functioning 
of IGNOU, a Central University. 
3. The Committee held extensive deliberations with a number of  stakeholders which included 
Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Vice -Chancellor, IGNOU , IGNOU  Teachers Association , 
representatives of Community C olleges from Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana and 
Uttarakhand and other representatives of IGNOU.  Views of the stakeholders and comments of the 
Department were taken note of while formulating the observations and recommendations of the Committee. 
4. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied on the following: 
(i) Verbatim record of the oral evidence taken on the subject; 
(ii) Presentation made and clarification given by the Secretary , Department of Higher 
Education 
(iii) Presentation made and clarification given by the Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU 
(iv) Presentation made and clarification given by the stakeholders of Community Colleges; 
(v) Presentation made and clarification given by the IGNOU Teacher's Association and other 
representatives of IGNOU; 
 (vi) Replies to questionnaire received from the Department of Higher Education; 
(vii) Replies to questionnaire received from the IGNOU Teacher's Association;  
(viii) Replies to questionnaire received from the stakeholders; 
(ix) Report of the High -Powered Committee  appointed by IGNOU to review its Academic 
Programmes;   
(x) Report of the Community Colleges Review Committee of IGNOU; and 
(xi) Minutes of the relevant Meetings of Board of Management, IGNOU. 
4. The Committee considered the subject in three sittings held on 19th February, 28th March and 25th 
April, 2014. 
5. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the subject and adopted the same in its meeting held 
on 25th April, 2014. 
6. For facility of the reference, observations and recommendations of Committee have been printed in 
bold letters at end of Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
NEW DELHI  
April, 25, 2014 
Vaisakha 5, 1936 (Saka) 
 
BIRENDER SINGH 
Chairman 
 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on  Human Resource Development                                                                    

REPORT 
I INTRODUCTION  
1.1 The Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) was established by an Act of 
Parliament in   1985. The mandate of the University is to:- 
(a) strengthen and diversify the degree, certificate and diploma courses related to the  needs 
of employment and necessary for building the economy of the country on the basis of  its 
natural and human resources; 
(b) provide access to higher education for large segments of the population, and in  
particular, the disadvantaged groups such as thos e living in remote and rural areas 
including working people, housewives and other adults who wish to upgrade or acquire 
knowledge through studies in various fields; 
(c) promote acquisition of knowledge in a rapidly developing and changing society and to  
continually offer opportunities for upgrading knowledge, training and skills in the context 
of innovations, research and discovery in all fields of human endeavours; 
(d) provide an innovative system of university level education, flexible and open, in  regard 
to methods and pace of learning, combination of courses, eligibility for enrolment, age  of 
entry, conduct of examination and operation of the programmes with a view to promote  
learning and encourage excellence in new fields of knowledge; 
(e) contribute to  the improvement of the educational system in India by providing a 
nonformal channel complementary to the formal system and encouraging transfer of credits 
and exchange of teaching staff by making wide use of texts and other software developed 
by the University; 
(f) provide education and training in the various arts, crafts and skills of the country,  
raising their quality and improving their availability to the people; 
(g) provide or arrange training of teachers required for such activities or institutions; 
(h) provide suitable post-graduate courses of study and promote research; 
(i) provide the counselling and guidance to its students; and 
(j) promote national integration and the integrated development of the human personality  
through its policies and programmes. 
 
1.2 IGNOU began by offering two academic programmes in 1987 i.e. Diploma in Management 
and Diploma in Distance Education with strength of 4,528 students. The University has 
continuously strived to build an inclusive knowledge society through inclus ive education.  It has 
tried to increase the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) by offering high -quality teaching through the 
Open and Distance Learning (ODL) mode.   
1.3 The University has been networking with reputed public institutions and private enterprises 
for enhancing the educational opportunities being offered by it.  The University has established the 

Centre for Extension Education, National Centre for Disability Studies and National Centre for 
Innovation in Distance Education to focus on specific learne r group and enrich the distance 
learning system.  IGNOU with the launch of EduSat has ushered in a new era of technology -
enabled education in the country.   
1.4 The University has been functioning quite efficiently and smoothly. However, in the recent 
times,  some contentious issues have been raised from time to time which primarily relate to 
winding up of the Distance Education Council, discontinuance of certain programmes and courses, 
closure of Community Colleges, thereby jeopardising the career of a large number of students who 
had taken admission in them.  Issue of the appointment of its present Vice -Chancellor has also 
been raised.  The Committee also underst ands that a number of court cases relating to different 
aspects of the functioning of the University have been filed in this regard.  Some of the complaints 
were brought before the Committee also. Taking note of the facts placed before it, the Committee 
felt that there was a need to examine the entire matter in totality, especially because the reputation 
of a well -established premier Central University was involved.  The Committee, accordingly, 
decided to examine these issues impacting the overall functioning of the University.  
II CONSULTATION PROCESS  
2.1 To begin with, the Committee sought the views of the Vice -Chancellor, IGNOU and  
Secretary, Department of Higher Education on the issues arising out of the complaints placed 
before it. It heard the Vice -Chancellor, IGNOU and the Secretary, Department of Higher 
Education in its meeting held on the 19th February, 2014.    
2.2 The Vice -Chancellor, IGNOU informed the Committee that on his taking over as a 
permanent Vice-Chancellor on the 20 th March, 2013, his attention was drawn to a few challenges 
facing the University which required to be addressed without any further delay.  These were the 
convocation scheduled for the 12 th April, 2013, delay in the distribution of study material to 
students of July, 2012 session and admission for July, 2013 session.   
2.3 The members then raised the issue of closure of Community Colleges and many 
programmes.  The Vice -Chancellor stated that  problems started surfacing from 2007 onwards.  
The Committee was given to understand that thousands of courses were running without any 
approval, without any procedure, without any approval from the Academic Council and the Board 
of Studies.  The entire m atter was placed before the Board of Management in November, 2011 
which directed the constitution of a High -Powered Committee.  The Board of Management also 

directed that all the MoUs signed by the University should be subjected to a thorough review.  Out 
of the 500 Community Colleges, only 250 Community Colleges had admitted students and, 
accordingly, their results were reviewed. Out of these 250 Community Colleges, only 146 
Community Colleges had responded.  31,000 cases were reviewed and they were issued  
certificates.  It was also clarified that since the year 2000, IGNOU was running Army, Navy and 
Assam Rifles Education Projects.  Also, the four centres in the North-East were running.   
2.4  The Committee then heard the views of the Secretary, Higher Edu cation on the various 
aspects relating to the functioning of IGNOU.  The Secretary informed the Committee that the 
problems started in 2007 when IGNOU started giving approvals to courses in the distance mode 
for technical education.  There was tripartite a greement between the three regulators, i.e. AICTE, 
UGC and IGNOU but that never worked.  Not only this, IGNOU just entered into MoUs and other 
arrangements with all kinds of institutions and even individuals which was against all statutory 
provisions.  The  Secretary also informed the Committee that a Sub -Committee had been set up 
under the Board of Management with the task to fix responsibility therefor.  On a specific query 
with regard to the problems being faced by the students of Community Colleges, it w as assured by 
both the Vice -Chancellor, IGNOU and the Secretary, Higher Education, that interests of all the 
students had been fully protected. 
2.5 During the interaction with the Vice -Chancellor, IGNOU and the Secretary, Higher 
Education, a number of area s of concern were raised.  The Committee felt that it needed a 
thorough introspection from all conceivable aspects.  Only then an objective assessment about the 
gamut of problem -areas being faced by IGNOU could be made.  This exercise could only be 
considered complete if the views of other stakeholders were also heard. 
2.6 To make  a further analysi s of the circumstances that led to the discontinuation of the 
Community Colleges Scheme, the Committee held discussion with some of the representatives of 
the Com munity Colleges from Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Delhi, and 
Uttarakahand on the 28 th March, 2014 .  The representatives informed the Committee about the 
manner in which they started Community Colleges in 2009.  IGNOU had published an 
advertisement in the national level newspape rs, seeking expression of interest from regist ered 
societies or institutions who wish ed to open Community Colleges.  In response to that 
advertisement, they applied for opening of Community Colleges.  The re was a nation al level 
Expert Committee which had  exclusive meetings with them.  The Committee interviewed them , 

verified their records and approved their proposal s.  After the approval , the Committee gave them 
permission to open Community Colleges.  Thereafter, they were supposed to form three regulatory 
Committees, namely, Community Colleges Committee, Academic Committee and Examination 
Committee with a  representative from IGNOU.  The IGNOU nominee used to monitor the 
working of these Community Colleges time and again  and a status report was being sent to 
IGNOU.  The enrolment of students was also done by IGNOU.   
 
2.7 The Committee was further informed that the Community Colleges had spent  huge funds 
as per the  requirements for setting up of Community Colleges and inf rastructure, students 
websites, furniture, CCTV  cameras, conference room etc.  Community Colleges signed an 
undertaking and after that the IGNOU officials completed their insp ection of the Community 
College and a recognition   letter was sent to them.  The y also received the manual published by 
IGNOU on the guidelines, all details like how to conduct exams, how to run colleges, how to 
programme the syllabi and courses and so on.  Thus , from 2009 , the S cheme of Community 
Colleges started and admission s started taking place and first batch was supposed to come in the 
year 2010-11.  
 
2.8 They further informed the Committee that e verything was going on smoothly till they 
received a letter from IGNOU that the Scheme of Community Colleges wa s being reviewed and 
till the final outcome, the scheme was being kept in abeyance.  The results of the students who had 
appeared in the exam s were declared on time but they were yet to receive their certificates.  
IGNOU did not give any reason for putting this scheme in abeya nce.   Subsequently, IGNOU 
informed all the Community Colleges that their papers were reviewed and they found that some of 
the colleges had not submitted all the papers.  After  the submission of their papers , IGNOU 
informed them that 146 Community Colleges have been selected out of 532  Community Colleges.  
Even though they selected 146 Community Colleges , but nothing ha d moved forward, no 
certificate had been issued.  No Community College wa s allowed to make fresh admissions and 
even the existing students c ould not take exams since there was no directive from IGNOU.  The 
only reply they received from IGNOU was that it ha d been kept in abeyance and after few months  
that they were informed that this scheme had been discontinued.   
 
 

 
2.9 The representatives of Community Colleges submitted that this move of the University had 
put them to immense problem s since the students who ha d been admitted felt  that it was the 
college which was at fault.  T he career of a large number of students wa s at stake due to delay 
tactics being played by IGNOU.  The representatives from Community C olleges of Kerala 
informed that cases had been filed in Kerala High Court.  The Court in its verdict said that students 
be allotted enrolment number and IGNOU’s letter of abeyance be kept on hold.  IGNOU ha d not 
implemented the Court’s verdict even after two years.  The Court also gave a verdict to declare the 
result of the students but that was also not implemented.  The representatives said that they  had 
tried to meet the Vice Chancellor an d officials of IGNOU to plead their grievances .   However, 
most of the time, they did not get any reply from them.  Later , they were told that the Community 
Colleges had  been closed down because IGNOU ha d not got the mandate to run face to face 
courses.  It was also pointed out that the Delhi High Court judgement was only an observation of 
the C ourt according  to the affidavit submitted b y IGNOU.  The same judgement had  blamed 
IGNOU for not doing natural justice and for its gro ss negligence in action.  This  Court also 
directed IGNOU to issue ro ll numbers, to conduct exams and to admit students to the second year 
in AICTE approved colleges at the cost of IGNOU.  All the verdicts came from different courts 
favouring Community Colleges but the Vice Chancellor had kept everything aside and nothing had 
been done so far.  
 
2.10 The Committee sought to know the solution to the problem from the representatives of 
Community Colleges from Kerala.  They informed the Committee that first of all the Community 
Colleges website should be opened and the results should be published through that website and 
secondly the certificates may be issued on the basis of that result.  Thirdly, the Community 
Colleges should be permitted to conduct the pending examinations of the students  who have 
already been admitted and issue enrolment number for conduct of examination before the 30 th 
April.  Lastly, the enrolment numbers may be issued to those who were waiting for the third year 
degree after completion of ADP and conduct their examinat ion along with the term -end 
examination of the IGNOU. 
 
2.11 To have better understanding of the complex issues relating to IGNOU, the Committee also 
heard the representatives of the IGNOU Teachers' Association.  Its interaction with the 
Association gave a fair idea to the Committee that the University was facing problems.  It was 

pointed out that the meetings of the Board of Management were not being conducted as envisaged.  
Grievances of teachers were also not being addressed properly.  The undercurrent of  the 
interaction was that the role being played by both the Vice -Chancellor and the Ministry was not as 
expected of these authorities. 
2.12 Lastly, the Committee also had the opportunity to share the experience of one ex -Pro-Vice-
Chancellor and an official  of the University.  This discussion enabled the Committee to have an 
insight into the various problems being faced in the University at the ground level. 
2.13 Committee's detailed and in depth discussions with all the stakeholders right from the 
Secretary, Higher Education to the Vice -Chancellor, IGNOU to representatives of a few 
Community  Colleges, representatives of IGNOU Teachers' Association and two experts 
associated with the University have enabled it to have an idea about the inherent complexities 
connected with the various areas of concern afflicting the University.  After an extensive analysis 
of the entire matter, the Committee could identity the genesis behind the different problem -areas, 
gravity of the issues, areas of their impact, factors lea ding to such a situation and the viable 
solutions resulting in strengthening the functioning of the University.  In the succeeding 
paragraphs, the Committee has dwelt upon the same. 
III APPOINTMENT OF THE VICE-CHANCELLOR 
3.1 It was pointed out that the pro cess of appointment of the present Vice -Chancellor was not 
as per the Statutes of IGNOU which said that the senior-most Pro-Vice-Chancellor was to be made 
the Vice-Chancellor.  However, Prof. Aslam was not the senior -most Pro-Vice-Chancellor at that 
time.  Similarly, the aspect regarding his confirmation as the Vice -Chancellor also needed to be 
looked into.  Joint Secretary, instead of Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development 
representing the Ministry in the meetings and extension beyond the age of  65 years needed to be 
examined. 
3.2 On the issue of appointment, the Vice -Chancellor and Secretary, Department of Higher 
Education in their presentation before the Committee submitted that the appointment of Vice -
Chancellor of IGNOU was regulated under Statute 1 (6) of IGNOU Act which States that. 
“If the office of Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or  
otherwise, or if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other 
cause, the senior most Pro -Vice-Chancellor shall p erform the duties of the Vice -
Chancellor, and if there is no Pro -Vice-Chancellor, the senior most P rofessor from 
amongst Directors of the School s shall perform the functions  of the Vice -

Chancellor until the new Vice -Chancellor assumes his office or until the existing 
Vice-Chancellor attends to the duties of his office as the case may be” 
 
3.3 The Committee was informed  that under the above provisions,  Prof. M. Aslam, the then 
senior most Professor from amongst the Directors of the Schools was asked to function as Vice -
Chancellor, IGNOU on the 20 th October, 2011 when the term of the previous Vice -Chancellor, 
Professor V.N. Rajasekharan  Pillai expired.  The Department also submitted that when term of 
Prof. V.N. Rajasekharan Pillai, as Vice -Chancellor, IG NOU expired, the term of the Pro -Vice-
Chancellors also stood expired on the same date as their appointment was co -terminus with that of 
Vice-Chancellor.  Thereafter, Prof. M. Aslam was given the charge of the office of Vice -
Chancellor as he was the senior most Professor amongst the Directors of Schools Prof. M. Aslam 
held the office as acting Vice -Chancellor till his superannuation i.e.  31 st July, 2012, after which 
Prof. Gopinath Pradhan, the Senior -Most Director in the University, was made acting Vice -
Chancellor and held the post till 20th March, 2013.  It was accordingly clarified that no violation of 
rules had taken place in the appointment of acting Vice -Chancellor of University after expiry of 
term of the regular Vice-Chancellor on the 20th October, 2011.  
3.4 On the issue of appointment of the acting Vice -Chancellor, Prof. M. Aslam as the regular 
Vice-Chancellor the Secretary, Department of Higher Education submitted that the appointment of 
Vice-Chancellor was regulated by Statute 1(2) of the IGNOU Act which states that:-  
“The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from out of a panel of not 
less than three persons recommended by a Committee under clause(3)’; 
Clause (3) of the statute read as “The Committee referred to in clause (2) shall 
consist of three members of whom two shall be nominated by the Boar d of 
Management and one by the V isitor, and the person nominated by the V isitor shall 
be the convenor of the Committee”. 
 
3.5 The Committee was informed that, accordingly, a Committee headed by Justice V.N. 
Khare, former Chief Justice of India was constituted and two other members being Shri J.M. 
Lyngdoh, former Election Commissioner and Prof. S.K. Joshi, former Director General, CSIR.  
The Department submitted that the Committee recommended a  panel of the following three 
persons for consideration of the Visitor, Prof M. Aslam, Prof. Sanjay Dhande and Prof. Dipankar 
Gupta.  From the panel, the President of India in his capacity as Visitor, approved  the name of 
Prof. M. Aslam as regular Vice -Chancellor of the University. Thus, the selection process of the 
regular permanent Vice-Chancellor was absolutely in order and as per the rules and the procedure. 

3.6 A specific query regarding the practice earlier with regard to the selection of senior -most 
Pro-Vice-Chancellor or from the senior-most Professor as the Vice-Chancellor on the retirement of 
the Vice-Chancellor elicited the response of the Secretary that the issue needed to be looked into.  
It was, however, clarified that the appointment letters of the Pro-Vice-Chancellors  mentioned that 
their terms were co-terminus with the Vice-Chancellor. 
3.7 The Committee has taken note of Statute 1(6) of the IGNOU Act which clearly specifies 
that on the Office of the Vice -Chancellor becoming vacant due to de ath, resignation or otherwise, 
the senior-most Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor and if there is 
no Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the senior-most Professor from amongst the Directors of the Schools shall 
perform the functions of th e Vice -Chancellor.  Committee’s attention has also been drawn by 
second proviso to Statute 3(2) as per which a Pro -Vice-chancellor performing the functions of the 
Vice-Chancellor shall continue in office, notwithstanding the expiration of his term of Offic e as 
Pro-Vice-Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes  his office or until the existing Vice -
Chancellor attends to the duties of his office. 
3.8 The Committee is aware that the terms of all the four Pro -Vice-Chancellors were co-
terminus with the then Vice-Chancellor.  The Committee would, however, like to point out 
that this situation arising on the completion of the term of the Vice -Chancellor on the 20 th 
October, 2011 could  have been easily anticipated. The Committee was given to understand 
that in the past the charge of Vice -Chancellor was always handed over to the senior most 
Pro-Vice-Chancellor.  The Committee would like to point -out that Statute 1(6) provides that 
in the event of the office of the Vice -Chancellor becoming vacant, the senior -most Pro-Vice-
Chancellor shall perform the duties of Vice -Chancellor and if there is no Pro -Vice-
Chancellor, the senior most Professor from amongst the Directors of School shall perform 
the functions of Vice-Chancellor.  Statute 3(2) provides that the term of Pro-Vice-Chancellor 
shall be decided by the Board of Management and shall not exceed three years or until the 
expiration of the term of Vice -Chancellor.  Second proviso to Statute 3(2) clearly mentions 
that a Pro -Vice-Chancellor while performing the fun ctions of the Vice -Chancellor under 
Statute 1(6) shall continue in office notwithstanding the expiry of his term as Pro -Vice-
Chancellor.  The Committee is of the view that there is an element of ambiguity in these two 
Statutes as they are liable to be inte rpreted either way. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that Statute 1(6) and 3(2) need to be reviewed and amended suitably to avoid 

such occurrences in future.  The Committee is also not very happy with the role played by 
the Ministry.  It could have a dvised the University in the right perspective taking note of the 
relevant issues, past practice and the emerging scenario. 
3.9 While interacting with a former Pro -Vice-Chancellor and an official of IGNOU, certain 
facts were placed before the Committee whi ch clearly indicated that the issue of handing over the 
charge of Vice-Chancellor to the senior most Pro -Vice-Chancellor/Senior-most Professor was not 
handled in an objective manner.  The Committee was informed that a writ petition had been filed 
in the De lhi High Court, challenging the appointment of Prof. Aslam as the Acting Vice -
Chancellor as the senior-most Professor amongst the Directors.  On that basis and also in the light 
of the term of Prof. Aslam as the Director of the School of Continuing Education coming to an end 
on the 31st December, 2011, a request had been made for the postponement of the 111 th meeting of 
the Board of Management scheduled for the 29 th December, 2011. Not  only the meeting of the 
Board was duly held but the facts as furnished by the previous Vice -Chancellor regarding the 
irregularities in the handing over the charge of Vice -Chancellor to Prof. Aslam were not placed 
before the Delhi High Court.   
3.10 The Committee was informed that case before the next date of the Delhi High Co urt was 
fixed for 2 nd February, 2012 and Prof. Pillai had sent a detailed letter to the University on 29 th 
January, 2012 itself.   Prof. Pillai had challenged the stand taken by the University before the 
Court that he did not give the charge to the senior -most Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Dr. Latha Pillai) on 
completion of his term.  In fact, the charge handover to the senior -most Pro-Vice-Chancellor was 
duly approved by him which had been accepted by her. In case of her non -acceptance, charge 
would have been given  to the next Pro -Vice-Chancellor.  It was also clarified that the Office 
Circular dated 14 th September, 2011 was a mere endorsement of the statutory provision.  The 
specific request made by Prof. Pillai for placing these facts before the Delhi High Court w as 
simply ignored. 
3.11 During his deposition before the Committee, Prof. Ramanujam, one of the pro -Vice-
Chancellors during that period, informed that in the past on similar occasions, charge of Vice -
Chancellor was duly handed over to the senior -most Pro-Vice-Chancellor.  He also shared details 
of discussions regarding inherent discrepancies involved in the handing over of charge of Vice -
Chancellor to the senior -most Professor instead of senior -most Pro -Vice-Chancellor on the 20 th 
October, 2011.  On being a sked about the reason in the delay on handing over the charge to the 

senior-most Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the Registrar informed the outgoing Vice -Chancellor that a fax 
letter had come from the Ministry as per which the charge was to be given to the senior -most 
Professor from amongst the Directors.  The orders for appointing  the senior most Pro -Vice-
Chancellor as acting Vice -Chancellor were given by the outgoing Vice -Chancellor at 3.30 p.m. 
and the fax message from the Ministry was received at 6.30 p.m., that too from a Consultant and 
not a permanent employee of  the Ministry. 
3.12 The documents made available to the Committee by the witnesses and also its 
interaction with them make it abundantly clear that the issue of handing over the charge of 
Vice-Chancellor to the rightful claimant was not handled in a judicious and objective 
manner, in accordance with the statutory provisions.  On the contrary, every effort was 
made to delay not only the specific statutory requirements but also to totally ignore the well -
established practice of similar occasions in the past.  This raises very disturbing issues, 
especially in the backdrop of the matter already being sub -judice.  The Committee is 
particularly disturbed by the role played by the Department in the entire affair .  It seems 
that both the Department and the acting Vice -Chancellor, who apparently had a vested 
interest, were together in misleading the High Court.  The process of distorting facts 
continues even now when the persistent  queries from the Committee have elicited very 
categorical denial from both the Vice -Chancellor and the Secretary, Higher Education.  Had 
it not been the clarifications/details supported by documents by the two witnesses, the 
Committee would also have simply been misled.   
3.13 The Committee also finds it very strange that the acting Vice -Chancellor could go 
ahead by taking decisions on crucial policies/schemes of the University when five nominees of 
the Visitor were to be nominated. Three meetings of the BoM were held when five nominees 
of the Visitor were yet to be nominated.  A perusal of the minutes of the meetings of the 
Board of Management confirms the observations of the Committee. The fact remains that 
where the authority is entrusted with the acting charge he should handle only routine affairs.  
The Committee finds no justification for non -adherence to this well-established and justified 
practice. 
3.14 The other contentious issue related to the attending of the Board meetings by the Joint 
Secretary, in the place of the Sec retary, Department of Higher Education who  was statutorily 
mandated to be the member of the Board.  It was pointed out that it was practical ly impossible for 

the Secretary to attend the meetings of about 150 institutions under the Department.   None of the  
previous Secretaries were regularly attending the meetings of the Board of Management of 
IGNOU.  On this practice being questioned, the  Committee was assured that all the relevant Acts 
would be amended one by one so that representative of the Secretary wa s also duly authorised to 
attend these meetings. 
3.15 The Committee takes objection to the contention of the Secretary that due to pre -
occupation of the Secretary, Joint Secretary concerned was representing him in the Board of 
Management meetings of IGNOU and this has been the practice as in the case of other 
similar bodies.  The Committee would like to point out that all the statutory provisions are 
required to be adhered to in the true spirit.  The Committee would appreciate that as 
assured by the Secreta ry, amendments are going to be made in all the relevant Acts.  Till 
then, it should be ensured that all such meetings are attended by the Secretary. 
IV DISSOLUTION OF THE DISTANCE EDUCATION COUNCIL (DEC) 
4.1 Dissolution of the Distance Education Council was another issue which was brought before 
the Committee. It was pointed out that this move was a decision taken in haste without taking into 
consideration all the relevant factors and its resultant impact on all concerned.  On being asked in 
this regard, the Department submitted that the Distance Education Council (DEC) of IGNOU was 
created through Statute 28 of the IGNOU Act, 1985, after receiving the approval of the Visitor in 
the year 1991.  Upto 2007, DEC used to give recognition to institutions offering  general courses in 
the distance mode but from that year, it also started giving recognition for technical programmes 
also under the distance mode.  It was pointed out that this was against the policy of AICTE, which 
was responsible for maintaining standards in technical education, to conduct technical programmes 
through regular (conventional) mode only.  Besides that, the Delhi University had challenged the 
authority of  DEC to regulate their ODL programmes in the Delhi High Court.  The main issue 
before the Court was whether an authority of one University could regulate other Universities. 
4.2 Taking cognizance of this situation, the Department in 2010, constituted a seven member 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Prof. N.R. Madhav Menon, to suggest measu res to regulate 
the standards of education imparted through distance mode.  The Department, in principle, 
accepted the report submitted by this Committee, except creation of a separate regulatory authority 
for Distance Education system in the country due t o pendency of the Higher Education and 
Research Bill, 2011 in the Parliament which envisaged subsuming of all the existing regulators.  

Instead of creating a separate regulatory body, the Department took a decision to dissolve DEC 
and let the existing regu lators viz. UGC and AICTE, created by the respective Acts of Parliament 
to perform the regulatory responsibilities for ODL mode also. 
4.3 The Committee was informed that upon the approval of the Madhav Menon Committee 
Report, the minutes of the meeting wer e forwarded to AICTE, UGC and DEC on the 30 th April, 
2012, pursuant to which the matter was discussed in DEC's 40 th meeting held on the 8 th June, 
2012.   After due deliberations, DEC recommended to the Board of Management of IGNOU to 
repeal Statute 28 whereunder DEC was created.  The resolution of DEC was approved by the 
Board which recommended repeal of Statute 28.  Based on the approval of DEC and the Board, the 
proposal to repeal Statute 28 to cause dissolution of DEC was placed before the Visitor  (President 
of India).  The Visitor approved the proposal, based on which IGNOU was requested to repeal 
Statute 28.  IGNOU, accordingly notified repealing of Statute 28 vide notification dated the 1 st 
May, 2013.  The Department further added that the Secretar iats of both the Houses of Parliament 
had been requested to lay the notification. 
4.4 The Committee notes that the Distance Education Council, which was mandated to 
regulate distance education in the country, had come into existence as an authority of 
IGNOU under Statute 28 framed in exercise of powers conferred by Section 16 of the 
IGNOU Act, 1985.  The Committee does not find any merit or justification in the kind of 
initiative taken by the Department in dissolving a statutory body functioning since 1991.   
The Committee is well aware that the Delhi University had challenged the authority of DEC 
to regulate their ODL programmes in the Delhi High Court.  But it is also equally true that 
the Madhav Menon Committee, while suggesting measures to regulate the st andards of 
education being imparted through distance mode, had also recommended creation of a 
separate regulatory authority, the Distance Education Council for regulating distance 
education by a separate Act of Parliament.  The Committee fails to understan d the element 
of urgency behind the move of the Department to entrust UGC and AICTE to perform the 
regulatory responsibilities for Open and Distance Learning mode also.  The Committee 
would like to point out that nowhere in the Acts governing UGC and AICTE , responsibility 
of regulating distance education has been entrusted to these authorities.  The argument of 
the Department that the Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011 envisaging subsuming of 
all existing regulators also does not hold ground.  The Committee would like to point out that 

even this proposed legislation has left untouched the Distance Education Council.  Not only 
this, the Committee in its Report on the Bill had strongly advocated the need for having an 
independent statutory authority for distance education. 
4.5 Another worrisome aspect for the Committee is that the Report on the Higher Education 
and Research Bill, 2011 was presented on the 13 th December, 2012 after extensive deliberations 
with all the stakeholders including the Department of Higher Education beginning from February, 
2012.  It was during this period only that the issue of dissolution of DEC was being discussed by 
the concerned authorities, i.e UGC, AICTE, DEC and the Board of Management of IGNOU.  Not 
only this, in the meeti ngs of both DEC and the Board of Management of IGNOU, the two 
prominent views which emerged were that (i) it would be appropriate if DEC is made an 
independent regulator rather then bringing it under UGC and (ii) DEC should continue under 
IGNOU in the pres ent set -up.  The Committee also observes that it took three meetings of the 
Board of Management to give a formal approval to the resolution of DEC to repeal Statute 28 of 
the IGNOU Act. 
4.6 The Committee observes that the Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011 is yet to 
be passed by the Parliament.  Recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
for retaining the bodies like UGC, AICTE and NCTE and also DEC as an independent 
statutory authority is bound to be reflected in the proposed legislat ion.  Not only this, what is 
more surprising is that the proposal for dissolution of DEC was strongly resisted by the 
Council as well as the Board of Management of IGNOU.  The minutes of the meetings of the 
Board of Management are self -revealing where majo rity view was strongly against such a 
move.  Arguments put forth were substantive enough and did not deserve to be ignored.  The 
Committee is constrained to observe that the views of the Department's nominee prevailed 
upon the majority of members represent ing the University and having the first hand 
experience about the role and mandate of DEC.  A Central University is considered to be an 
autonomous body having well -defined powers and functions and fully authorised to act 
accordingly.  But the meeting of th e Board indicated very obviously that the University was 
destined to follow the diktat of the Department, notwithstanding the viability of the move.  
The Committee expresses its serious concern on the entire issue. 
4.7 The Committee would also like to poin t out that the writ petition of the Delhi 
University before the Delhi High Court challenging the status of DEC as an authority of 

IGNOU could have been easily addressed by giving the status of an independent statutory 
authority as recommended by the Madhav  Menon Committee and by the Committee on 
HRD in its Report on the Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011. 
V DISCONTINUANCE OF THE COMMUNITY COLLEGES SCHEME 
5.1 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the issue of closing of 532 Community Colleges 
by IGNOU and its resultant impact on all the stakeholders, particularly the student community.  
On a specific query in this regard, the Department submitted that as info rmed by IGNOU, there 
were 532 Community Colleges allowed to operate under the IGNOU Community Colleges 
Scheme in clear violation of the IGNOU Act, Statute and Ordinances.  These Colleges were 
allowed to offer all sorts of programmes in face -to- face mode in the name of IGNOU, which was 
a violation of the IGNOU Act as the University was mandated to impart education through Open 
and Distance Learning mode only.  Besides, there was no control over fee fixation except deciding 
IGNOU share i.e `250/- for certificate, `500/- for Diploma and `750/- for Degree programmes.  
There was also no mechanism in place as to how much these Colleges were actually charging from 
students.  Admissions and examinations were conducted directly by these colleges and IGNOU 
was expect ed to offer degrees and diplomas in areas unknown to the academic framework of 
IGNOU. 
5.2 The IGNOU Community Colleges Scheme was launched on the 4 th July, 2009.  Under this 
Scheme, a Community College can get registered for offering academic programmes at the level of 
certificate, diploma, associate degree and non -credit customised.  After successful completion of 
study through this Scheme, a student will be certified by IGNOU.  A Community College gets 
registered with IGNOU provided it fulfils certain con ditions.  There is a specified regulatory 
mechanism under the Scheme having Community College Board, Academic Committee, 
Examination Committee.  Each body has a representative from IGNOU who will be providing 
guidance to the Community College and give a re port to the Community College Unit of IGNOU.  
Monitoring will also be done by the Regional Centres.  IGNOU observers will also be there during 
examinations.   
5.3 The Committee observes that the Scheme of Community Colleges was a well -conceived 
Scheme having the required bodies and monitoring mechanism in place.  The Concept Note for 
Associate Degree Programme through Community College was considered and approved at the 
46th meeting of the Academic Council held on the 13 th January, 2009.  It was followed by  formal 

approval by the Board of Management in its meeting held on the 15 th April, 2009.  Subsequently, a 
series of meetings of various Expert Committees, experience -sharing by international experts, 
seminars, training programmes, teleconferences were held.  This process made all the stakeholders 
aware about the Community Colleges Scheme in totality.  During the initial year of the launch of 
the Scheme, Gyandeep Project - IGNOU Army Community College Scheme was initiated on the 
4th September, 2009, followed by launch of Akashdeep Project -IGNOU Air Force Community 
College Scheme on the 27 th December, 2010 and the Sagardeep Project IGNOU  Navy 
Community College Scheme on the 24 th June, 2011.  The Committee also takes note of the fact 
that this Scheme was introduced in the country, keeping in view the major contribution of 
Community Colleges in different parts of the world to extend access to post secondary studies for 
millions of students who would otherwise not have the desired opportunity.   
5.4 The above details leave no doubt that the Scheme of Community Colleges was the outcome 
of extensive deliberations involving all the stakeholders.  All the regulatory bodies were duly put 
in place with a multi -level monitoring mechanism involving all the stakeholders with IGNOU 
playing the role of Co -ordinator.  The Scheme was initiated by IGNOU and was to be 
implemented by the various Community Colleges under the close supervision of IGNOU .  Any 
deviation or departure from the guidelines could have been easily identified and remedial measures 
taken accordingly. 
5.5 The Committee observes that the Scheme launched on the 4 th July, 2009 had hardly 
completed two years when the Board of Manageme nt, in its meeting held on the 29 th December, 
2011 was informed by the Chairman (Vice -Chancellor) about some major issues and challenges 
faced by him as the Vice -Chancellor, IGNOU.  After some discussion, the Board decided to 
constitute a High Powered Comm ittee to review the role of IGNOU as mandated, examine the 
entire gamut of issues and trade between quality and quantity as per the Act and submit its Report 
in a time -bound manner for further decision/direction.  One of the issues to be taken up by this 
Committee was to examine the recently introduced Scheme of IGNOU Community Colleges and 
its conformity with the Act, Statutes and Ordinances of the University to provide legitimacy and 
authenticity to this new initiative.  
5.6 The High Powered Committee in its report submitted on the 14 th May, 2012 observed the 
following:- 
"In 2009, IGNOU launched its Community College Scheme.  The main objectives 
of the scheme were: 
 Skill-based education leading to certification by IGNOU; 

 A successful intervention into the National Skill Mission; 
 Contribution towards enhancement of Gross Enrolment Ratio; and  
 Provision of vertical mobility from vocational to higher education. 
 
Some 500 vocational training, institutions across the country, including the training 
centres of th e Defence Services, were selected through Memoranda of 
Understanding (MOU) between IGNOU and each of these colleges.  The major 
provisions in the MOUs were: 
 
 IGNOU will certify the courses offered by these institutions on the basis of 
successful completion of the courses they are currently running; 
 IGNOU will nominate a representative on the relevant authorities of the 
colleges to ensure that the content, instructional system and testing practices are 
of acceptable quality; 
 The students of these institutions will be awarded an Associate degree if they 
earn 64 credits in all (the programme they complete from their own institution 
together with, if necessary, additional modules from the many programmes 
offered by the university); 
  
The colleges can admit students to IGNOU’s programmes selected by them and 
charge a fee prescribed by them from which IGNOU will be paid the standard fee. 
 Community-based training institutions who wish to join this programme have to 
sign an undertaking accepting the terms and conditions of the Scheme. 
 
5.7 The High Powered Committee made the assessment of the Scheme as follows: 
"The programme has run for two years now.  Though the initiative has still to be 
formalised as a regular programme of the IGNOU, it is worthwhile to  examine the 
experience gained from this experiment and draw appropriate lessons and based on 
those lessons formalise the scheme as early as possible.  The important issues that 
have surfaced from the two-year experiment are: 
 
 The authenticity of the statu tory provisions in the IGNOU Act is not formally 
and fully reflected or protected in the contractual obligations entered into 
between IGNOU and the participating institution; 
 Structures and processes for the supervision and control of the programme are 
not settled through statutory provisions; 
 Curriculum structure and assessment procedures are not formally laid down; 
 Monitoring and evaluation systems are not strong and adequate; 
 There are no quality assurance processes and mechanisms;  
 Accreditation of prio r learning, credit transfer, and further requirements for 
grant of Associate degree by IGNOU need to be clearly spelt out; 
 In the absence of these provisions, there are opportunities for misuse of the 
scheme that permits enrolment of students in the regula r programmes of the 
university". 
 

5.8 The Committee takes note of the fact that the High Powered Committee was of the view 
that the Scheme of Community Colleges fits well with IGNOU’s mandate for skill  development.  
It was pointed out that the objectives of the Scheme of Community Colleges should be 
development of skills consistent with the objectives of the National Skill Development Mission.  
In order to meet these objectives, the High Powered Committee recommended the restructuring of 
the Scheme as indicated below: 
(i) There should be an appropriate statutory mechanism responsible for designing, 
developing and delivering all programmes of skill development through the 
instrument of Community Colleges. 
(ii) This statute should have the following provisions: 
 The composition of the Authority, Board or any other structure for the 
administration of the Scheme; and  
 Its composition powers and functions. 
(iii) The Processes: 
This body when established shall lay down the details of the terms and conditions 
for select ion of colleges or institutes, their responsibilities including duties and 
obligations, the processes for settling the curricula, the instructional system, 
assessment procedures and practices, quality assurance systems, the basis of sharing 
the fees, accre ditation/recognition procedures, mechanisms for monitoring and 
evaluation of their performance, additional requirements to earn Associate degree, 
and the modules to be completed for further high education programmes of their 
choice and so on. 
 
5.9 The Comm ittee also observes that the major recommendation of the High Powered 
Committee was that till such restructuring t ook place, no new colleges should be admitted to the 
Scheme of Community Colleges.   
 
5.10 The Report of the High Powered Committee was placed  before the Board of Management 
in its meeting held on the 31 st May, 2012.  On the Community Colleges Scheme, the Board 
resolved as follows: 
- Community Colleges Scheme be subjected to a thorough time -bound review.  Till then, 
all actions be kept in abeyance .  The Vice -Chancellor may constitute the Review 
Committee(s) to complete the task in six months. 
 
5.11 Subsequently, the Vice -Chancellor constituted the Community Colleges Review 
Committee on the 6th July, 2012 with the following terms of reference: 

- to un dertake a comprehensive review of the existing IGNOU Community Colleges 
Scheme in the light of the findings/recommendations of the High Powered Committee 
approved by the Board of Management. 
- to frame a revised scheme, consistent with the objectives of the National Skill 
Development Mission and National Technical and Vocational Qualification 
Framework. 
- to recommend an organizational structure for the implementation of the Scheme. 
- to recommend model guidelines for the implementation of the Scheme. 
- to consider and recommend special provisions to protect the continuance or the existing 
arrangements for organizing skill development programmes. 
- to suggest mechanism to safeguard the academic interest of the existing students, 
defence personnel etc. enrolled under the Scheme. 
 
5.12 The Committee, thereafter, went through the recommendations of the Community Colleges 
Review Committee which were submitted to the Vice Chancellor, IGNOU on the 19th November 
2012.  The broad recommendations of the Review Committee were as follows: 
(a) Provision for Statute/Ordinance for offering programme through Community Colleges 
should be made. 
(b) The IGNOU Community Colleges Scheme-2012, as proposed  be introduced 
(c) Community Colleges Division should be created as per the Organ isational Structure and 
human resources recommended therein. 
(d) The qualifications of the faculty to be engaged by the Community Colleges for Vocational 
Education courses should be as per the norms of AICTE. 
(e) Professional Development of the Faculty and Staff of CCs may be done by IGNOU Faculty 
from various Schools of Studies, Staff Training and Research Institute of Distance 
Education and the Community Colleges cum Knowledge and Skill Providers identified by 
IGNOU. 
(f) The University may include Armed Force Communi ty Colleges    in the Scheme of 
Community Colleges and ask the Armed Forces to follow the Scheme.  Alternatively, the 
University may create a separate Scheme for them. 
(g) HISCET should be treated as a Community College  They must submit necessary 
documents for registration as Community College and offer the programmes. 
(h) Human Resource Requirement in concerned IGNOU Divisions 
(i) Towards safeguarding interests of Existing Students: The Vice-Chancellor may constitute a 
Screening Committee to examine and identify the C ommunity Colleges which have 
followed all the provisions of the existing Community Colleges Scheme .  The existing 
students of such Community Colleges may be permitted to complete the programmes of 
study to which they were admitted as per the ongoing Scheme.   
(j) No fresh admissions be permitted in Community Colleges till the University frames a 
revised Community Colleges Scheme.   
 
5.13 The Review Committee also made the following recommendations:- 

 
(a) To begin with, IGNOU may consider establishing 100 Community Colleges/Community 
College cum Knowledge and Skill Providers. 
(b) IGNOU may fund some of the Community Colleges and/or establish its own Community 
Colleges as Model Community Colleges at some places over the period of time. 
(c) IGNOU may consider providing budgeta ry support to the tune of  `1,00,000 (Rupees one 
Crore) as Seed Money for undertaking various activities pertaining to the setting -up of the 
Community College System in the University. 
 
5.14 The Board of Management at its meeting held on the 5th January, 2013 directed that: 
 
- before introduction of any new scheme, objectivity and transparency may be ensured to 
avoid controversies/legal implications. 
- recommendations of the Review Committee are in consonance with the provisions of 
IGNOU Act/Statutes/Ordinance. 
- results of the students under the existing scheme are declared without delay 
safeguarding their interests. 
- ongoing court cases are handled carefully ensuring the best interests of students and the 
University. 
The Board also approved for setting  up of a separate Armed Forces Unit for defence 
personnel for offering programmes in conformity with the Act, Statutes and Ordinances of 
the University. 
 
5.15 The Board of Management, in its meeting held on the 15 th June, 2013 approved the 
following recommendations made by the Review Committee: 
- discontinuance of the existing Community Colleges Scheme 
- introduction of a new Community Colleges  Scheme through a separate 
statute/ordinance. 
 
The Board also approved the re commendations of the Screening Committee for declaration of 
pending results under both the Community Colleges Scheme and the Armed Forces Community 
Colleges Scheme.  The future examinations for the remaining students were to be conducted by the 
Student Evaluation Division as per the established procedure of the University. 
 
5.16 The Committee, while making a comparison of the High Powered Committee Report 
dated May, 2012, the Minutes of the 118 th Meeting of the Board of Management held on the 
15th June 3013 and the recommendations given in the report of the Community Colleges 
Review Committee dated November, 2012 finds that neither the High Powered Committee 
nor the Review Committee talks about  discontinuation of the existing Community Colleges.   

The Committee would like to draw attention to the following term of reference of the High 
Powered Committee: 
- to review the existing range of programmes and courses with particular  reference 
to the concern for quality assurance, viability of enrolment and  the modes of 
delivery in the context of the mandate as contained in the IGNOU Act and 
recommend appropriate modifications necessary in their systems of delivery 
including the advisability of the continuance of those which are not considered 
viable or do not conform to the mandate of the University. 
 
5.17 The Committee would also like to place on record the following 
observation/recommendation of the High Powered Committee: 
 
“The Committee Colleges Scheme launched by the University in 2009 as a part of its 
mission to contribute to skill development initiatives at the national level has yielded 
valuable lessons.  Based on this experience, the University should now formulate a new 
Scheme structured with the statutory backing of the Act and Statutes.  Till the Scheme is 
restructured, no new institutions should be brought within the scope of the existing 
Scheme of Community Colleges” 
 
5.18 The Committee would also like to point out that the two main terms of reference of 
the Review Committee were: 
- to undertake a comprehensive review of the existing IGNOU Community Colleges 
Scheme in the light of the findings and recommendations of the High Powered 
Committee. 
- to frame a revised scheme to establish Community Colleges Scheme, consistent 
with the objectives of the Nat ional Skill Development Mission and National 
Technical and Vocational Qualifications Framework. 
 
5.19 The Committee finds it highly disturbing that the Board of Management has tried to  
enforce the decision of discontinuation of Community Colleges Scheme i n  a very arbitrary 
manner which was not recommended by either the High Powered Committee or the Review 
Committee and yet citing it as their recommendation.   Committee's attention has been 
drawn by one pertinent recording of the minutes of 118 th Meeting which shows that Director 
R&D was the Chairman of the Review Committee, whereas Prof. Vinay Kumar Pathak, Vice 
Chancellor, V.M Open University, Kota  was the Chairman of the Review Committee.  It is 
also disturbing that in the presence of Prof. Vinay Kumar P athak, Chairman of the Review 
Committee in the 118 th meeting of Board of Management, the Director, R&D was being 
projected as the Chairman of the Review Committee.   Committee's attention has also been 
drawn by the 112 th meeting of the Board of Management held on the 9 th April, 2012, which 
was attended by six members, one of them being the Joint Secretary of the Department 

representing the Secretary.  Quorum for the meeting of the Board of Management is six and 
the Joint Secretary cannot be considered a full -fledged member in view of the statutory 
provision.  The Committee is of the firm view that a meeting being held without quorum that 
too under the Chairmanship of the acting Vice -Chancellor goes against the prescribed 
norms.  Decisions taken during such a meeting are likely to be questioned.   
 
5.20 The Review Committee had identified a number of drawbacks/shortcomings in the existing 
Community Colleges Scheme which included:- 
-     curriculum varying from college to college: 
- infrastructure, availability of teachers, labs, local needs, curriculum etc. not taken into 
account  by the Community Colleges. 
- broad functions of the Community College Examination Board not stipulated clearly. 
- composition of the Fee Fixation Commit tee does not cover any representative of the 
Community College. 
- nomination of all the members of the Community Colleges Board by the 
Chairperson/Secretary. 
- examination of the curriculum, creditisation by the Academic Committee not done 
scientifically 
- no provision of seeking approval of IGNOU on the schedule of examinations etc. 
- in the initial phases, most of the Community Colleges registered without any 
inspection. 
- processing of results, issue of Grade Cards is done by IGNOU, without any 
involvement in paper setting etc. 
- monitoring mechanism not effective enough 
 
5.21 The Committee had the opportunity to go through the Manua l for Community 
Colleges, 2011 which contains full details relating to regulatory bodies of Community 
Colleges, creditisation, studen t registration, examination, training programmes at 
Community Colleges, monitoring mechanism and some general guidelines.  The Committee 
finds that all the drawbacks/shortcomings identified by the Review Committee stand fully 
covered in the Manual of the e xisting Community Colleges.  If that was not 
implemented/enforced in the right earnest, the fault lies mainly with the University, 
notwithstanding the responsibility of individual Community Colleges.  Not only this, there 
was a specified monitoring mechanism involving Headquarters/Regional Centres. 
  
5.22 The Committee made an attempt to analyse the manual of the pervious Community 
Colleges Scheme and the proposed Community Colleges Scheme.  The Committee finds no major 
difference between the two Schemes.  These are only two exceptions. One is that a Community 

College Advisory Council under the chairmanship of the Vice -Chancellor, IGNOU has been 
suggested which is mandated to meet at least  twice in a year.  The other difference is that under 
the previous Sc heme, Community Colleges were to conduct Academic Programmes generally 
through face -to-face mode.  Under the revised scheme, programmes are to be offered through 
Open and Distance Learning. 
 
5.23 The Committee is also aware of the fact that the primary mandate of IGNOU is 
introduction and promotion of Open University and distance education systems.  However, there 
are several provisions that do not restrain the University from using classroom engagement as a 
means to fulfil its mandate. The Committee has  been informed that there are as many as 164 
programmes in the face -to-face mode on IGNOU campus and at partner institutions across the 
country. 
 
5.24 The Committee would like to point out that the Scheme of Community Colleges was 
launched in July, 2009.  The programme had run for about two years only.  It wa s too short 
a time to take a final view about the status of a Scheme, especially keeping in view the level of 
pre-introduction exercise undertaken by the University.  The reasonable approach would 
have been to suggest measures for strengthening the Scheme.  The Committee strongly feels 
that this was the mandate of the High Powered Committee also which had very rightfully 
adhered to the same.  It had nowhere recommended scrapping the Scheme.  Instead, it had 
recommended restructuring of the Scheme by having an appropriate statutory mechanism 
for the Scheme along with certain other modifications. The only restriction placed by the 
Committee was that no new colleges should be admitted to the Scheme of Commun ity 
Colleges till such restructuring.  
 
5.25 The Committee also takes note of the following decisions of the Screening Committee: 
 
 
 
First meeting held on the 27th December, 2012 
 
- in respect of 14 colleges, the Committee recommended release of all the pend ing 
results of these colleges till December, 2011 Term and Examination. 
- In view of some of these colleges having followed the prescribed procedures, results of 
June 2012 TEE may be declared. 
- Results of June, 2012 TEE be obtained from all colleges and relea se of results of 
colleges which have followed the procedure. 
 

 
Second meeting held on the 15th February, 2013 
 
- recommended release of pending results of 58 colleges till the December, 2011 
examinations. 
- recommended 23 colleges who had followed all procedures and taken admission till 
January, 2012 cycle should be allowed to conduct examination. 
- also decided that the existing students whose admission were withhold in the light of 
the 113th BoM decision need to be allowed to complete the programmes. 
 
Third meeting held on the 15th March, 2013 
 
- recommended declaration of pending results upto December, 2011 in respect of 18 
colleges. 
- Recommended declaration of pending results upto December, 2011 in respect of 44 
colleges. 
- Also recommended declaration of pending results upto December, 2011 in respect of 
18+44 colleges. 
- recommended declaration of pending results where they have been placed on the 
website or subsequently removed after the decision of BoM at its 113 th meeting held on 
31.5.2012. 
 
5.26 The Committee notes that the Board of Management in its meeting held on the 15 th June, 
2013 accepted the following recommendations of the Review Committee: 
- the existing Community Colleges Scheme being not strictly covered under the IGNOU 
Act/Statute/Ordinances, it may be discontinued and the existing students admitted till 
January, 2012 may be allowed to complete their Programmes of studies. 
- Launch of a new Comm unity Colleges Scheme to be operationalized under a 
Statute/ordinance of the University. 
5.27 However, the Committee is surprised to note that in their correspondence with the 
Community Colleges, the University failed to forward the decisions taken by the Board of 
Management.   Instead, they were informed that based on the High Powered Committee Report, 
the Scheme has been kept in abeyance on 20 June, 2012 for six months.  This was followed by a 
mail sent by the University on 24 th June, 2013 that the Scheme had been discontinued and pending 
results of 146 colleges will be declared/completed that too till December, 2011 only.  Since then, 
University Website has been closed and there are no communication channels open between the 
University and Community Colleges/Students. 
5.28 The Committee found it surprising that out of the 532 Community Colleges, only 146  
Colleges could be certified by the Screening Committee as functioning in accordance with the 
prescribed norms and guidelines.  Committee's attention was drawn by the minutes of the Review 
Committee meeting held on the 7 th November, 2012, which mentioned that out of the 620 

Community Colleges registered, IGNOU had to de -register 88 Community Colleges in April, 
2011.  In addition, 257 Community Colleges thou gh registered did not enrol any students so far.  
Thus, functional Community Colleges numbered only 275.  The Review Committee had also taken 
note of the fact that only 172 Community Colleges had submitted Review Reports with the 
remaining 103 Community Colleges failing to submit Review Reports. 
 
5.29 The Committee finds it rather surprising that the impression being given  is that there 
were 532 Community colleges, with majority of them not adhering to the prescribed format.  
However, the factual position w as that as many as 257 Community Colleges had failed to 
enrol any student and thus could not be considered functional in the real sense.  Out of the 
remaining 275 functional Community Colleges, 172 Colleges had submitted that review 
report.  With respect t o 103 colleges failing to do so, responsibility lies on the IGNOU 
nominees also who could not pursue compliance of this requirement.  The Committee 
strongly feels that even at this late stage, this issue can be taken up with the concerned 
colleges. 
 
5.30 Committee’s attention has also been drawn to a number of cases pending in various 
High Courts where directions have been given to the University to keep the 20 th June, 2012 
IGNOU letter in abeyance and conduct examinations of ongoing programmes and declare  
results accordingly. From the above, the Committee can only infer that the entire issue of 
Community Colleges Scheme has been mishandled in every conceivable manner.  After an 
extensive exercise, a Scheme is launched by a premier Central University involv ing highest 
authorities in the higher education sector.  A manual giving details of all aspects of the 
Scheme is made available.  Community Colleges are duly registered by the IGNOU 
authorities.  Presence of IGNOU nominee is in all the bodies of the Commun ity Colleges.  
There is also a monitoring mechanism.  Hardly two years are over and the University has 
suddenly a change of heart. Initiative is taken to review the Scheme.  A High powered 
Committee is duly constituted which simply recommends restructuring  of certain aspects 
and till then no new institution should be brought under the Scheme.  The Review 
Committee approves a revised Scheme which is broadly speaking the earlier scheme only 
with only two exceptions.  This is followed by Screening Committee ce rtifying 146 
Community Colleges functioning as per the prescribed norms.  It is pertinent to note that at 

the ground level, there were only 275 functional Community Colleges, out of which only 172 
Community Colleges had complied with the directive of furni shing Review Reports.  Logical 
course would have been to modify the Scheme as recommended by the High Powered 
Committee and permit these 172 Community Colleges to continue and the remaining 103 
colleges given a last chance.   
5.31 The Committee is also of the view that the issue of Community Colleges Scheme 
should have been placed first before the Academic Council, the body authorised to take 
policy decisions.  The Committee is not aware about the background of this development.  
But the manner in which mee tings of the Board of Management were conducted, that too 
under the Chairmanship of acting Vice -Chancellor, one can not expect objectivity of 
decisions.  
5.32 The Committee finds it very strange that although the Board of Management in its 
meeting held on the 15 th June, 2013 had accepted the recommendation of the Review 
Committee that existing students admitted till January, 2012 may be allowed to complete 
their programmes of studies, nothing has moved forward since then.  This is evident from 
the submissio ns made by the representatives of Community Colleges appearing before the 
Committee.  Even the High Court directives have been ignored.  It is high time that the 
recommendations made by the Review Committee/ Screening Committee are implemented in 
letter an d spirit.  The Committee would also like  to draw the attention of both the Vice -
Chancellor, IGNOU and the Secretary, Higher Education to the assurance given to it  that 
interest of each and every student stood fully protected.   
5.33 It was on the 15 th June, 2013, that the Board of Management gave its approval to the 
launch of new Community Colleges Scheme to be operationalised under a Statute/Ordinance 
of the University.  It will be a year very soon, since this approval was given by the Board of 
Management.  However, no information has been forthcoming from either the University or 
the Department about any progress made in this direction so far.   The Committee fails to 
comprehend the reasons for this undue delay -in implementing a decision taken by the Board  
of Management.  The University has shown undue haste in scrapping a Scheme which was in 
its initial years of existence.  But the logical follow -up action which should be based on the 
recommendations made by the High Powered Committee, Review Committee and  the 
Screening Committee and also the ground reality still remains on paper.  The Committee 

would like to emphasise that the Community Colleges functioning as per the norms need to 
be permitted to continue with appropriate modifications, wherever necessary. 
5.34 The Committee expresses its sense of extreme unhappiness at the turn of events.  Not 
only the Board of Management is properly constituted with respect to two -three meetings, 
acting Vice-Chancellor is taking major policy decisions that too not in con sonance with the 
High Powered Committee recommendations. Even those decisions remain to be 
implemented.  Unfortunately, in  the entire process, the innocent students have become the 
victims for no fault of theirs.  What is more disturbing is the role of the  nodal Department 
which is supposed to uphold all the Government directives and statutory provisions.  The 
Committee has been given to understand that an internal Committee has been constituted to 
fix the responsibility in the case.  However, full details about this Committee along with the 
time-limit by when this Committee has to give its report are not known to the Committee.   
5.35 The Committee is of the firm view that it is high time that the entire issue is put to a 
thorough probe by an independent authority.  The Inquiry Committee so appointed should 
examine the issues which may inter-alia include the appointment of acting Vice -Chancellor, 
powers of acting Vice -Chancellor vis-a-vis regular Vice -Chancellor, viability of decisions 
taken by the acting Vice-Chancellor on crucial policies/schemes of the University, dissolution 
of the Distance Education Council, discontinuation of the C ommunity Colleges Scheme, not 
implementing fully the recommendations of the Madhav Menon Committee, the High 
Powered Committee and the Review Committee on Community Colleges; ignoring the High 
Court directives with regard to Community Colleges and not prot ecting the interest of 
students.   

 
MISCELLANEOUS 
6.1 The Committee had the opportunity to interact with the IGNOU Teachers’ Association.  A 
very pertinent issue raised by the Association was the discrimination meted out to academics of the 
University.  It was clarified that there were teachers who did the academic functioning, preparing 
material audio video etc. Academics were the people of the Regional Centres who engaged the 
students in the teaching -learning process.  As per the IGNOU Act, both teachers  and academics 
were similar in their status, their service conditions were similar and their recruitment was also 
similar.  However, in the Sixth Pay Commission, academics generally from library and physical 
instructions have not been treated at par with t eachers.  As a result IGNOU academics, in spite of 
coming through the same selection route and performing the some academic functions have been 
denied the third promotion and also retirement at 65 years available to teachers of all Central 
Universities. 
6.2 The Committee is of the view that the issue of disparity between teachers of IGNOU 
and academics at Regional Centres needs to be examined in the right perspective and final 
decision taken in the matter without any delay.   
6.3 In conclusion, the Committe e would like to emphasize that IGNOU is a Central 
University established under an Act of Parliament.  Nobody can deny the fact that all the 
Central Universities are autonomous and enjoy an independent status.  But it is also equally 
true that the Universit y is governed by the Act and Statutes and has to function in 
accordance with that.  It would have been in the fitness of things had this aspect was adhered 
to   in every respect in the context of IGNOU. 
******** 
 

 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
III APPOINTMENT OF THE VICE-CHANCELLOR 
 The Committee is aware that the terms of all the four Pro -Vice-Chancellors were co-
terminus with the then Vice -Chancellor.  The Committee would, however, like to point out 
that this situation arising on the completi on of the term of the Vice -Chancellor on the 20 th 
October, 2011 could  have been easily anticipated. The Committee was given to understand 
that in the past the charge of Vice -Chancellor was always handed over to the senior most 
Pro-Vice-Chancellor.  The Com mittee would like to point -out that Statute 1(6) provides that 
in the event of the office of the Vice -Chancellor becoming vacant, the senior -most Pro-Vice-
Chancellor shall perform the duties of Vice -Chancellor and if there is no Pro -Vice-
Chancellor, the se nior most Professor from amongst the Directors of School shall perform 
the functions of Vice-Chancellor.  Statute 3(2) provides that the term of Pro -Vice-Chancellor 
shall be decided by the Board of Management and shall not exceed three years or until the 
expiration of the term of Vice -Chancellor.  Second proviso to Statute 3(2) clearly mentions 
that a Pro -Vice-Chancellor while performing the functions of the Vice -Chancellor under 
Statute 1(6) shall continue in office notwithstanding the expiry of his term a s Pro -Vice-
Chancellor.  The Committee is of the view that there is an element of ambiguity in these two 
Statutes as they are liable to be interpreted either way. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that Statute 1(6) and 3(2) need to be reviewed and amen ded suitably to avoid 
such occurrences in future.  The Committee is also not very happy with the role played by 
the Ministry.  It could have advised the University in the right perspective taking note of the 
relevant issues, past practice and the emerging scenario.    (Para 3.8) 
 The documents made available to the Committee by the witnesses and also its 
interaction with them make it abundantly clear that the issue of handing over the charge of 
Vice-Chancellor to the rightful claimant was not handled in a j udicious and objective 
manner, in accordance with the statutory provisions.  On the contrary, every effort was 
made to delay not only the specific statutory requirements but also to totally ignore the well -
established practice of similar occasions in the p ast.  This raises very disturbing issues, 
especially in the backdrop of the matter already being sub -judice.  The Committee is 
particularly disturbed by the role played by the Department in the entire affair.  It seems 
that both the Department and the acti ng Vice -Chancellor, who apparently had a vested 

interest, were together in misleading the High Court.  The process of distorting facts 
continues even now when the persistent  queries from the Committee have elicited very 
categorical denial from both the Vi ce-Chancellor and the Secretary, Higher Education.  Had 
it not been the clarifications/details supported by documents by the two witnesses, the 
Committee would also have simply been misled.       (Para 3.12)   
 The Committee also finds it very strange that the acting Vice -Chancellor could go 
ahead by taking decisions on crucial policies/schemes of the University when five nominees of 
the Visitor were to be nominated. Three meetings of the BoM were held when five nominees 
of the Visitor were yet to be nominated.  A perusal of the minutes of the meetings of the 
Board of Management confirms the observations of the Committee. The fact remains that 
where the authority is entrusted with the acting charge he should handle only routine affairs.  
The Committee finds no justification for non -adherence to this well-established and justified 
practice.                  (Para 3.13)   
 The Committee takes objection to the contention of the Secretary that due to pre -
occupation of the Secretary, Joint Secretary concerned was representing him in the Board of 
Management meetings of IGNOU and this has been the practice as in the case of other 
similar bodies.  The Committee would like to point out that all the statutory provisions are 
required to be adhered to in the true spirit.  The Committee would appreciate that as 
assured by the Secretary, amendments are going to be made in all the relevant Acts.  Till 
then, it should be ensured that all such meetings are attended by the Secretary.  
                  (Para 3.15)   
IV DISSOLUTION OF THE DISTANCE EDUCATION COUNCIL (DEC) 
 The Committee notes that the Distance Education Council, which was mandated to 
regulate distance education in the country, had come into existence as an authority of 
IGNOU under Statute 28 framed in exercise of powers conferred by Section 16 of the 
IGNOU Act, 1985.  The Committee does not find any merit or justification in the kind of 
initiative taken by the Department in dissolving a statutory body functioning since 19 91.  
The Committee is well aware that the Delhi University had challenged the authority of DEC 
to regulate their ODL programmes in the Delhi High Court.  But it is also equally true that 
the Madhav Menon Committee, while suggesting measures to regulate the  standards of 
education being imparted through distance mode, had also recommended creation of a 

separate regulatory authority, the Distance Education Council for regulating distance 
education by a separate Act of Parliament.  The Committee fails to unders tand the element 
of urgency behind the move of the Department to entrust UGC and AICTE to perform the 
regulatory responsibilities for Open and Distance Learning mode also.  The Committee 
would like to point out that nowhere in the Acts governing UGC and AI CTE, responsibility 
of regulating distance education has been entrusted to these authorities.  The argument of 
the Department that the Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011 envisaging subsuming of 
all existing regulators also does not hold ground.  The Committee would like to point out that 
even this proposed legislation has left untouched the Distance Education Council.  Not only 
this, the Committee in its Report on the Bill had strongly advocated the need for having an 
independent statutory authority for distance education.            (Para 4.4)   
 The Committee observes that the Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011 is yet to 
be passed by the Parliament.  Recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
for retaining the bodies like UGC, AICTE  and NCTE and also DEC as an independent 
statutory authority is bound to be reflected in the proposed legislation.  Not only this, what is 
more surprising is that the proposal for dissolution of DEC was strongly resisted by the 
Council as well as the Board  of Management of IGNOU.  The minutes of the meetings of the 
Board of Management are self -revealing where majority view was strongly against such a 
move.  Arguments put forth were substantive enough and did not deserve to be ignored.  The 
Committee is cons trained to observe that the views of the Department's nominee prevailed 
upon the majority of members representing the University and having the first hand 
experience about the role and mandate of DEC.  A Central University is considered to be an 
autonomous body having well -defined powers and functions and fully authorised to act 
accordingly.  But the meeting of the Board indicated very obviously that the University was 
destined to follow the diktat of the Department, notwithstanding the viability of the mov e.  
The Committee expresses its serious concern on the entire issue.          (Para 4.6)   
4.7 The Committee would also like to point out that the writ petition of the Delhi 
University before the Delhi High Court challenging the status of DEC as an authority of 
IGNOU could have been easily addressed by giving the status of an independent statutory 
authority as recommended by the Madhav Menon Committee and by the Committee on 
HRD in its Report on the Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011. 

                    (Para 4.7)   
V DISCONTINUANCE OF THE COMMUNITY COLLEGES SCHEME 
 The Committee, while making a comparison of the High Powered Committee Report 
dated May, 2012, the Minutes of the 118 th Meeting of the Board of Management held on the 
15th June 3013 and the recommendations given in the report of the Community Colleges 
Review Committee dated November, 2012 finds that neither the High Powered Committee 
nor the Review Committee talks about  discontinuation of the existing Community Colleges.   
The Committee would like to draw attention to the following term of reference of the High 
Powered Committee: 
- to review the existing range of programmes and courses with particular  reference 
to the concern for quality assurance, viability of enrolment and  the modes of 
delivery in the context of the mandate as contained in the IGNOU Act and 
recommend appropriate modifications necessary in their systems of delivery 
including the advisability of the continuance of those which are not considered 
viable or do not conform to the mandate of the University. 
         (Para 5.16)   
 
 The Committee would also like to place on record the following 
observation/recommendation of the High Powered Committee: 
 
“The Committee Colleges Scheme launched by the University in 200 9 as a part of its 
mission to contribute to skill development initiatives at the national level has yielded 
valuable lessons.  Based on this experience, the University should now formulate a new 
Scheme structured with the statutory backing of the Act and S tatutes.  Till the Scheme is 
restructured, no new institutions should be brought within the scope of the existing 
Scheme of Community Colleges”   
(Para 5.17)   
 
 The Committee would also like to point out that the two main terms of reference of 
the Review Committee were: 
- to undertake a comprehensive review of the existing IGNOU Community Colleges 
Scheme in the light of the findings and recommendations of the High Powered 
Committee. 
- to frame a revised scheme to establish Community Colleges Scheme, consistent  
with the objectives of the National Skill Development Mission and National 
Technical and Vocational Qualifications Framework.  
(Para 5.18)   
 
 
 The Committee finds it highly disturbing that the Board of Management has tried to  
enforce the decision of discontinuation of Community Colleges Scheme in  a very arbitrary 
manner which was not recommended by either the High Powered Committee or the Revie w 

Committee and yet citing it as their recommendation.   Committee's attention has been 
drawn by one pertinent recording of the minutes of 118 th Meeting which shows that Director 
R&D was the Chairman of the Review Committee, whereas Prof. Vinay Kumar Pathak, Vice 
Chancellor, V.M Open University, Kota was the Chairman of the Review Committee.  It is 
also disturbing that in the presence of Prof. Vinay Kumar Pathak, Chairman of the Review 
Committee in the 118 th meeting of Board of Management, the Director, R&D  was being 
projected as the Chairman of the Review Committee.  Committee's attention has also been 
drawn by the 112 th meeting of the Board of Management held on the 9 th April, 2012, which 
was attended by six members, one of them being the Joint Secretary o f the Department 
representing the Secretary.  Quorum for the meeting of the Board of Management is six and 
the Joint Secretary cannot be considered a full -fledged member in view of the statutory 
provision.  The Committee is of the firm view that a meeting being held without quorum that 
too under the Chairmanship of the acting Vice -Chancellor goes against the prescribed 
norms.  Decisions taken during such a meeting are likely to be questioned.     
                   (Para 5.19)   
 
 The Committee had the opportunity to go through the Manua l for Community 
Colleges, 2011 which contains full details relating to regulatory bodies of Community 
Colleges, creditisation, student registration, examination, training programmes at 
Community Colleges, monitoring mecha nism and some general guidelines.  The Committee 
finds that all the drawbacks/shortcomings identified by the Review Committee stand fully 
covered in the Manual of the existing Community Colleges.  If that was not 
implemented/enforced in the right earnest, the fault lies mainly with the University, 
notwithstanding the responsibility of individual Community Colleges.  Not only this, there 
was a specified monitoring mechanism involving Headquarters/Regional Centres.  
                               (Para 5.21)   
    
  
 
 The Committee would like to point out that the Scheme of Community Colleges was 
launched in July, 2009.  The programme had run for about two years only.  It wa s too short 
a time to take a final view about the status of a Scheme, especially keeping in view the level of 
pre-introduction exercise undertaken by the University.  The reasonable approach would 

have been to suggest measures for strengthening the Scheme.  The Committee strongly feels 
that this was the mandate of the High Powered Committee also which had very rightfully 
adhered to the same.  It had nowhere recommended scrapping the Scheme.  Instead, it had 
recommended restructuring of the Scheme by having an appropriate statutory mechanism 
for the Scheme along with certain other modification s. The only restriction placed by the 
Committee was that no new colleges should be admitted to the Scheme of Community 
Colleges till such restructuring.        (Para 5.24)   
 
 
 The Committee finds it rather surprising that the impression being given  is that there 
were 532 Community colleges, with majority of them not adhering to the prescribed format.  
However, the factual position was that as many as 257 Community Colleges had failed to 
enrol any student and thus could not be considered functional in t he real sense.  Out of the 
remaining 275 functional Community Colleges, 172 Colleges had submitted that review 
report.  With respect to 103 colleges failing to do so, responsibility lies on the IGNOU 
nominees also who could not pursue compliance of this re quirement.  The Committee 
strongly feels that even at this late stage, this issue can be taken up with the concerned 
colleges.                  (Para 5.29)   
 
 Committee’s attention has also been drawn to a number of cases pending in various 
High Courts wh ere directions have been given to the University to keep the 20 th June, 2012 
IGNOU letter in abeyance and conduct examinations of ongoing programmes and declare 
results accordingly. From the above, the Committee can only infer that the entire issue of 
Community Colleges Scheme has been mishandled in every conceivable manner.  After an 
extensive exercise, a Scheme is launched by a premier Central University involving highest 
authorities in the higher education sector.  A manual giving details of all aspects of the 
Scheme is made available.  Community Colleges are duly registered by the IGNOU 
authorities.  Presence of IGNOU nominee is in all the bodies of the Community Colleges.  
There is also a monitoring mechanism.  Hardly two years are over and the Universi ty has 
suddenly a change of heart. Initiative is taken to review the Scheme.  A High powered 
Committee is duly constituted which simply recommends restructuring of certain aspects 
and till then no new institution should be brought under the Scheme.  The Re view 
Committee approves a revised Scheme which is broadly speaking the earlier scheme only 

with only two exceptions.  This is followed by Screening Committee certifying 146 
Community Colleges functioning as per the prescribed norms.  It is pertinent to not e that at 
the ground level, there were only 275 functional Community Colleges, out of which only 172 
Community Colleges had complied with the directive of furnishing Review Reports.  Logical 
course would have been to modify the Scheme as recommended by the  High Powered 
Committee and permit these 172 Community Colleges to continue and the remaining 103 
colleges given a last chance.                (Para 5.30)   
 The Committee is also of the view that the issue of Community Colleges Scheme 
should have been pla ced first before the Academic Council, the body authorised to take 
policy decisions.  The Committee is not aware about the background of this development.  
But the manner in which meetings of the Board of Management were conducted, that too 
under the Chair manship of acting Vice -Chancellor, one can not expect objectivity of 
decisions.               (Para 5.31)   
 The Committee finds it very strange that although the Board of Management in its 
meeting held on the 15 th June, 2013 had accepted the recommendation of the Review 
Committee that existing students admitted till January, 2012 may be allowed to complete 
their programmes of studies, nothing has moved forward since then.  This is evident from 
the submissions made by the representatives of Community Colleges appearing before the 
Committee.  Even the High Court directives have been ignored.  It is high time that the 
recommendations made by the Review Committee/ Screening Committee are implemented in 
letter and spirit .  The Committee would also like  to draw the attention of both the Vice -
Chancellor, IGNOU and the Secretary, Higher Education to the assurance given to it  that 
interest of each and every student stood fully protected.           (Para 5.32)   
  
It was on t he 15th June, 2013, that the Board of Management gave its approval to the 
launch of new Community Colleges Scheme to be operationalised under a Statute/Ordinance 
of the University.  It will be a year very soon, since this approval was given by the Board of  
Management.  However, no information has been forthcoming from either the University or 
the Department about any progress made in this direction so far.   The Committee fails to 
comprehend the reasons for this undue delay -in implementing a decision taken b y the Board 
of Management.  The University has shown undue haste in scrapping a Scheme which was in 

its initial years of existence.  But the logical follow -up action which should be based on the 
recommendations made by the High Powered Committee, Review Co mmittee and the 
Screening Committee and also the ground reality still remains on paper.  The Committee 
would like to emphasise that the Community Colleges functioning as per the norms need to 
be permitted to continue with appropriate modifications, wherever necessary.  
                 (Para 5.33)   
 The Committee expresses its sense of extreme unhappiness at the turn of events.  Not 
only the Board of Management is properly constituted with respect to two -three meetings, 
acting Vice-Chancellor is taking maj or policy decisions that too not in consonance with the 
High Powered Committee recommendations. Even those decisions remain to be 
implemented.  Unfortunately, in  the entire process, the innocent students have become the 
victims for no fault of theirs.  What is more disturbing is the role of the nodal Department 
which is supposed to uphold all the Government directives and statutory provisions.  The 
Committee has been given to understand that an internal Committee has been constituted to 
fix the responsibility in the case.  However, full details about this Committee along with the 
time-limit by when this Committee has to give its report are not known to the Committee.   
                (Para 5.34)   
 The Committee is of the firm view that it is high time that the entire issue is put to a 
thorough probe by an independent authority.  The Inquiry Committee so appointed should 
examine the issues which may inter-alia include the appointment of acting Vice -Chancellor, 
powers of acting Vice -Chancellor vis-a-vis regular Vice -Chancellor, viability of decisions 
taken by the acting Vice-Chancellor on crucial policies/schemes of the University, dissolution 
of the Distance Education Council, discontinuation of the C ommunity Colleges Scheme, not 
implementing fully the recommendations of the Madhav Menon Committee, the High 
Powered Committee and the Review Committee on Community Colleges; ignoring the High 
Court directives with regard to Community Colleges and not prot ecting the interest of 
students.  
(Para 5.35)     
MISCELLANEOUS 

6.2 The Committee is of the view that the issue of disparity between teachers of IGNOU 
and academics at Regional Centres needs to be examined in the right perspective and final 
decision taken in the matter without any delay.                                             (Para 6.2)   
6.3 In conclusion, the Committee would like to emphasize that IGNOU is a Central 
University established under an Act of Parliament.  Nobody can deny the fact that all the 
Central Universities are autonomous and enjoy an independent status.  But it is also equa lly 
true that the University is governed by the Act and Statutes and has to function in 
accordance with that.  It would have been in the fitness of things had this aspect was adhered 
to   in every respect in the context of IGNOU.            (Para 6.3)   
******** 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
MINUTES 
_____________________________________ 

 
 
IX 
NINTH   MEETING 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 
19th February, 2014 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe , New 
Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.  Shri Birender Singh  - Chairman 
2. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
3.  Shri Baishnab Parida 
4.    Shri Tarun Vijay 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
5. Shri P.K. Biju 
6.     Dr. Charles Dias 
7. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya 
8. Shri Virender Kashyap 
9.  Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
10.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
11.  Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana 
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY 
  
(i) Prof. M. Aslam, Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU 
(ii) Prof. S.M.S. Chaudhary, Registrar (Admn.) 
(iii) Prof. Ravindra Kumar, Director, ACD 
(iv) Dr. S. Mahapatra, Director, RSD 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
(v) Shri Ashok Thakur, Secretary 
(vi) Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman, University Grants Commission;  
(vii) Shri Amit Khare, Joint Secretary  
(viii) Shri Praveen Prakash, Joint Secretary  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Smt.  Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri   N.S. Walia, Director 
Shri   Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Smt.  Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director 
Smt.  Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director 

 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt the 262 nd Report of Sub -Committee- II  on the “Functioning of 
National Sports Federations” and to hear the Vice -Chancellor, IGNOU and the Secret ary, 
Department of Higher Education on the functioning of IGNOU . 
3. The Committee first considered and adopted the 262 nd Report on the ‘Functioning of 
National Sports Federations’.  Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Vice -Chancellor, 
IGNOU a nd other officials on the functioning of IGNOU.  The members raised some queries 
which were replied to by the Vice-Chancellor and other officials of IGNOU.  
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Higher 
Education and o ther officials on the functioning of IGNOU.  The members raised some queries 
which were replied to by the Secretary. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.  

X 
TENTH   MEETING 
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 
28th March, 2014 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.  Shri Birender Singh  - Chairman 
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Baishnab Parida 
4. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem 
5. Shri Tarun Vijay 
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
7. Smt. Helen Davidson 
8.     Dr. Charles Dias 
9. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya 
10. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
11.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY TEACHERS ASSOCIATION 
(i) Prof. B.S. Saraswat, President  
(ii) Dr. V.P. Rupam, Vice President  
(iii) Ms. Poonam Bhushan, Secretary  
(iv) Dr. Kamal Vagrecha, Treasurer  
 
COMMUNITY COLLEGES 
 
(v) Shri K.P.S. Abid Thangal, Pravasi IGNOU Community College, Kerala 
(vi) Shri Rajeev KR, Principal, JDT Islam IGNOU Community College, Calicut, Kerala 
(vii) Shri Basil KA, Director, Al Jamia IGNOU Community College, Mallapuram, Kerala 
(viii) Dr. K.V.A. Naidu, Principal, GMR Varalakshmi IGNOU Commu nity College, Srikakulum, 
Andhra Pradesh 
(ix)     Dr. M. Purushottam Rao, Coordinator, GMR Varalakshmi IGNOU  Community College,  
Srikakulum, Andhra Pradesh 
(x) Shri Sidappa Agarakhed, Chairman, Bijapur Rural Community College, Bijapur 
(xi)     Shri Shivendra Kumar, Coordinator, Tecnia Institute, New Delhi 
(xii)    Shri Sita Ram Sharma, CIMT Community College, Rewari, Haryana 
(xiii) Shri Vijay Bhatt, Principal, IGNOU-HIFEED Community College, Dehradun, Uttrakhand 
(xiv) Shri Suket Sharma, HTS, Community College, Hissar 
 

FORMER IGNOU REPRESENTATIVES 
 
(xv)  Prof. P.R. Ramanujam, Former Pro-Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU 
(xvi)   Dr. R. Sudarsan, Dy. Director, Planning Commission, IGNOU 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Smt.  Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri   N.S. Walia, Director 
Shri   Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Smt.  Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director 
Smt.  Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee 
convened to hear the representatives of IGNOU Teacher s’ Association and Community Colleges 
from the States  of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Delhi, Haryana and Uttrakhand and former 
Pro-Vice-Chancellor  of IGNOU on the Functioning of IGNOU. 
3. The Committee first heard the views of the representatives o f IGNOU Teachers 
Association on the overall functioning of IGNOU including the challenges faced by it, the 
programmes and courses being offered to students and the contribution of the Association in the 
decision making as well as in the promotion of educat ion through distance learning and other 
administrative matters.  The members raised some queries which were replied to by the 
representatives. 
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of Community Colleges 
from the States of Kera la, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh on the issues relating to the overall 
functioning of IGNOU, status of functioning of Community Colleges, hardship faced by the 
Community Colleges and the impact of the closure of Community Colleges on the students.  The 
members raised some queries which were replied to by the representatives  
 (The meeting was then adjourned for lunch). 
5. Thereafter, the Committee again assembled to hear the views of the Community Colleges 
from the States of Delhi, Haryana and Uttrakhand on  various issues relating to the functioning of 
IGNOU as well as the functioning of Community Colleges problems being faced by them and 
impact of the closing of the Community Colleges on the students.  The Committee then heard the 
views of  Prof. B.R. Raman ujam, former Pro -Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU and his colleague on the 
functioning of IGNOU, its role and achievement in imparting education through distance learning 
mode, impact of its outreach on student community.  The members raised some queries which 
were replied to by the representatives. 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.  

XI 
ELEVENTH   MEETING 
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 25 th 
April, 2014 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.  Shri Birender Singh  - Chairman 
2. Shri A.B. Bernard 
3.  Shri Baishnab Parida 
4. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem 
5.    Shri Tarun Vijay 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
6. Shri P.K. Biju 
7. Smt. Helen Davidson 
8.     Dr. Charles Dias 
9. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
10. Shri M.K. Raghavan 
11. Shri M.I. Shanavas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Smt.  Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri   N.S. Walia, Director 
Shri   Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Smt.  Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director 
Smt.  Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt the draft 263 rd Report of the Com mittee  on the ‘Functioning of 
IGNOU’. 
3. The Committee then considered the draft 263rd Report on  the ‘Functioning of IGNOU’ and 
adopted the Report with few modifications.  The Committee also authorized the Chairman of the 
Committee to present the Report  to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha since the Parliament was not 
in session.   
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 p.m. to meet again at 11. a.m. on 6th May, 2014. 
 