Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTIETH REPORT
REPORT NO. 
260
The Indian Institutes of Information 
Technology Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2013)

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTIETH REPORT
The Indian Institutes of Information
Technology Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A BBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—17
5. N OTE OF D ISSENT .................................................................................................................. 18—20
6. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 21—27
7. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 29—37
8. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 39 —91

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 31st August, 2013)
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
9. Shri Tarun Vijay
10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suresh Angadi
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Sivasami C.
15. Shrimati Helen Davidson
16. Dr. Charles Dias
17. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
18. Shri Virender Kashyap
19. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
20. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
21. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
22. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
23. Capt. Jai Naraian Prasad Nishad
24. Shri M.K. Raghavan
25. Shri K. Chandrashekar Rao
26. Shri M.I. Shanavas
27. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
28. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
29. Shri Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
30. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana
31. Shri Manicka Tagore
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and
sixtieth Report of the Committee on the Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013.
*
2. The Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013 was introduced in the Lok Sabha
on 18
th March, 2013. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with Speaker, Lok Sabha referred **
the Bill to the Committee on 17 th May, 2013 for examination and report.
3. The Bill seeks to establish twenty new IIITs and also declare the existing four Indian
Institutes of Information Technology as Institutions of National Importance. The Bill being a major
policy initiative in the field of Information Technology the Committee decided to issue a Press
Release for eliciting wider public opinion on the Bill. The Committee held extensive deliberations
with the Secretary, Department of Higher Education and other stakeholders.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in four sittings held on 1
st and 10 th October, 5 th and
12th December, 2013.
5. The Committee, while drafting the report, relied on the following:–
(i) Background Note on the Bill received from the Department of Higher Education;
(ii) Detailed clause by clause note on various provisions of the Bill;
(iii) S tatus Note on the four centrally-funded IIITs;
(iv) Details of consultation with all stakeholders including State Governments;
(v) Verbatim record of the oral evidence taken on the Bill; and
(vi) Presentation made and clarification given by the Secretary, Department of Higher
Education.
6. The Committee considered its Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 12
th December, 2013.
7. One Note of dissent given by Shri P.K Biju is appended to the Report.
8. For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters at the end of the report.
New Delhi; BIRENDER SINGH
December 12, 2013 Chairman,
Agrahayana 21, 1935 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II Section 2 dated the 18 th March, 2013.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 50901 dated the 17 th May, 2013.

ABBREVIATIONS
IIIT : Indian Institutes of Information Technology
ESDM : Electronics System Design and Manufacturing
ONGC : Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
NEEPCO : North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited
HSIDC : Haryana State Industrial Development Corporation
TCS : Tata Consultancy Services
N-PPPP : Not-for-Profit Public Private Partnership
NASSCOM : National Association of Software and Service Companies
UGC : University Grants Commission
AICTE : All India Council of Technical Education
NIT : National Institutes of Technology
IIM : Indian Institutes of Management
IIT : Indian Institutes of Technology
DPR : Detailed Project Report
SEZ : Special Economic Zone
(iv)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013 was referred to the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development by the Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 17 May, 2013 for examination and report.
1.2 The Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013 seeks to incorporate the existing
four Indian Institutes of Information Technology (IIITs) at Allahabad, Gwalior, Jabalpur and
Kancheepuram under the Indian Institutes of Information Technology Act so as to provide them
independent statutory status and to declare them as Institutions of National Importance. The Bill
further seeks to establish twenty new Indian Institutes of Information Technology in Public-Private-
Partnership (PPP) mode and also incorporate them as Institutions of National Importance under the
Act.
1.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as follows:–
“At present, there are four Indian Institutes of Information Technology established by the
Central Government under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 at Gwalior, Allahabad,
Jabalpur and Kancheepuram. To meet the challenges of the Indian Information Technology
industry, the Ministry of Human Resource Development intends to establish twenty new
Indian Institutes of Information Technology on Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis. The
partners in setting up the Indian Institutes of Information Technology would be the Ministry
of Human Resource Development, the concerned State Government where such Indian
Institute of Information Technology will be established and the industry as conceived under
the Scheme formulated by the Central Government in this behalf.
The main objective in establishing Indian Institutes of Information Technology is to set up
a model of education which can produce world class human resource in the field of
information technology. These institutions are conceived as self-sustaining, research-led
institutions contributing significantly to the global competitiveness of key sectors of the
Indian economy and industry with application of information technology in selected domain
areas.”
1.4 Giving a background of the Bill, the Department of Higher Education submitted that the
existing four Indian Institutes of Information Technology (IIITs) at Allahabad, Gwalior, Jabalpur
and Kancheepuram were set up in the years 1998, 1999, 2005 and 2007 respectively under the
Societies Registration Act and were governed by their Memorandum of Association and Rules. Their
incorporation under the Act would confer upon them an independent statutory status, besides
declaring them as Institutions of National Importance.
1.5 The Secretary highlighted the distinct features of the existing four IIITs. Under-graduate,
Post-graduate and Ph.D. programmes were available in these Institutions. There was varying
number of faculty posts created with considerable gap so far as the existing faculty strength was
concerned. In IIIT, Allahabad, against the sanctioned faculty strength of 109, faculty in position
was 49+66 visiting faculty. Out of the sanctioned strength of 47 faculty members in IIIT, Gwalior,
permanent faculty was 27 and 20 were visiting faculty. So far as IIIT, Jabalpur was concerned,
out of the sanctioned faculty strength of 55, only 36 were in position. In IIIT, Kancheepuram, only
18 faculty members were in position against the sanctioned strength of 42. Student strength varied
in the four IIITs. Whereas IIITs at Allahabad and Gwalior were functioning from their permanent

2
campus, construction work of permanent campus was in progress in IIIT, Jabalpur and
Kancheepuram. Lastly, Central funds were being duly provided to these IIITs.
1.6 Giving an idea about the background of the Bill necessitating the requirement of the present
legislation, the Secretary drew attention to the following factors:
– to ensure uniformity and autonomy in academic, administrative and financial matters in
IIITs.
– to facilitate the awarding of degrees by the IIITs as the existing four IIITs were set
up initially as Societies. Though out of the four, three IIITs at Allahabad, Gwalior and
Jabalpur have already been converted into the deemed Universities, the one at
Kancheepuram was still functioning as society.
– novel experiment to bring the Central Government Institutions and the Institutions set
up in partnership with State Government and Industry under a single legislation.
– to develop knowledge in Information Technology and with special focus on specific
domain areas.
– to provide manpower of global standards in Information Technology.
– to develop institutional framework for peer learning and networked research.
1.7  It was further informed that the Central Government in December, 2012, had approved a
Scheme for establishing twenty new IIITs, one in each State, in Public Private Partnership mode.
The partners in setting up these IIITs were envisaged to be the Central Government, the State
Government and identified industry partners. In order to ensure uniformity and autonomy in
governance, it was considered necessary to establish these IIITs through a Central Legislation. This
legislation would also institutionalize structures such as IIIT council for policy discussion, peer
learning, networked approach to research and academic programmes, besides ensuring transparency
and accountability. It was further envisaged that the professional expertise and skilled manpower
in IT developed by these IIITs would harness the multi-dimensional facets of IT in various
domains. It was expected that these IIITs would produce world-class high quality technical
personnel in order to provide manpower for emerging industries, science departments and
laboratories which in turn would contribute to the development of the industries and finally boost
the economic growth of the country.
1.8 The Committee was further informed that the capital cost of each IIIT would be `128.00
crore to be contributed in the ratio of 50, 35 and 15 per cent by the Central Government, State
Government and the industry respectively. For the North-Eastern States, the ratio would be 57.7,
35 and 7.5 per cent. In addition, the Central Government would provide `50.00 crore for faculty
development programme. The project was targeted to be completed in nine years from 2011-12 to
2019-20. Each IIIT shall meet its entire operating expenditure on its own within five years of its
commencement, out of student fees, research and other internal accruals. It was also submitted
that the concerned State Government would provide 50-100 acres of land free of cost for setting
up of IIITs. The industry partners, in addition to sharing the capital cost, were expected to
contribute towards research labs and projects, internship, faculty chairs etc. from time to time. He
also informed that there shall be a cap on the amount of support by the Central/State Governments
and any escalation in the cost estimates would be arranged by the private partners.
1.9 The Committee was given to understand that proposals were invited by the Department
from all the State Governments for setting up of IIITs. Land has been identified by 20 State
Governments, i.e.  Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar , Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan,

3
Tamil Nadu, Tripura, West Bengal, UP and Goa. Proposals of 11 States i.e. Assam, Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu
and Tripura have been approved. MoU and MoA have been signed and society of IIITs registered
by four States, i.e.  IIIT, Kota (Rajasthan), IIIT, Guwahati (Assam), IIIT, Chittoor (Andhra
Pradesh) and IIIT, Tiruchapalli (Tamil Nadu). It was also informed that academic session had
started in 5 IIITs in 2013-14 at Under-graduate level at IIIT, Kota, IIIT, Chittoor, IIIT, Guwahati
and IIIT, Vadodara and Post-graduate level at IIIT, Tiruchapalli.
1.10 The Committee observes that the country has done tremendously well in the field of
Information Technology, which has become an important tool in the development of
manpower for various areas of knowledge. The Indian Information Technology industry has
emerged as a strong and credible force which is now recognized as a major constituent of
the global information technology services industry. The Committee understands that in
order to provide manpower of global standards for the information technology industry to
cater to the needs of emerging areas of knowledge, economy, education and training,
information technology is a pre-requisite. There is also no denying the fact that the IT
sector has a positive impact on our economy and governance which in turn has improved
immensely every aspect of our society, be it education, health facilities, agricultural
innovations or service sector. The Committee welcomes the objective behind the proposed
legislation. However, a plain reading of the Bill raises very pertinent areas of concern. Both
the detailed inputs made available to the Committee and its deliberations have highlighted
very visible gaps so far as status of existing centrally-funded IIITs, mode of setting up the
new IIITs, their governance structure and likely impact on all the envisaged stakeholders
is concerned. The Committee is constrained to observe that the element of in depth
examination of the proposal from all conceivable angles at the initial stage is lacking to a
great extent. This is borne out by the fact that the very basis of IIITs being set up in PPP
mode, with no convincing reasoning therefor is proposed to be done away after five years.
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
2.1 The Committee was informed that the salient features of the draft Bill for establishment of
IIITs as Institutions of National Importance and the implementation of the scheme for new IIITs
in PPP mode was discussed in the State Education Ministers’ Conference on 5 June, 2012.
According to the Department, the draft Bill was discussed in detail and the States unanimously
supported the Bill. In fact, the States demanded early passage of the Bill in Parliament. During
discussion, some State Governments offered suggestions which the Department agreed to consider.
The suggestions were to allow Central and State Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) to be accepted
as industry partners for establishment of IIITs and giving States the flexibility to bring in one or
more industry partners instead of limiting the number of partners to three.
2.2 The Committee was also informed that a Cabinet Note was circulated to all the concerned
Ministries and Departments to elicit their views on the draft legislation. The Ministry of Finance,
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Science and Technology and the Planning Commission had
supported the proposal. However, the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and the
Department of Electronics and Information Technology made some important observations/
comments which are as follows:–
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Ministry of Science and Technology
– Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Ministry of Science and Technology,
supports the establishment of 20 new IIITs in the country in PPP mode with Central
Government institution, institutions set up in partnership with State Government and

4
Industry as stakeholders. The Department concurs with the view that various benefits
would accrue to the industry as partners namely, availability of qualified manpower for
undertaking new product development and R&D, collaborative development of
innovative products and services in association with IIITs, and an opportunity to drive
research in IIITs based on perceived future needs of the industry etc.
– However, the Ministry of Human Resource Development may like to consider the
inclusion of a provision in the Draft Cabinet Note that would spell out a scheme/
mechanism to encourage private sector participation through fiscal incentives etc.
The Department of Electronic and Information Technology, Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology
– Consideration of restoring the functions of the Council as per clause 35 of the Bill of
2010.
– In view of the renewed thrust to Electonics Systems Design and Manufacturing, it is
important that MHRD may expand the ambit of education to include “education in
Electronics System Design and Manufacturing (ESDM)” and to change the name of the
institutes as “Indian Institutes of Electronics and IT”. Such a name would create a
fillip to the capacity building needed to meet the challenge of growing market demand
in the ESDM sector to USD.
2.3 The response of the Department to above said observations was that the Indian Institute of
Information Technology name has become a brand name and should provide the requisite incentive
to encourage private/public sector participation. It is proposed to capitalize on it rather than change
it, keeping in view the fact that it takes a long time for a brand name to be built in the minds
of the stakeholders. Further, Electronic and Communication Engineering is already a central part of
each of the 20 IIITs which are designed/proposed to have the presence of domain areas. The
institute itself goes beyond IT and Electronics, to include its application areas.
2.4 The Committee is constrained to observe that no serious efforts have been made by
the Department of Higher Education to have wide ranging consultation with all the
stakeholders. State Governments and industry partners are the most crucial stakeholders in
this endeavour envisaging collaboration between the Centre, States and Industry partners.
Simple presentation and discussion by the Joint Secretary, Department of Higher Education
on such an important piece of legislation in the State Education Ministers’ Conference
cannot be considered adequate enough as focussed and issue-specific deliberations cannot
take place in such a large body holding a formal meeting. Rightful course would have been
to secure the specific and pointed reaction to all the conceivable aspects, both direct and
indirect, of the proposed structure of IIITs in a PPP mode by all the stakeholders. This
would have required sharing of inputs and series of intensive deliberations. One cannot
overlook the fact that the States contributing 35 per cent of the capital cost, besides
providing 50-100 acres of land free of cost remain the major stakeholder. Committee’s
attention was also drawn towards a list of industry partners identified by the Department
including private industries such as TCS, Infosys, Tata Motors, CK Birla Groups etc. and
Central/State PSUs such as ONGC, NEEPCO, UP Electronics Corporation, HSIDC (Haryana)
etc. As the details of discussions held with the private industries and Central/State PSUs
have not been shared, the Committee is not aware about their views/suggestions on the Bill.
2.5 The Committee, in order to have a broad based consultation on the proposed legislation,
decided to issue a Press Release. Unfortunately, the Press Release failed to receive the desired
response. The Committee then decided to hear the representatives of IIIT, Hyderabad and Bangalore

5
so that it could understand the difference between IIITs, Allahabad, Jabalpur, Gwalior and
Kancheepuram and IIITs, Hyderabad and Bangalore with reference to their set-up, governance
structure and functioning. It was informed that IIITs, Hyderabad and Bangalore were established
in 1998 and were the initiatives of the respective State Governments, IT industries in the State and
the industry bodies. They were set up through a Government order, but as a not-for-profit, public
private partnership. The IIITs of Hyderabad and Bangalore are registered societies, with recognition
as deemed university under section 3 of the UGC Act.
2.6 The representatives of IIIT, Hyderabad submitted before the Committee that IIIT,
Hyderabad was an autonomous University set up in 1998 as a not-for-profit Public Private
Partnership (N-PPP) entity and was the first IIIT to be set up under this model in India. The
Government of Andhra Pradesh catalyzed the institute set-up of buildings. The IIIT-Hyderabad
model combined the social orientation of Government institutions with the resemblance of the
private sector. It was further submitted that the independence offered by the model, combined with
the financial self-sufficiency, was critical to autonomy and flexibility in programmes and
procedures. The Institute had transferred this autonomy internally to its faculty and research
groups. The representative also added that the Governing Council of IIIT, Hyderabad consisted of
15 eminent people from academic and industry, along with nominees of the Government. This
Council was empowered to take all decisions about the institute. IIIT, Hyderabad was helping to
train teachers of engineering colleges in Andhra Pradesh and also giving them digital courseware
so that their students could benefit directly.
2.7 The representative of IIIT, Bangalore submitted that it was set up consequent to the 1997
Karnataka’s Industrial Promotion Policy for the Information Technology Sector. The policy was
evolved by the Government in discussion with the leading industries and industry associations like
NASSCOM. Subsequent to the adoption of the policy, the Government had discussions among
Government officers, industry leaders, industry associations and academics involved in the IT
sector. After multiple rounds of discussions, it was decided to set up an IIIT (at that time Indian
Institute of Information Technology) as an Industry Driven Initiative and the Government’s role
limited to (a) provision of land (b) `10 crore for infrastructure and (c) provision of necessary
guidelines and support to promote the growth of the Institute to achieve the objective of a world
class/Global Institute of Excellence. The major objectives of the Institute were to become a
specialized centre for higher learning in IT to promote Bangalore as a global centre of Excellence
in IT, to carry out R&D both on its own account and also based on sponsorship from Indian and
Global IT industry, to act as an interface between industry and academic community, to co-create
Intellectual Property and commercialization of IP and to train professionals from industry and
Government on advanced IT technologies. Thus, the Institute was to promote a close and
symbiotic relationship with the Industry. IIIT, Bangalore was set up purely as a post-graduate
institute. The reason for focussing only on the postgraduate education was to focus on research,
product development and design patents. IIIT, Bangalore was structured as a Registered Society,
with founding members, patron members (industries which donate `1 crore), industry members
who donate `25 lakhs and individuals who had the expertise and had made significant contribution
to IT. The membership of the society was not automatic. The membership has to be approved by
the Governing Body. Thus, by merely paying the fees or donation, one could not become a member
of the society.
2.8 On a specific query regarding model of IIIT, Hyderabad and Bangalore proving more
successful when compared with the four IIITs in the Government sector, the Department’s reply
was that IIIT Hyderabad and Bangalore have made a mark in terms of the research output and the
quality of their students. However, it could not be said that they have been more successful. The
centrally funded IIITs are inclusive in the sense that the Central Reservation Act applies to them.
Besides, the placement record of the older centrally funded IIITs has been excellent. The proposed

6
IIIT Bill, 2013 amalgates the best features of IIIT, Bangalore and Hyderabad along with necessary
mechanism to ensure transparency, inclusion and accountability and also autonomy. On a query
regarding the role of the State Governments and industry in setting up of IIIT, Hyderabad and
Bangalore and their involvement in the day to day functioning of these institutions, the Department
informed that the Andhra Pradesh Government provided the land at a discounted rate and initial
buildings to IIIT, Hyderabad and also persuaded top industries to partner with the institution. The
Government or the industry is not involved in the day-to-day functioning of the institute in any
manner. However, principal Secretaries, IT and Higher Education were there in the Governing
Council, the highest body of governance. Similarly, in IIIT, Bangalore, neither the State Government
nor the industry had any role in managing day-to-day affairs. Two officers of the State
Government had been invited to serve on the 17 member Governing Board.
2.9 The Committee understands that the proposed legislation amalgamates the best features of
IIIT, Bangalore and IIIT, Hyderabad along with necessary mechanisms to ensure transparency (RTI
Act), inclusion (Central Reservation Act) and accountability and also autonomy. The Committee also
notes the distinct features of IIIT, Hyderabad which has been set up in the Not for Profit-PPP
mode with no support from the Government for running expenses. Only infrastructure in the form
of land and some buildings was provided by the State Government. With regard to IIIT, Bangalore,
State Government has supported with land and infrastructure grants.
2.10 On a specific query, the Committee was informed that both the IIITs at Hyderabad and
Bangalore have made a mark in terms of research output and the quality of their students. It was
also admitted that it could not be said that these two Institutes have been more successful than
the centrally funded IIITs, especially IIIT, Allahabad and IIIT, Gwalior which were started around
the same time as IIIT, Hyderabad and Bangalore. Not only this, the centrally-funded IIITs were
inclusive in the sense that the Central Reservation Act applied to them. Besides, the placement
record of the older centrally-funded IIITs had been excellent.
III. ISSUES OF CONCERN
3.1 The Committee strongly feels that there are major shortcomings as elaborated below
which relate not only to the various provisions of the proposed legislation but also have
failed to address some very crucial aspects which should have been incorporated therein.
Another worrisome factor is that the basic objective of the Bill does not seem to have been
carried forward along the expected lines as after a period of five years, the governance
structure of the IIITs is envisaged to undergo a complete change-over.
Scheme of Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) mode in setting up of IIITs
3.2 The Committee observes that the proposal for exploring the possibility of the establishment
of the IIITs in PPP mode came from the Planning Commission. These IIITs are to be set up in
public-private-partnership mode with the capital cost of establishing each IIIT, to be shared in the
ratio of 50:35:15 by the Central Government, State Governments and the concerned Industry
partners respectively. For the North-East States, the contribution envisaged is 57.50:35:7.5 per cent.
In addition to this, `50 crore would be provided by the Central Government for faculty
development. Besides, an amount of upto `10.00 crore from the Department will be provided to
meet any deficit in operating expenditure during the initial four years. Lastly, the concerned State
Government will provide 50-100 acres of land, free of cost. The project is targeted to be
completed in nine years from 2011-12 to 2019-20. It has also been specified that each IIIT shall
meet its entire operating expenditure on its own within five years of commencement out of student
fees, research and other internal accruals. In other words, the maximum cost of establishing these
institutions is to be borne by the Central Government followed by the respective State

7
Governments. Only 15 and 7.5 per cent is to be contributed by the private sector. In such a
scenario, what would be the control/interest of the private sector in the day-to-day functioning or
in the policy decision of the institution acquires significant importance.
3.3  The Committee has been given to understand that the role envisaged for the industry
partners in the management of IIITs is to help in the development of R&D capability in IT industry
as well as in domain industry ( e.g. automotive, energy, remote sensing, building, transportation,
agriculture, etc.), enhance global competitiveness of Indian industry by helping to create innovative
products and services, open up new areas for Indian Industry where it will be able to enter and
research world class levels, help develop innovative products for the domestic market, which will
be the future products for the world, make available exceptionally educated manpower for
undertaking product development and doing applied research and also generate socially-conscious
and conscientious manpower. Besides this, the following specific role has been envisaged for the
industry partner:–
– industry to be represented on Board of Governors and to have a role in appointing
Chairperson and Director.
– to do joint research projects, create joint IPRs.
– depute industry professionals as adjunct faculty.
– encourage students to do research projects with Industry professionals as mentors.
– encourage  faculty to have sabbaticals for short period with industry.
– internship, job opportunities for students of IIITs.
– offer sponsored Ph.Ds. for employees of Industry.
– to provide input on course curriculum in line with developments in the IT industry.
3.4 The Committee, taking into account the role assigned to the industry partner, observes
that the proportion of role that is being given to the industry partner is disproportionately
large compared to the contribution it would be making towards the cost of establishing the
institutions. For five years, contribution of Central and State Government would be 50 and
35 per cent respectively as compared to 15 per cent contribution by industry sector. Not only
this, cost of land to be provided by the State Government, if added to their contribution,
increases its share considerably. Similarly, Central Government is mandated to provide
additional `60 crore . In other words, there is no justifiable comparison between the Centre-
State contribution and the one from the industry partner. The situation becomes somewhat
unrealistic in the context of PPP mode as this mode,  instead of being a permanent one, can
be considered as transitional, because after five years, these institutions are expected to
become fully private. Each IIIT will be meeting its entire operating expenditure on its own,
out of student fees, research and other internal accruals. The Committee fails to understand
the justification for continuing the public-private characteristic of IIIT only for five years.
These IIITs could have easily continued to have the specified role as assigned in the initial
stage. With the Institution taking roots, it could have started generating its own funds with
Central/State share decreasing accordingly. Another disturbing feature noticed is that even
during the first five years of its existence, the presence of Central and State Governments
is simply not there in all the decision-making authorities of the Institute. The Committee can
only say that the proposed IIITs would be purely private entities from day one of their
existence. The only supervisory role is assigned to an internal Committee to review its
performance within seven years and thereafter every five years Central Government has the
power to recommend on only policy-related issues.

8
3.5 The Committee fails to identify any justification for handing over an institution
established with full support from the Central and State Government which continued
undiminished for five years to a private partner having full control of the institution. In
the name of supervision there is a so-called review by an internal Committee and that too
after a gap of five years. The Committee is of the firm view that the role of the Central
and the State Government cannot be secondary, tertiary or peripheral to the private
industry partners, especially in the light of major contribution being from these authorities.
The governance structure needs re-consideration more so because the Committee
apprehends that this set of educational institutions might become profit-making business
institutions. Therefore, the Central Government and State Governments should not have a
diminished role in decision and policy making of these institutions. Presence of both
Central and State Government has to be there without restrictions of time.
3.6 The Committee has been given to understand that in the case of centrally funded IIITs,
industry involvement is on a particular project and not on a continuous basis. The Committee
agrees with the contention that the IT industry being applied in nature and having a very short
technology cycle, a continuous and long term engagement of the industry is necessary to align
institute with industry requirement for academic inputs, course design, R&D so as to increase
employability which would benefit students, faculty, industry and society at large alike.
3.7 The Committee would, however like to point out that in our country, there are well-
established institutes that are fully funded by the Government and there are institutes that
are privately funded. The Committee strongly feels that instead of having IIITs under the
PPP mode, what needs to be encouraged are industry academia collaborations. An individual
entity having a stake on the ownership might give rise to conflict between the welfare
objective of the Government and the profit motive of the industry a few years down the
line. Nobody can deny the fact that IITs and NITs are functioning remarkably well and are
known worldwide for their excellence despite no industry having a stake in their ownership.
In fact, industries now compete to associate themselves with these institutes for the quality
of graduates they produce every year.
3.8 The Committee strongly feels that instead of locating industry partners for investing
in IIITs, the Bill should suggest locating them for informal and formal collaborations for
purely academic and industrial research-oriented purposes. Industrial training can be made
part of the curriculum in these institutes where industry partners can participate in terms
of teaching and imparting practical skills. Similarly, extended industry internship can be
made compulsory for all UG students in their third/fourth year. Private partners can also
play a role in sponsoring industry oriented research rather than funding them. Instead of
administration and management of the Institute, the industry partner should be engaged in
purely academic and research oriented activities.
Regional Balancing
3.9 It is an undisputed fact that the recent decades have seen tremendous growth in the setting
up of technical institutions in the country with the maximum intake showing in information
technology. Private sector has been the major contributor by establishing a large number of
institutions. In the recent years, Central Government has also come forward by increasing the
number of IITs, NITs and IIMs. The Committee has been given to understand that the proposal
for twenty new IIITs is a step in that direction.
3.10 The Committee, through its various Reports from time to time has been voicing its concern
on the increasing element of regional imbalancing in the setting up of higher education institutions
in the country. Southern and Western region of the country have seen the major influx of such

9
institutions. This trend has led to a situation where job placements have failed to match the sharp
increase in the intake capacity. According to AICTE figures, between 2007-08 and 2011-12, the
number of seats in Engineering and Technology Institutions has risen by a whopping 130.8%.
State-wise percentage of unemployed engineers, according to the Institute of Applied Manpower
Research (2007) shows that percentage of unemployed Electronics Engineers was 22.28%. The
Committee has no doubt that the latest figures would indicate a more dismal position. Another allied
aspect is the great demand of IT related courses by students. This has led to a situation where
main focus of technical institutions, especially in the private sector is on making available more and
more such courses to the detriment of other core areas of technology. This increase is also there
in the Government Sector with substantive addition in the number of IITs and NITs.
3.11  In such a scenario, the right approach would have been to make an assessment about the
ground level and start the process of setting up of IIITs only in those areas not having such
institutions. Unfortunately, Committee’s specific query in this regard has elicited a negative reply
from the Department. Proposals were invited from all the States for IIITs based on their
commitment to contribute funds, land free of cost and encumbrances. The Department had clarified
that the location for each IIIT was a well-thought decision arrived at by a careful consideration
of all factors like:
– presence of a number of IT parks and IT SEZs to enable the institute to leverage the
good quality infrastructure.
– presence of leading IT companies will enable the development of academia industry
linkages.
– presence of non-IT industry will enable the IIIT to develop domain specialization.
– availability of infrastructure including good connectivity, local transport, clean city
Environment.
– location should allow for future expansion of the institute.
3.12 On this issue being raised again by the Committee, the Department pointed out that a
Detailed Project Report (DPR) to establish twenty IIITs in the country was sent to the Planning
Commission for in-principle-approval in 2006. The Planning Commission asked the Department to
explore the possibility of the establishment of these IIITs in PPP mode as this provided the
necessary forward and backward linkages. Subsequently, a Task Force was constituted to
deliberate on the operational details of setting up the IIITs in PPP mode.
3.13 The Committee can only say that the above response of the Department clearly
establishes the fact that the most crucial issue about the requirement of IIITs at the
ground level has remained unaddressed right from the beginning. The very fact that the
Department approached all the State Governments for coming forward with their proposals
for IIITs indicates that the location of these IIITs was not that important. The number of
proposed IIITs was also decided at the initial stage. The Committee is not aware about the
rationale for arriving at the figure of twenty IIITs.
3.14 The Committee would like to point out that the factors as indicated by the
Department are to be taken into account along with the implications of other similar
institutions already functioning in that area. If already excess number of IT institutions is
there, then benefits as enumerated above are essentially going to get diluted. The
Committee finds that among the twenty States agreeing to set up IIITs, majority of States
from N-E region, J&K and Uttarakhand have not come forward. Proposal from the State of
Madhya Pradesh, already having two well established Centrally-funded IIITs has also been
approved. Also, major States like Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and

10
Maharashtra, having both Government and private technical institutions have shown their
interest by responding with their proposals. The Committee has very serious apprehensions
about the ground-level situation prevailing in majority of technical institutions in such
States. Not only considerable number of seats are going vacant, large number of students
fail to get campus placements. The vision of the proposed IIITs to address the challenges
faced by the Indian IT industry in terms of domain specific skill deficit for the growing IT
market in India and the world over is well-received. But the fact remains that ground level
situation should have been the decisive factor for setting up an IIIT. Ideally, a gradual
beginning should have been made. In the case of NITs, the existing RECs were converted
into statutory bodies with only four pre-identified well-established State institutions being
given the same status.
Issue of Faculty Shortage
3.15 The Committee has been voicing its concern on the acute shortage of faculty in higher
educational institutions across the country. Right from well-established Central Universities to those
set up recently, State universities as well as private universities, premier institutions like IITs, NITs
and IIMs, this problem has emerged as the biggest handicap. Situation continues to be grim with
no improvement foreseen in the near future.
3.16 Feedback relating to availability of required faculty in the existing IIITs made available to
the Committee revealed that IIITs were also facing the same problem. The representatives of IIIT,
Hyderabad submitted that IIIT, Hyderabad currently had 78 full time faculty members, out of the
sanctioned strength of 100. The Committee was given to understand that the faculty recruitment
was very competitive which went on year-round. Against the sanctioned strength of 50 faculty
positions in IIIT, Bangalore, currently the Institute had 30 full time regular faculty and 9 part time
visiting faculty. The Committee observed that the position was no different in the four Centrally-
funded IIITs. In IIIT, Allahabad, against the sanctioned strength of 109 faculty, 49 were permanent
faculty and 66 were visiting faculty. In IIIT, Gwalior, against the sanctioned 47 faculty, 27 were
permanent faculty and 20 were visiting faculty. Position was better in IIIT, Jabalpur with there
being 49 permanent faculty against the sanctioned strength of 55 faculty. However, in IIIT,
Kancheepuram, out of 42 sanctioned faculty, only 19 faculty members were in position. On this
issue being taken up with the Department, it was submitted that the reasons for large number of
vacancies in the IIITs of Allahabad, Jabalpur, Gwalior and Kancheepuram were as follows:
– These IIITs were at par with IITs in 5th Pay Commission. However, in 6th Pay
Commission, the pay structure of these IIITs was made at par with NITs, so it was
not very attractive to get faculty in these IIITs. However, now an order to bring them
in parity with IIT Pay Scales has been issued, so the faculty situation is expected to
improve.
– Alternative job opportunities are good in IT and Management.
– Minimum qualification at entry level is Ph.D. Qualification and quality candidates are
not available.
– For senior level positions, teachers from existing institutions of higher learning with old
pension scheme do not apply as the IIITD&M-Jabalpur is under new pension scheme,
so they may lose their pension benefits. MHRD is trying to address this issue in
consultation with the Department of Pensions.
3.17 When asked to substantiate the steps taken for augmenting the faculty in IIITs, the
Department submitted that availability of top of the line faculty was critical to the success of the
IIIT initiative. There was a need to provide a research-oriented environment, sustainable faculty

11
development initiatives and market driven compensation to attract and retain good faculty. Each
IIIT would enter into formal collaborations with premier academic institutions in India ( e.g. IITs
and IIIT, Hyderabad etc.) and overseas which would not only help in faculty development, but
would also lead to collaborative research. Another important element would be to encourage the
corporate partners for each institute to depute experienced professionals as faculty to the IIIT for
an extended period. The scheme for setting up of 20 new IIITs in the PPP mode provided for a
Faculty Development Programme for which `50.00 crore would be provided by the Central
Government. National knowledge network and new mode of online education would also be utilized
for filling the gap between the sanctioned strength and actual number of faculty. Existing IIITs will
play the role of mentor for developing faculty. The new IIIT in PPP mode in Chittoor established
in Andhra Pradesh under this scheme proposed to meet some of junior faculty requirements through
lecturers cum PhD students, who were expected to teach as well pursue PhD program in parallel
from IIIT-Hyderabad. Aggressive efforts were also envisaged to attract and retain faculty in
collaboration with industry partners.
3.18 It is an undisputed fact that the problem of shortage of faculty persists and ails most
of universities/institutions of the country. The Committee notes that a number of initiatives
are proposed to be taken by the Department to tackle this challenge in the proposed IIITs.
The various measures proposed to be initiated can only be termed as long-term planning
whose impact will be evident after a considerable time-gap. The Committee fails to
understand as to how such a major requirement of qualified faculty can be met for as many
as twenty IIITs to be set up in the near future. Not only this, in view of the ever-increasing
demand of IT professionals the world over, chances of young IT students, getting attractive
job offers on completion of their B.Tech courses, going for teaching profession are very less.
The Committee strongly feels that merely declaring IIITs as Institutions of National
Importance will not serve any purpose. The main objective of every educational institution
is to impart quality education to its students and this could be done by qualified and
experienced faculty only. In other words, teachers are the foundation stone on which the
edifice of every institution is structured.
3.19 The Committee is also of the view that other technological interventions, such as the
one based on MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) run by IITs can prove to be helpful
especially in view of its likely immediate impact. The Committee can only reiterate that
this aspect has to be given top priority. The other viable option likely to show immediate
results would be to utilize the services of available teachers to the maximum through means
of information technology like video-conferencing by having the facility of a single teacher
teaching the students of more than one IIIT at the same time.
Status of Centrally-funded IIITS and the proposed IIITS on PPP Mode
3.20 The Committee observes that the Bill seeks to incorporate the existing four IIITs as well as
the proposed twenty IIITs as Institutions of National Importance. Out of the four existing IIITs, IIIT
Allahabad and Gwalior have been in existence since 1999-00 and 1998-99 respectively. Similarly, IIIT,
Jabalpur and Kancheepuram were set up in 2005-06 and 2007-08 respectively. Over the years, these
IIITs have been functioning satisfactorily in all their designated areas. IIITs at Allahabad, Gwalior and
Jabalpur have been declared as deemed to be universities. Student placement records over the years
have also continued to be very impressive. In other words, the four Centrally-funded IIITs as well
as IIITs, Bangalore and Hyderabad have been equally successful.
3.21 When this issue was taken up with the Department, the Committee was informed that with
the enactment of the proposed legislation, the four centrally-funded IIITs will be accorded an
independent statutory status and also declared as Institutions of National Importance. These IIITs

12
will also be part of the proposed IIIT Council with a view to co-ordinate their activities, ensure
peer learning and have across-the-IIITs linkages for net-worked research and programmes. The
Committee was given to understand that the governing structure remained pre-dominantly the same
except for the mode of selection of Chairman, Director and the industry representatives on the
Board of IIITs. In case of centrally-funded IIITs, the Search-cum-Selection Committee will have
two nominations from the Central Government and one nomination by the State Government. In
case of PPP mode IIITs, Chairman will be appointed by a Search-cum-Selection Committee which
will have one nominee each of the Centre, State and industry partners. Further, the process of
selection of the Director will be different in case of existing Government, IIITs to the extent that
the nominee of the industry would be replaced by that of the Central Government.
3.22 The Committee is not able to reconcile with the clarification given by the Department. On
the one had as pointed out by the Department, the centrally-funded IIITs will be getting a statutory
status, it has also been mentioned that their existing structure will continue. These institutions are
registered as societies with a BOG with representation from the Ministry, industry, academia and
State Government. The Committee would, however, like to point out that as provided in clause 4(1)
and in the schedule, the four existing centrally-funded IIITs will no longer be registered societies
but statutory bodies.
3.23 The Committee observes that with the enactment of the proposed legislation, the
existing centrally-funded IIITs as well as the proposed IIITs to be set up on PPP mode will
be having the same status and will be functioning in accordance with the provisions of the
new Act. However, the Committee is surprised to note lack of clarity in view of the existing
four IIITs continuing to get the support of Central funding whereas the proposed IIITs
would not be getting any financial support at the Central and State level after five years.
The Committee understands that Central/State Government nominees would not be having
any hand in decision making in both the categories of IIITs. The Committee fails to find
any justified reasons for such a situation. Instead of Central and State Governments being
involved in the running of proposed IIITs at par with the industry partners their presence
is proposed to be withdrawn even in the case of existing Centrally-funded IIITs. There does
not seem to be any rationale for envisaging the governance structure of IIITs in the
proposed legislation.
3.24 Another issue which is somewhat disturbing is the proposal to declare the yet to be
established IIITs as Institutions of National Importance. The existing Centrally-funded IIITs
and the proposed IIITs cannot be treated at equal footing. Over the years IIITs, Allahabad,
Gwalior, Jabalpur and Kancheepuram have earned their name with the first three IIITs
being given the status of deemed-to-be universities. The Committee would appreciate if this
aspect is reviewed by the Department and appropriate decision taken accordingly.
IV. THE COMMITTEE MAKES RECOMMENDATIONS ON SOME OF THE PROVISIONS
AS FOLLOWS:
Clause 3: Definitions
4.1 Clause 3 deals with definitions. The definition of the term ‘industry partner’, besides
trust and company includes an individual. The Committee is of the opinion that an
individual being considered as an industry partner would not be justified. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends deletion of the same.
V. CLAUSE 9: INSTITUTE TO BE NOT-FOR-PROFIT LEGAL ENTITY
5.1 Clause 9 provides that every Institute shall be a not for profit legal entity and no part of

13
the surplus, if any, in revenue of such Institute, after meeting all expenditure in regard to its
operations under this Act, shall be invested for any purpose other than for the growth and
development of such Institute or for conducting research therein.
5.2 The Committee is of the view that it should be specifically provided that no part of
the surplus could be diverted to the industry partner. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends the addition of the following proviso to clause 9:
“Provided that no part of such surplus revenue shall be appropriated, distributed or
transferred to its industry partner or to any other person.”
VI. CLAUSE 10: INSTITUTE IN PUBLIC-PRIV ATE PARTNERSHIP MODE
6.1 Clause 10 relates to establishment of Institutes in public-private-partnership mode. It
includes provision relating to identification of the industry partner, criteria for proposal for setting
up IIIT and Memorandum of Understanding to be signed by the Central Government, State
Government and industry partner.
6.2 The Committee notes that this clause does not specify the conditions in case the
industry partner puts forth the proposal to pull out of the joint partnership. It is also silent
on a situation arising from the violation of terms and conditions of MoU. The Committee
recommends that relevant provisions in this regard need to be incorporated in the Bill.
VII. CLAUSE 11: ESTABLISHMENT OF INSTITUTE FULLY FUNDED BY CENTRAL
GOVERNMENT
7.1 This clause relates to establishment of an IIIT fully funded by the Central Government.
7.2 The Committee observes that the main objective of the proposed legislation is to declare the
four centrally funded IIIT as Institutions of National Importance and also to establish twenty IIITs
in PPP mode. On a query about having a specific provision for establishment of centrally-funded
IIITs, the Department informed that the rationale for having a provision for setting up of centrally
funded IIITs in the Bill was to enable the Central Government to establish new centrally funded
IIITs when such a need arose, especially in cases where the private industry may not be
forthcoming and a particular State may need it from an economic development perspective to
correct regional imbalances.
7.3 The Committee observes that Chapter III pertains to establishment of Institutes in
public-private partnership mode. Whereas Clause 10 of this Chapter dwells upon IIITs to
be established under PPP mode, clause 11 refers to IIITs fully funded by Central
Government. The Committee strongly feels that governance structure of Centrally-funded
and PPP mode institutions cannot be on a uniform pattern. Both Central and State
Government are the major stakeholders with industry partner being a smaller partner to
them in the case of PPP mode IIITs. So far as Centrally funded IIITs are concerned,
obviously the Central Government is the major stakeholder supported by its State partner.
The Committee would like to point out that ideally, there should have been a separate
Chapter devoted to management and other allied aspects for the centrally funded IIITs.
However, the Bill as drafted treats both the two envisaged categories of IIITs on the same
footing. What is more disturbing is that various provisions as formulated clearly indicate
that governance edifice is meant for a purely private institution. The Committee
expresses its serious apprehensions on the adverse impact likely to emerge in the near
future. The Committee would appreciate if all the relevant provisions are reviewed so as
to bring out the exact set up of both the categories of IIITs. There should not be any
scope of ambiguity.

14
VIII. CLAUSE 12: BOARD OF GOVERNORS
8.1 Clause 12 deals with the composition of the Board of Governors and the Search-cum-
Selection Committee for the appointment of the Chairperson.
8.2 The Committee observes that the 15-member Board of Governors does not have a nominee
either from the Central or the State Government. On this issue being taken up with the Department,
the Committee was informed that IIITs were the specialized institutes in high-end technology.
Therefore, it was thought that the Central Government may be better represented through some of
the centrally-funded technical institutions and research laboratories, which would provide domain
specific expertise. As a result, the Director of IIT, NIT (Central Government Institutions), Vice-
Chancellor of the University in the Zone (Central/State Government) and two representatives of the
research laboratories had been included. There was a representative of the SC/ST community, who
shall be nominated by the State. However, in case of centrally funded IIITs, Central Government’s
nominee was there.
8.3 The Committee finds the above justification given by the Ministry as totally
unconvincing. The Committee would like to emphasize that in the case of centrally-funded
institutions, nominees of both Central and State Government are to be mandatorily there
in all the decision-making bodies. The proposed legislation deals with both centrally-funded
as well as PPP mode IIITs. While the centrally funded IIITs are the total responsibility of
the Central Government, Centre would be contributing 50 per cent of the infrastructure
cost of `128 crore for each IIIT in PPP mode. The Centre will also provide `60.00 crore for
faculty development and up to `10 crore to each such IIIT for the recurring expenditure
during the first five years. State Government will be contributing 35 per cent along with 50-
100 acres land free of cost.
8.4 In such a scenario, the Committee fails to understand the rationale for not having
any nominee from the Central and State Government in the Board of Governors. This is
all the more surprising when private institutions like IIIT, Hyderabad and Bangalore have
Government nominees on their decision-making bodies. The Committee is of the view that
nomination of representatives of centrally-funded technical institutions and research
laboratories will no doubt facilitate dissemination of domain-specific expertise. But it
cannot in any way take the place of representation of Government nominee who will be
having the authority to take a stand on policy issues. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that composition of the Board of Governors may be re-looked into so as to
have the required representation of Government nominees both at the Central and State
level.
IX. CLAUSE 20: REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE OF INSTITUTE
9.1 Clause 20 deals with review of performance of Institute. This review will be carried out
by a Committee to be constituted within seven years of establishment of Institute and thereafter
every fifth year. The recommendations of the Committee are to be laid before both the Houses of
Parliament.
9.2 The Committee observes that this Committee shall consist of members of repute
from relevant fields of teaching, learning and research in the Institute. The Committee is
of the view that such an internal Committee would not be in a position to make an
objective assessment. Association of experts from other institutions/universities would make
the composition of such a Committee balanced. However, this provision alone would not be
adequate enough. Appropriate step would have been to have an independent body for this
purpose.

15
X. CLAUSE 34: COUNCIL OF INSTITUTES
10.1 Clause 34 deals with the Council of the Institutes and its composition.
10.2 According to the Department, this Central Apex Body i.e. IIIT Council would co-ordinate
activities of all the institutes and deliberate on matters of common interest, policy discussion, peer
learning, networked approach to research and academic programmes, besides ensuring transparency
and accountability.
10.3 From a perusal of this provision, it is evident that the IIIT Council consists of a Minister
from Central Government, a Minister in charge of technical education of State Government, the
industry partner of each of the Institutes; Chairpersons of each Institute, Directors of each of the
Institutes, four persons nominated by the Central Government, one each from the Ministry of
Finance, Technical Education, Science and Technology and Information Technology, three persons
from information technology industry and three persons of eminence from academia or civil
society.
10.4 The Committee observes that the Council is a large body having various categories
of representatives. However, there is no representation from bodies like UGC and AICTE.
UGC is an apex body regulating the entire gamut of higher education and AICTE in the
nodal statutory body for technical education. As the proposed IIITs are envisaged to be the
premier technical institutions, it would be appropriate if the representatives of UGC and
AICTE are also included in the Council. The Committee would also like to point out that
representation of Members of Parliament is there in similar bodies of all higher educational
institutions. However, the same is missing in the Council of IIITs. The Committee is of the
view that inclusion of a MP would prove helpful in facilitating the interests of the proposed
IIITs. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the inclusion of all the above-mentioned
authorities/MPs in the Council of IIITs.
XI. CLAUSE 36: FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL
11.1 This clause deals with functions of the Council.
11.2 As per clause 14, one of the functions of the Board would be to fix, by the statutes, fees
and other charges payable by students on a specific query in this regard, the Committee was
informed that there was a wide variation in the fee structure of the privately managed IIITs at
Hyderabad and Bangalore and the four centrally-funded IIITs at Allahabad, Gwalior, Jabalpur and
Kancheepuram. Whereas fees charged for different programmes by IIIT, Hyderabad and Bangalore
are from `1.2 lakhs to `1.6 lakhs, fees being charged by centrally-funded IIITs are `70,000 and
for some programmes even less.
11.3 The Committee is apprehensive that with no uniform fee structure for various
courses in IIITs, any amount of fees could be decided and charged by the respective
institutions which could be a burden on the students, especially the students belonging to
economically weaker sections. The Committee is of the considered view that there is a need
for having a mechanism for providing uniform fees for all the centrally-funded IIITs and
also in the proposed IIITs. Committee’s attention has been drawn by the functions assigned
to the Council of NITs. Out of the various functions, one relates to levying of fees. The
Committee fails to understand the reason for not assigning this function to the Council of
IIITs. With this function assigned to the Board of every IIIT, there would be neither any
element of uniformity nor any outer limit on fees to be charged. The Committee is of the
firm view that like NITs, the proposed IIITs have to exercise their main functions under
the Central Body of Council.

16
XII. GAP AREAS IN THE BILL
12.1 Based on the overall analysis of the Bill, especially in the context of other similar pieces of
legislation, the Committee observes that there are three major gap areas as indicated below:
No Mechanism in the Bill for monitoring/regulating IIITs.
12.2 The proposed Bill envisaging IIITs in PPP mode gives complete autonomy to these
institutions in matters of academics, faculty, personnel, finances, administration etc. These
institutions would enjoy unfettered freedom in financial administration also. They would be free to
evolve their own admission criteria, decide their own fee structure and other charges, appoint
teachers, determine their salaries and service conditions etc. Unlike centrally funded institutions,
PPP mode institutions would not be under the purview of the CAG.
12.3 The Committee was given to understand that the monitoring mechanism was provided in
clause 20 which specified that every institute shall, within seven years from the establishment and
incorporation of such institute under this Act and thereafter at the expiry of every fifth year,
constitute with the prior approval of the Central Government, a Committee to evaluate and review
the performance of such institute in achievement of its objects in the said period.
12.4 The Committee is of the firm view that mere evaluation and review of every IIIT
after seven years after its establishment by an internal Committee and thereafter every
five years cannot take the place of an in-built effective monitoring mechanism having the
presence of independent members for these IIITs. There has to be a balance of autonomy
and accountability if these institutions are to set benchmarks for excellence in their domain
of specialization .
No provision regarding imposition of penalties
12.5 The Committee observes that the proposed legislation does not have any provision regarding
imposition of penalties, monetary or other for contravening the provisions of the Bill or any rules
made thereunder. The Committee notes that there is no provision to tackle a situation where an
industry partner deviates from the Memorandum of Understanding entered into with the Central
Government. On a specific query in this regard, the Committee was informed that the involvement
was voluntary and MoU provided that the efforts of all parties shall be to resolve the issues, if
any, amicably. In case of misunderstandings, the matter shall be placed before the Minister whose
decision shall be final and binding on all three parties.
12.6 The Committee is of the considered view that there might be instances of
contravention of provisions of the Bill or the MoU, more so in view of the autonomy and
flexibility envisaged for IIITs which is likely to increase after five years of their coming
into existence. The Committee strongly feels that a specific provision outlining the kind of
penalties liable to be imposed in case of non-adherence to the terms and conditions can be
easily incorporated in the Bill. Such a provision is required to be there, keeping in view the
kind of autonomy and freedom from bureaucratic control envisaged for the proposed IIITs.
The Committee recommends that a specific provision pertaining to penalties, authority
having the power to impose the same and the procedure therefor may be incorporated in
the Bill.
Absence of Grievance Redressal Mechanism for students and teachers in the Bill
12.7 The Committee observes that there is no provision for a mechanism for redressal of
grievances of teachers and students in the IIITs. There is no mention of any way out for

17
registering complaints of teachers and students and disposing the same by an authority which
would be objective and fair. When this issue was taken up with the Department, Committee’s
attention was drawn to clause 19 which provided that the Board may, by statutes, declare such
other posts as authorities of the Institute and specify the duties and functions of each such
authority. It also provided that the Board may constitute such Committees as it may deem fit for
proper management of affairs of the Institute. Also, once formed, the IIIT council headed by HRD
Minister would be empowered to take up such issues as may be referred to it by the Centre, States
and the Institute. Any grievance can be addressed by the IIIT Council.
12.8 The Committee would like to point out that the Central Universities Act, 2009 has
specific provisions like ‘Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against
students’ and ‘Right to appeal’. Not only this, statutes to be made under the Act are to
provide for the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students
and the University and also the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any
employee or student against the action of any officer or authority of the University.
Similarly, the NIT Act has a provision relating to Tribunal of Arbitration. The Committee
fails to understand the reasons for not having similar provisions in the proposed legislation.
The Committee recommends that all the required provisions as incorporated in other
similar Acts may be incorporated in the proposed legislation also.
XIII.  CONCLUSION
13.1 It is an undisputed fact that our country has made its presence felt in the
information technology industry and is now recognized as a major constituent of the global
information technology services industry. The Committee is also aware that many of our
universities and research organizations are doing commendable work in the field of
information technology in spite of severe shortage of qualified and experienced faculty. The
Committee further observes that many of the industries are relying on information
technology more nowadays and they would be needing increasing trained manpower in the
field of information technology. The objective behind the proposed legislation is laudable.
However, the Committee, after making an in-depth analysis of the Bill has drawn the
attention of the Government to the shortcomings, lack of provisions and contradictions
observed in the Bill in the Report. The Committee would appreciate that necessary
modifications are brought out in the Bill as recommended by it. The Committee is of the
firm view that the right approach would be to set up the IIITs on the pattern of NITs. The
Committee would also appreciate if instead of going for twenty IIITs simultaneously, every
proposal is examined from all conceivable angles and only set up thereafter. Number of
proposed IIITs could be less in the process but the objectives will be more than specific,
balanced and achievable.
14. The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
15. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the
amendments/additions suggested by it.
I6. The Committee would like the Ministry to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill.

18
18
102, South Avenue,
New Delhi-100011
Phone : 011-23795681
Fax : 011-23795683
Mobile : +91 9013180313
K. MADHAV AN SMARAKA MANDIRAM
Nair Thara, Vadakkencherry
Palakkad, Kerala-678683
Phone : 04922-257600
Fax : 04922-257900
Mobile : +91 9447719000
E-mail : pkbijump@gmail.com
P.K. BIJU
Member of Parliament
(Lok Sabha)
Alathur, Kerala
Member:
* Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development
* Consultative Committee for
Information Technology
* Court of Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi
Web Site: www.pkbijump.in
12.12.13
The Indian Institute of Information Technology Bill, 2013: A Dissent Note
Dear Chairman,
The enthusiasm on passing the Indian Institute of Information Technology Bill, 2013 is an
example of another effort by the Government to commercialisation and sabotaging of social justice
in education at the expense of tax payers money. The bill  seeks to four existing IIITs and twenty
new IIITs to be under Public Private Participation (PPP) mode under the guise of producing world
class human resource in the IT sector.
Clause 10 (6.a)  says that
“The investment of capital in establishment of the institute, the respective shares in such
investment of capital of the Central Government, the concerned State Government and the
industry partner, and the phasing of such capital investment over a period of five years”.
It is a matter of grave concern that the basic objective of the bill does not seem to have
been carried forward the expected lines as after a period of five years and the governance -
structure of IIITs is envisaged to undergo a complete change over. In India, till date there has been
no systematic evaluation of successful PPP implementation in any sector. Rather, PPP experiments
in sectors such as basic services such as water and electricity have proven anti-people·
repercussions. In countries with a weak or non-existent regulatory regime, there have been
disastrous consequences. In Africa, Latin America, Eastern Europe and south Asian countries the
process has been often chaotic and counter-productive. In this context, there is no convincing
basis to set up the IIITs under PPP mode and done away to be replaced by the private.
Secondly, according to clause 10 (3.d) one of the criteria for selection of the proposal shall
availability of land (50-100 acres) free of coast provided by the state government. The committee
was further informed that the capital cost of IIIT would be 128.00 crore to be contributed in the
ratio of 50, 35 and 15 per cent by the Central Government, State Government and the industry
respectively. For the North-Eastern States, the ratio would be 57.7, 35 and 7.5 per cent. In
addition, the Central Government would provide 50.00 crore for faculty development programme.
According to definition given by World Bank (2012):
NOTE OF DISSENT

19
PPPs are a partnership between the public (government) A long-term contract between a
private party and a government agency, for providing a public asset or service,  in which
the private party bears significant risk and management responsibility.
Again the International Labour Organization (ILO) and UN defined PPP as:
Public-Private-Partnerships are voluntary and collaborative relationships among various
actors in both public (State) and private (non-State) sectors, in which all participants agree
to work together to achieve a common goal or undertake specific tasks. Partnerships may
serve various  purposes, including advancing  a cause, to implement normative standards or
codes of conduct, or to share and coordinate resources and expertise. They may consist
of a specific single activity, or may evolve  into a set of actions or even  an enduring alliance,
building consensus and ownership with each collaborating organization and its stakeholders.
While they vary considerably, such partnerships are typically established as structured
cooperative efforts with a sharing of responsibilities as well as expertise, resources and
other benefits.
Here only 15 and 7.5 per cent is to be contributed by the private sector. In such a scenario,
the pertinent question is that, what would be the interest of the private sector in sharing the
responsibilities and risk sharing? The logical end of this PPP initiative is privatisation after five
years. It is also pertinent that why such huge major investment by the Government  should be gone
to the hands of private sector?
This would lead to the next scenario that after five years everything would be decided by
the private sector in the IIITs. Clause 8. (1) says that “Every Institute shall be open to all persons
of either sex, irrespective of caste, creed, race, religion, disability, domicile, social or  economic
background”. It generally involves  the introduction of business plans and private sector values in
decision-making using narrowly defined efficiency and financial criteria. Students and teachers
would be treated largely as ‘consumers’ whose needs are assessed purely in terms of the needs
of paying individuals rather than as collective groups whose needs may be contradictory and
unequal. Performance indicators would be adopted which give  greater priority to narrow efficiency
and value for money criteria than to effectiveness of service delivery and the meeting of social
needs.
Another concern is the veracity of the claims in the statement of Objects and reasons of
the IIIT bill 2013. It reads; In order to provide manpower of global standards for the information
technology industry to cater the needs of emerging areas of knowledge economy, education and
training, information technology. For example, In IIIT, Allahabad, against the sanctioned faculty
strength of 109, faculty in position was 19+66 visiting faculty. Out of the sanctioned strength of
47 faculty members in IIIT: Gwalior, permanent faculty was 27 and 20 were visiting faculty. So
far as IIIT, Jabalpur was concerned, out of the sanctioned faculty strength of 55, only 36 were
in position. In IIIT, Kancheepuram, only 18 faculty members were in position against the
sanctioned strength of 42. How these institutions with shortage of faculties can produce world
class manpower. Again, the purpose of IITs bill 2013, as per its statement of Objects and reasons
are not to pursue knowledge in the form of research but only to act an agency to produce
manpower to the industry not to the society.
It is evident by the importance given  to the industry. The following specific role has been
envisaged for the industry partner:–
■ industry to be represented on Board of Governors and to have  a role in appointing
Chairperson and Director.
■ to do joint research projects, create joint IPRs.

20
■ depute industry professionals as adjunct faculty.
■ encourage students to do research projects with Industry professionals as mentors.
■ encourage faculty to have sabbaticals for short period with industry.
■ internship, job opportunities for students of IIITs.
■ offer sponsored Ph.Ds. for employees of Industry.
■ to provide input on course curriculum in line with development in the IT industry.
Taking into account the role assigned to the industry partner the proportion of role that is
being given to the industry partner is disproportionately large compared to the contribution it would
be making towards the cost of establishing the institutions. For five years, contribution of Central
and State Government would be 50 and 35 per cent respectively as compared to 15 per· cent
contribution by industry sector. Not only this, cost of land to be provided by the State
Government, if added to their contribution, increases its share considerably.
The enthusiasm for PPP rests on the idea that the public sector is incapable of delivering
alone, and that partnerships would assist in releasing resources from the private sector to
implement major developmental objectives. But, nobody can deny the fact that IITs and NITs are
functioning remarkably well and are known worldwide for their excellence despite no industry
having a stake in their ownership. In fact, industries now compete to associate themselves with
these institutes for the quality of graduates they produce every year. Then the very argument for
PPP mode would be dubious. The only supervisory role is assigned to an internal committee to
review its performance within seven years and thereafter every five years Central Government has
the power to recommend on only policy-related issues.
Further it is difficult to understand the rationale for not having any nominee from the
Central and State Government in the Board of Governors. This is all the more surprising when
private institutions like IIIT, Hyderabad and Bangalore have Government nominees on their decision-
making bodies.
I have strong reservations against handing over an institution established with full support
from the Central and State Government which continued undiminished for five years to a private
partner having full control over the institution leading to commercialisation. The Government needs
to maintain its involvement, whether in its capacity as partner or regulator. This is especially true
where accountability is critical, cost-shifting present’s problems and above all societal normative
choices and social justice are more important than costs. Hence, I strongly oppose to implement
the “The Indian Institute of Information Technology Bill, 2013” in any of its forms.
Sd/-
P.K. Biju

21
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
I. INTRODUCTION
The Committee welcomes the objective behind the proposed legislation. However, a
plain reading of the Bill raises very pertinent areas of concern. Both the detailed inputs
made available to the Committee and its deliberations have highlighted very visible gaps so
far as status of existing centrally-funded IIITs, mode of setting up the new IIITs, their
governance structure and likely impact on all the envisaged stakeholders is concerned. The
Committee is constrained to observe that the element of in depth examination of the
proposal from all conceivable angles at the initial stage is lacking to a great extent. This
is borne out by the fact that the very basis of IIITs being set up in PPP mode, with no
convincing reasoning therefor is proposed to be done away after five years. (Para 1.10)
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
The Committee is constrained to observe that no serious efforts have been made by
the Department of Higher Education to have wide ranging consultation with all the
stakeholders. State Governments and industry partners are the most crucial stakeholders in
this endeavour envisaging collaboration between the Centre, States and Industry partners.
Simple presentation and discussion by the Joint Secretary, Department of Higher Education
on such an important piece of legislation in the State Education Ministers’ Conference
cannot be considered adequate enough as focussed and issue-specific deliberations cannot
take place in such a large body holding a formal meeting. Rightful course would have been
to secure the specific and pointed reaction to all the conceivable aspects, both direct and
indirect, of the proposed structure of IIITs in a PPP mode by all the stakeholders. This
would have required sharing of inputs and series of intensive deliberations. One cannot
overlook the fact that the States contributing 35 per cent of the capital cost, besides
providing 50-100 acres of land free of cost remain the major stakeholder. Committee’s
attention was also drawn towards a list of industry partners identified by the Department
including private industries such as TCS, Infosys, Tata Motors, CK Birla Groups etc. and
Central/State PSUs such as ONGC, NEEPCO, UP Electronics Corporation, HSIDC (Haryana)
etc. As the details of discussions held with the private industries and Central/State PSUs
have not been shared, the Committee is not aware about their views/suggestions on the Bill.
(Para 2.4)
III. ISSUES OF CONCERN
The Committee strongly feels that there are major shortcomings which relate not
only to the various provisions of the proposed legislation but also have failed to address
some very crucial aspects which should have been incorporated therein. Another worrisome
factor is that the basic objective of the Bill does not seem to have been carried forward
along the expected lines as after a period of five years, the governance structure of the
IIITs is envisaged to undergo a complete change-over. (Para 3.1)
Scheme of Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) mode in setting up of IIITs
The Committee, taking into account the role assigned to the industry partner,
21

22
observes that the proportion of role that is being given to the industry partner is
disproportionately large compared to the contribution it would be making towards the cost
of establishing the institutions. For five years, contribution of Central and State
Government would be 50 and 35 per cent respectively as compared to 15 per cent
contribution by industry sector. Not only this, cost of land to be provided by the State
Government, if added to their contribution, increases its share considerably. Similarly,
Central Government is mandated to provide additional `60 crore . In other words, there is
no justifiable comparison between the Centre-State contribution and the one from the
industry partner. The situation becomes somewhat unrealistic in the context of PPP mode
as this mode,  instead of being a permanent one, can be considered as transitional, because
after five years, these institutions are expected to become fully private. Each IIIT will be
meeting its entire operating expenditure on its own, out of student fees, research and other
internal accruals. The Committee fails to understand the justification for continuing the
public-private characteristic of IIIT only for five years. These IIITs could have easily
continued to have the specified role as assigned in the initial stage. With the Institution
taking roots, it could have started generating its own funds with Central/State share
decreasing accordingly. Another disturbing feature noticed is that even during the first five
years of its existence, the presence of Central and State Governments is simply not there
in all the decision-making authorities of the Institute. The Committee can only say that the
proposed IIITs would be purely private entities from day one of their existence. The only
supervisory role is assigned to an internal Committee to review its performance within
seven years and thereafter every five years Central Government has the power to
recommend on only policy-related issues.  (Para 3.4)
The Committee fails to identify any justification for handing over an institution
established with full support from the Central and State Government which continued
undiminished for five years to a private partner having full control of the institution. In
the name of supervision there is a so-called review by an internal Committee and that too
after a gap of five years. The Committee is of the firm view that the role of the Central
and the State Government cannot be secondary, tertiary or peripheral to the private
industry partners, especially in the light of major contribution being from these authorities.
The governance structure needs re-consideration more so because the Committee
apprehends that this set of educational institutions might become profit-making business
institutions. Therefore, the Central Government and State Governments should not have a
diminished role in decision and policy making of these institutions. Presence of both
Central and State Government has to be there without restrictions of time. (Para 3.5)
The Committee strongly feels that instead of having IIITs under the PPP mode, what
needs to be encouraged are industry academia collaborations. An individual entity having a
stake on the ownership might give rise to conflict between the welfare objective of the
Government and the profit motive of the industry a few years down the line. Nobody can
deny the fact that IITs and NITs are functioning remarkably well and are known worldwide
for their excellence despite no industry having a stake in their ownership. In fact,
industries now compete to associate themselves with these institutes for the quality of
graduates they produce every year. (Para 3.7)
The Committee strongly feels that instead of locating industry partners for investing
in IIITs, the Bill should suggest locating them for informal and formal collaborations for
purely academic and industrial research-oriented purposes. Industrial training can be made
part of the curriculum in these institutes where industry partners can participate in terms
of teaching and imparting practical skills. Similarly, extended industry internship can be
made compulsory for all UG students in their third/fourth year. Private partners can also

23
play a role in sponsoring industry oriented research rather than funding them. Instead of
administration and management of the Institute, the industry partner should be engaged in
purely academic and research oriented activities. (Para 3.8)
The Committee finds that among the twenty States agreeing to set up IIITs, majority
of States from N-E region, J&K and Uttarakhand have not come forward. Proposal from the
State of Madhya Pradesh, already having two well established Centrally-funded IIITs has
also been approved. Also, major States like Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu
and Maharashtra, having both Government and private technical institutions have shown
their interest by responding with their proposals. The Committee has very serious
apprehensions about the ground-level situation prevailing in majority of technical
institutions in such States. Not only considerable number of seats are going vacant, large
number of students fail to get campus placements. The vision of the proposed IIITs to
address the challenges faced by the Indian IT industry in terms of domain specific skill
deficit for the growing IT market in India and the world over is well-received. But the fact
remains that ground level situation should have been the decisive factor for setting up an
IIIT. Ideally, a gradual beginning should have been made. In the case of NITs, the existing
RECs were converted into statutory bodies with only four pre-identified well-established
State institutions being given the same status. (Para 3.14)
Issue of Faculty Shortage
It is an undisputed fact that the problem of shortage of faculty persists and ails most
of universities/institutions of the country. The Committee notes that a number of initiatives
are proposed to be taken by the Department to tackle this challenge in the proposed IIITs.
The various measures proposed to be initiated can only be termed as long-term planning
whose impact will be evident after a considerable time-gap. The Committee fails to
understand as to how such a major requirement of qualified faculty can be met for as many
as twenty IIITs to be set up in the near future. Not only this, in view of the ever-increasing
demand of IT professionals the world over, chances of young IT students, getting attractive
job offers on completion of their B.Tech courses, going for teaching profession are very less.
The Committee strongly feels that merely declaring IIITs as Institutions of National
Importance will not serve any purpose. The main objective of every educational institution
is to impart quality education to its students and this could be done by qualified and
experienced faculty only. In other words, teachers are the foundation stone on which the
edifice of every institution is structured. (Para 3.18)
The Committee is also of the view that other technological interventions, such as the
one based on MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) run by IITs can prove to be helpful
especially in view of its likely immediate impact. The Committee can only reiterate that
this aspect has to be given top priority. The other viable option likely to show immediate
results would be to utilize the services of available teachers to the maximum through means
of information technology like video-conferencing by having the facility of a single teacher
teaching the students of more than one IIIT at the same time. (Para 3.19)
Status of Centrally-funded IIITS and the proposed IIITS on PPP Mode
The Committee observes that with the enactment of the proposed legislation, the
existing Centrally funded IIITs as well as the proposed IIITs to be set up on PPP mode will
be having the same status and will be functioning in accordance with the provisions of the
new Act. However, the Committee is surprised to note lack of clarity in view of the existing
four IIITs continuing to get the support of Central funding whereas the proposed IIITs

24
would not be getting any financial support at the Central and State level after five years.
The Committee understands that Central/State Government nominees would not be having
any hand in decision making in both the categories of IIITs. The Committee fails to find
any justified reasons for such a situation. Instead of Central and State Governments being
involved in the running of proposed IIITs at par with the industry partners their presence
is proposed to be withdrawn even in the case of existing Centrally-funded IIITs. There does
not seem to be any rationale for envisaging the governance structure of IIITs in the
proposed legislation. (Para 3.23)
Another issue which is somewhat disturbing is the proposal to declare the yet to be
established IIITs as Institutions of National Importance. The existing Centrally-funded IIITs
and the proposed IIITs cannot be treated at equal footing. Over the years IIITs, Allahabad,
Gwalior, Jabalpur and Kancheepuram have earned their name with the first three IIITs
being given the status of deemed-to-be universities. The Committee would appreciate if this
aspect is reviewed by the Department and appropriate decision taken accordingly. (Para 3.24)
IV. CLAUSE 3: DEFINITIONS
Clause 3 deals with definitions. The definition of the term ‘industry partner’, besides
trust and company includes an individual. The Committee is of the opinion that an
individual being considered as an industry partner would not be justified. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends deletion of the same. (Para 4.1)
V. CLAUSE 9: INSTITUTE TO BE NOT-FOR-PROFIT LEGAL ENTITY
The Committee is of the view that it should be specifically provided that no part of
the surplus could be diverted to the industry partner. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends the addition of the following proviso to clause 9:
“Provided that no part of such surplus revenue shall be appropriated, distributed or
transferred to its industry partner or to any other person.” (Para 5.2)
VI. CLAUSE 10: INSTITUTE IN PUBLIC-PRIV ATE PARTNERSHIP MODE
The Committee notes that this clause does not specify the conditions in case the
industry partner puts forth the proposal to pull out of the joint partnership. It is also silent
on a situation arising from the violation of terms and conditions of MoU. The Committee
recommends that relevant provisions in this regard need to be incorporated in the Bill.
(Para 6.2)
VII. CLAUSE 11: ESTABLISHMENT OF INSTITUTE FULLY FUNDED BY CENTRAL
GOVERNMENT
The Committee observes that Chapter III pertains to establishment of Institutes in
public-private-partnership mode. Whereas Clause 10 of this Chapter dwells upon IIITs to be
established under PPP mode, clause 11 refers to IIITs fully funded by Central Government.
The Committee strongly feels that governance structure of Centrally-funded and PPP mode
institutions cannot be on a uniform pattern. Both Central and State Government are the
major stakeholders with industry partner being a smaller partner to them in the case of
PPP mode IIITs. So far as Centrally funded IIITs are concerned, obviously the Central
Government is the major stakeholder supported by its State partner. The Committee would
like to point out that ideally, there should have been a separate Chapter devoted to
management and other allied aspects for the centrally funded IIITs. However, the Bill as

25
drafted treats both the two envisaged categories of IIITs on the same footing. What is more
disturbing is that various provisions as formulated clearly indicate that governance edifice
is meant for a purely private institution. The Committee expresses its serious
apprehensions on the adverse impact likely to emerge in the near future. The Committee
would appreciate if all the relevant provisions are reviewed so as to bring out the exact
set up of both the categories of IIITs. There should not be any scope of ambiguity.
(Para 7.3)
VIII. CLAUSE 12: BOARD OF GOVERNORS
The Committee would like to emphasize that in the case of centrally-funded
institutions, nominees of both Central and State Government are to be mandatorily there
in all the decision-making bodies. The proposed legislation deals with both centrally-funded
as well as PPP mode IIITs. While the centrally funded IIITs are the total responsibility of
the Central Government, Centre would be contributing 50 per cent of the infrastructure
cost of `128 crore for each IIIT in PPP mode. The Centre will also provide `60.00 crore for
faculty development and up to `10 crore to each such IIIT for the recurring expenditure
during the first five years. State Government will be contributing 35 per cent along with
50-100 acres land free of cost. (Para 8.3)
The Committee fails to understand the rationale for not having any nominee from
the Central and State Government in the Board of Governors. This is all the more
surprising when private institutions like IIIT, Hyderabad and Bangalore have Government
nominees on their decision-making bodies. The Committee is of the view that nomination
of representatives of centrally-funded technical institutions and research laboratories will no
doubt facilitate dissemination of domain-specific expertise. But it cannot in any way take
the place of representation of Government nominee who will be having the authority to
take a stand on policy issues. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that composition of
the Board of Governors may be re-looked into so as to have the required representation of
Government nominees both at the Central and State level. (Para 8.4)
IX. CLAUSE 20: REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE OF INSTITUTE
The Committee observes that this Committee shall consist of members of repute
from relevant fields of teaching, learning and research in the Institute. The Committee is
of the view that such an internal Committee would not be in a position to make an
objective assessment. Association of experts from other institutions/universities would make
the composition of such a Committee balanced. However, this provision alone would not be
adequate enough. Appropriate step would have been to have an independent body for this
purpose. (Para 9.2)
X. CLAUSE 34: COUNCIL OF INSTITUTES
The Committee observes that the Council is a large body having various categories
of representatives. However, there is no representation from bodies like UGC and AICTE.
UGC is an apex body regulating the entire gamut of higher education and AICTE in the
nodal statutory body for technical education. As the proposed IIITs are envisaged to be the
premier technical institutions, it would be appropriate if the representatives of UGC and
AICTE are also included in the Council. The Committee would also like to point out that
representation of Members of Parliament is there in similar bodies of all higher educational
institutions. However, the same is missing in the Council of IIITs. The Committee is of the
view that inclusion of a MP would prove helpful in facilitating the interests of the proposed

26
IIITs. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the inclusion of all the above-mentioned
authorities/MPs in the Council of IIITs. (Para 10.4)
XI. CLAUSE 36: FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL
The Committee is apprehensive that with no uniform fee structure for various
courses in IIITs, any amount of fees could be decided and charged by the respective
institutions which could be a burden on the students, especially the students belonging to
economically weaker sections. The Committee is of the considered view that there is a need
for having a mechanism for providing uniform fees for all the centrally-funded IIITs and
also in the proposed IIITs. Committee’s attention has been drawn by the functions assigned
to the Council of NITs. Out of the various functions, one relates to levying of fees. The
Committee fails to understand the reason for not assigning this function to the Council of
IIITs. With this function assigned to the Board of every IIIT, there would be neither any
element of uniformity nor any outer limit on fees to be charged. The Committee is of the
firm view that like NITs, the proposed IIITs have to exercise their main functions under
the Central Body of Council. (Para 11.3)
No Mechanism in the Bill for monitoring/regulating IIITs
The Committee is of the firm view that mere evaluation and review of every IIIT
after seven years after its establishment by an internal Committee and thereafter every
five years cannot take the place of an in-built effective monitoring mechanism having the
presence of independent members for these IIITs. There has to be a balance of autonomy
and accountability if these institutions are to set benchmarks for excellence in their domain
of specialization . (Para 12.4)
No provision regarding imposition of penalties
The Committee is of the considered view that there might be instances of
contravention of provisions of the Bill or the MoU, more so in view of the autonomy and
flexibility envisaged for IIITs which is likely to increase after five years of their coming
into existence. The Committee strongly feels that a specific provision outlining the kind of
penalties liable to be imposed in case of non-adherence to the terms and conditions can be
easily incorporated in the Bill. Such a provision is required to be there, keeping in view the
kind of autonomy and freedom from bureaucratic control envisaged for the proposed IIITs.
The Committee recommends that a specific provision pertaining to penalties, authority
having the power to impose the same and the procedure therefor may be incorporated in
the Bill. (Para 12.6)
Absence of Grievance Redressal Mechanism for students and teachers in the Bill
The Committee would like to point out that the Central Universities Act, 2009 has
specific provisions like ‘Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against
students’ and ‘Right to appeal’. Not only this, statutes to be made under the Act are to
provide for the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students
and the University and also the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any
employee or student against the action of any officer or authority of the University.
Similarly, the NIT Act has a provision relating to Tribunal of Arbitration. The Committee
fails to understand the reasons for not having similar provisions in the proposed legislation.
The Committee recommends that all the required provisions as incorporated in other
similar Acts may be incorporated in the proposed legislation also. (Para 12.8)

27
XIII.  CONCLUSION
The Committee, after making an in-depth analysis of the Bill has drawn the
attention of the Government to the shortcomings, lack of provisions and contradictions
observed in the Bill in the Report. The Committee would appreciate that necessary
modifications are brought out in the Bill as recommended by it. The Committee is of the
firm view that the right approach would be to set up the IIITs on the pattern of NITs. The
Committee would also appreciate if instead of going for twenty IIITs simultaneously, every
proposal is examined from all conceivable angles and only set up thereafter. Number of
proposed IIITs could be less in the process but the objectives will be more than specific,
balanced and achievable. (Para 13.1)

MINUTES

II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the
1st October, 2013 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Derek O’ Brien
6. Shri Baishnab Parida
7. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
8. Shri Tarun Vijay
LOK SABHA
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
11. Shrimati Helen Davidson
12. Dr. Charles Dias
13. Shri Virender Kashyap
14. Shri Mahadeo Singh Khandela
15. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
16. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
17. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
18. Shri M.K. Raghavan
19. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
20. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
21. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana
22. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
31

32
The National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
I. Department of Higher Education
(i) Shri Ashok Thakur, Secretary
(ii) Ms. Amita Sharma, Additional Secretary
(iii) Shri Alok Mishra, Director
(iv) Shri Rajesh Singh, Director
***
III. Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013
(i) Shri S.G. Deshmukh, Director, IIIT, Gwalior
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on the ***  ***
and Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013. *** ***.
3. * * *
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of  the Secretary and other officials of
Department of Higher Education on the ***  *** Indian Institutes of Information Technology
Bill, 2013 followed by presentations on both the Bills. The members raised some queries on both
the Bills which were replied to by the Secretary.  The Committee decided to forward questionnaire
on both the Bills to the Department of Higher Education for their written comments.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 2.10 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on the 10 th October, 2013.
*** Relates to other matters.

33
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
10th October, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
6. Shri Baishnab Parida
7. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
LOK SABHA
8. Shri  P.K. Biju
9. Shrimati Helen Davidson
10. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
11. Shri Virender Kashyap
12. Shri Mahadeo Singh Khandela
13. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
14. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
15. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
16. Shri M.K. Raghavan
17. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY BILL, 2013
I. Department of Higher Education
(i) Ms. Amita Sharma, Additional Secretary
(iii) Shri Alok Mishra, Director
33

34
II. Representatives of IIITs
(i) Prof. P.J. Narayanan, Director, IIIT, Hyderabad
(ii) Shri Rajagopalan, Professor, IIIT, Bangalore
(ii) Shri Pankaj Jalote, Director, IIIT, Delhi
(iv) Prof. S.G. Deshmukh, Director, IIIT, Gwalior
(v) Dr. Jayanti Ravi, Commissioner, Technical Education, Government of Gujarat
(vi) Prof. Rajeev Sangal, Director, IIT (BHU), Varanasi
***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the Additional Secretary, Department of Higher Education along with the
representatives of International Institutes of Information Technology, Bangalore and Hyderabad on
the Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013  *** *** ***.
3. The representatives of International Institutes of Information Technology, Hyderabad and
Bangalore then gave a presentation before the Committee, outlining the distinct features of their
respective institutions and also gave their views on the Bill before the Committee.  Members raised
some queries on the Bill which were replied to by the Additional Secretary and the representatives
of the Institutes of Hyderabad and Bangalore.  The Committee decided to forward a list of issues
raised on the various provisions of the Bill to the Department of Higher Education for their written
comments.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.10 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on the 17 th October, 2013.
*** Relates to other matters.

35
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the
5th December, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
2. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
3. Shri Derek O’ Brien
4. Shri Baishnab Parida
5. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
7. Shri P.K. Biju
8. Dr. Charles Dias
9. Shri Virender Kashyap
10. Shri Mahadeo Singh Khandela
11. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
12. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
13. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
14. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
15. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY BILL, 2013
I. Department of Higher Education
(i) Shri Ashok Thakur, Secretary
(ii) Ms. Amita Sharma, Additional Secretary
(iii) Shri Alok Mishra, Director
35

36
II. Representatives of IIITs
(i) Prof. P.J. Narayanan, Director, IIIT, Hyderabad
(ii) Shri Rajagopalan, Professor, IIIT, Bangalore
(iii) Shri S.G . Deshmukh, IIIT, Gwalior
(iv) Shri Rajeev Sangal, Director, IIIT, BHU
(v) Shri Rajeeva Swarup, Principal Secretary, HE, Government of Rajasthan
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on certain issues on
the Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013 and *** *** ***.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Higher
Education on the issues/areas of concern in the Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill,
2013 which were clarified by the Secretary and other officials of the Department. *** ***.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.25 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

37
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
12th December, 2013 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
4. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Baishnab Parida
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
7.  Shri P.K. Biju
8.  Dr. Charles Dias
9.  Shri Virender Kashyap
10.  Shri Mahadeo Singh Khandela
11. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee to
consider and adopt draft 260
th Report on the Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013.
3. The Committee, then, considered and adopted the draft 260 th Report on the Indian Institutes
of Information Technology Bill, 2013. Shri P.K. Biju, M.P., Lok Sabha submitted his note of dissent
on the Bill.
4. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Report in both the Houses
of Parliament on 13
th December, 2013. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence
Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia, M.P. Rajya Sabha and in the absence of both, Dr . Janardhan Waghmare,
M.P. Rajya Sabha to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri P.K. Biju, M.P., Lok Sabha and
in his absence Dr. Charles Dias, M.P. Lok Sabha to lay the Report in the Lok Sabha.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 2.55. 
P.M.
37

ANNEXURES

41
18 March, 2013
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 38 of 2013
THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
BILL, 2013
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Declaration of certain institutions as institutions of national importance.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
T
HE INSTITUTES
4. Establishment and incorporation of Institutes.
5. Effect of incorporation of Institutes.
6. Objects of Institute.
7. Powers and functions of Institutes.
8. Institute to be open to all races, creeds and classes.
9. Institute to be not-for-profit legal entity.
CHAPTER III
E
STABLISHMENT  OF INSTITUTES  IN PUBLIC -PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP  MODE
10. Institute in public-private partnership mode.
11. Establishment of Institute fully funded by Central Government.
CHAPTER IV
THE AUTHORITIES  OF INSTITUTES
12. Board of Governors.
13. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to, members of Board.
14. Powers and functions of Board.
15. Senate.
16. Powers and functions of Senate.
17. Research Council.
18. Director.
19. Other Committees and authorities.
20. Review of performance of Institute.

42
CHAPTER V
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
CLAUSES
21. Grants by Central Government.
22. Fund of Institute.
23. Statutes.
24. Statutes how to be made.
25. Ordinances.
26. Ordinances how to be made.
27. Annual accounts and balance sheet.
28. Books of account to be maintained by Institute.
29. Appointment of auditors.
30. Annual report of Director.
31. Annual meeting of Board to consider statement of accounts.
32. Annual statement of accounts of Institutes fully funded by Central Government.
33. Annual report of each Institute.
CHAPTER VI
T
HE COUNCIL
34. Council of Institutes.
35. Term of office and allowances payable to members of Council.
36. Functions of Council.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
37. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.
38. Returns and information to be provided to Central Government or State Government.
39. Powers of Central Government to issue directions.
40. Institute to be public authority under Right to Information Act.
41. Power of Central Government to make rules.
42. Transitional provisions.
43. Power to remove difficulties.
44. Laying of rules and notifications.
THE SCHEDULE.

43
AS I NTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
ON 26 TH N OVEMBER , 2012
Bill No. 38 of 2013
THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to declare certain institutions of information technology to be
institutions of national importance with a view to develop
new knowledge in information technology and to provide
manpower of global standards for the information technology
industry and to establish other Institutions of Information
Technology and to provide for certain other matters connected
with such institutions or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Institutes of
Information Technology Act, 2013.
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Whereas the objects of the institutes mentioned in the
Schedule are such as to make them institutions of national
importance, it is hereby declared that each such institute is an
institution of national importance.
43
Short title and
commencement.
Declaration of
certain
institutions as
institutions of
national
importance.

44
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appointed day” means the date of establishment of
the Indian Institute of Information Technology established
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4;
(b) “Board”, in relation to any Institute, means the
Board of Governors referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 12;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board
appointed under sub-section ( 2) of section 12;
(d) “Council” means the Council established under sub-
section ( 1) of section 34;
(e) “Director” means the Director of the Institute;
(f) “existing Institute” means the Institute mentioned in
column (3) of the Schedule;
(g) “industry partner” means an individual, or a trust
established under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, or company
established under the Companies Act, 1956, or society formed
and registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or
a combination of one or more of such industry partner,
having interest in the information technology industry or
related areas, and providing, under a scheme of the Central
Government, funds for capital investment for establishment of
an Institute and for its maintenance;
(h) “Institute” means any of the institutions mentioned
in column (5) of the Schedule and such other Institutes
established under section 10 or section 11;
(i) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette and the expression “notify” shall be construed
accordingly;
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(k) “public-private partnership mode” means such
partnership under a scheme of the Central Government which
provides for establishment of Institute involving collaboration
between the Central Government, State Government and the
industry partner;
(l) “Schedule” means the Schedule to this Act;
(m) “Senate”, in relation to any Institute, means the
Senate thereof;
(n) “Statutes” and “Ordinances”, in relation to any
Institute, mean the Statutes and Ordinances of that Institute
made under this Act.
Definitions.
2 of 1882.
1 of 1956
21 of 1860.

45
CHAPTER II
THE INSTITUTES
4. ( 1) ( a) On and from the commencement of this Act, every
existing Institute, shall be a body corporate by the same name as
mentioned in column ( 5) of the said Schedule.
(b) On and from the appointed day, any other Institute
of Information Technology as may be established under
section 10 or section 11 shall be a body corporate by such
name as the Central Government may notify.
(2) Every existing Institute or any Institute established under
clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) shall have perpetual succession and a
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract, and shall, by its name, sue or be sued.
5. On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(a) any reference to any existing Institute in any
contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference
to the corresponding Institute mentioned in column ( 5) of the
Schedule;
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, of or
belonging to every existing Institute shall vest in the
corresponding Institute mentioned in column ( 5) of the
Schedule;
(c) all the rights, debts and other liabilities of every
existing Institute shall be transferred to, and be the rights
and liabilities of, the corresponding Institute mentioned in
column ( 5) of the Schedule;
(d) every person employed by any existing Institute,
immediately before such commencement, shall hold his office
or service in the corresponding Institute mentioned in
column ( 5) of the Schedule, by the same tenure, at the same
remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and
with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave,
gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have
held the same if this Act had not been enacted and shall
continue to do so unless and until his employment is
terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and the terms
and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable
to such employee, his employment may be terminated by the
Institute in accordance with the terms of the contract with
the employee or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf,
on payment to him by the Institute of compensation
equivalent to three months’ remuneration in case of permanent
Establishment
and
incorporation
of Institutes.
Effect of
incorporation
of Institutes.

46
employees and one month’s remuneration in the case of other
employees:
Provided further that any reference, by whatever form
of words, to the Director, Registrar or other officer of any
existing Institute mentioned in column ( 3) of the Schedule in
any law for the time being in force, or in any instrument or
other document, shall be deemed as a reference to the
Director, Registrar or other officer of the corresponding
Institute mentioned in column ( 5) of the Schedule;
(e) every person pursuing any academic or research
course, immediately before such commencement in any
existing Institute, shall be deemed to have registered with the
corresponding Institute mentioned in column ( 5) of the said
Schedule at the same level of course in such Institute;
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted by or
against the existing Institute, immediately before such
commencement, may continue by or against the
corresponding Institute mentioned in column ( 5) of the
Schedule.
6. The objects of every Institute shall be to––
(a) emerge as one amongst the foremost institutions in
information technology and allied fields of knowledge;
(b) advance new knowledge and innovation in
information technology and allied fields to empower the nation
to the forefront in the global context;
(c) develop competent and capable youth imbued with
the spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship with the social
and environmental orientation to meet the knowledge needs of
the country and provide global leadership in information
technology and allied fields;
(d) promote and provide transparency of highest order
in matters of admission, appointment to various positions,
academic evaluation, administration and finance.
7. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute shall
exercise the following powers and functions, namely:—
(a) to provide for instructions in such fields of
knowledge relating to information technology and allied areas
as the Institute may think fit, for the advancement of learning
and dissemination of knowledge;
(b) to lead, organise and conduct research and
innovation in information technology and allied fields of
knowledge in such manner as the Institute may think fit,
including collaboration or association with any other Institute,
educational institution, research organisation or body corporate;
Objects of
Institute.
Powers and
functions of
Institutes.

47
(c) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas
and other academic distinctions or titles and to confer
honorary degree;
(d) to institute teaching, research or other academic
positions, required by the Institute with such designations as
it may deem fit, and to appoint persons on tenure, term or
otherwise to such positions;
(e) to appoint persons working in any other Institute or
educational institution or involved in research of significance
in any industry as adjunct, guest or visiting faculty of the
Institute on such terms and for such duration as the Institute
may decide;
(f) to create administrative and other posts and to make
appointments thereto;
(g) to make provision for dissemination of knowledge
emerging from research and for that purpose to enter into
such arrangements, including consultancy and advisory
services, with other institutions, industry, civil society or
other organisations, as the Institute may consider necessary;
(h) to determine, specify and receive payment of fees
and other charges, as the Institute may deem fit, from
students and any other person, institution or body corporate
for instructions and other services, including training,
consultancy and advisory services, provided by the Institute;
(i) to deal with any property belonging to, or vested in,
the Institute in such manner as the Institute may deem fit for
advancement of the objects of the Institute:
Provided that no land or other immovable property shall
be disposed of by the Institute without the prior approval of
the Central Government:
Provided further that where the land for the Institute
has been provided free of cost by a State Government, such
land may be disposed of only with the prior approval of such
State Government;
(j) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions
from the Government and to receive bequests, donations and
transfer of movable or immovable properties from testators,
donors or transferors, as the case may be;
(k) to establish and maintain such infrastructure as may
be necessary;
(l) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships,
exhibitions, prizes and medals; and
(m) to do all such things as may be necessary,
incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of the
objects of the Institute.

48
8. (1) Every Institute shall be open to all persons of either
sex, irrespective of caste, creed, race, religion, disability, domicile,
social or economic background.
(2) Admissions to every course or programme of study in
each Institute shall be based on merit assessed through transparent
and reasonable criteria disclosed through its prospectus, prior to the
commencement of the process of admission by such Institute:
Provided that every such Institute shall be a Central
Educational Institution for the purposes of the Central Educational
Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006.
9. Every Institute shall be a not-for-profit legal entity and no
part of the surplus, if any, in revenue of such Institute, after
meeting all expenditure in regard to its operations under this Act,
shall be invested for any purpose other than for the growth and
development of such Institute or for conducting research therein.
CHAPTER III
E
STABLISHMENT  OF INSTITUTES  IN PUBLIC -PRIV ATE-PARTNERSHIP  MODE
10. (1) A State Government may establish an Institute under
this Act.
(2) For the purposes of establishment of an Institute in the
public-private-partnership mode, a State Government shall identify
an industry partner for collaboration and submit a proposal to the
Central Government in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall examine the proposal on the
basis of such criteria as may be prescribed and such criteria shall
include the following, namely:—
(a) the investment of capital required for establishing
the proposed Institute and its phasing;
(b) the expertise and standing of the industry partner
referred to in sub-section ( 2) in the field of information
technology;
(c) the assessment of the capability, financial and other
resources of the industry partner to support the Institute;
(d) the availability of adequate land free of cost for
establishment of the Institute;
(e) the availability of, or the commitment of the State
Government to make available, adequate physical and social
infrastructure at the proposed site for establishment of the
Institute;
(f) the commitment of the concerned State Government
and the industry partner for supporting the Institute after its
establishment.
Institute to
be open to all
races, creeds
and classes.
Institute in
public-private-
partnership
mode.
5 of 2007.
Institute to
be not-for-
profit legal
entity.

49
(4) The Central Government with the concurrence of the
concerned State Government may suggest modifications to the
proposal submitted to it under sub-section ( 2), if any.
(5) The Central Government shall, on acceptance of the
proposal with modifications, if any, under sub-section ( 4), enter into
a memorandum of understanding or an agreement with the
concerned State Government and the industry partner for the
establishment of the proposed Institute, subject to the provisions of
this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(6) Every memorandum of understanding or agreement
referred to in sub-section ( 5) shall contain,—
(a) the investment of capital in establishment of the
Institute, the respective shares in such investment of capital
of the Central Government, the concerned State Government
and the industry partner, and the phasing of such capital
investment over a period of five years;
(b) the first Statutes of the Institute;
(c) the commitment of the Central Government, the
concerned State Government and the industry partner in
ensuring autonomy to the proposed Institute.
(7) Where a proposal submitted by the State Government
under sub-section ( 2) is not acceptable to the Central Government,
it shall communicate its decision to that State Government,
specifying the reasons for such decision.
11. (1) The Central Government may establish an Institute
fully funded by it.
(2) Nothing contained in section 10 shall apply to an Institute
established by the Central Government under sub-section ( 1).
CHAPTER IV
T
HE AUTHORITIES  OF INSTITUTES
12. ( 1) The Board of Governors of each Institute shall be the
principal executive body of that Institute.
(2) The Board of Governors of each Institute shall consist of
the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, to be appointed by the Institute as
provided in sub-section ( 3);
(b) two persons from the industry in the field of
information technology, to be appointed by the Institute as
provided in sub-section ( 5);
(c) two persons from leading research laboratories
having research interests in the field of information
Establishment
of Institute
fully funded
by Central
Government.
Board of
Governors.

50
technology, to be appointed by the Institute as provided in
sub-section ( 6);
(d) two persons having special knowledge or practical
experience in respect of education or engineering, to be
appointed by the Institute as provided in sub-section ( 6);
(e) two persons from amongst faculty members of the
Institute to be nominated by the Chairperson in consultation
with the Director and two senior most Deans of the Institute;
(f) the Director of the Indian Institute of Technology
located in the zone in which the Institute is located, ex-
officio ;
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “zone” shall
have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Explanation to
section 11 of the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961;
(g) the Vice-Chancellor of a University in the State, to
be nominated by the State Government in which the Institute
is located, ex-officio ;
(h) one person to represent the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes to be nominated by the State Government;
(i) the Director of the National Institute of Technology
of the State in which the Institute is located, ex officio ;
(j) two senior most Deans of the Institute;
(k) the Director of the Institute who shall be its
Member-Secretary.
(3) The Chairperson shall be appointed by the Institute from
a panel of three names recommended by a Search-cum-Selection
Committee consisting of—
(a) a nominee of the Central Government who shall be
a person of eminence in academia in the field of engineering
or science;
(b) a nominee of the State Government who shall be a
person of eminence in academia in the field of information
technology; and
(c) a nominee of the Central Government, in case of an
Institute fully funded by the Central Government, or by the
industry partner, in case of an Institute established in the
public-private partnership mode, to represent industry.
(4) The Director of the Institute shall be the convenor of the
meetings of the Search-cum-Selection Committee but shall not
participate in its deliberations.
(5) A member of the Board referred to in clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 2) shall be appointed by the Institute on approval of a
59 of 1961.

51
specific name by the Board from a panel of names recommended by
the Central Government, in case of an Institute fully funded by the
Central Government, or by the industry partner, in case of an
Institute established in the public-private-partnership mode.
(6) A member of the Board referred to in clause ( c) or
clause ( d) of sub-section ( 2) shall be appointed by the Institute on
approval of a specific name by the Board from a panel of names
recommended by the Council.
13. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term
of office of the Chairperson or any other member of the Board,
other than an ex-officio member, shall be for a period of five years
from the date of his nomination.
(2) The term of office of an ex-officio member shall continue
so long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member.
(3) The term of office of a member nominated under clause
(e) of sub-section ( 2) of section 12 shall be for a period of two
years from the date of his nomination.
(4) A member of the Board, other than an ex-officio member,
who fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the Board, shall
cease to be a member of the Board.
(5) Members of the Board shall be entitled to such
allowances, as may be specified in the Statutes, for attending
meetings of the Board or as may be convened by the Institute.
14. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of
every Institute shall be responsible for the general superintendence,
direction and control of the affairs of the Institute and shall have the
power to frame, amend, modify or rescind the Statutes and the
Ordinances governing the affairs of the Institute to achieve the
objects specified in section 6.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
Board shall have the following powers, namely:-—
(a) to decide questions of policy relating to the
administration and working of the Institute;
(b) to make Statutes governing the administration,
management and operations of the Institute;
(c) to examine and approve the annual budget estimates
of the Institute;
(d) to examine and approve the plan for development of
the Institute and to identify sources of finance for
implementation of the plan;
(e) to establish departments, faculties or schools of
studies and initiate programmes or courses of study at the
Institute;
Term of office
of, vacancies
among, and
a l l o w a n c e s
payable to,
members of
Board.
Powers and
functions of
Board.

52
(f) to create teaching and other academic posts, to
determine the number of such posts and emoluments thereof
and to define the duties and conditions of service of teachers
and other academic staff:
Provided that the Board shall not take action otherwise
than on consideration of the recommendations of the Senate;
(g) to provide, by the Statutes, the qualifications,
criteria and processes for appointment to teaching and other
posts in the Institute;
(h) to fix, by the Statutes, fees and other charges
payable for pursuit of courses or programmes in the Institute;
(i) to exercise such other powers and perform such
other duties as may be conferred or imposed by this Act or
the Statutes.
(3) The Board may, subject to the provisions of this Act and
the Statutes, delegate such powers and functions to the Senate, the
Research Council, or to the Director or other officer of the
Institution as the Board may deem fit.
(4) The Board shall conduct an annual review of the
performance of the Director with specific reference to his leadership
in the achievement of the objects of the Institute.
(5) The Board shall in exercise of the powers and discharge
of functions strive to provide autonomy in academic matters to the
Senate and departments or faculties or schools, as the case may be.
(6) Where in the opinion of the Chairperson, the situation is
so emergent that an immediate action needs to be taken in the
interest of the Institute, the Chairperson in consultation with the
Director, may, after recording the reasons for his opinion, issue
such order, as he thinks fit:
Provided that such orders shall be submitted for ratification of
the Board in the next meeting.
15. (1) The Senate of every Institute shall consist of the
following persons, namely:–
(a) the Director of the Institute who shall be the
Chairperson of the Senate;
(b) heads of all departments, faculties or schools, as
the case may be, comprising the Institute;
(c) Deans in charge of academic, research and student
affairs in the Institute;
(d) six members of faculty from amongst the
Professors of the Institute to be nominated by the Board;
Senate.

53
(e) three persons of eminence in the field of education
having knowledge of inter-disciplinary field, to be nominated
by the Board; Senate.
(f) three persons of eminence from the fields of
research in information technology or related fields, to be
nominated by the Board;
(g) such other persons to be nominated by the Board to
provide representation in such fields of knowledge or
technology which, in its opinion, are not adequately
represented.
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue
so long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member.
(3) The term of office of a member nominated under
clauses ( d) to ( f) of sub-section ( 1) shall be for a period of three
years from the date of his nomination.
(4) A member of the Senate under clauses ( d) to ( f) of sub-
section ( 1) who fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the
Board, shall cease to be a member of the Board.
16. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and
the Ordinances, the Senate shall be the principal academic body of
the Institute and shall have the power to enact, amend or modify the
Ordinances governing academic matters and the affairs and welfare
of students of the Institute.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
Senate shall have the following powers, namely:—
(a) to specify the criteria and procedure for admission
to courses or programmes of study offered by the Institute;
(b) to recommend the Board to institute teaching and
other academic posts, determination of their number and
emoluments and defining the duties and conditions of service
of teachers and other academic posts;
(c) to recommend the Board about commencement of
new programmes or courses of study;
(d) to specify the broad academic content of
programmes and courses of study and to suggest modifications,
if any;
(e) to specify the academic calendar and approve grant
of degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles;
(f) to exercise such other powers and discharge such
other functions as may be assigned to it, in the Statutes, by
the Board.
Powers and
functions of
Senate.

54
17. ( 1) Every Institute shall establish a Research Council
comprising of the Director and such other members, as may be
specified in the Statutes by the Board.
(2) The Research Council of every Institute shall—
(i) interface with research funding organisations,
industry and civil society to identify potential areas for
research;
(ii) organise and promote research in such Institute or
in collaboration with any institution of higher learning or
research laboratories;
(iii) assist teachers in obtaining funding from external
sources for research projects prepared by them;
(iv) provide, out of the funds placed at its disposal by
the Board, research resources and grant assistance for
research projects proposed to be undertaken by teachers in
such Institute;
(v) provide for incubation of technology applications
emerging from research and to protect and utilise the
intellectual property obtained from research in the Institute;
(vi) make provisions for research and advisory services
and for that purpose enter into such arrangements with other
institutions, industry, civil society or other organisations and
enable the research to be disseminated to industry and society
through such arrangements;
(vii) exercise such other powers and perform such
other functions as may be assigned to it by the Statutes.
18. (1) The Director shall be the principal executive officer of
every Institute and shall be responsible for implementation of the
decisions of the Board and Senate and for the day-to-day
administration of the Institute.
(2) The Director shall exercise such other powers and
discharge such other duties as may be assigned to him by this Act
or the Statutes or Ordinances or delegated by the Board or the
Senate.
(3) The Director shall be appointed by the Board from a panel
of names recommended by a Search-cum-Selection Committee
consisting of—
(a) the Chairperson of the Board;
(b) the Director of the Indian Institute of Technology
of the zone in which the Institute is located;
(c) the nominee of the Central Government, in case of
an Institute fully funded by the Central Government, who
Research
Council.
Director.

55
shall be a person of eminence in academia in the field of
information technology;
(d) three nominees, one each from the Central
Government, the concerned State Government, each of whom
shall be a person of eminence in academia in the field of
information technology, and a nominee of the industry partner
from the information technology industry, in the case of an
Institute established in the public-private partnership mode.
(4) The Director shall, except on account of resignation or
removal, hold office for a period of five years from the date on
which he enters upon his office.
(5) The Director may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the Chairperson, resign from his office.
(6) The Director may be removed by the Board on proven
charges of misbehaviour or misconduct:
Provided that the Director shall not be removed from his
office, except by an order made by the Board after an inquiry
instituted in this behalf by the Board, and after giving him a
reasonable opportunity of being heard:
Provided further that where the institution of an inquiry or
removal of the Director is being considered by the Board, the
Director shall refrain himself from the proceedings of the Board.
(7) The Board may remove the Director from office, if it is
dissatisfied with the functioning of the Institute after review of the
affairs of the Institute under sub section ( 6).
(8) The Board shall initiate the process of appointment in
respect of any vacancy due to arise for the post of Director on
completion of tenure before a period of six months from the date
of arising of such vacancy:
Provided that the process of appointment shall be completed
before such vacancy arises.
(9) Where any casual vacancy has occurred for the post of
Director, the process of appointment in respect of such vacancy
shall be completed within a period of three months from the date of
such vacancy.
19. (1) The constituion, powers and functions of the other
authorities as may be declared by the Statutes shall be such as may
be provided by the Statutes.
(2) The Board may constitute such Committees, as it may
deem fit, for efficient management of affairs of the Institute.
20. ( 1) Every Institute shall, within seven years from the date
of establishment and incorporation of such Institute under this Act
and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, constitute, with
Other
Committees
and authorities.
Review of
performance
of Institute.

56
the prior approval of the Central Government, a Committee to
evaluate and review the performance of such Institute in
achievement of its objects during the said period.
(2) The Committee constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall
consist of members of repute in academia or industry, from relevant
fields of teaching, learning and research in such Institute.
(3) The Committee shall assess the performance of Institute
and make recommendations on—
(a) the extent of fulfilment of the objects of the
Institute mentioned in section 6 and its contribution to the
society;
(b) the promotion of transformational research and its
impact on industry or society;
(c) the advancement of fundamental research;
(d) the establishment of the Institute as amongst the
global leaders in the area of information technology;
(e) the extent of achievement of social equality through
education and research in the Institute; and
(f) such other parameters as the Board may consider
necessary and specify.
(4) The Board shall consider the recommendations referred to
in sub-section ( 3) and take such action as it may deem fit:
Provided that the recommendations of the Committee along
with an explanatory memorandum on the action taken or proposed
to be taken, specifying the reasons thereof, shall be submitted to the
Central Government or to the State Government in case of an
Institute established under section 10 in the public-private
partnership mode and the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be, shall cause such recommendations
to be laid before each House of Parliament or the State Legislature.
(5) The Central Government shall have the power to give
such directions, emanating from the recommendations of the
Committee, on policy relating to national purposes, as it may deem
fit, and the Institute shall comply with such directions:
Provided that if any dispute arises as to whether the direction
is a question of policy relating to national purpose or not, the
decision of the Central Government shall be final.
CHAPTER V
A
CCOUNTS AND AUDIT
21. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to each Institute,
which is fully funded by the Central Government, grants of such
Grants by the
Central
Government.

57
sums of money as are required for supporting the Institute for its
operation, management and maintenance.
(2) The Central Government shall provide to each Institute,
including Institutes established in the public-private-partnership
mode, grants of such sums of money as are required to meet the
expenditure on scholarships or fellowships instituted by it, including
scholarships or fellowships for students from socially and
educationally backward classes or categories of citizens enrolled in
such Institute.
22. ( 1) Every Institute shall maintain a fund to which shall be
credited—
(a) all monies provided by the Central Government or
the State Government or industry partner, as the case may be;
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;
(c) all monies received by the Institute by way of
grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers;
(d) all monies received by the Institute from utilisation
of intellectual property arising from research conducted or
provision of advisory or consultancy services by it; and
(e) all monies received by the Institute in any other
manner or from any other source.
(2) The fund of every Institute shall be applied towards
meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses incurred in
the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act,
furtherance of research in the Institute or in collaboration with other
educational institutions or industry and for capital investment aimed
at the growth and development of the Institute.
23. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the conferment of honorary degrees;
(b) the formation of departments of teaching;
(c) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the
Institute and for admission to the examinations of degrees and
diplomas of the Institute;
(d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships,
exhibitions, medals and prizes;
(e) the term of office and the method of appointment
of officers of the Institute;
(f) the qualifications of teachers of the Institute;
(g) the classification, the method of appointment and
the determination of the terms and conditions of service of
teachers and other staff of the Institute;
Fund of
Institute.
Statutes.

58
(h) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident
funds for the benefit of the officers, teachers and other staff
of the Institute;
(i) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities
of the Institute;
(j) the establishment and maintenance of halls and
hostels;
(k) the conditions of residence of students of the
Institute and the levying of fees for residence in the halls and
hostels and or other charges;
(l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and
members of the Board;
(m) the authentication of the orders and decisions of
the Board;
(n) the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any
Committee, the quorum at such meetings and the procedure
to be followed in the conduct of their business; and
(o) any other matter which is required to be or may be
specified by Statutes or in respect of which provision is to be
made by Statutes.
24. (1) The first Statutes of each Institute shall be framed by
the Board with the prior approval of the Central Government and a
copy of the same shall be laid, as soon as may be, before each
House of Parliament.
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or
additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes in the
manner provided in this section.
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any
amendment or repeal of Statutes shall require the previous approval
of the Central Government.
25. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the
Ordinances of every Institute may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the admission of the students to the Institute;
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees
and diplomas of the Institute;
(c) the conditions under which students shall be
admitted to the degree or diploma courses and to the
examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees
and diplomas;
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships,
scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;
Ordinances.
Statutes how
to be made.

59
(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties
of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;
(f) the conduct of examinations;
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of
the Institute; and
(h) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes
is to be or may be provided for by the Ordinances.
26. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances
shall be made by the Senate.
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from
such date as it may direct, but every Ordinance so made shall be
submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall be considered
by the Board at its next meeting.
(3) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or
cancel any such Ordinance and such Ordinance shall from the date
of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the
case may be.
27. (1) At every annual meeting of the Institute, the Director
shall lay before the Board—
(a) a balance sheet as at the end of the financial year;
(b) a statement of income and expenditure for that
period.
(2) Every balance sheet and statement of income and
expenditure of such Institute shall give a true and fair view of the
state of affairs of such Institute as at the end of the financial year
and shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be in such form
as may be prescribed and in accordance with such general
instructions and accounting standards as may be prescribed, or as
near thereto as circumstances admit.
(3) Where the statement of income and expenditure and the
balance sheet of the Institute do not comply with the accounting
standards, the Institute shall disclose in its statement of income and
expenditure and balance sheet, the following, namely:—
(a) the deviation from the accounting standards;
(b) the reasons for such deviation; and
(c) the financial effect, if any, arising due to such
deviation.
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this section, the
expression “accounting standards” means the standards of
accounting recommended by the Institute of Chartered Accountants
of India constituted under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.
Ordinances
how to be
made.
Annual
accounts and
balance sheet.
38 of 1949.

60
28. (1) Every Institute shall keep proper books of account
with respect to—
(a) all sums of money received and expended by it and
the matters in respect of which the receipt and expenditure
take place;
(b) the assets and liabilities of the Institute;
(c) the properties, movable and immovable of the
Institute.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), proper books of
account shall not be deemed to be kept with respect to the matters
specified therein, if such books are not kept—
(a) as are necessary to give a true and fair view of the
state of affairs of the Institute and to explain its transactions;
and
(b) on accrual basis and according to the double entry
system of accounting.
29. (1) The Board of every Institute shall, before the expiry
of three months prior to the end of the financial year, without
prejudice to the provisions contained in the Comptroller and Auditor
General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 or
any other law for the time being in force containing provisions for
audit of accounts by the Institutes, appoint an auditor or auditors,
on such remuneration, as it thinks fit, to scrutinise the balance sheet
and the statement of income and expenditure of such Institute.
(2) No person appointed as auditor or persons in the
employment of such auditor shall have any direct or indirect
interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter concerning
or related to the administration or operations (except being enrolled
as students) of the Institute.
(3) The provisions of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956
on the qualifications and disqualifications of auditor shall apply,
mutatis mutandis, for appointment of an auditor under this Act.
(4) Every auditor of each Institute shall have such powers
and perform such duties as the auditor may think necessary for the
performance of his duties as an auditor and as are available to, or
are required of, such auditor under the Companies Act, 1956.
30. (1) There shall be attached to every statement of accounts
laid before the Board of each Institute, a report by its Director, with
respect to—
(a) the state of affairs of such Institute;
(b) the amounts, if any, which it proposes to carry to
any surplus reserves in its balance sheet;
Books of
account to be
maintained by
Institute.
Appointment
of auditors.
Annual report
of Director.
56 of 1971.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.

61
(c) the extent to which understatement or
overstatement of any surplus of income over expenditure or
any shortfall of expenditure over income has been indicated
in the auditor’s report and the reasons for such
understatement or overstatement;
(d) the productivity of research projects undertaken by
the Institute measured in accordance with such norms as may
be specified by any statutory regulatory authority;
(e) appointment of the officers and teachers of the
Institute; and
(f) benchmark and internal standards set by the
Institute, including the nature of innovations in teaching,
research and application of knowledge.
(2) The report of the Director shall also include a statement
showing the name of the five officers and other employees of the
Institute who received the highest remuneration (including
allowances and other payments made to such employee) during the
preceding financial year and the contributions made by such
employees during the financial year.
(3) The statement referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall indicate
whether any such employee is a relative of any member of the
Board or Senate of the Institute and if so, the name of such
member and such other particulars as may be required.
(4) The Director shall also be bound to give the complete
information and explanations in its report on every reservation,
qualification or adverse remark contained in the auditors’ report.
31. ( 1) The statement of accounts, including the balance
sheet and the statement of income and expenditure, the auditor’s
report, the report of the Director and other documents required to
be annexed or attached with such statement, shall be brought before
the Board in its meeting at such time immediately, but not later than
three months, from the conclusion of the financial year.
(2) A copy of every statement of accounts (including the
balance sheet, statement of income and expenditure, the auditors’
report and every other document required to be annexed or attached
to balance sheet) which is to be laid before the Board of each
Institute shall, not less than twenty-one days before the date of the
meeting, be sent to every member of the Board.
(3) After the statement of accounts referred to in sub-
section ( 1) has been laid before the Board of each Institute, such
balance sheet, statement of income and expenditure and other
documents shall be published and placed on the website of such
Institute.
Annual
meeting of
Board to
consider
statement of
accounts.

62
32. ( 1) The statement of accounts of each Institute, which is
fully funded by the Central Government, shall be audited by such
auditor as may be appointed in this behalf by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of each Institute, which is fully funded by the Central
Government, shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India has in connection with the audit of the Central Government
accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other
documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the Institute.
(3) A copy of the statement of accounts including the balance
sheet and the statement of income and expenditure, the auditor’s
report, the report of the Director and other documents required to
be attached with such statement, shall be submitted to the Central
Government, and that Government shall, as soon as may be, cause
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
33. (1) The annual report of each Institute shall be prepared
under the direction of the Board, which shall include, among other
matters, the steps taken by the Institute towards the fulfilment of its
objects and an outcome based assessment of the research being
undertaken in such Institute, and be submitted to the Board on or
before such date as may be specified and the Board shall consider
the report in its annual meeting.
(2) The annual report as approved by the Board shall be
published and placed on the website of the Institute.
(3) The annual report of each Institute which is fully funded
by the Central Government shall be submitted to the Central
Government who shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be
laid before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
THE COUNCIL
34. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf, there shall be established
for all the Institutes specified in column ( 5) of the Schedule, a
central body to be called the Council.
(2) The Council shall consist of the following members,
namely:––
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government having administrative
control of the technical education, ex officio , as Chairperson;
Annual
statement of
accounts of
Institute fully
funded by
Central
Government.
Annual report
of each
Institute.
Council of
Institutes.

63
(b) the Minister in charge of technical education of
State Governments of such States where the Institutes are
located, ex officio ;
(c) the industry partner of each of the Institutes
established in the public-private-partnership mode;
(d) the Chairpersons of each of the Institutes, ex
officio;
(e) the Directors of each of the Institutes, ex officio ;
(f) four persons to be nominated by the Central
Government, one each to represent the Ministry concerned
with finance, technical education, science and technology and
information technology;
(g) three persons from the information technology
industry to be nominated by the Council , from a panel
comprised of two names recommended by each Institute;
(h) three persons of eminence in research in
information technology to be nominated by the Council , from
a panel comprised of two names recommended by each
Institute;
(i) three persons to represent persons of eminence from
academia or civil society to be nominated by the Council,
from a panel comprised of two names recommended by each
State Government of such States where Institutes are located.
(3) The Council shall have a Secretariat with a Secretary to
be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Council may constitute a Standing Committee of the
Indian Institute of Information Technology Council to assist the
Council in discharge of its duties and responsibilities.
(5) The expenditure on the Council shall be met by the
Central Government.
35. ( 1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term
of office of a member of the Council, other than an ex officio
member, shall be for a period of three years from the date of
nomination.
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue
so long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member.
(3) The members of the Council shall be entitled to such
other travelling and such other allowances, as may be prescribed,
for attending meetings of the Council or its Committees.
36. ( 1) The Council shall coordinate the activities of all the
Institutes.
Term of
office and
allowances
payable to
members of
Council.
Functions of
Council.

64
(2) Without pre judice  to the provisions of sub-section ( 1),
the Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to recommend to the Central Government, the
institution of scholarships including research and for the
benefit of students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and other socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens;
(b) to recommend to the Central Government, proposals
for establishment of new Institutes of Information Technology
in the public-private-partnership mode;
(c) to deliberate on such matters of common interest to
Institutes as may be referred to it by any Institute;
(d) to perform such other functions as may be referred
to it by the Central Government or any State Government:
Provided that nothing in this section shall derogate the powers
and functions vested by law in the Board or Senate or other
authorities of each Institute.
(3) The Chairperson of the Council shall ordinarily preside at
the meetings of the Council and in his absence any other member,
chosen by the members present from amongst themselves at the
meeting, shall preside at the meeting.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
37. No act of the Council, or any Institute or Board or Senate
or any other body set-up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be
invalid merely by reason of––
(a) any vacancy or defect in the constitution thereof; or
(b) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the
merits of the case; or
(c) any defect in the selection, nomination or
appointment of a person acting as a member thereof.
38. ( 1) Every Institute shall furnish to the Central
Government such returns or other information with respect to its
policies or activities as the Central Government may, for the
purpose of reporting to Parliament or for the making of policy, from
time to time require.
(2) Every Institute, established in the public-private-
partnership mode, shall furnish to the State Government in which
such Institute is located, such returns or other information with
respect to its policies or activities as that Government may, for the
purpose of reporting to the concerned State Legislature or for the
making of policy, from time to time require.
Acts and
proceedings
not to be
invalidated by
vacancies,
etc.
Returns and
information
to be
provided to
Central
Government
or State
Government.

65
39. The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be
issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the
efficient administration of this Act.
40. The provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005 shall
apply to each Institute, including Institutes established in the public-
private-partnership mode, as if it were a public authority defined in
clause ( h) of section 2 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.
41. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which the State
Government shall submit proposal to the Central Government
under sub-section ( 2) of section 10;
(b) the criteria for examination of the proposal of the
State Government under sub-section ( 3) of section 10;
(c) the form of balance sheet and statement of income
and expenditure, and the accounting standards under sub-
section ( 2) of section 27;
(d) the manner of appointment of Secretary under sub-
section ( 3) of section 34;
(e) the travelling and such other allowances payable to
the members of the Council for attending meetings of the
Council or its Committees under sub-section ( 3) of section 35;
(f) any other matter which is to be or may be,
prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be made by
the Central Government by rules.
42. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act––
(a) the Board of every Institute functioning as
such immediately before the commencement of this Act shall
continue to function until a new Board is constituted for that
Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a new
Board under this Act, the members of the Board holding
office before such commencement of this Act shall cease to
hold office;
(b) every Senate constituted in relation to every
Institute before the commencement of this Act shall be
deemed to be the Senate constituted under this Act until a
Senate is constituted under this Act for that Institute, but on
the constitution of the new Senate under this Act, the
Powers of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
22 of 2005. Institute to
be public
authority
under Right
to Information
Act.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
Transitional
provisions.

66
members of the Senate holding office before the
commencement of this Act shall cease to hold office;
(c) the Statutes, Ordinances, rules, regulations and bye-
laws of each existing Institute as in force, immediately before
the commencement of this Act, shall continue to apply to the
corresponding Institute in so far as they are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act until the first Statutes and the
Ordinances are made under this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, without pre judice  to the
provisions of sub-section ( 1), if it considers necessary and
expedient to do so, by notification, take such measures which may
be necessary for the transfer of the existing Institute mentioned in
column ( 3) of the Schedule to the corresponding Institute mentioned
under column ( 5) of the Schedule.
43. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give such
directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as
appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of the period of three years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
44. Every rule made and every notification issued by the
Central Government under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses
agree that the rule or notification should not be made or issued, the
rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Laying of
rules and
notifications.

67
67
THE SCHEDULE
[See section 4( 1)]
Sl. Name of the Name of the Location Name of the
No. State existing Institute Ins titute
incorporated
under this Act
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1. Uttar Indian Institute of Allahabad Indian Institute
Pradesh Allahabad, being a of Information
society Technology, Tec hnology
registered under Information
the Societies Allahabad.
Registration Act,
1860 (21 of 1860)
2. Madhya Atal Bihari Vajpayee Gwalior Atal Bihari
Pradesh Indian Institute of Vajpayee Indian
Information Institute of
Technology and Information
Management, T echnology and
Gwalior, being a Management,
society registered Gwalior.
under the Societies
Registration Act,
1860 (21 of 1860)
3. Madhya Pandit Dwaraka Jabalpur Pandit Dwaraka
Pradesh Prasad  Mishra Prasad Mishra
Indian Institute of Indian Institute
Information of Information
Technology, Design Technology,
and Manufacturing, Design and
Jabalpur, being a Manufacturing,
society registered Jabalpur.
under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860
(21 of 1860)
4. Tamil Nadu Indian Institute of Kanchee- Indian Institute
Information puram of Information
Technology Technology
Design and Design and
Manufacturing, Manufacturing,
Kancheepuram, being Ka ncheepuram.
a society registered
under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860
(21 of 1860)

68
68
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Education is a key element for developing human resources
and contributing to the growth of the society. From relatively small
beginning, the Indian information technology industry has emerged
as a strong and credible force which is now recognised as a major
constituent of the global information technology services industry.
In order to provide manpower of global standards for the
information technology industry to cater the needs of emerging
areas of knowledge economy, education and training, information
technology is a prerequisite.
2. At present, there are four Indian Institutes of Information
Technology (IIITs) established by the Central Government under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) at Gwalior, Allahabad,
Jabalpur and Kancheepuram. To meet the challenges of the Indian
Information Technology Industry, the Ministry of Human Resource
Development intends to establish twenty new Indian Institutes of
Information Technology on Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis.
The partners in setting up the Indian Institute of Information
Technology would be the Ministry of Human Resource Development,
the concerned State Government where such Indian Institute of
Information Technology will be established and the industry as
conceived under the Scheme formulated by the Central Government
in this behalf.
3. The main objective in establishing Indian Institutes of
Information Technology is to set up a model of education which
can produce world class human resource in the field of information
technology. These institutions are conceived as self sustaining,
research-led institutions contributing significantly to the global
competitiveness of key sectors of the Indian economy and industry
with application of information technology in selected domain areas.
4. The Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013
seeks to declare the four existing Indian Institutes of Information
Technology, funded by the Central Government, as Institutions of
National Importance and to provide for the establishment of other
Institutions of Information Technology.
5. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various
provisions contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU.
The 4th December, 2012.

69
69
Notes on clauses
Clause 1 .—This clause provides for the short title and
commencement of the proposed legislation.
Clause 2 .—This clause deals with declaration of certain
institutions as institutions of national importance.
Clause 3 .—This clause provides for definitions of various
expressions used in the proposed legislation, which, inter alia ,
include “appointed day”, “existing Institute”, “industry partner”,
“public-private-partnership mode”, etc.
Clause 4 .—This clause relates to establishment and
incorporation of Institutes. Sub-clause ( a) of clause ( 1) of the said
clause provides that on and from the commencement of the Act—
(a) every existing Institute, shall be a body corporate by the same
name as mentioned under column ( 5) of the said Schedule; ( b) on
and from the appointed day, any other Institutes of Information
Technology as may be established under section 10 or section 11
shall be a body corporate by such name as the Central
Government may, notify. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause
provides that every existing Institute referred to in clause ( a) or
the Institutes established under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) shall
have perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject
to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall,
by the said name, sue or be sued .
Clause 5 .—This clause provides for effect of incorporation
of Institutes. It provides that on and from the date of
commencement of this Act:—( a) any reference to any existing
Institute in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a
reference to the corresponding Institute mentioned in column ( 5)
of the Schedule; ( b) all properties, movable and immovable, of or
belonging to every existing Institute shall vest in the corresponding
Institute mentioned under column ( 5) of the Schedule; ( c) all the
rights, debts and other liabilities of every existing Institute shall be
transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the
corresponding Institute mentioned in column ( 5) of the Schedule;
(d) every person employed by any existing Institute, immediately
before such commencement, shall hold his office or service in the
corresponding Institute mentioned in column ( 5) of the Schedule,
by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same
terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to
pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he
would have held the same if this Act had not been enacted and
shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is

70
terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and the terms and
conditions are duly altered by the Statutes. However, the sub-
clause provides that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to
such employee, his employment may be terminated by the Institute
in accordance with the terms of the contract with the employee
or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment, to
him by the Institute of compensation equivalent to three months’
remuneration in case of permanent employees and one month’s
remuneration in the case of other employees. The said sub-clause
further provides that any reference, by whatever form of words,
to the Director, Registrar or other officer of any existing Institute
mentioned in column ( 3) of the Schedule, in any law for the time
being in force, or in any instrument or other document, shall be
deemed as a reference to the Director, Registrar or other officer
of the corresponding Institute column ( 5) of the Schedule;
(e) every person pursuing, any academic or research course
immediately before such commencement in any existing Institute,
shall be deemed to have registered with the corresponding Institute
mentioned in column ( 5) of the said Schedule at the same level of
course in such Institute; ( f) all suits and other legal proceedings
instituted by or against the existing Institute, immediately before
such commencement, may continue by or against the
corresponding Institute mentioned in column ( 5) of the Schedule.
Clause 6 .—This clause deals with objects of Institutes. It
provides that the objects of every Institute shall be to––( a) emerge
as one amongst the foremost institutions in information technology
and allied fields of knowledge; ( b) advance new knowledge and
innovation in information technology and allied fields to empower
the nation to the forefront in the global context; ( c) develop
competent and capable youth imbued with the spirit of innovation
and entrepreneurship with the social and environmental orientation
to meet the knowledge needs of the country and provide
global leadership in information technology and allied fields;
(d) promote and provide transparency of highest order in matters
of admission, appointment to various positions, academic evaluation,
administration and finance.
Clause 7 .—This clause deals with powers and functions of
Institutes. It provides that subject to the provisions of this Act,
every Institute shall exercise the following powers and perform the
following functions—( a) to provide for instructions in such fields
of knowledge relating to information technology and allied areas as
such Institute may think fit, for the advancement of learning and
dissemination of knowledge; ( b) to lead, organise and conduct
research and innovation in information technology and allied fields
of knowledge in such manner as the Institute may think fit,
including collaboration or association with any other Institute,
educational institution, research organisation or body corporate;
(c) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas and other
academic distinctions or title and to confer honorary degree; ( d) to

71
institute teaching, research or other academic positions, required
by the Institute with such designations as it may deem fit, and to
appoint persons on tenure, term or otherwise to such positions;
(e) to appoint persons working in any other Institute or
educational institution or involved in research of significance in
any industry as adjunct, guest or visiting faculty of the Institute on
such terms and for such duration as the Institute may decide;
(f) to create administrative and other posts and to make
appointments thereto; ( g) to make provision for dissemination of
knowledge emerging from research and for that purpose to enter
into such arrangements including consultancy and advisory
services, with other institutions, industry, civil society or other
organisations, as the Institute may consider necessary; ( h) to
determine, specify and receive payment of fees and other charges,
as the Institute may deem fit, from students and any other person,
institution or body corporate for instructions and other services,
including training, consultancy and advisory services, provided by
the Institute; ( i) to deal with any property belonging to, or vested
in, the Institute in such manner as the Institute may deem fit for
advancement of the objects of the Institute and no land or other
immovable property shall be disposed of by the Institute without
the prior approval of the Central Government and where the land
for the Institute has been provided free of cost by a State
Government, such land may be disposed of only with the prior
approval of such State Government; ( j) to receive gifts, grants,
donations or benefactions from the Government and to receive
bequests, donations and transfer of movable or immovable
properties from testators, donors or transferors, as the case may
be; ( k) to establish and maintain such infrastructure as may be
necessary; ( l) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships,
exhibitions, prizes and medals; and ( m) to do all such things as
may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all
or any of the objects of the Institute.
Clause 8 .—This clause provides that each Institutes shall be
open to all races, creeds and classes. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said
clause provides that every Institute shall be open to all persons of
either sex, irrespective of caste, creed, race, religion, disability,
domicile, social or economic background. Sub-clause ( 2) of the
said clause provides that admissions to every course or programme
of study in each Institute shall be based on merit assessed
through transparent and reasonable criteria disclosed through
its prospectus, prior to the commencement of the process of
admission by such Institute. However, every such Institute shall be
a Central Educational Institution for the purposes of the Central
Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006.
Clause 9 .—It provides that every Institute shall be a not-for-
profit legal entity and no part of the surplus, if any, in revenue of
such Institute, after meeting all expenditure in regard to its
operations under this Act, shall be invested for any purpose other

72
than for the growth and development of such Institute or for
conducting research therein.
Clause 10 .—This clause relates to Institute in public-private
partnership mode. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that a
State Government may establish an Institute under this Act. Sub-
clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that for the purposes of
establishment of an Institute in the public-private partnership mode, a
State Government shall identify an industry partner for collaboration
and submit a proposal to the Central Government in such form and
manner as may be prescribed. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause
provides that the Central Government shall examine the proposal on
the basis of such criteria. However, such criteria for examination shall
include — ( a) the investment of capital required for establishing the
proposed Institute and its phasing; ( b) the expertise and standing of
the industry partner referred to in sub-section ( 2) in the field of
information technology; ( c) assessment of the capability, financial and
other resources of the industry partner to support the Institute;
(d) availability of adequate land free of cost for establishment of the
Institute; ( e) availability of, or the commitment of the State
Government to make available, adequate physical and social
infrastructure at the proposed site for establishment of the Institute;
(f) commitment of the concerned State Government and the industry
partner for supporting the Institute after its establishment. Sub-
clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that the Central Government
with the concurrence of the concerned State Government may
suggest modifications to the proposal submitted to it under sub-
section ( 2), if any. Sub-clause ( 5) of the said clause provides that the
Central Government shall, on acceptance of the proposal with such
modifications as may be concurred in by the State Government, enter
into a memorandum of understanding or an agreement with the
concerned State Government and the industry partners for
establishing proposed Institute subject to the provisions of this Act
and rules made thereunder. Sub-clause ( 6) of the said clause provides
that every memorandum of understanding or agreement referred to in
sub-section ( 5) shall contain,— ( a) the investment of capital in
establishment of the Institute, the respective shares in such
investment of capital of the Central Government, State Government
concerned and the industry partner, and the phasing of such capital
investment over a period of five years; ( b) the first Statutes of the
Institute; ( c) the commitment of the Central Government, the
concerned State Government and the industry partner in ensuring
autonomy to the proposed Institute. Sub-clause ( 7) of the said clause
provides that where the proposal submitted by the State Government
under sub-section ( 2) is not acceptable to the Central Government, it
shall communicate its decision to the State Government, specifying
the reasons for such decision.
Clause 11 .—This clause relates to establishment of Institute
by the Central Government. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause
provides that the Central Government may establish an Institute

73
which shall be fully funded by it. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause
provides that nothing contained in section 10 shall apply to such
an Institute as the Central Government may establish under sub-
section ( 1).
Clause 12 .—This clause deals with the Board of Governors.
Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that the Board of
Governors of each Institute shall be the principal executive body
of that Institute. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that
the Board of Governors of each Institute shall consist of the
following members—( a) a Chairperson, to be appointed by the
Institute in the manner provided in sub-section ( 3); ( b) two
persons from the industry in the field of information technology,
to be appointed by the Institute in the manner provided in sub-
section ( 5); ( c) two persons from leading research laboratories
having research interests in the field of information technology to
be appointed by the Institute as provided in sub-section ( 6);
(d) two persons having special knowledge or practical experience
in respect of education or engineering to be appointed by the
Institute as provided in sub-section ( 6); ( e) two persons from
amongst faculty members of the Institute to be nominated by the
Chairperson in consultation with the Director and two senior most
Deans of the Institute; ( f) Director of the Indian Institute of
Technology located in the zone in which the Institute is located,
ex officio ; ( g) Vice-Chancellor of a University in the State to be
nominated by the State Government in which the Institute is
located, ex officio ; (h) one person to represent the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes to be nominated by the State
Government; ( i) Director of National Institute of Technology of
the State in which the Institute is located, ex officio ; ( j) two
senior most Deans of the Institute; ( k) Director of the Institute
who shall be its Member-Secretary.
Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that the
Chairperson shall be appointed by the Institute from a panel of
three names recommended by a Search-cum-Selection Committee
consisting of — ( a) a nominee of the Central Government who
shall be a person of eminence in academia in the field of
engineering or science; ( b) a nominee of the State Government
who shall be a person of eminence in academia in the field of
information technology; ( c) a nominee of the Central Government,
in case of an Institute fully funded by the Central Government, or
by the industry partner, in case of an Institute established in the
public-private-partnership mode, to represent industry. Sub-
clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that the Director of the
Institute shall be the convenor of the meetings of the Search-cum-
Selection Committee but shall not participate in its deliberations.
Sub-clause ( 5) of the said clause provides that a member of the
Board referred to it in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) shall be
appointed by the Institute on approval of a specific name by the
Board from a panel of names recommended by the Central
Government, in case of an Institute fully funded by the Central

74
Government, or by the industry partner, in case of an Institute
established in the public-private partnership mode. Sub-clause ( 6)
of the said clause provides that a member of the Board referred
to in clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub-section ( 2) shall be appointed
by the Institute on approval of a specific name by the Board from
a panel of names recommended by the Council.
Clause 13 .—This clause deals with term of office of,
vacancies among, and allowances payable to, members of the
Board. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that save as
otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of the
Chairperson or any other member of the Board, other than an ex
officio member, shall be for a period of five years from the date
of his nomination. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that
the term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long
as he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member. Sub-
clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that the term of office
of a member nominated under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 12 shall be for a period of two years from the date of his
nomination. Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that a
member of the Board, other than an ex officio member, who fails
to attend three consecutive meetings of the Board, shall cease to
be a member of the Board. Sub-clause ( 5) of the said clause
provides that members of the Board shall be entitled to such
allowances, as may be specified in the Statutes, for attending
meetings of the Board or as may be convened by the Institute.
Clause 14 .—This clause deals with powers and functions of
the Board. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that subject
to the provisions of this Act, the Board of every Institute shall be
responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control
of the affairs of the Institute and shall have the power to frame,
amend, modify or rescind the Statutes and the Ordinances
governing the affairs of the Institute to achieve the objects
specified in section 6. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides
that without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
Board shall have the following powers ( a) to decide questions of
policy relating to the administration and working of the Institute;
(b) to make Statutes governing the administration, management and
operations of the Institute; ( c) to examine and approve the annual
budget estimates of the Institute; ( d) to examine and approve the
plan for development of the Institute and to identify sources of
finance for implementation of the plan; ( e) to establish
departments, faculties or schools of studies and initiate
programmes or courses of study at the Institute; ( f) to create
teaching and other academic posts, to determine the number and
emoluments of such posts and to define the duties and conditions
of service of teachers and other academic staff and the Board shall
not take action otherwise than on consideration of the
recommendations of the Senate; ( g) to provide, by the Statutes,
the qualifications, criteria and processes for appointment to
teaching and other posts in the Institute; ( h) to fix, by the

75
Statutes, fees and other charges payable for pursuit of courses or
programmes in the Institute; ( i) to exercise such other powers and
perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed by this
Act or the Statutes. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that
the Board may, subject to the provisions of this Act and the
Statutes, delegate such powers and functions to the Senate, the
Research Council, or to the Director or other officer of the
Institution as the Board may deem fit. Sub-clause ( 4) of the said
clause provides that the Board shall conduct an annual review of
the performance of the Director with specific reference to his
leadership in the achievement of the objects of the Institute. Sub-
clause ( 5) of the said clause provides that the Board shall in
exercise of the powers and discharge of functions strive to
provide autonomy in academic matters to the Senate and
departments of faculties or schools, as the case may be. Sub-
clause ( 6) of the said clause provides that where in the opinion of
the Chairperson, the situation is so emergent that an immediate
action needs to be taken in the interest of the Institute, the
Chairperson in consulation with the Director, may, after recording
the reasons for his opinion, issue such order as he thinks fit and
such orders shall be submitted for ratification of the Board in the
next meeting.
Clause 15 .—This clause relates to Senate. Sub-clause ( 1) of
the said clause provides that the Senate of every Institute shall
consist of the following persons — ( a) the Director of the
Institute shall be the Chairperson of the senate; ( b) heads of all
departments, faculties or schools, as the case may be, comprising
the Institute; ( c) Deans in charge of academic, research and
student affairs in the Institute; ( d) six members of faculty from
amongst the Professors of the Institute to be nominated by the
Board; ( e) three persons of eminence in the field of education
having knowledge of inter-disciplinary field, to be nominated by
the Board; ( f) three persons of eminence from the fields of
research in information technology or related fields to be
nominated by the Board; ( g) such other persons to be nominated
by the Board to provide representation in such fields of knowledge
or technology which, in its opinion, are not adequately
represented. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that the
term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as
he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member. Sub-
clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that the term of office of
a member nominated under clauses ( d) to ( f) of sub-section ( 1)
shall be for a period of three years from the date of his
nomination. Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that a
member of the Senate under clauses ( d) to ( f) of sub-section ( 1),
who fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the Board, shall
cease to be a member of the Board.
Clause 16 .—This clause relates to powers and functions of
Senate. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that subject to

76
the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the
Senate shall be the principal academic body of the Institute and
shall have the power to enact, amend, modify the Ordinances
governing academic matters and the affairs and welfare of
students in the Institute. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides
that without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
Senate shall have powers – ( a) to specify the criteria and
procedure for admission to courses or programmes of study
offered by the Institute; ( b) to recommend the Board to institute
teaching and other academic posts, determination of the number
and emoluments of such posts and defining the duties and
conditions of service of teachers and other academic posts; ( c) to
recommend to the Board about commencement of new
programmes or courses of study; ( d) to specify the broad
academic content of programmes and courses of study and to
suggest modifications therein; ( e) to specify the academic calendar
and approve grant of degrees, diplomas and other academic
distinctions or titles; ( f) to exercise such other powers and
discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it, in the
Statutes, by the Board.
Clause 17 .—This clause relates to Research Council. Sub-
clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that every Institute shall
establish a Research Council comprising of the Director and such
other members as may be specified, in the Statutes, by the Board.
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that the Research
Council of every Institute shall — ( i) interface with research
funding organisations, industry and civil society to identify
potential areas for research; ( ii) organise and promote research in
such Institute or in collaboration with any institution of higher
learning or research laboratories; ( iii) assist teachers in obtaining
funding from external sources for research projects prepared by
them; ( iv) provide, out of the funds placed at its disposal by the
Board, research resources and grant assistance for research
projects proposed to be undertaken by teachers in such Institute;
(v) provide for incubation of technology applications emerging
from research and to protect and utilise the intellectual property
obtained from research in the Institute; ( vi) make provisions for
research and advisory services and for that purpose enter into
such arrangements with other institutions, industry, civil society or
other organisations and enable the research to be disseminated to
industry and society through such arrangements; ( vii) exercise
such other powers and perform such other functions as may be
assigned to it by the Statutes.
Clause 18 .—This clause relates to Director. Sub-clause ( 1)
of the said clause provides that the Director shall be the principal
executive officer of every Institute and shall be responsible for
implementation of the decisions of the Board and Senate and for
the day-to-day administration of the Institute. Sub-clause ( 2) of the
said clause provides that the Director shall exercise such other

77
powers and discharge such other duties as may be assigned to
him by this Act or the Statutes or Ordinances or delegated by the
Board or the Senate. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides
that the Director shall be appointed by the Board from a panel of
names recommended by a Search-cum-Selection Committee
consisting of ( a) the Chairperson of the Board; ( b) the Director of
the Indian Institute of Technology of the zone in which the
Institute is located; ( c) the nominee of the Central Government, in
case of an Institute fully funded by the Central Government, who
shall be a person of eminence in academia in the field of
information technology; ( d) three nominees, one each from the
Central Government, the concerned State Government, each of
whom shall be a person of eminence in academia in the field of
information technology, and a nominee of the industry partner
from the information technology, in case of an Institute
established in the public-private-partnership mode. Sub-clause ( 4)
of the said clause provides that the Director shall, except on
account of resignation or removal, hold office for a period of five
years from the date on which he enters upon his office. Sub-
clause ( 5) of the said clause provides that the Director may, by
notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Chairperson,
resign from his office. Sub-clause ( 6) of the said clause provides
that the Director may be removed by the Board on proven charges
of misbehaviour or misconduct. However, the said sub-clause
provides that the Director shall not be removed from his office,
except by an order made by the Board after an inquiry instituted
in this behalf by the Board, and after giving him a reasonable
opportunity of being heard and where the institution of an inquiry
or removal of the Director is being considered by the Board, the
Director shall refrain himself from the proceedings of the Board.
Sub-clause ( 7) of the said clause provides that the Board may
remove the Director from office, if it is dissatisfied with the
functioning of the Institute after review of the affairs of the
Institute in the manner provided in sub-section ( 6). Sub-clause ( 8)
of the said clause provides that the Board shall initiate the process
of appointment in respect of any vacancy due to arise for the post
of Director on completion of tenure before a period of six months
from the date of arising of such vacancy and the process of
appointment shall be completed before such vacancy arises. Sub-
clause ( 9) of the said clause provides that where any casual
vacancy has occurred for the post of Director, the process of
appointment in respect of such vacancy shall be completed within
a period of three months from the date of such vacancy.
Clause 19 .—This clause deals with other committees and
authorities. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides the
constitution, powers and functions of the other authorities as may
be declared by the Statutes shall be such as may be provided by
the Statutes. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that the
Board may constitute such committees, as it may deem fit, for
efficient management of affairs of the Institute.

78
Clause 20 .—This clause deals with review of performance
of Institute. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that every
Institute shall, within seven years from the date of establishment
and incorporation of such Institute under this Act and thereafter at
the expiration of every fifth year, constitute, with the prior
approval of the Central Government, a Committee to evaluate and
review the performance of such Institute in achievement of its
objects during the said period. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause
provides that the Committee constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall
consist of members of repute in academia or industry, from
relevant fields of teaching, learning and research in such Institute.
Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that the Committee shall
assess the performance of Institute and make recommendations
on—(a) the extent of fulfilment of the objects of the Institute
mentioned in section 6, and its contribution to the society; ( b) the
promotion of transformational research and its impact on industry
or society; ( c) the advancement of fundamental research; ( d) the
establishment of the Institute as amongst the global leaders in the
area of information technology; ( e) the extent of achievement of
social equality through education and research in the Institute;
(f) such other parameters as the Board may consider necessary
and specify. Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that the
Board shall consider the recommendations referred to in sub-
section ( 3) and take such action, as it may deem fit and the
recommendations of the Committee along with an explanatory
memorandum on the action taken or proposed to be taken,
specifying the reasons thereof, shall be submitted to the Central
Government or to the State Government in case of an Institute
established under section 10 in the public-private partnership mode
and the Central Government or the State Government, as the case
may be, shall cause such recommendations to be laid before each
House of Parliament or the State Legislature. Sub-clause ( 5) of the
said clause provides that the Central Government shall have
the power to give such directions, emanating from the
recommendations of the Committee, on policy relating to national
purpose, as it may deem fit, and the Institute shall comply with
such directions and if any dispute arises as to whether the
direction is a question of policy relating to national purpose or not,
the decision of the Central Government shall be final.
Clause 21 .—This clause deals with grants by Central
Government. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that the
Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, make to each Institute, which is
fully funded by the Central Government, grants of such sums of
money as are required for supporting the Institute for its
operation, management and maintenance. Sub-clause ( 2) of the
said clause provides that the Central Government shall provide to
each Institute, including Institutes established in the public private
partnership mode, grants of such sums of money as are required
to meet the expenditure on scholarships or fellowships instituted

79
by it, including scholarships or fellowships for students from
socially and educationally backward classes or categories of
citizens enrolled in such Institute.
Clause 22 .—This clause relates to fund of Institute. Sub-
clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that every Institute shall
maintain a fund to which shall be credited—( a) all monies provided
by the Central Government or the State Government or industry
partner, as the case may be; ( b) all fees and other charges
received by the Institute; ( c) all monies received by the Institute
by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or
transfers; ( d) all monies received by the Institute from utilisation
of intellectual property arising from research conducted or
provision of advisory or consultancy services by it; ( e) all monies
received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other
source. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that the fund of
every Institute shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of
the Institute including expenses incurred in the exercise of its
powers and discharge of its duties under this Act, furtherance of
research in the Institute or in collaboration with other educational
institutions or industry and for capital investment aimed at the
growth and development of the Institute.
Clause 23 .—This clause relates to Statutes. It provides that
subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for
all or any of the following matters—( a) the conferment of
honorary degrees; ( b) the formation of departments of teaching;
(c) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Institute and
for admission to the examinations of degrees and diplomas of the
Institute; ( d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships,
exhibitions, medals and prizes; ( e) the terms of office and the
method of appointment of officers of the Institute; ( f) the
qualifications of teachers of the Institute; ( g) the classification, the
method of appointment and the determination of the terms and
conditions of service of teachers and other staff of the Institute;
(h) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for
the benefit of the officers, teachers and other staff of the
Institute; ( i) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities
of the Institute; ( j) the establishment and maintenance of halls and
hostels; ( k) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute
and the levying of fees for residence in the halls and hostels and
of other charges; ( l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson
and members of the Board; ( m) the authentication of the orders
and decisions of the Board; ( n) the meetings of the Board, the
Senate, or any Committee, the quorum at such meetings and the
procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business; and
(o) any other matter which is required to be or may be specified
by Statutes or in respect of which provision is to be made by
Statutes.
Clause 24 .—This clause relates to Statutes how made. Sub-
clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that the first Statutes of

80
each Institute shall be framed by the Board with the prior approval
of the Central Government and a copy of the same shall be laid,
as soon as may be, before each House of Parliament. Sub-
clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that the Board may, from
time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or
repeal the Statutes in the manner provided in this section. Sub-
clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that every new Statute or
addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of Statutes
shall require the previous approval of the Central Government.
Clause 25 .—This clause deals with Ordinances. It provides
that subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the
Ordinances of every Institute may provide for all or any of the
following matters — ( a) the admission of the students to the
Institute; ( b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees
and diplomas of the Institute; ( c) the conditions under which
students shall be admitted to the degree or diploma courses and to
the examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees
and diplomas; ( d) the conditions of award of the fellowships,
scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; ( e) the conditions and
mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners
and moderators; ( f) the conduct of examinations; ( g) the
maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and
(h) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or
may be provided for by the Ordinances.
Clause 26 .—This clause deals with Ordinances how made.
Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that save as otherwise
provided in this section, Ordinances shall be made by the Senate.
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that all Ordinances
made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may
direct, but every Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon
as may be, to the Board and shall be considered by the Board at
its next meeting. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that
the Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any
such Ordinance and such Ordinance shall from the date of such
resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case
may be.
Clause 27 .—This clause relates to the annual accounts and
balance sheet. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that at
every annual meeting of the Institute, the Director shall lay before
the Board – ( a) a balance sheet as at the end of the financial year;
(b) a statement of income and expenditure for that period. Sub-
clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that every balance sheet and
statement of income and expenditure of such Institute shall give a
true and fair view of the state of affairs of such Institute as at the
end of the financial year and shall, subject to the provisions of this
section, be in such form and in accordance with such general
instructions and accounting standards as may be prescribed, or as
near thereto as circumstances admit. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said
clause provides that where the statement of income and

81
expenditure and the balance sheet of the Institute do not comply
with the accounting standards, the Institute shall disclose in its
statement of income and expenditure and balance sheet, the
following — ( a) the deviation from the accounting standards;
(b) the reasons for such deviation; and ( c) the financial effect, if
any, arising due to such deviation.
Clause 28 .—This clause deals with books of account to be
maintained by Institute. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides
that every Institute shall keep proper books of account with
respect to—( a) all sums of money received and expended by it
and the matters in respect of which the receipt and expenditure
take place; ( b) the assets and liabilities of the Institute; ( c) the
properties, movable and immovable of the Institute. Sub-clause ( 2)
of the said clause provides that for the purposes of sub-
section ( 1), proper books of account shall not be deemed to be
kept with respect to the matters specified therein, if such books
are not kept—( a) as are necessary to give a true and fair view of
the state of affairs of the Institute and to explain its transactions;
and ( b) on accrual basis and according to the double entry system
of accounting.
Clause 29 .—This clause deals with appointment of auditors.
Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that the Board of every
Institute shall, before the expiry of three months prior to the end
of the financial year, without prejudice to the provisions contained
in the Comptroller and Auditor-General’s (Duties, Powers and
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 or any other law for the time
being in force containing provisions for audit of accounts by the
Institutes, appoint an auditor or auditors, on such remuneration as
it thinks fit, to scrutinise the balance sheet and the statement of
income and expenditure of such Institute. Sub-clause ( 2) of the
said clause provides that no person appointed as auditor or persons
in the employment of such auditor shall have any direct or indirect
interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter concerning
or related to the administration or operations (except being enrolled
as students) of the Institute. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause
provides that the provisions of section 226 of the Companies
Act, 1956 on the qualifications and disqualifications of auditor shall
apply mutatis mutandis for appointment of an auditor under this
Act. Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that every auditor
of each Institute shall have such powers and perform such duties
as the auditor may think necessary for the performance of his
duties as auditor and as are available to, or are required of, such
auditor under the Companies Act, 1956.
Clause 30 .—This clause deals with annual report of
Director. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that there shall
be attached to every statement of accounts laid before the Board
of each Institute, a report by its Director, with respect to —
(a) the state of affairs of such Institute; ( b) the amounts, if any,
which it proposes to carry to any surplus reserves in its balance

82
sheet; ( c) the extent to which understatement or overstatement of
any surplus of income over expenditure or any shortfall of
expenditure over income has been indicated in the auditor’s report
and the reasons for such understatement or overstatement; ( d) the
productivity of research projects undertaken by the Institute
measured in accordance with such norms as may be specified by
any statutory regulatory authority; ( e) appointment of the officers
and teachers of the Institute; ( f) benchmark and internal standards
set by the Institute, including the nature of innovations in teaching,
research and application of knowledge. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said
clause provides that the report of the Director shall also include a
statement showing the name of the five officers and other
employees of the Institute who received the highest remuneration
(including allowances and other payments made to such employee)
during the preceding financial year and the contributions made by
such employees during the financial year. Sub-clause ( 3) of the
said clause provides that the statement referred to in sub-
section ( 2) shall indicate whether any such employee is a relative
of any member of the Board or Senate of the Institute and if so,
the name of such member, and such other particulars as may be
required. Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that the
Director shall also be bound to give the complete information and
explanations in its report on every reservation, qualification or
adverse remark contained in the auditors’ report.
Clause 31 .—This clause provides that annual meeting of
Board to consider statement of accounts. Sub-clause ( 1) of the
said clause provides that the statement of accounts, including the
balance sheet and the statement of income and expenditure, the
auditor’s report, the report of the Director and other documents
required to be annexed or attached with such statement, shall be
brought before the Board in its meeting at such time immediately,
but not later than three months, from the conclusion of the
financial year. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that a
copy of every statement of accounts (including the balance sheet,
statement of income and expenditure, the auditors’ report and
every other document required to be annexed or attached to
balance sheet) which is to be laid before the Board of each
Institute shall, not less than twenty-one days before the date of the
meeting, be sent to every member of the Board. Sub-clause ( 3) of
the said clause provides that after the statement of accounts
referred to in sub-section ( 1) has been laid before the Board of
each Institute, such balance sheet, statement of income and
expenditure and other documents shall be placed on the website of
such Institute.
Clause 32 .—This clause provides for annual statement of
accounts of Institutes fully funded by the Central Government.
Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that the statement of
accounts of each Institute, which is fully funded by the Central
Government, shall be audited by such auditor as may be appointed

83
in this behalf by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of each Institute, which
is fully funded by the Central Government, shall have the same
rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection
with the audit of the Central Government accounts, and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books,
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers
and to inspect the offices of the Institute. Sub-clause ( 3) of the
said clause provides that a copy of the statement of accounts
including the balance sheet and the statement of income and
expenditure, the auditor’s report, the report of the Director and
other documents required to be attached with such statement, shall
be submitted to the Central Government, and that Government
shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
Clause 33 .—This clause deals with annual report of each
Institute. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the annual
report of each Institute shall be prepared under the direction of the
Board, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken
by the Institute towards the fulfilment of its objects and an
outcome based assessment of the research being undertaken in
such Institute, and be submitted to the Board on or before such
date as may be specified and the Board shall consider the report
in its annual meeting.  Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides
that the annual report as approved by the Board shall be published
and placed on the website of the Institute. Sub-clause ( 3) of the
said clause provides that the annual report of each Institute which
is fully funded by the Central Government shall be submitted to
the Central Government who shall, as soon as may be, cause the
same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 34 .—This clause deals with Council of Institutes.
Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that with effect from
such date as the Central Government may, by notification, specify
in this behalf, there shall be established for all the Institutes
specified in column ( 5) of the Schedule, a central body to be
called the Council. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that
the Council shall consist of the following members — ( a) the
Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government having administrative control of the technical
education, ex officio , as Chairperson; ( b) the Minister in charge of
technical education of State Governments of such States where the
Institutes are located, ex officio ; ( c) the industry partner of each
of the Institutes established in the public-private-partnership mode;
(d) the Chairpersons of each of the Institutes, ex officio; (e) the
Directors of each of the Institutes, ex officio ; ( f) four persons to
be nominated by the Central Government, one each to represent

84
the Ministry concerned with finance, technical education, science
and technology and information technology; ( g) three persons from
the information technology industry to be nominated by the
Council , from a panel comprised of two names recommended by
each Institute; ( h) three persons of eminence in research in
information technology to be nominated by the Council , from a
panel comprised of two names recommended by each Institute;
(i) three persons to represent persons of eminence from academia
or civil society to be nominated by the Council, from a panel
comprised of two names recommended by each State Government
of such States where Institutes are located.  Sub-clause ( 3) of the
said clause provides that the Council shall have a Secretariat with
a Secretary to be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that the Council may
constitute a Standing Committee of the Indian Institute of
Information Technology Council to assist the Council in discharge
of its duties and responsibilities. Sub-clause ( 5) of the said clause
provides that the expenditure on the Council shall be met by the
Central Government.
Clause 35 .—This clause provides the term of office and
allowances payable to members of Council. Sub-clause ( 1) of the
said clause provides that save as otherwise provided in this
section, the term of office of a member of the Council, other than
an ex officio member, shall be for a period of three years from the
date of nomination. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that
the term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long
as he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member. Sub-
clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that the members of the
Council shall be entitled to such other travelling and such other
allowances, as may be prescribed, for attending meetings of the
Council or its Committees.
Clause 36 .—This clause deals with functions of Council.
Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that the Council shall
coordinate the activities of all the Institutes. Sub-clause ( 2) of the
said clause provides that without prejudice to the provisions of
sub-section ( 1), the Council shall perform the following functions—
(a) to recommend to the Central Government, the institution of
scholarships including research and for the benefit of students
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens; ( b) to
recommend to the Central Government, proposals for
establishment of new Institutes of Information Technology in the
public-private-partnership mode; ( c) to deliberate on such matters
of common interest to Institutes as may be referred to it by any
Institute; ( d) to perform such other functions as may be referred
to it by the Central Government or any State Government and
nothing in this section shall derogate the powers and functions
vested by law in the Board or Senate or other authorities of each
Institute. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that the

85
Chairperson of the Council shall ordinarily preside at the meetings
of the Council and in his absence any other member, chosen by
the members present from amongst themselves at the meeting,
shall preside at the meeting.
Clause 37 .—This clause deals with acts and proceedings not
to be invalidated by vacancies, etc. It provides that no act of
Council, or any Institute or Board or Senate or any other body set-
up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid merely by reason
of — ( a) any vacancy or defect in the constitution thereof; or
(b) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the
case; or ( c) any defect in the selection, nomination or appointment
of a person acting as a member thereof.
Clause 38 .—This clause deals with returns and information
to be provided to Central Government or State Government. Sub-
clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that every Institute shall
furnish to the Central Government such returns or other
information with respect to its policies or activities as the Central
Government may, for the purpose of reporting to Parliament or for
the making of policy, from time to time require. Sub-clause ( 2) of
the said clause provides that every Institute, established in the
public-private-partnership mode, shall furnish to the State
Government in which such Institute is located, such returns or
other information with respect to its policies or activities as that
Government may, for the purpose of reporting to the concerned
State Legislature or for the making of policy, from time to time
require.
Clause 39 .—This clause deals with powers of Central
Government to issue directions. It provides that the Institute shall
carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to time
by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this
Act.
Clause 40 .—This clause provides that the Institute to be a
public authority under Right to Information Act, 2005. It provides
that the provisions of the said Act shall apply to each Institute,
including Institutes established in the public-private-partnership
mode, as if it were a public authority defined in clause ( h) of
section 2 of the said Act.
Clause 41 .—This clause relates to power of Central
Government to make rules. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause
provides that the Central Government may, by notification make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. Sub-clause ( 2) of
the said clause provides that in particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for
all or any of the following matters— ( a) the form and manner in
which the State Government shall submit proposal to the Central
Government under sub-section ( 2) of section 10; ( b) the criteria
for examination of the proposal of the State Government under
sub-section ( 3) of section 10; ( c) the form of balance sheet and

86
statement of income and expenditure and the accounting standards
under sub-section ( 2) of section 27; ( d) the manner of
appointment of Secretary under sub-section ( 3) of section 34;
(e) the travelling and such other allowances payable to the
members of the Council for attending meetings of the Council or
its Committees under sub-section ( 3) of section 35; ( f) any other
matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of
which provision is to be made by the Central Government by
rules.
Clause 42.—This clause relates to transitional provisions.
Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act––( a) the Board of every Institute
functioning as such immediately before the commencement of this
Act shall continue to function until a new Board is constituted for
that Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a new
Board under this Act, the members of the Board holding office
before such commencement of this Act shall cease to hold office;
(b) every Senate constituted in relation to every Institute before
the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Senate
constituted under this Act until a Senate is constituted under this
Act for that Institute, but on the constitution of the new Senate
under this Act, the members of the Senate holding office before
the commencement of this Act shall cease to hold office; ( c) until
the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made under this Act, the
Statutes, the Ordinances, the rules, regulations and bye-laws of
each Institute as in force, immediately before the commencement
of this Act, shall continue to apply to the corresponding Institute
in so for as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that the Central
Government may, without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section ( 1), if it considers necessary and expedient, by
notification, take such measures which may be necessary for the
smooth transfer of the existing Institute mentioned in column ( 3)
of the Schedule to the corresponding Institute mentioned under
column ( 5) of the Schedule.
Clause 43 .—This clause deals with power to remove
difficulties. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that if any
difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official
Gazette, make such provisions or give such directions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty and no such
order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the
period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that every order made
under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Clause 44 .—This clause deals with laying of rules and
notifications. It provides that every rule made and every notification

87
issued by the Central Government under this Act, shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or
notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or notification.

88
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 4 of the Bill provides that every
existing Institute mentioned in column ( 3) of the Schedule shall be
a body corporate by the corresponding name as mentioned in
column ( 5) of the Schedule. The four existing Indian Institutes of
Information Technology are centrally funded for meeting their
expenditure. During the 11th Plan period these Institutes were
sanctioned grants-in-aid to the tune of Rs. 649.86 crore for meeting
their recurring and non-recurring expenditure.
2. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 10 of the Bill provides for
establishment of an Institute. Sub-clause ( 2) provides that for the
purpose of establishing an Institute in the public-private-partnership
mode, a State Government shall identify an industry partner for
collaboration and submit a proposal to the Central Government in
such form and manner as may be prescribed. The financial
requirement for setting up of these Institutes is estimated
at Rs. 2808.71 crore (Rs. 2558.71 crore, for non-recurring
expenditure, Rs. 200 crore for recurring expenditure and Rs. 50.00
crore, for faculty development expenditure) during the nine years
commencing from the financial year 2012-13.
3. Clause 21 of the Bill, inter alia, provides that the Central
Government may grant such sums of money, as are required by
such Institute or Institutes fully funded by the Central Government,
for supporting the Institute for its operation, management and
maintenance, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf. The clause further provides that the Central Government
shall provide to each such Institute, including Institutes established
in the public-private partnership mode, grants of such sums of
money as are required to meet the expenditure on scholarships and
fellowships instituted by it, including scholarships or fellowships for
students from socially and educationally backward classes or
categories of citizens enrolled in such Institute. The expenditure
would be met from the Consolidated Fund of India through the
budgetary provision under the Department of Higher Education of
the Ministry of Human Resource Development.
88

89
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Board to frame, with the
prior approval of the Central Government, the first Statutes of each
Institute. A copy of such Statutes shall be laid before each House
of Parliament.
2. Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the Senate of each Institute
to make Ordinances consistent with the provisions of the Act and
the Statutes. The matters in respect of which such Ordinances may
be made relate, inter alia, to the admission of the students to the
Institute; the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and
diplomas of the Institute; the conditions under which students shall
be admitted to the degree or diploma courses and to the
examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees and
diplomas; the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships,
exhibitions, medals and prizes; the conditions and mode of
appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and
moderators; the conduct of examinations; the maintenance of
discipline among the students of the Institute; and any other matter
which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be provided for
by the Ordinances.
3. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 41 of the Bill empowers the
Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of
the Act. Sub-clause ( 2) specifies the matters in respect of which
such rules may be made. These matters relate to ( a) the form and
manner in which the State Government shall submit proposal to the
Central Government under sub-section ( 2) of section 10; ( b) the
criteria for examination of the proposal of the State Government
under sub-section ( 3) of section 10; ( c) the form of balance sheet
and statement of income or expenditure and the accounting
standards under sub-section ( 2) of section 27; ( d) the manner of
appointment of Secretary under sub-section ( 3) of section 34;
(e) the travelling and such other allowances payable to the members
of the Council for attending meetings of the Council or its
Committees under sub-section ( 3) of section 35; ( f) any other
matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules.
4. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 43 of the Bill empowers the
Central Government, by order published in the Official Gazette, to
make such provisions or give such directions not inconsistent with
the provisions of the Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty and such an order is not to be
made after the expiry of a period of three years from the date of
commencement of the Act and that such order shall be laid before
each House of Parliament.
89

90
5. Clause 44 of the Bill provides that every rule made and
every notification issued by the Central Government are required to
be laid before each House of Parliament.
6. The matters in respect of which the Statutes, Ordinances
or rules may be made pertain to matters of procedure and
administrative details for which it is not practicable to make any
provision in the Bill. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.

91
91
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to declare certain institutions of information technology to be
institutions of national importance with a view to develop new
knowledge in information technology and to provide
manpower of global standards for the information technology
industry and to establish other Institutions of Information
Technology and to provide for certain other matters
connected with such institutions or incidental thereto.
(Shri M.M. Pallam Raju, Minister of Human Resource Development)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.