 
 
   
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022 / Agrahayana, 1944, (Saka)  
 
 
 
Report No 
342 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three 
Hundred Twenty Eighth Report on Plans for Bridging the 
Learning Gap caused due to School Lockdown as well as 
Review of Online and Offline Instructions and Examinations 
and Plans for Re-Opening of Schools 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred 
Twenty Eighth Report on Plans for Bridging the Learning Gap caused 
due to School Lockdown as well as Review of Online and Offline 
Instructions and Examinations and Plans for Re-Opening of Schools 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944(Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ABBREVIATIONS............................................................................................ (iii)-(iv) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................  1-49 
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ............................................................... .....   3-31 
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...........  32-42 
Chapter-III -  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee....   43-47 
 Chapter-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited…..     48 
   
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE ...................      49-50 
6. MINUTES ................................................................................................          51-52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13thSeptember, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. *Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
7. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. **Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Sangam Lal Kadedin Gupta 
16. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
17. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
28. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
29.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
31. Shri S. Venkatesan 
*Nominated w.e.f. 11.10.2022 
**Nominated w.e.f. 16.11.2022 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
(i) 

 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report 
on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Forty Second R eport of the Committee on the 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Three Hundred and 
Twenty Eighth Report on “Plans for Bridging the Learning Gap caused due to School Lockdown as 
well as Review of online and offline Instru ctions and Examinations and Plans for re -opening of 
Schools”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6 th August, 
2021. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned Report 
were re ceived from the Ministry of Education (Department of School Education and Literacy) vide 
their communication dated 16th December, 2021.  
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on         
15th December, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
15th December, 2022                                                                                                                
Agrahayana 24,1944 (Saka)
  
 
  
 
 
 
Shri Vivek Thakur  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
 
AEES Atomic Energy Education Society 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
BISAG-N Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications and Geo-in 
formatics 
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education 
CICSE Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations 
CIET Central Institute of Educational Technology 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CSC-SPV Common Service Centre-Special Purpose Vehicle 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CTSA Central Tibetan School Administration 
CWSN Children With Special Needs 
DAISY Digitally Accessible Information System 
DIETs District Institutes of Education and Training 
DIKSHA Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing 
DoSE&L Department of School Education and Literacy 
DTH Direct-to-Home 
EMRS-NSTA Eklavya Model Residential School- National Science Teaching Association 
FLN Foundational Literacy and Numeracy 
FTTH Fiber To The Home 
GER Gross Enrolment Ratio 
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
ISL Indian Sign Language 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IT Information Technology 
ITPD In-service Teacher Professional Development 
IVRS Interactive Voice Response System 
JNVs Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas 
KVS Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan 
MoD Ministry of Defence 
MoE Ministry of Education 
MOOCs Massive Open Online Courses 
MoTA Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
NAS National Achievement Survey 
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training 
NCTE National Council for Teacher Education 
NEP National Education Policy 
NIE National Institute of Education 
NIEPA National Institute of Educational Planning and Administration 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
 
NIOS 
 
 
National Institute of Open Schooling 
NIPUN National Initiative for Proficiency in Reading with Understanding and                 
Numeracy 
NISHTHA National Initiative for School Heads' and Teachers' Holistic Advancement 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NVS Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti 
NTA National Testing Agency 
OBC Other Backward Classes 
ODL Open and Distance Learning 
OoSC Out of School Children 
PCPs Personal Contact Programmes 
PDPET Professional Development Programme for Elementary Teachers 
PM e-VIDYA Pradhan Mantri eVidya 
PRAGYATA 
 
Plan, Review, Arrange, Guide, Yak(talk), Assign, Track, and Appreciate 
PSSCIVE Pandit Sunderlal Sharma Central Institute of Vocational Education 
RIE Regional Institute of Education 
R&I Research and Innovation 
RTE Right to Education 
RT-PCR Real time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction  
SAFAL Structured Assessment For Analysing Learning 
SC Scheduled Caste 
SIEs State Institutes of Education 
SIOS State Institute of Open Schooling 
SMILE Social Media Interface for Learning Engagement 
SOPs Standard Operating Procedures 
SRGs State Resource Groups 
SWAYAM Study Webs of Active–Learning for Young Aspiring Minds 
ST Scheduled Tribe 
TEI Terminal Endpoint Identifier 
UT Union Territory 
ZIETs  Zonal Institutes of Education and Training 
     
  
    
      
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in its 3 28th Report on “Plans for Bridging the Learning Gap caused 
due to School Lockdown as well as Review of online and offline Instructions and Examinations 
and Plans for re -opening of Schools ”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2021. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned 
Report were received from the Ministry of Education (Department of School Education and 
Literacy) vide their communication dated  16th December, 2021. These have been categorized as 
follows.  
 Chapter I: Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras – 18.1 ((a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f)), 18.2 ((a), (b), (c)), 18.5 ((a), (b), (c), (d), (e),
 (f), (g)), 18.7 ((a), (b), (c), (d), (e)), 18.9 ((a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h)) 
Total - 29 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
Government's replies:- 
Paras – 18.2 ((d), (e), (f), (g), (h)), 18.4 ((a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g)), 18.6 ((a), (b), 
(c), (d)), 18.8 ((a), (b), (c), (d)) 
Total - 20 
Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee:- 
Paras- 18.3 I(a), 18.3 II ((a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h)), 18.10 ((a), (b), (c), (d), 
(e)) 
Total - 14 
        

2 
 
Chapter-IV:  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited:- 
Paras - Nil 
Total - Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
LEARNING LOSS 
Recommendation 
1. Intensive bridge courses and accelerated learning programmes should be developed in 
consultation with experts in the field to make up for the learning loss and bring students to the 
level of learning of each class.          (Para-18.1 a) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry in its Action Taken Note has submitted that d uring the Covid-19 pandemic, 
teachers, parents, and students had to remain at homes to prevent its spread. In this situation, 
multiple alternative ways of learning at home throu gh interesting activities have been developed 
which would maintain continuity of their learning. NCERT has developed an Alternative 
Academic Calendar (AAC) which is flexible and suggestive for all the stages of school education 
resources along with textboo ks. The teachers can implement this taking into consideration the 
contexts and needs of the State/UT. This calendar has been developed by the faculty members of 
all the constituent units of the NCERT including NIE, CIET, PSSCIVE and all the five RIEs using 
on–line platforms for discussion and feedback. Also, t he Department of School Education and 
Literacy has issued guidelines for mainstreaming of Children of Migrant Labo urers and Out of 
School Children (OoSC) on 13th July 2020 and 7th January 2021 respecti vely. Thereafter, a 
comprehensive COVID Action plan was also shared with States/UTs and other stakeholders on 
4th May 2021 for mitigating the loss of learning.  It has further been stated that NCERT has also 
developed a bridge course for Out of School Child ren studying in special training centres for the 
age group 6 to 14 years under the provision of Right to Education Act, 2009. The course aims to 
bridge the learning gaps and help children to be mainstreamed in the regular school. The bridge 
course also com es with a teacher handbook, which will help the teacher in transaction and 
assessment of the competencies to bridge the learning gap.  In addition, bridge courses have been 
developed by NVS teachers Class wise and Subject wise. In the starting of the sessi on, 15 days 
were devoted for Bridge Course to bring the students to the level of learning of new class.  Special 
classes are also being arranged in KVS for students to address the learning loss. Worksheets, 

4 
 
specially designed learning modules, Alternative A cademic Calendar developed by NCERT have 
been provided to students and teachers to address learning loss. 
Recommendation 
2.  Learning Outcomes, subject -wise, during the pandemic period should be assessed by 
regularly conducting tests with multiple – choice questions or quizzes and remedial measures 
taken through intense customized personal remedial classes to address the problem areas of each 
student.              (Para-18.1 b) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has informed that during the COVID -19 Pandemic, Govern ment of India 
held detailed consultations with the States and UTs at different levels for taking their 
views/perspectives on how to assess and bridge the learning gap and thereby improve the 
Learning Outcomes (LOs) in the Covid -19 pandemic period.  Education being in the concurrent 
list of the Constitution, majority of the schools are under the domain of the respective State and 
UT Governments. Hence, to ensure that every student gets continued access to education, a multi -
pronged approach has been adopted. A comprehensive initiative called PM e -VIDYA has been 
initiated as part of Atma  Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyan on 17 th May, 2020, which unifies all efforts 
related to digital/online/on-air education to enable multi -mode access to education. The initiative 
includes: DIKSHA (one nation, one digital platform) which is the nation’s digital infrastructure 
for providing quality e -content for school education in states/UTs and QR coded Energized 
Textbooks for all grades are available on it (35 of the 36 states and  UTs have on boarded on 
DIKSHA platform and contextualised the content as per the local need); One earmarked 
SwayamPrabha TV channel per class from Class 1 to 12 (one class, one channel); Extensive use of 
Radio, Community radio and CBSE Podcast - ShikshaVani; Special e -content for visually and 
hearing impaired developed on Digitally Accessible Information System (DAISY) and in sign 
language on NIOS website/YouTube. 
The Ministry has further informed that it has undertaken a proactive initiative, named, 
‘MANODARPAN’ covering a wide range of activities to provide psychosocial support to 
students, teachers and families for Mental Health and Emotional Wellbeing during the COVID 
outbreak and beyond.  In addition to the above, the Central Government is constantly adv ising 
States/UTs through guidelines and meetings with respect to interventions for reducing impact of 

5 
 
pandemic on education and improving learning outcomes. The guidelines issued so far include 
Guidelines for Children of Migrant Laborers, Guidelines for Ou t of School Children and 
Mitigation of Loss of Learning, PRAGYATA Guidelines on Digital Education, Learning 
Enhancement Guidelines for Continuous Learning, Covid -19 Related Health and Safety 
SOP/Guidelines for School Re -Opening, COVID Action Plan for Schoo l Education, Alternate 
Academic Calendar, Guidelines for JNV –Residential Schools, Guidelines for parents on Home 
Based Education, Guidelines for orphaned Children, Guidelines for developing E -content for 
CWSN, CBSE competency-based assessment framework and NCTE Guidelines for TEIs. 
Also, t he Government of India has been implementing the sample based National 
Achievement Survey (NAS) aimed at classes III, V, VIII and X in a cycle of every three years. 
The next round of NAS held on 12th  November 2021 across the country will help in assessing the 
learning interruptions and new learnings during the COVID pandemic and support taking up of 
remedial measures. 
CBSE’s scheme of examinations in classes IX to XII mandates schools to conduct multiple 
examinations conti nuously. Schools are required to conduct periodic tests and other internal 
assessments, portfolios, projects and other formative and summative tests. In formative 
assessment, learning gaps are identified and various remedial measures are taken to address t he 
learning gaps. CBSE has developed resource material to handhold teachers regarding formative 
and summative assessment. In order to implement the recommendations of the NEP 2020, CBSE 
has also modified its examination scheme by introducing biannual exami nations from the 
academic session 2021-22.The examinations will be held at the end of two terms , each on half of 
the syllabus prescribed for the year. For classes X and XII, the first term examinations of one and 
a half hour are currently being conducted u sing the question paper comprising only Multiple Type 
Questions developed by CBSE and in the presence of external supervisors appointed by CBSE. 
The second term examination will be held during March –April 2022 for a duration of 2 -hours. 
This would have de scriptive questions and the results will be declared either on the basis of both 
of these examinations or on the basis of first term only if the second term is not possible due to 
any exigency. 
In NVS, formative assessment is regularly carried out including multiple choice questions, 
assignments, projects, quizzers, concept maps, etc. NVS has the provision of remedial classes in 
the regular timetable of schools. After assessing the problem areas of each student, remedial 

6 
 
measures are taken regularly by the NVS teachers.   Similarly, in KVS, regular tests through 
different e-platforms including support from DIKSHA portal have been conducted from time to 
time to address problem of each student. Subject wise, grey areas were identified and remediation 
provided to the students. Comprehensive guidelines have been issued to all Regions on 
03.08.2021.  
Recommendation 
3. Extra classes, curtailment of vacations, assigning expert teachers for personalized 
coaching, parental engagement, peer-group and collaborative learning may be explored to help 
students, who are lagging behind and provide them personalized and dedicated attention to bridge 
the learning gap. Senior class students should be advised to take up the role of mentors and take  
classes of the junior students and it should be taken as a criteria of assessment in more structured 
manner.              (Para-18.1 c) 
Action Taken 
Education being in the concurrent list, majority of the schools are under the domain of 
respective State a nd UT Governments. Decision regarding school reopening, provision of extra 
classes, vacation, personalized coaching are undertaken at state level. Guidelines for undertaking 
various activities are provided by the Department of School Education & Literacy f rom time to 
time for better implementation of the schemes and for improving the quality of education imparted 
in schools. Further, to address the issues related to gaps and/or loss of learning among students, 
during the lockdown, NCERT has prepared ‘Studen ts Learning Enhancement Guidelines’ with a 
focus on learning outcomes. The guidelines suggest models for the following three types of 
scenarios:  
(i) Learning Enhancement during COVID-19 for students without digital devices. 
(ii) Learning Enhancement during COVID-19 for students with limited accessibility to 
digital devices. 
(iii) Learning Enhancement during COVID-19 for students with digital devices. 
The guidelines can be accessed at: https://ncert.nic.in/pdf/announcement/Learning 
%20Enhancement Guidelines.pdf 

7 
 
NCERT has also developed a bridge course for Out of School Children (OoSC) studying in 
special training centres for the age group 6 to 14 years under the provisio n of Right to Education 
Act, 2009. The course aims to bridge the learning gaps and help children to be mainstreamed in 
the regular school. The bridge course also comes with a teacher handbook, which will help the 
teacher in transaction and assessment of th e competencies to bridge the learning gap.  Peer group 
and collaborative learning are also being encouraged among the students in NVS  schools. Under 
this, class-wise, subject-wise WhatsApp groups are created to give personalized guidance to the 
students. Parents are also being guided by the teachers to assist the learning of students at home.  
Further, group wise assignment and activities were given to students of KVS as per CBSE 
guidelines. Students are allowed to ask their queries through WhatsApp or make c all to the 
teachers. Guidelines issued for parents by the Ministry of Education have been shared with all 
KVs. Small Whatsapp groups have been formed to clarify doubts. 
Recommendation 
4. Specific instructional materials and worksheets, workbooks may be created to address the 
specific learning requirements of students thus enabling them to bridge the learning gap/loss. 
(Para-18.1 d) 
Action Taken 
 In order to explore ways of catering for student diversity, and enhancing quality of 
education, various interventions are being encouraged under SamagraShiksha. Learning 
enhancement (remedial teaching) is being supported with the main objective of identifying the 
learning gaps and equipping students with the core learning pre requisites appropriate for 
middle/secondary level of education. Teachers involved provide students with a variety of 
learning opportunities for effective learning, such as using diversified resources rather than 
focusing only on textbooks, and making use of a spectrum of multi-sensory experiences to tap the 
different potential of students. Worksheets/workbooks for various subjects have also been 
provided. This would help a diverse set of learners to bridge learning loss. 
 
Under Samagra  Shiksha, a provision has been provided for partnership with parents, 
families and the community wherein children’s interest and choices is taken care of. Teachers 
will involve parents/ guardians of children in the activities of the pre -school so that they are able 
to replicate the same or similar a ctivities at home. She/he will involve them in the development 

8 
 
of Teaching Learning Material (TLM) like toys, puppets, story char t, story box, flash cards, dolls 
and masks etc. Parents will also be involved in organizing cultural activities, field trips, 
excursions and visit to the fair etc. Parents or guardians will be continuously counselled 
regarding behavior problems of children.  A guideline for Three -month Play -based School 
Preparation Module for Grade -I Children, entitled VIDYA PRAVESH, have been deve loped as 
per the recommendations of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020. The purpose is to help 
teachers ensure that all children are exposed to a warm and welcoming environment when they 
enter Grade -I, particularly during the Covid -19 pandemic, leadi ng to their smooth transition to 
school. The guidelines intend to create a stimulating learning environment that is joyful, safe, 
ensures emotional security and provides support to all the children in school and at home. The 
play-based pedagogy is a signif icant aspect of the guidelines that plays a vital role in creating a 
joyful and stress-free environment for children to learn, and also in addressing the learning needs 
of children with special needs or disabilities (Divyang). Focus is also given on learni ng in mother 
tongue or home language and allowing as many languages as children bring to the classroom, 
including sign language. 
 
In NVS , Instructional package (supplementary learning materials / work books, 
worksheets, quizzes etc.) and learning resources  such as Exemplar problems & Bridge course 
materials are developed and being provided to the students along with similar materials available 
on Diksha Portal. Similarly, in KVS Worksheets, handouts are being prepared and used. 
 
In NIOS, Worksheets at Secon dary and Senior Secondary level are being developed with 
the purpose to provide academic support to learners and keep them academically engaged 
through constant practice. Similarly, the learner’s guide at Secondary and Senior Secondary level 
is being prepa red by NIOS for addressing the unfinished learning and learning losses due to 
COVID-19 pandemic. 
Recommendations 
5. Mandatory Helpline Centers for every subject to clear the doubts of the students should be 
made operational to clear the doubts of students in each subject. Phone -in programmes may also 
be aired through TV and on community radio with subject experts to elaborate on topics and 
explain difficult concepts to students. WhatsApp Groups comprising teachers/subject experts may 

9 
 
be created for each cla ss in schools to aid students in their learning, clarification of 
doubts/concepts etc.              (Para-18.1 e) 
6. The best formative assessments, like Chatbot Assessment, may be encouraged to map 
students learning processes / outcomes and identify those who require specific attention and the 
subjects in which targeted instruction is needed.                     (Para-18.1 f) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that a s indicated earlier, a comprehensive initiative called 
PM eVIDYA has been initiated  as part of Atma Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan on 17th May, 2020, 
which unifies all efforts related to digital/online/on -air education to enable multi -mode access to 
education. The initiative includes:  
 DIKSHA (one nation, one digital platform) is the nation’s digital infrastructure for 
providing quality e -content for school education in states/UTs and QR coded 
Energized Textbooks for all grades are available on it. 
 One earmarked SwayamPrabha TV channel per class from 1 to 12 (one class, one 
channel). 
 Extensive use of Radio, Community radio and CBSE Podcast- ShikshaVani. 
 Special e -content for visually and hearing impaired developed on Digitally 
Accessible Information System (DAISY) and in sign language on NIOS website/ 
YouTube. All these schemes/programmes are fr ee of cost and available to all the 
students across the nation. 
The PM eVidya DTH-TV Live telecast details (as on 14th September 2021) are as follows: 
i) Class 1 to 10 Live programmes: 1059 Live interactive sessions of 30 minutes each have 
been telecast on class based channels (1 to 10). It covered about 529.5 hours of telecast. 
ii) Class 11 & 12 Live programmes: 106 live interactive sessions of 60 minutes each have 
been telecast based on class based channels (11 & 12). It covered about 106 hours of 
telecast.    

10 
 
It has further been stated that to reach out to those students who lack access to technology , 
various innovative activities are being done at national, state or district level such as Gali -
GaliSim-Sim, Tili -Mili programme, Motor Eskool, Roving Teacher, Proj ect SMILE (Social 
Media Interface for Learning Engagement), e -Kaksha, formation of Whatsap p and other social 
media groups, Work Book Distribution at home, Teacher calling to maintain connects with 
students. Till 14 th September, 2021, 16,274 calls were received to enquire about telecast of 
educational programmes through PMeVIDYA IVRS.  In addition, the PMeVidya live TV 
Programme on Teaching Learning Interventions for Inclusive Classrooms - Ask the Expert:  121 
live sessions of 'Teaching Learning Interventi ons for Inclusive Classrooms - Ask the Expert' have 
been transmitted live covering about 60.5 hours. DIKSHA Chatbot through portal and whatsapp is 
available for users. Class-wise, subject-wise WhatsApp groups are being created at JNVs to give 
personalized guidance and to clear the doubts of the students. Subject -wise, group of teachers are 
created at cluster level for sharing of resources and experiences. Provision of helpline number has 
also been made in every JNV to provide assistance to the students and parents. In KVS, Students 
are allowed to ask their queries through WhatsApp or make call to the teachers and specially 
designated Email provided to the students in all KVs. WhatsApp groups ha ve been created for all 
groups. NIOS also provides online educati on support throughout the year using various online 
platform such as Live video programmes on e -Vidya, Content Support for NIOS Learners on 
DIKSHA (Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing) platform, Massive Open Online Courses 
(MOOCs) on SWAYAM Platfo rm, Live Personal Contact Programmes (PCPs) through Web 
Radio (MuktaVidyaVani) and Community based programmes on Community Radio (91.2 MHz) 
of NIOS. 
NEED FOR PROPER DOCUMENTATION AND DATA COLLECTION  
Recommendations 
7. The Committee recommends that a comprehensive assessment to collect data of the post 
COVID situation leading to the learning loss due to school lockdown may be under taken by the 
Department of School Education & Literacy to cover the following areas of concern: 
7.1.  learning loss assessment immediately across the country covering each and every student, 
with specific emphasis on students belonging to rural and backward areas as well as 
economically weaker and marginalized sections of the society and also Ch ildren with Special 
Needs. The findings / results of the survey should be compared with the figures for the pre-COVID 

11 
 
period and the groups of students and areas / subjects which require immediate remedial action 
should be identified;                        (Para-18.2 a) 
7.2.  the basic reading, writing and arithmetical skills of students of various classes and 
compare them with the results during pre -COVID period. Thereafter, remedial programmes / 
evidence based multi -pronged strategies may be devised to make up for the learni ng loss so that 
future learning and employment prospects are not adversely affected.                  (Para-18.2 b) 
Action Taken 
The Department  has informed that it has advised the States/UTs to conduct survey of 
children with and with out access to digital  devices. V arious initiatives were taken up by the 
Ministry of Education, States and Union Territories to mitigate the effect of the COVID pandemic 
on school education.  It has been submitted that a detailed report on these initiatives can be seen at 
the w ebsite of the Ministry of Education at the following link:  
https://dsel.education.gov.in/sites/default/files/update/covid_initiatives.pdf 
Further, the National Achievement Survey (NAS) was held on 12th November, 2021 across 
India to assess the learning outcomes of students and schools across grades 3,5, 8 and 10.  The 
NAS has covered (a) Government Schools (Central Government and State Government); (b) 
Government Aided School; and (c) Private Unaided Sch ools. The objective of NAS 2021 is to 
evaluate children's progress and learning competencies as an indicator of the health of the 
education system, so as to take appropriate steps for remedial actions at different levels. National, 
State/UT and District Re port cards will be prepared to enable analysis of results and remedial 
action at the appropriate levels. Also, Ministry of Education has launched a National Initiative for 
Proficiency in Reading with Understanding and Numeracy (NIPUN Bharat), for ensuring that 
every child in the country necessarily attains foundational literacy and numeracy (FLN) by the end 
of Grade 3, by 2026 -27. The National Mission lays down priorities and actionable agendas for 
States/UTs to achieve the goal of proficiency in foundation al literacy and numeracy for every 
child by the end of Grade 3. The Mission has been set up under the aegis of the centrally 
sponsored scheme of Samagra Shiksha which is an integrated scheme of school education 
covering from Pre-School to Senior Secondary level. It will focus on children of age group of 3 to 
9 years including pre -school to Grade 3. The children who are in Class 4 and 5 and have not 
attained the foundational skills will be provided individual teacher guidance and support, peer 
support and age appropriate and supplementary graded learning materials to acquire the necessary 

12 
 
competencies. The goals and objectives of the mission are required to be achieved by all Govt., 
Govt. Aided and Private Schools so that universal acquisition of FLN skills can be achieved. 
Furthermore, it has been stated that the Department has constantly advised States/UTs 
through guidelines and meetings like - PRAGYATA Guidelines on Digital Education, Learning 
Enhancement Guidelines for Continuous Learning, Covid Action Plan for School Education, 
Guidelines for parents on Home Based Education etc.  with respect to interventions for reducing 
impact of pandemic on education to address learning gap.  Under this, in KVS, r emedial 
programmes such as special classes are being arranged to address learning loss. Similarly, in NVS, 
assessment is being made an integral part of Online Learning and is mapped with learning 
outcomes so that remediation programme may be imparted on graded pattern according to the 
learning level of student s. CBSE has also taken the following measures to promote Foundational 
Literacy and Numeracy (FLN): 
(i) The following eight modules under three MOOCs are prepared on FLN and so far, 
around 54000 teachers have been registered for training on these:  
a. Meaning and Importance of Foundational Learning 
b. Teaching and Learning changes recommended by the NEP for FLN grades 
c. Learning Goals for Foundational Literacy and Numeracy across Grades 1, 2 and 3 
d. Skills and Mind sets of an FLN Teacher 
e. Active Pedagogy and the shift from Traditional Practice 
f. Conducive Classroom Environment 
g. Importance of Classroom Assessments 
h. Structured lesson plans as a tool to improve student learning and achieve FLN 
outcomes 
(ii) A microsite has been created which can be accessed at http://cbseacademic.nic.in/fln/ 
(iii) A question bank of 500 competency -based questions for each grade for grades 1 to 5 
available at CBSE FLN microsite. 
(iv) A Monitoring Group under FLN has been constituted which would include progress 
and re view of teacher training, integration of Reading Mission, Assessment tools of 
Pratham, oral reading fluency tools and SAFAL (key stage assessment at 3,5)  
(v) Continuous interactions with schools, teachers, parents etc. through webinars are being 
carried out. 

13 
 
Recommendation 
7.3 Out-of-school children, particularly girls, during the pandemic and concerted action taken to 
bring them back to school and mainstream education by giving them incentives in the form of 
study material, digital devices, wholesome nutritional food etc;       (Para-18.2 c) 
Action Taken 
 The Department of School Education and Literacy has informed that i n order to prevent 
drop outs, lower enrolments and loss of learning, the Ministry of Education has issued guidelines 
for identification, smooth admission process and continued education of migrant children on 13 th 
July, 2020. 
 Further, to ensure that children have access to education with quality and equity and to 
minimize the impact of the pandemic on school education in the country, Minis try of Education 
has shared guidelines dated 7 th January, 2021 with all States  which, among others, include 
identification of out of school children from age 6 -18 years, enrolment drives and awareness 
generation, student support while schools are closed, continued Education for Children with 
Special Needs (CWSN), student support on school reopening and Teacher capacity building. Also, 
a comprehensive COVID action plan has been shared with the States and UTs on 4th May 2021, 
outlining the role of local bodies, formation of nodal group at village/town level, conducting door -
to-door/helpdesk-based/App based survey to identify out of school children, their mainstreaming 
and resource sharing.  
            The Department has developed an online module for compili ng the data of Out of School 
Children (OoSC) identified by each State/UT and their mapping with Special Training Centres 
(STC) on the PRABANDH Portal ( http://samagrashiksha.in). The concerned State/UT validates 
the child wise information of the identified OoSC and STC uploaded by the concerned Block 
Resource Centre of the State for monitoring the progress of mainstreaming of OoSC. 
           During the pandemic, the Ministry of Education has also taken various steps for providing 
children continued access to education, which are available to each category of students 
irrespective of their region or economic standard. A comprehensive initiative called PM e -Vidya 
has been started which aims to unify all efforts related to digital/online/on-air education to enable 
multi-mode access to education. The initiative includes all forms of digital modes to provide wide 
access- DIKSHA (online), SWAYAM (online), SWAYAM PRABHA (TV), other TV Channels 

14 
 
including use of Doordarshan and  AIR Networks. Further, an Alternate Academic Calendar has 
been prepared for learning solutions for grade 1 to 12 for both children with and without device. 
Also, Pragyata guidelines were issued to States/UTs to facilitate continued education through 
various modes. The guidelines inter-alia include situation where internet connectivity is not 
available or available with very less bandwidth, resources are shared through various platforms 
like television, radio etc., that do not depend on internet. 
          Moreover, under S amagra Shiksha, financial assistance is provided to States and UTs for 
undertaking various activities to reduce dropout rate including opening/strengthening of new 
schools upto senior secondary level, construction of school buildings & add itional classrooms, 
setting up, up-gradation and running of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas for girls belonging to 
disadvantaged groups such as SC, ST, OBC, Minority and Below Poverty Line (BPL), setting up 
of residential schools/hostels, free uniforms, free text books, transport allowance and undertaking 
enrolment & retention drives. Further, special training for age appropriate admission of out of 
school children and residential as well as non -residential training for older children, seasonal 
hostels /residential camps, special training centres at worksites, transport/ escort facility are also 
supported to bring out of school children to the formal schooling system. Also, mid -day meal is 
provided to students at the elementary level of education.  
           Further, under the student oriented component for the children with special needs, financial 
assistance is provided for identification and assessment of children with special needs, aids and 
appliances, braille kits and books, appropriate teaching lear ning material and stipend to girl 
students with disability etc. Also, Section 10 of the RTE Act states that it shall be the duty of 
every parent or guardian to admit or cause to be admitted his or her child or ward, as the case may 
be, for elementary educa tion in the neighborhood school. The scheme further emphasizes upon 
provision of gender segregated toilets in all schools, provision of self -defence training from 
classes VI to XII and Special state specific projects such as Life Skills, Awareness programm es, 
Incinerators, Sanitary Pad Vending Machines etc. for varied interventions under equity for 
enhancing access, retention and quality for girls by promoting enrolment drives, retention and 
motivation camps, gender sensitization modules etc. 
        In add ition to the above, under Samagra Shiksha, for the first time in 2021 -22, financial 
assistance upto Rs. 2000 per annum has been provided for supporting Out of School Children  
(OoSC) of age group of 16-19 years, belonging to socio -economically disadvantaged groups, for 

15 
 
completing their education through NIOS/SIOS, for accessing course materials and certification. 
Also, under National Means -cum-Merit Scholarship Scheme, scholarship is awarded to 
meritorious students of economically weaker sections to arrest t heir drop out at class VIII and 
encourage them to continue the study at secondary stage. 
DIGITAL DIVIDE 
Recommendations 
8. The Department should make concerted efforts in coordination with 
Ministries/Departments concerned to make available high -speed internet connectivity and at least 
one TV Set, one Desktop Computer, large screens with projectors etc. in all schools across the 
country to bridge the digital divide. The problem of power outages in various parts of the country 
may be tackled by leveragin g non-conventional energy sources like solar power, wind power etc. 
in schools and make them self-sufficient educational hubs.       (Para-18.5 a) 
9. The step taken by UT of Ladakh to distribute pre-loaded Tablets may be replicated in other 
parts of the country to distribute pre -loaded Tablets customized for each class for students in 
middle school and re - furbished laptops with pre -loaded educational programmes for students of 
secondary and senior secondary classes may be distributed instead of providing  free textbooks. 
Efforts may also be made to manufacture such tablets/laptops indigenously at low cost through 
public-private partnership and by involving IITs, IT Industry, business houses etc.    (Para-18.5 b) 
 
10. A Digital Library with tablets, laptops , educational videos and other digital devices may 
be set up in each school, wherefrom students may borrow such devices for their educational needs 
for a specified time period.                     (Para-18.5 c) 
11. Leverage private sector expertise and resources through effective collaboration to provide 
digital devices to students belonging to economically weaker and marginalized sections of society. 
The Department should make concerted efforts to utilise CSR funds for this purpose. 
 (Para-18.5 d) 
12. Classes with physical distancing in community halls, auditorium etc. in villages and small 
towns, mobile classes etc. may be explored as innovative strategies for students who cannot afford 

16 
 
digital devices. Large Screens with projectors may be set up in pl aygrounds or open areas for 
such students to avail online classes.                     (Para-18.5 e) 
13. The Department should moot a proposal with MeitY and Ministry of Communications for 
provision of internet packs at concessional rates to students parti cularly from economically 
backward and marginalized sections of society as well as high speed internet connectivity to all 
schools.              (Para-18.5 f) 
14. The best practices adopted by teachers/schools in various States/UTs to ensure continued 
education during the pandemic, bridge the digital divide and minimize learning loss may be 
collated and issued by the Department in the form of guidelines/practices to be adapted by other 
States/UTs to suit their specific requirements.                     (Para-18.5 g) 
Action Taken 
Below mentioned efforts have been made by the Department to overcome the digital 
divide: 
Under the Bharat Net programme, the CSC e -Governance Services India Ltd (CSC -SPV) 
of MeitY has been assigned the task of providing Fibre to the Home (FTTH) connectivity to Gram 
Panchayats including connectivity to the Government Institutions, including schools. This project 
is for providing Internet connection to Government schools in respective Gram Panchayat. The 
School Education Departments of the respective State Governments have appointed State/District-
wise Nodal Officers for this project for effective implementation. About 63,100 Schools have 
been provided FTTH connections through Bharat Net so far.  To reach out to those students who 
lack access to technology, various innovative activities are being done at national, state or district 
level such as Gali -GaliSim-Sim, Tili -Mili programme, Motor Eskool, Roving Teacher, Project 
SMILE (Social Media Interface for Learning Engagement), e -Kaksha, formation of WhatsApp 
and other social media groups, Work Book Distribution at home, Teacher calling to maintain 
connects with students. 
Moreover, Navodaya Vidyalayas have well equipped computer labs and smart computer 
labs with 40 laptop / tablets in mos t of the schools that are used by the students for their 
educational needs. In 616 JNVs, smart computer labs have also been established under Corporate 
Social Responsibility (CSR). Total 825 Computer labs with smart provisions are established in 

17 
 
JNVs under  CSR. NVS is in process of providing Digital Table ts pre -loaded with educational 
contents to all the students of Class XI & XII. The students who do not afford digital devices are 
being guided through Mobile School / home visits by teachers at a centrally located place of 
students residence, personal contact by the teachers using telephone or through indirect contact 
(any parent / relative or other JNV students nearby / Peer group / Alumni) or local teachers. 
Instructional packages (Supplementary learning m aterials / workbooks etc. and learning resources 
such as Exemplar problems, Bridge courses etc. were delivered to home. Efforts are being made 
by NVS to upgrade to high speed Internet connectivity in all JNVs. Guidelines for Online 
Education have been issu ed by NVS incorporating the experiences / best practices adopted by 
Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas for continued education of students. Recently , 1173 Smart 
Classrooms has been set up in 99 JNVs, located in Minority Concentrated Areas. Ministry of 
Minority Affairs has funded for these Smart Classrooms. Training has been provided to all the 
teachers on Smart Classroom & Virtual Classroom at school after installation. There is a proposal 
for setting up of 1511 Smart Classrooms in 152 JNVs located in Tribal distr icts with financial 
assistance of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan also has a good digital/technological infrastructure comprising 
of: 
 11780 e-classroom 
 376 Digital Language Lab with 30 consoles in each lab 
 11080 Personalized E-learning systems 
 6447 E-Pragya Touch Tablets 
 Students computer ratio- 16:01 
 Further, continuous upgradation and procurement of digital/ technological infrastructure is 
undertaken to facilitate effective academic transaction. All KVs are using available resources like 
e-Classrooms, Computers, TVs for students. Good Broad Band connectivity with specified speed 
depending on the number of students is being made available in almost all KVs. Under project e -
prajna, 6447 Tablets preloaded with e -content were pr ovided to students and teachers of one 
Kendriya Vidyalaya in each region. Presently , these students are studying in class -XII. All 
DCs/Principals have been requested to explore CSR for providing digital devices to the students 
of KVs. To minimise the digital divide, various steps have been taken up by NIOS which include 
the following: 

18 
 
● NIOS delivers 3 hours live video programmes every day on e-vidya 10 and 12 channels 
for providing continuous learning support for learners at the Secondary and Senior 
Secondary level including Vocational Courses and Indian Sign Language based content 
w.e.f. 01.04.2021 i.e., after the onset of the second wave of COVID Pandemic. These 
channels can be accessed through DD, dish TV, and Jio App. Jio T.V. App. 
● NIOS content is available on a separate vertical ‘DIKSHA’ (Digital Infrastructure for 
Knowledge Sharing)  of e-Vidya involving e -content and QR coded energized books for 
all the classes and  provides multi -mode access to digital/online education called ‘one 
nation, one digital platform’ comprising one channel for each class. The special e -content 
for visually and hearing-impaired students is also available on the platform. Till now, 652 
NIOS contents related to different subjects at secondary level and 1018 contents at Senior 
Secondary level are uploaded on DIKSHA Portal. The learners can download the video 
and content and learn at their own convenient time. 
● Live Personal Contact Programmes (PCPs) of Secondary, Senior Secondary, Vocational 
courses and Diploma in Elementary Education (D.El.Ed.)  are broadcast through Web 
Radio (Mukta Vidya Vani).  
● The Community Radio (91.2 MHz)  of NIOS broadcasts live programmes on topics 
relevant to the communit y. To provide a safe and comfortable atmosphere for healthy 
living and education during COVID -19 pandemic, various civic issues related to COVID -
19 such as guidance and counseling, social distancing measures and health and nutrition, 
Yoga and meditation are discussed.  
● Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs)  relating to NIOS (grades 9 to 12 of open 
schooling) are uploaded on SWAYAM portal which contain 42 courses including 13 
courses at Secondary level, 20 courses at Senior Secondary level and 8 Vocational courses. 
80,000 learners have already enrolled in these courses. SWAYAM MOOCs have been 
developed using the four -quadrant approach – text in PDF, a teaching video, self -
assessment exercises; and discussion forum. 
● Worksheets at Secondary and Senior Secondary le vel are being developed with the 
purpose to provide academic support to learners and keep them academically engaged 
through constant practice. These are exploratory in nature and help in developing problem-

19 
 
solving skills, creative thinking, and life skills ; in the form of project work that engages 
learners in some activity, etc. 
● The learner’s guide at Secondary and Senior Secondary level is being prepared by NIOS 
for addressing the unfinished learning and learning losses due to COVID -19 pandemic. In 
the lea rner's guide, the contents presented in the textbook (Self -Learning Material of 
NIOS) are broken down into concise summary and are presented with the support of visual 
cues, pictures and flow charts. 
● For facilitating education of Divyangjan, study material has been developed in Digitally 
Accessible Information System (DAISY) and in sign language; both are available on NIOS 
website/YouTube. 176 sign language videos are uploaded on DIKSHA portal by NIOS. 
Contents in sign language medium are delivered twice a week through live video 
programme on e-Vidya 10 channels.  
NIOS Video resources are available on the NIOS website (www.nios.ac.in) and YouTube 
channel. 
CAPACITY BUILDING OF TEACHERS  
Recommendations 
15. The Department should encourage States / UTs to augment existing digital / technological 
infrastructure and create more such facilities for optimal utilization of the same by teachers / 
students for efficient and effective delivery of content via online mode.     (Para-18.7 a) 
16. Teachers may be traine d in a strategic manner so as to enable them to create captivating 
content for digital education and engage students in online mode through active interaction and 
creation of a school like ambience.             (Para-18.7 b) 
 
17. Teachers, particularly in rural, tribal and backward areas may be given intensive training 
in use of digital devices and Information Technology in collaboration with IITs, private sector etc. 
                                                          (Para-18.7 c) 

20 
 
18. Provision of incentives in the form of digital devices, internet connectivity, data packs etc. 
at home to teachers, particularly those in rural, remote or backward areas, in order to encourage 
them to shift to digital education and explore new strategies / innovations therein. 
 (Para-18.7 d) 
19. Specialized training programmes may also be developed for teaching children with special 
needs, physically challenged children and children with learning disabilities, particularly for 
imparting online / distance education.          (Para-18.7 e) 
Action Taken 
As informed in its Action taken Notes, t he Department of School Education and Literacy 
has launched an initiative to improve learning outcomes at the Elementary level through an 
Integrated Teacher Training Programme called NISHTHA – National Initiative for School Heads’ 
and Teachers’ Holistic Advancement under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Samagra  Shiksha 
in August 2019.  The aim of this training is to motivate and equip teachers to encourage and foster 
critical thinking in students, handle diverse situations and act as first level counsellors.   
Due to COVID-19 challenges and in order to provide continuous professional development 
opportunities to the teachers at the elementary level, this Department has launched NISHTHA  
online using DIKSHA platform in October 2020.   Under NISHTHA, a module on integrating 
ICT in teaching, learning and assessment has been introduced. Further, NCERT has initiated a 
webinar series from April, 2020 focusing on orientation of teachers, studen ts and other 
stakeholders on use of various ICT tools, digital initiatives and emerging trends in educational 
technology, cyber safety and security. Further, NEP 2020 emphasizes the continuous professional 
development of school heads and teachers to meet t he needs of enriched teaching -learning 
processes for quality education. Also, it has been highlighted in NEP 2020, that each teacher and 
school principal is expected to participate in at least 50 hours of continuous professional 
development every year for their own professional development, driven by their own interests. To 
realize this goal, NCERT has developed a series of courses for continuous professional 
development and delivered through DIKSHA. States/UTs have run these courses on DIKSHA.   
NCERT has also been conducting various online/ blended courses on ICT/ ET as under:  
  Online Certificate Course on Action Research in Educational Technology  

21 
 
1. The online course on Action Research in Educational Technology is specially developed 
for the teacher educators at elementary level working in District Institutes of Education 
and Training (DIETs), different State Councils of Educational Research and Training 
(SCERTs) and State Institutes of Education (SIEs). The course also aims at assisting them 
in conducting In -service Teacher Professional Development (ITPD) in Action Research. 
On 1st December 2020, the 10th cycle of courses on Online Action in Educational 
Technology was started with 160 candidates in blended mode. Online synchronous 
meetings were conduc ted on a regular basis to resolve the issue and doubts raised by 
participants. 139 candidates completed the course. 
2. The same course was also conducted through SWAYAM portal  and 6,583 teachers and 
teacher educators have participated in the course. 
Rollout of ICT and pedagogy integration curriculum in States /UTs/ autonomous 
organisations  
1. Courses under ICT in education curriculum is implemented in States/UTs under Samagra  
Shiksha to enable teachers to use technology in the classroom.  Induction- 1 course was 
implemented in Karnataka and 11,481 teachers were trained and certified during 2020 -21. 
Training was also initiated for 2021-22. 
2. Around 400 sessions were conducted as part of a Webinar series for various stakeholders 
on ET and ICT tools. 
3. Online courses were conducted for the National ICT awardees. Almost 65 awardees were 
awarded Induction 1 certificate and 27 awardees were certified for Refresher 1 course on 
“ICT Pedagogy Integration in Teaching Learning and Assessment’. 
4. Virtual workshop on ‘Development of e-Content' was conducted in two phases for State 
Resource Groups (SRGs) of all the 36 States/UTs and around 750 participants were 
trained. Virtual training was also attended by 2000 teachers of Punjab through YouTube. 
Workshops on e -Content development wer e conducted for participants from Chandigarh. 
Also training support was provided for the states of Assam, Haryana and UP. 
5. On the occasion of Safer Internet Day, a panel discussion was conducted and an online 
quiz was also launched on Feb 13, 2021. Around 3 5,938 participants attempted the quiz, 
out of which 19,505 were certified on “Safer Internet Day Awareness Quiz”. 

22 
 
6. Online training on ‘Development of digital game -based e-Content, was conducted for 10 
days during 5 -16 July 2021. Around 3755 participants reg istered for the course including 
students and teachers. At the end of the online course, around 202 submitted a digital game 
as an assignment and around 125 were certified after evaluation of the digital games. 
7. A five days online workshop on ‘Use and Integ ration of Technology on One Year 
Implementation of the Vision of NEP - 2020’ was organised during August 9 -13, 2021. 
About 13,385 participants registered themselves and around 2172 participated in the 
course assessment quiz conducted at the end of the work shop and 1204 scored 70% & 
above and were certified. 
Professional Development of NCERT Faculty and teachers on ICT in Education  
1. An online training programme was conducted on “Assessment using Google Forms’ on 
May 7, 2020. 
2. Training on conducting ‘Online Cl asses using Google Meet’ and web -based training on 
‘Cyber Safety & Security’ was also conducted through YouTube for NCERT faculty and 
Demonstration Multipurpose Schools. 
       ICT course through NISHTHA 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0  
1. One dedicated course on ‘Integration of ICT in Teaching, Learning and Assessment’ was 
developed and conducted as part of NISHTHA 1.0 (Elementary) through DIKSHA portal 
and around 29,25,296 teachers and school heads at the elementary level of education were 
enrolled and 25,87,674 were certified. This course was implemented in 30 States/ UTs and 
8 autonomous organisations (CBSE, CICSE, KVS, NVS, CTSA, AEES, Sainik Schools, 
EMRS-NSTA under MoE, MoD and MoTA) in 13 languages. 
2. One dedicated course on ‘ICT in Teaching, Learning and Asse ssment’ is being conducted 
as part of NISHTHA 2.0 (Secondary) through DIKSHA portal and around 64,83,11 
teachers and school heads at the secondary level of education were enrolled and 42,32,36 
were certified till date. This course is being implemented by 3 1 States/ UTs and 7 
autonomous organisations (CBSE, CICSE, KVS, NVS, CTSA, AEES, Sainik Schools, 
under MoE and MoD) in 8 languages. 
Module 1 of NISHTHA is specifically on ‘Curriculum, Learner Centred Pedagogy, Learning 
Outcomes and Inclusive Education’, wherein the pedagogies for achieving the learning outcomes 

23 
 
for all children have been specified, namely, role of teachers in creating inclusive classrooms and 
Teacher’s skills- accept and address diversity, gender sensitive education, inclusion in teaching of 
different subjects and assessment for inclusive environment.  Further, it also includes   content on 
assistive technologies, digit al resources for DIVYANG children etc.  NCERT has developed 
guidelines on specific goal of developing teaching -learning e-content for Children with Special 
Needs.  
At Present, the following contents in English and Hindi Medium in the form of Text, Video 
and Sign Language are available on DIKSHA Platform for the benefit of the Learners: 
 NCERT and NIOS have also developed e content for visually impaired children and 
uploaded on DIKSHA. 
 21 subjects of Secondary level comprising 763 content pieces 
 32 subjects of Senior Secondary level comprising 1333 content pieces 
 191 videos in ISL medium for 7 subjects of Secondary and Senior Secondary level.  
NISHTHA secondary Program has also been launched for all the teachers of 
NavodayaVidyalaya Samiti to adopt innovative teaching methodologies and pedagogies.  Also, 
KVS regularly organizes In -Service courses for the teachers to update them with new and 
innovative teaching methodologies to impart such learning and progressively assess difficulties. 
Online In-service Courses and workshops were conducted by KVS through its Zonal Institutes of  
Education and  Training (ZIETs), for capacity building and hand holding of teachers so as to 
enable them to conduct online classes efficiently.  During these courses, teachers have been 
trained on use of different platforms, developing & use of various e -resources, audio/video 
recording & techniques for uploading of content. Training of teachers was also conducted to 
apprise them about different methods to conduct online assessment. A total number of 42821 
teachers were trained from April, 2020 till 31 st January, 2021 for conducting online classes. 
Trainings, workshops and webinars are being conducted from time to time to sensitize all teachers 
about the effective use of devices. 
CBSE conducted 2420267 man -hours of training for around 0.7 million teachers from April 
2021 till present on different areas including online pedagogy. Several bite -sized modules were 
also prepared and disseminated post training to augment the capacities o f teachers.403634 
teachers have also been trained under National Initiative for School Heads’ and Teachers’ Holistic 

24 
 
Advancement (NISHTHA) program of the Government of India. In addition , following action has 
been taken by CBSE: 
(i) National Annual Conference of Sahodaya School Complexes are held on yearly basis. 
Under Sahodaya, CBSE has helped schools come together and form an interactive and 
sharing relationship. At present, there are 260 such complexes which are active throughout 
the country and share and ca re for each other,  particularly those which are in close physical 
proximity.  
(ii) Webinar Series on NEP : CBSE conducted a series of webinars for its Principals, Teachers 
and Parents to facilitate effective implementation of NEP -2020 from July -August 2020 
onwards.  
(iii) Development of online and blended teacher training modules and content as exemplar by 
CBSE: The following eight modules under three MOOCs are prepared on FLN and so far, 
around 54000 teachers have been registered for training on these:  
 Meaning and Importance of Foundational Learning 
 Teaching and Learning changes recommended by the NEP for FLN grades 
 Learning Goals for Foundational Literacy and Numeracy across Grades 1, 2 and 3 
 Skills and Mind sets of an FLN Teacher 
 Active Pedagogy and the shift from Traditional Practice 
 Conducive Classroom Environment 
 Importance of Classroom Assessments 
(iv) Structured lesson plans as a tool to improve student learning and achieve FLN outcomes : 
In respect of NIOS, following actions have been initiated: 
 NIOS organizes  training programmes for its Study Centre Coordinators and tutors who 
take academic counselling sessions for NIOS learners on weekends. 
 NIOS is developing a 100 days online teacher training programme to orient teachers for 
digital teaching -learning, transforming teaching with 21st Century Skills and to provide 
engaging learning experience.  This will aid the capacity building of teachers in new 
knowledge and 21st century skills to perform their duties at the optimum level. 
 Periodic in-service training is also needed in order to keep the teachers up to date and in 
consonance with the latest developments in knowledge as well as new technology or 
techniques used in the teaching learning process.  However, it is not always practical to 

25 
 
develop training pro grammes right from scratch, rather Competency -based approaches 
may be integrated into the existing teacher training course. Hence, NIOS is reviewing its 
existing Professional Development Programme for Elementary Teachers (PDPET) Course 
to integrate compete ncy based approaches into education which the teachers would 
integrate into their own practice during their classes based on learning outcomes as a cross 
cutting theme across all activities and tasks that comprise the training. 
 NIOS regularly undertakes ca pacity building programmes to orient the Academic Faculty 
to the various facets of work and activities at NIOS with particular emphasis on their role 
in the Department.  
 Recently, a two -day orientation Programme was organized on 12th -13th April 2021 at 
NIOS Headquarters for the faculty members of the Academic Department to familiarize 
them with the various dimensions of Open Schooling. Different sessions on Evolution of 
Open Schooling, NEP - Implications for Open Schooling, Activities of NIOS, Roles and 
Functions of the Academic Department, Development of Self Learning Material, 
Overview of Media and ICT, Overview of the NIOS Library and Free -to-use Resources, 
Assessment Practices at NIOS, and Projects at NIOS were conducted. 
 NIOS is developing the Gender Gr een Teacher Programme which is an in -service 
professional development programme for school teachers, in the areas of environment and 
gender. It shall be complemented by a strong ICT enabled network of teacher practitioners. 
The programme shall include modu les on gender and environment with a common focus 
on how these themes can be mainstreamed and integrated in teaching and learning. The 
overall objective is to increase knowledge, change attitudes and improve responsible 
practices/behaviours in regards to both the environment and gender, at both the level of the 
teacher and the learner. 
For developing specialized training programmes for teaching children with special needs, 
physically challenged children and children with learning disabilities , NVS has taken following 
action: 
• Facilities such as ramps and special toilets are provided to Children with Special Needs 
(students). 
• Sessions on inclusive education are the integral part of all induction trainings 
organized for teachers and Principals. 
• Collaboration with specialized training institutes is being done to impart training. 

26 
 
Similarly, in KVS  inclusive education is a part of all training programs for teachers. 
Sessions are held during in -service training program of teachers and focused workshops are also 
held to sensitize teachers and provide basic training. 
Following initiatives have also bee n undertaken by NIOS for creation of content for 
DIVYANG children: 
 NIOS is delivering one -hour live programme in Indian Sign Language twice a week on 
PM e-Vidya 10 TV Channel since September 2020. 
 NIOS delivers 3 hours live video programmes every day on PM  e-vidya 10 and 12 
channels for providing continuous learning support for learners at the Secondary and 
Senior Secondary level including Vocational Courses and Indian Sign Language based 
content. 
 Sign Language Dictionary comprising of 36 videos of about 2000 words and sentences. 
 
SCHOOL RE-OPENING GUIDELINES DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC  
Recommendation  
20. The closure of schools for over a year has had a deep impact on the wellbeing of students, 
especially their mental health.  The hazards of not opening the schools are too serious to be 
ignored.  The confinement of young children within the four walls of the house, being unable to 
attend school, has altered the relationship between the parent and the children adversely.  The 
closure of schools has impacte d the social fabric of the family in negative manner leading to 
early/child marriage and increased involvement of children in household chores.  The present 
situation has exacerbated the learning crisis that existed even before the pandemic with the 
marginal and vulnerable children getting adversely affected.  Keeping this situation in mind, it 
becomes all the more imperative to open schools.  The seriousness of the matter should not be 
overlooked and a well -balanced reasoned view may be taken for opening u p of the schools.  The 
Committee accordingly recommends the following: 
Accentuated vaccine programmes for all students, teachers and allied staff so that schools may 
start functioning normally at the earliest.                      (Para-18.9 a) 
Action Taken 

27 
 
School Education Secretaries of all the States and Union Territories were requested to 
comply with the advisory of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for undertaking 100% 
vaccination for the eligible age-groups by duly creating additional vaccination centres and optimal 
capacity utilization of existing centres vide the Ministry’s D.O. letter No. 1 -2/2020-IS.5 dated 
19.07.2021.  All the States and UTs have been requested to upload the status of reopening of 
schools and vaccination of school staff on the Google Tracker created for this purpose.  
Similarly, all the Autonomous Bodies under the Department of School Education and 
Literacy were also requested to get all their officers/staff (teaching/non -
teaching/regular/contractual) vaccinated urgentl y vide the Ministry’s D.O. letter No. 7 -2/2021-
Sch.4 dated 26.7.2021.  They have also been requested to upload the status of vaccination of their 
staff on the Google Tracker. 
Staff of the Jawahar  Navodaya Vidyalayas are getting Vaccine for COVID -19. Around  
92% of the JNV staff has got at least first dose of the Vaccine and around 45% have received both 
the doses of the vaccine. The parents / guardians of students have been made aware about the 
Vaccination programme by the JNVs, and they are motivated to get  Vaccination for themselves 
and eligible wards. 
KVs are being opened as per the direction of concerned state governments and classes are 
being conducted in blended mode. 
Recommendation  
21. Classes may be held on alternate days or in two shifts to thin out  students along with 
observance of physical distancing and compulsory wearing of face masks at all times, frequent 
hand sanitization etc.                         (Para-18.9 b) 
22. Regular thermal screening at the time of attendance and random RT -PCR tests may be 
conducted to identify and isolate any infected student / teacher / staff immediately. A sick -room 
with essential facilities / medicines may be set up in each school for facilitating observation, 
immediate isolation and for providing basic medical kit in case of emergency.     (Para-18.9 c) 
23. Zero tolerance towards laxity in maintaining Covid protocols and appropriate behavior by 
all the stake holders, namely, school management / authorities, teachers, students, allied staff, 

28 
 
parents, visitors, schoo l and private transporter and any other person(s) connected with school 
management and functioning.            (Para-18.9 d) 
Action Taken 
It was informed that the Ministry of Education, Department of School Education and 
Literacy have issued detailed, exhaustive and comprehensive Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP)/Guidelines for Health and Safety protocols for reopening of Schools and Learning with 
Physical/Social Distancing in consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and 
after taking  into consideration the suggestions/comments received from States and Union 
Territories vide letter No. 11 -16/2020-Sch.4 dated 05.10.2020.The guidelines/SOPs are divided 
into two parts: 
a) Part I refers to the health and safety aspects for reopening schools. These are based on the 
prevailing instructions of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare with regard to health and 
safety protocols, and may be implemented by adopting/adapting in accordance with the 
local situation in all States/UTs. 
b) Part II refers to lear ning with physical/social distancing and the aspects related to the 
delivery of education, such as curriculum transactions, instructional load, timetables, 
assessment, emotional and mental health and capacity building of stakeholders, etc.  
c) These guideline s are advisory in nature and States &UTs may use these in the manner 
deemed fit to prepare their own guidelines/SOPs. 
States and UTs have been advised that based on these guidelines/SOPs, they may develop their 
own Standard Operating Procedures for reopening schools and for training different stakeholders.    
For conduct of physical classes , guidelines issued by respective State Government are being 
followed by NVS and KVS.  During the period of suspension of physical classes, online classes / 
offline academic support is being provided to the students as per Pragyata guidelines. 
Adherence to the SOPs on school re -opening and COVID -19 management plan is being 
monitored in NVS at three levels viz. Cluster Level, Regional Office Level and Head Quarter 
Level. In every JNV, provision for isolation centre has been made. Regular thermal scanning of 
employees is being done by Vidyalaya Staff Nurse. Every JNV has a Medical Inspection room in 
which basic facilities and medicines are available. 

29 
 
KVS follows the protocols, and guidelines issued by Govt. of India/State Authority and 
instructed to all Regional Offices to take all preventive measures to contain the spread of COVID -
19 and give proper attention on sensitisation/cleanliness of Vidyalaya campus vide this  office 
letter dated 19.04.2021, 22.04.2021 & 21.06.2021. 
Recommendation  
24. Each school should have at least two Oxygen concentrators with trained personnel to 
address any eventuality and provide first aid till availability of outside medical help.    (Para-18.9 e) 
Action Taken 
The SOP/Guidelines for reopening of schools issued by this Department provide for 
constitution of ‘Task Teams’ such as, Emergency Care Support/Response Team, General Support 
Team for all stakeholders, Commodity Support Team, Hygi ene Inspection Team, etc. with 
earmarked responsibilities. 
These SOP/Guidelines provide for ensuring availability in school or at contactable 
distance, full -time trained health care attendant/nurse/doctor and counsellor to take care of 
physical and mental health of the students.  
All States/UTs are expected to comply with the COVID -19 related directions issued by 
Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, from 
time to time. 
The extent and severity of COVID -19 is evolving and changing with time and also varies 
spatially from region to region. The response and safety protocols will accordingly need to be 
adjusted to these dynamics by the States/UTs from time to time. States/UTs may plan additional 
measures depending on the local situation.   
Education being a subject in the Concurrent List of Constitution, majority of schools are 
under the jurisdiction of the State Governments.  It is, therefore, for the respective State/UT 
Governments to take appropriate action to ensure availability of the requisite 
facilities/equipment/items to deal with any eventuality in their schools. 

30 
 
Every JNV has at least one oxygen cylinder, along with pulse oxymeter and thermal 
scanners in sufficient numbers. Oxygen Concentrators are also available at Regional office level 
which can be utilized by the JNVs, in case of emergency. 
Recommendation  
25. Students belonging to economically weaker and marginalized sections of society may be 
supplied hand sanitizer/facemask at regular interval.         (Para-18.9 f) 
Action Taken 
The SOP/Guidelines for reopening of schools issued on 5.10.2020 clearly provide that the 
schools are to “Ensure availability of key supplies like thermometers, disinfectants, soaps, etc., 
and arrange for availability of these  essentials. The thermometer to be used should be a calibrated 
contact-less infrared digital thermometer.” 
A checklist for safe school environment has been prescribed in the SOP/Guidelines for 
reopening of schools.  This contains a Checklist for School Adm inistrators, Teachers and other 
Staff.  Under this Section, the School Administration is to confirm that key supplies like 
thermometers (calibrated contact -less infrared digital thermometer), disinfectants, soaps, hand 
sanitizers, masks, etc., are availabl e in adequate quantity in the school. This is applicable for all 
the staff and students, whosoever is in need of these items. 
Face masks and sanitizers are provided by the JNVs, free of costs to all the students. In the 
KVS,hand sanitizers to workers are being provided at regular intervals.  
Recommendation  
26. Frequent / surprise inspection of schools may be done by health inspectors / health 
workers to ensure strict adherence to hygiene and COVID protocols.       (Para-18.9 g) 
Action Taken 
The SOP/Guidelines are provided for organizing regular health check -up of students a nd 
teachers. Further, education , being a subject in the Concurrent List of Constitution, majority of 
schools are under the jurisdiction of the State Governments.  It is, theref ore, for the respective 
State/UT Governments to take appropriate action to ensure frequent checks of their schools to 
ensure adherence to hygiene and COVID protocols. 

31 
 
In addition, the school-wise SOPs on school re-opening and COVID-19 management plans 
of every JNV are approved by the concerned district authorities and they regularly visit the JNVs 
to inspect the adherence to the COVID -19 Protocols. At the cluster level,  an Assistant 
Commissioner of NVS supervises the JNVs in the matter. 
Recommendation  
27. Best practices being followed in different countries for opening of schools may be taken 
into consideration for taking an informed decision.          (Para-18.9 h) 
Action Taken 
The decision for reopening schools in States/UTs is a matter within the purview and 
authority of the State/UT and, therefore, it is for the State/UT Governments to take into 
consideration all the relevant factors, including the practice being followed in different countries 
for opening of schools. 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
NEED FOR PROPER DOCUMENTATION AND DATA COLLECTION  
Recommendations 
1. Impact of online/digital/distant education during the pandemic to create data sets based 
on demography, socio-economic status, student's learning habits, including hours of online study, 
students perception of their self -learning, occupational aspirations, psychological effect etc. for a 
comparative study/analysis and for augmenting policy makers' awareness and aid them in 
formulating policies for ensuring better preparedness and for planning for future scenarios; 
              (Para-18.2 d) 
2. Availability of digital devices and their usage, with special emphasis on rural, tribal and 
backward areas of the country and the economically weaker and marginalized sections of society 
and remedial action taken based on the findings thereof;         (Para-18.2 e) 
3. Performance assessment of teachers, especially in coordination with the States and UTs, 
to ascertain their potential in handling audio-visual tools and imparting digital education;  
    (Para-18.2 f) 
4. The minimum requirements of technological infrastructure for improving digital education 
in schools across the country, particularly in rural, tribal, hilly and backward areas as well as in 
Aspirational Districts, and chalk out a roadmap for development of such facilities with increased 
investment to meet any such emergent situations in future.              (Para-18.2 g) 
5. Weekly assessment of digital learning outcomes to regularly assess learning progress of 
students to enable them to course correct in case requisite targets are not achieved.  (Para-18.2 h) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that a  comprehensive initiative called PM e-vidya has been 
initiated which unifies all efforts related to digital/online/on-air education to enable multi-mode 

33 
 
access to education. This will benefit nearly 25 crore school going children across the country. 
The initiative is a work in progress and includes:  
 DIKSHA, the nation’s digital infrastructure for providing quality e -content for school 
education in states/ UTs:  and QR coded Energized Textbooks for all grades (one nation, 
one digital platform). 
 One earmarked TV channel per class from 1 to 12 (one class, one channel) 
 Extensive use of Radio, Community radio and CBSE Podcast- ShikshaVani 
 Special e-content for visually and hearing impaired. 
 
To reach out to those students who lack access to technology , various innovative activities 
are being done at national, state or district level such as Gali-GaliSim-Sim, Tili-Mili programme, 
Motor Eskool, Roving Teacher, Pro ject SMILE (Social Media Interface for Learning 
Engagement), e -Kaksha, formation of Whatsap p and other social media groups, Work Book 
Distribution at home, Teacher calling to maintain connects with students. 
Also, keeping in view the availability of digita l infrastructure, PRAGYATA Guidelines on 
Digital Education have been issued.  The guidelines brief on various modes of digital education 
including online mode that depends more on availability of internet, partially online mode that 
utilizes the blended approach of digital technology and other offline activities, and offline mode 
that utilizes television and radio as a major medium of instruction of education. It also provides a 
roadmap or pointers for carrying forward enhanced quality online education. This guideline will 
be useful for a diverse set of stakeholders including school  heads, teachers, parents, teacher 
educators and students. It also outlines the support to be provided to students with special needs. 
Main emphasis is on balanced online and offline activities keeping the screen time as an 
essential parameter according to  the level of students. Physical health and mental wellness is 
stressed across the guidelines so that children do not get overly stretched or stressed, or get 
affected negatively owing to prolonged use of digital devices. The guidelines can be accessed at: 
https://www.education.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/pragyata-guidelines_0.pdf 
Further, the state governments have been directed to act based on the situation prevailing 
at every place to meet the demands of all students for providing them with the digital access 
required for learning digitally. Depending on the states’ requirement , the Ministry of Education 
provides Rs.6.40 Lakh for setting up computer labs and Rs.2.40 Lakh for smart classroom. 

34 
 
During 2021 -22, an outlay of Rs. 276.0 lakh has been es timated under ICT and Digital 
Initiatives to the State of Kerala for establishment of smart classrooms in 115 schools. 
 
Under the Bharat Net programme, the CSC e-Governance Services India Ltd (CSC-SPV) 
of MeitY has been assigned the task of providing Fibre  to the Home (FTTH) connectivity to 
Gram Panchayats including connectivity to the Government Institutions, including schools. This 
project is for providing Internet connection to Government schools in respective Gram 
Panchayat. The School Education Departm ents of the respective State Governments have 
appointed State/District-wise Nodal Officers for this project for effective implementation. About 
63,100 Schools have been provided FTTH connections through BharatNet so far. 
PM e-Vidya live TV Programme on Teaching Learning Interventions for Inclusive 
Classrooms - Ask the Expert: 121 live sessions of 'Teaching Learning Interventions for Inclusive 
Classrooms - Ask the Expert' have been transmitted live covering about 60.5 hours. Further, 
DIKSHA Chatbot through portal and WhatsApp are available for users. 
In addition to the above, Jawahar  Navodaya Vidyalayas are residential schools which are 
well equipped with desktops, laptops and internet connectivity. All classrooms of 99 JNVs located 
in Minority Concentrated Areas, have been converted into smart classrooms. In 616 JNVs, smart 
computers labs have been established under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). NVS has 
conducted survey of availability of digital devices with the students and strategy for reaching out 
to every student through online and offline modes was finalized. For the students who are not 
having devices or internet connectivity, remedial measures were taken to reach out to them by 
way of providing them the printed instructional packages and thro ugh personal contact by the 
teachers through telephone or through indirect contact (any parent / relative or other JNV student 
nearby / Peer group / Alumni). Instructional packages (Supplementary learning materials / 
workbooks etc.)and learning resources s uch as Exemplar problems & Bridge courses etc. were 
delivered to home. JNVs have been directed to chalk out strategy for each student in consultation 
with teachers and parents to ensure that child-wise learning plan and necessary well-being support 
is identified. Every teacher has to maintain data regarding accessibility of digital education, socio -
economic status, learning habits and special attention, if required for every child. Online classes 
by teachers are monitored / inspected by Vice Principals and Principals of the JNVs on regular 
basis to judge the quality of teaching and ascertain their potential in imparting digital education 
and providing technical assistance, if needed. Regional Offices also monitor the online teaching 

35 
 
transactions to ascertain the quality of education being imparted. Attendance of students in online 
classes is reviewed on weekly basis by the JNVs. Student-wise assessment on progress of learning 
and need of additional support is also being done by teachers and the same is monito red at 
Principal level. Officers from Regional Offices also monitor online classes. 
Also, in KVS, m apping of students to assess availability of devices was done and about 
98.82 % students reached through various modes of online teaching - learning process. All out 
efforts are also being made to reach to all. Teachers’ performance being assessed from time to 
time by Principals/VP/HM and hand h olding or support is also being provided by Principals & 
Regional Office through training, workshops and webinars. In house content too has been 
prepared by the teachers. There are 11780 - E –classrooms, 376 - Digital Language lab, 88163 - 
Desktop computers available in KVs. All KVs are using these technological infrastructures to 
impart digital education to the students.    
DIGITAL EDUCATION AND ITS EFFICACY  
Recommendations 
6. Recorded online courses/Massive Open Online Courses may be developed in all regional 
languages for each class where students can customize learning speeds and timings. (Para-18.4 a) 
7. An Integrated Learning Management System, a software application for overall 
administration may be created for availability, tracking, reporting and delivery of all educational 
content created across the country in multiple languages on a single platform a s well as for 
training-learning and development/capacity building programmes for both students and teachers.    
              (Para-18.4 b) 
 
8. Artificial Intelligence-based education tools which can collect data on a student's level of 
understanding and learning progress, analyze it and accordingly determine or customize the 
digital content/course to augment comprehension and spur learning progress.          (Para-18.4 c) 
9. Augmented and Virtual Reality Education solutions may be developed for enabling 
interactive learning and understanding core concepts. The Department may enter into 
collaboration with the Indian Institutes of Technology and oth er leading engineering colleges to 
develop low cost technologies for the same.          (Para-18.4 d) 

36 
 
10. Virtual labs with simulation exercises for practical classes should be developed for 
extensive use in all classes across schools.        (Para-18.4 e) 
11. Regular feedback/control mechanism for e -content should be made mandatory as the 
course designer needs to be aware of the needs of the 'end users' i.e., students and teachers and 
tailor/customize content and delivery to suit their needs/requirement.                         (Para-18.4 f) 
12. Technical courses may be incorporated in the curriculum to equip students for 
technological and digital advancements and enhance their digital literacy.               (Para-18.4 g) 
Action Taken 
As informed by the Department, the following efforts have been made to improve digital 
education: 
E-Content is available in 33 Indian languages on DIKSHA. 4,167 Textbooks  are 
energized by States/UTs and published on DIKSHA, 2,11,304 pieces of e -content are live on 
DIKSHA as on date. 14 States/UTs and central organizations (including CBSE and NCERT) are 
leveraging Vidya Daan to source content on DIKSHA.  Further, CBSE has advised its schools to 
follow the PRAGYATA Guidelines for Digital Education developed by Ministry of Educat ion 
which also specify the time duration per day for online classes for different classes in school. 
NVS teachers have created class -wise and subject-wise e-content that was circulated to all 
the JNVs for the use of teachers and students during digital / o nline learning. Single Learning 
Management System (LMS) using platform of Microsoft Teams for Education is being adopted in 
NVS for online classes. Teachers are being trained and MS Teams would be used by all JNVs for 
conducting online teaching and learnin g by providing personalized e -content / projects for 
assessment and performance analysis of the students as well as monitoring of classes. Attendance 
of students during online classes is also being recorded. NVS teachers have created class -wise and 
subject-wise e-contents that were circulated to all the JNVs for the use of teachers and students. 
The content is open -ended and can be customized by the teachers as per their requirement.  NVS 
has incorporated technical courses such as artificial intelligence, Co ding, Data Science and 
Information Technology for Classes VI to VIII. For Classes IX & X Artificial Intelligence, Data 
Science & Information Technology and for Classes XI & XII , Information Technology and 
Computer Science have been incorporated. 

37 
 
KVS follows the curriculum designed by CBSE and Artificial Intelligence as a skill course 
has been introduced in all the Kendriya  Vidyalayas from session 2020 -21 onwards.  NIOS also 
provides online education support throughout the year using various online platform s uch as Live 
video programmes on e -Vidya, Content Support for NIOS Learners on DIKSHA (Digital 
Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing) platform, Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) on 
SWAYAM Platform, Live Personal Contact Programmes (PCPs) through Web Radio (Mukta 
Vidya Vani) and Community based programmes on Community Radio (91.2 MHz) of NIOS. 
CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS, OUT -OF-SCHOOL CHILDREN, CHILDREN OF 
MIGRANT WORKERS  
Recommendation  
13. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts made by the Department to provide 
inclusive and equitable learning to all by enhancing and integrating learning with technology, 
recommends that the Department should give wide publicity to the various steps and measures 
taken by it to impart inclusive and equitable e ducation to all sections of students, including 
CWSN, OoSC, children of migrant workers etc., so that the beneficiaries are aware of th e 
facilities available for them.             (Para-18.6 a)  
14. The Department should urge the States / UTs for better and stricter implementation of the 
various guidelines issued in this regard, so that the benefits actually percola te to the ground level.
               (Para-18.6 b)  
15. Concerted efforts may be made to develop textbooks in DAISY for mat in regional 
languages also.              (Para-18.6 c)  
16. Special audio / video content and in Indian Sign Language may be created to cater to the 
curricular learning requirements of physically challenged children / children with special needs. 
                          (Para-18.6 d)  
Action Taken 
Education being in the Concurrent List of the Constitution, majority of the schools falls 
under the domain of the respective State/UT Government.  To prevent loss of learning and to 
ensure that children have access to education with quality and equity and to minimize the impact 
of the pandemic on school education in the country, the Department of School Education & 

38 
 
Literacy has shared detailed guidelines dated 13th July, 2020 and 7th January, 2021, on the steps to 
be taken by the States and UTs. The guidelines, among others include admission without any 
procedural formalities, identification of out of school children, enrolment drives and awareness 
generation, student support while schools are closed, continued education for Children With 
Special Needs (CWSN), student support on school reopening and Teacher capacity building. 
Further, it was informed that a comprehensive COVID action plan has also been  shared 
with States and UTs on 4 th May 2021 which delineates detailed action plan for all Stakeholders 
involved on Access, Retention, Continuous Learning, Capacity Building and Stakeholder 
engagement. 
The Department has also been pursuing the matter relati ng to the safety and security of the 
Children during these times through regular follow -up, Project Approval Board Meetings, etc. 
Also, various interventions under Samagra Shiksha have been realigned to manage the crisis with 
specific emphasis on access to  quality education, learning process and safety & security of 
children and also that funding provided for various components under Samagra Shiksha may be 
utilized to deal with the current situation.  The efforts have been made by Department of School 
Education & Literacy for Children With Special Needs as mentioned below: 
i) In all , 580 textbook based ISL videos have been recorded. Out of these , 490 are from 
classes 1 to 5. Out of these, 350 textbook based ISL videos uploaded on DIKSHA. 
ii) Out of 10,000 ISL dictionary words, all 10,000 ISL dictionary words have been uploaded 
on DIKSHA. From these 200 ISL dictionary videos with audio/ voice over and subtitles 
have been prepared and a flip book has been developed. The ISL Dictionary of 10,000 
words on DIKSHA was launched by Hon'ble Prime Minister of India on 7th Sept, 2021. 
iii) About 2,607 audio book chapters have been developed and uploaded on DIKSHA. The 
Talking Books (377) /Audio Books chapters (2,350) uploaded on DIKSHA and ePathshala 
was launched by Hon'ble Prime Minister of India on 7th Sept, 2021. 
As per the Policy, 3% seats in Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas are reserved for admission of 
CWSN. Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas provide inclusive education to the children with special 
needs. This policy of NVS is widely published through notifications and other publicity materials 
viz. prospectus of NVS Entrance Exam. The various guidelines issued by Government of India are 
circulated to all the JNVs for implementation. NVS has also prepared its own “Guidelines for 

39 
 
Online Education” drawing from guidelines of MoE and experiences of JNVs. Implementation of 
these guidelines is being monitored. 
KVS has informed all concerned about resources available for students especially CWSN. 
DCs, Principals, & Teachers are being sensitized about the effective implementation of the various 
guidelines. NCERT developed ‘Priya the Accessibility Warrior’ which is being shared with all 
KVS. 
Central Board of Secondary Education has permitted its schools to continue education through 
online mode.  CBSE vide its circular number 52/2020 directed schools to make adjustments 
needed for Divyang students learning. Schools were specifically suggested to: 
 use alternatives to print, such as audio or other formats in instruction, and sign -
language options in  all forms of the learning material (virtual, printed or 
broadcasted). 
 use flexible scheduling, assistive technology, simplified homework and formative 
assessments to alleviate the pressure on students and parents. 
 guide and train teachers and provide them  evidence-based resources on how to teach 
children with special needs in remote and online settings.  
 support parents by offering expert advice of special educators and counsellors.  
 follow the Pragyata guideline’s section 3.4 which provides insights on su pporting 
online learning of Children With Special Needs (CWSN). 
CBSE has also brought out a manual on mental health and psychosocial wellbeing during 
COVID. The Board has also organized a series of wellness webinars involving students as peer 
leaders and influencers and discussed issues such as care, compassion, communication, integrating 
art in education, importance of life skills and coping mechanisms especially during pandemic. 
NIOS is the largest “Open School” in the world which provides education to al l including 
disadvantaged persons who because of one or other reasons could not continue their education in 
the formal system of education.  For Children with Special Needs, NIOS has taken following 
action:  

40 
 
 NIOS has transformed seven subjects each at Secondary and Senior Secondary level to 
Video format in Indian Sign Language for facilitating education of deaf and hard of 
hearing learners. These sign language videos are available on NIOS Channel on YouTube 
and Diksha platform. 
 Sign Language Dictionary comprising 36 videos of about 2000 words and sentences has 
been prepared and is available on NIOS website. 
 NIOS has introduced Indian Sign Language as a language subject. 
 NIOS is working on the process of standardization of Indian Sign Language (ISL). In t his 
regard, a committee has been constituted for standardization of Indian Sign Language and 
various initiatives have already been taken. 
 One-hour Live telecast videos in Indian Sign Language on e -Vidya channel is being done 
regularly since September 2020 for awareness and dissemination of ISL across the country 
 Talking books for the learners with blindness and low vision in 6 subjects at Secondary 
level and 10 at Senior Secondary level are developed.  
 NIOS is in the process of developing a training manual for capacity building of 
functionaries associated with special education of NIOS all over the country, and the 
process has already been initiated. 
In respect of Out-of-School Children, following action has been taken by NIOS:  
 NIOS focuses on understanding  the problems of dropouts and creates pathways to take 
them into the fold of NIOS. 
 In compliance of NEP 2020,  a committee has been constituted comprising officials from 
CBSE, KVS, NVS, NCERT, NIEPA to prepare a scheme to cater the educat ional needs of 
dropouts from the formal school system through ODL courses designed by NIOS. NIOS 
will develop a mechanism of collaboration with states/UTs. 
REVIEW OF EXAMINATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS  
Recommendation  

41 
 
17. A credible, fair and transparent system of continuous assessment throughout the year may 
be developed and put in place even when normal functioning of schools re -commences, so as to 
meet any future emergent scenarios. This system should be over and above the final board 
examinations and would aid in helping s tudents and teachers get a correct perspective of their 
learning curve. and course correct wherever required.         (Para-18.8 a) 
18. Guidelines for Internal Assessment, Practicals, Project Work, particularly for classes 10 
and 12, be formulated and circ ulated for strict implementation in every school at the Centre and 
in States / UTs, be it Government, Government -aided or private, in order to ensure objective and 
uniform standard of assessment across the country.          (Para-18.8 b) 
19. Workbooks be d esigned to test and assess the understanding of core concepts and their 
practical application in each subject and teachers may assign topic -wise exercises from these 
workbooks to regularly assess their students' learning progress by assigning marks thereto  and 
tabulating them for final assessment.           (Para-18.8 c) 
20. Experiential learning may be encouraged and teachers may be given extensive training to 
adopt new and innovative teaching methodologies to impart such learning and progressively 
assess students' learning abilities and difficulties. Research Projects based on the experiential 
learning and understanding of core concepts in each subject and Presentations by students of 
their own projects before a panel of subject experts for objective evalu ation thereof may also be 
considered as an alternative assessment method.          (Para-18.6 d) 
Action Taken 
CBSE’s scheme of examinations in classes IX to XII mandates schools to conduct multiple 
examinations continuously. Schools are required to conduct  periodic tests and other internal 
assessments, portfolios, projects and other formative and summative tests. In formative 
assessment, learning gaps are identified and various remedial measures are taken to address the 
learning gaps. CBSE has developed res ource material to handhold teachers regarding formative 
and summative assessment. 
CBSE has modified its examination scheme by introducing biannual examinations from 
the current academic session 2021-22 to implement the recommendation of NEP-2020. 

42 
 
The exami nations will be held at the end of two terms each on half of the syllabus 
prescribed for the year. For classes X and XII, the first term examinations of one and a half hour 
are currently being conducted using the question paper comprising only Multiple Typ e Questions 
developed by CBSE and in the presence of external supervisors appointed by CBSE. The second 
term examination will be held during March –April, 2022 for a duration of 2 -hours. This would 
have descriptive questions. The results will be declared either on the basis of both of these 
examinations or on the basis of first term only if the second term is not possible due to any 
exigency. 
Guidelines for assessment issued by CBSE are being implemented in all JNVs. NVS has 
formulated and implemented system of continuous assessment incorporating the CBSE guidelines 
which includes formative assessments including competency based tests, Quizzes, Activities, 
Projects and assignments etc. Online course on Experiential Learning and Competency based 
Education has been undertaken by the Principal and Vice Principals on DIKSHA portal. 
Instructional package (supplementary learning materials/workbooks, worksheets, quizzes etc.) and 
learning resources such as Exemplar problems, Bridge course material are developed and provided 
along with similar materials which are available on DIKSHA Portal to the JNV students for their 
learning & assessments. 
The KVS has also followed  all the norms related to fair and transparent examination 
systems as prescribed by the Govt. Authorities and CBSE. Parents’ teacher’s meetings are being 
organized regularly to develop better understanding of the examination process. Examination 
schedule and curriculum are intimated to all students in the beginning of academic session through 
online teaching and other modes of communications. The development of project work is an 
integral part of all secondary and senior secondary level students and separat e marks are assigned 
to them in the final results. Research Projects based on the experiential learning have been taken 
up for understanding of core concepts in each subject. 
***** 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
STEPS TO ENSURE CONTINUED LEARNING  
Recommendation 
1. Budget for the Digital/Online education:  The Committee noted with concern the 
underutilization of the allotted funds by some States and recommends that  the Department should 
urge the States / UTs to fully utilize the budget grants made to them during the financial year 
2021-22 to augment digital / online education and create necessary infrastructural and 
technological facilities required therefor. The Co mmittee also recommends that since the digital / 
online mode of education is going to be the new normal even after the pandemic subsides, efforts 
to technologically empower every school and students across the country may be aggressively 
pursued and additional funds allocated for the purpose, as per requirement.         
           (Para-18.3 I) 
2. Use of Satellite TV for telecasting Educational content - a cost effective and viable 
solution- Telecast of educational programmes through satellite TV, on the model of Gujarat and 
Odisha, for a cost -effective mode of online education with wide outreach should be developed in 
all other States/UTs in collaborating with BISAG-N.             
           (Para-18.3 II a) 
3.  Wide publicity may be given to the educatio nal programmes being aired on Doordarshan 
and on satellite TV to create awareness amongst general public.  The educational channels of the 
Department may be clubbed and placed along with entertainment or news channels having high 
TRPs for enhanced visibili ty and attract higher viewership, instead of placing them at the end of 
the spectrum of available channels as being done at present.           
           (Para-18.3 II b) 
4.  The presentation of educational programmes on Doordarshan may be re -designed to 
make it more lively and engaging for the students. Theatre/Cine artists, Cartoonists may be roped 
in for creating interesting and engaging educational content.    (Para-18.3 II c) 

44 
 
5. ISRO may provide increased transponder capacity for enhanced content deliv ery through 
satellite TV.            (Para-18.3 II d) 
6.  Increased bandwidth may be provided for community radios for enhanced educational 
content and wide publicity may be given to such programmes.    (Para-18.3 II e) 
7. States should be encouraged to use available time slots on DD regional TV channels to air 
educational content by utilizing existing resources and satellite capacity optimally.   
(Para-18.3 II f) 
8. The Department should take proactive measures along with Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and Department of Telecommunication to upgrade and revive tele -education 
networks in different States under Edusat  Programme by upgrading networks, replacing obsolete 
equipment with latest gadgets.          
           (Para-18.3 II g) 
9. All schools, community halls in villages, small towns etc. should be equipped with 
Doordarshan Free Dish, so that students can watch educational channels and learn there from. 
            (Para-18.3 II h) 
Action Taken 
 As informed to the Committee, t he Department of School Education & Literacy has made 
the following efforts to ensure continued learning: 
A comprehensive initiative called PM e -VIDYA has been initiated which unifies all efforts 
related to digital/online/on -air education to enable multi -mode access  to education. This will 
benefit nearly 25 crore school going children across the country. The initiative is a work in 
progress and includes: 
 DIKSHA, the nation’s digital infrastructure for providing quality e -content for school 
education in States/UTs and QR coded Energized Textbooks for all grades (one nation, one 
digital platform). 
 One earmarked TV channel per class from 1 to 12 (one class, one channel) 
 Extensive use of Radio, Community radio and CBSE Podcast- Shiksha Vani 

45 
 
 Special e-content for visually and hearing impaired. 
In order to support and reach out to those who do not have much access to the internet, MOE 
introduced SWAYAM PRABHA DTH channels. SWAYAM PRABHA is a group of 32 channels 
devoted to telecast of high -quality educational programmes. The re are 12 Dedicated TV channels 
one each from Class 1 to 12. For each class, there are adequate telecast hours with a repeat at 
convenient times in the day.  
NIOS provides online education support throughout the year through live interactive 
programmes of e-Vidya 10 and 12 channels at the Secondary and Senior Secondary level. For 
facilitating education of Divyangjan , study material has been developed in Digitally Accessible 
Information System (DAISY) and in sign language; both are available on NIOS website/ YouTube. 
In addition, NIOS is telecasting one hour live interactive programmes on e -Vidya channel in sign 
language. 
Comments of the Committee 
 It has been observed that the Ministry has initiated various programmes in the 
direction of e-learning. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should focus towards 
increasing the reach of these programmes to remotest areas of the country and should also 
chalk out ways with Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology for introduction of 
cost effective technologies such as Public wi -fi under the Bharat Net Programme that can 
easily be afforded by any section of the society.  The Committee further recommends that 
besides s chools and community halls, Common Service & free  public wi -fi Centers and 
Gram Panchayat Sachivalyas be also equipped with Doordarshan Free Dish.   Also, efforts 
be made to make available e-learning content in Regional languages too.  The Committee 
should also be apprised of the bottlenecks  being faced i n the implementation of such 
programmes on digital platforms and the response of the students towards them. 
 The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the Department in its action 
taken reply has not addressed various specific recommendations like underutilization of 
Budgetary grants by States, increasing transponder capacity and bandwidth for enhanced 
educational content and upgradation of Edusat programme etc, which had been made by the 
Committee. Therefore, the Committee suggests that the Department submit a 
recommendation-wise action taken status for perusal of the Committee especially 

46 
 
highlighting t he status of Community Radios, Incentives for students towards Data 
Recharge and new technological platforms like use of Podcast/ Edtech etc. 
BLENDED (HYBRID) MODE OF EDUCATION FOR THE FUTURE 
Recommendation 
10. The Department may ensure that the investment  made by the Centre and States for 
developing digital / online education during the pandemic period are systematically integrated 
into the education system, so that the gains achieved are not lost once normal functioning of 
schools recommence.             
               (Para-18.10 a) 
11. The Department may chalk out a long term strategy to sort out the impediments in this 
field and ensure access to good quality and equitable digital education at economical rates to 
students in each and every part of the country.              
(Para-18.10 b) 
 
12. Conscious efforts may be made by the Department to remodel curricular learning at all 
levels to incorporate both conventional pedagogy and digital / online education in equal measure, 
so that blended learning becomes a norm rather than a concept in the near future.  (Para-18.10 c) 
13. A study of the methods adopted by other countries in the field of blended education may be 
conducted and best practices may be collated and adapted to suit the educational requirements  of 
our country.           (Para-18.10 d) 
14. The Department should set up at least one school on the complete hybrid model of 
teaching in every district and tehsil of the country. These schools should become operational by 
October and all the necessary infrastructure should be made available to them. These schools will 
be a case study for setting up more such schools in the future and will help inspire other schools. 
                               
             (Para-18.10 e) 
 
 

47 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry of Education has formed the National Steering Committee for the 
development of National Curriculum Frameworks on 21 -9-2021. The Committee will be assisted 
by NCERT. One of the terms and reference of the Committee is ‘All the National Curriculum 
Frameworks would also reflect upon the implications of situations such as COVID -19 Pandemic 
on respective areas for future.’ 
The Department has also drafted a centrally sponsored scheme for setting up of exemplar 
schools for approval. The scheme for Exemplar Schools is intended to prepare schools of 
excellence. The project will cover more than 15000 schools managed by Central 
government/State/UT Government/local bodies. There will be special focus on Aspirational 
districts by including all KVS and NVS schools in these di stricts, along with other state/UT 
government schools. More than 20 lakh students are expected to be the direct beneficiaries of the 
scheme.  
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is of the view that integration and propagation of Smart Class 
Programme will be extremely beneficial in Blended learning programmes in the country. 
Besides that roping in social enterprises and Ed Tech Platform  (with requisite Tax 
incentives) will be able to provide the necessary encouragement towards such programmes. 
The Comm ittee is of the view that National Steering Committee for the development of 
National Curriculum Frameworks should chalk out a policy in this direction too and apprise 
the Committee of the same. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should 
ensure that proper infrastructure is available for deemed purpose so as to adequately 
address any dropouts taking place and to apprise the Committee of the efforts taken up by 
the Ministry in this regard and also the steps taken to monitor and inspect the progra mmes 
to be initiated at the grass root level.  Also, a status report on Integrated Scheme on School 
Education,   Digital Initiatives and other innovative Programmes for monitoring Smart 
Class Set be also submitted for perusal of the Committee.   
**** 
 

48 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil-. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

49 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE (CHAPTER-III) 
STEPS TO ENSURE CONTINUED LEARNING  
 It has been observed that the Ministry has initiated various programmes in the 
direction of e-learning. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should focus towards 
increasing the reach of these program mes to remotest areas of the country and should also 
chalk out ways with Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology for introduction of 
cost effective technologies such as Public wi -fi under the Bharat Net Programme that can 
easily be afforded by a ny section of the society.  The Committee further recommends that 
besides s chools and community halls, Common Service & free public wi -fi Centers and 
Gram Panchayat Sachivalyas be also equipped with Doordarshan Free Dish.   Also, efforts 
be made to make available e -learning content in Regional languages too.  The Committee 
should also be apprised of the bottlenecks  being faced in the implementation of such 
programmes on digital platforms and the response of the students towards them. 
 The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the Department in its action 
taken reply has not addressed various specific recommendations like underutilization of 
Budgetary grants by States, increasing transponder capacity and bandwidth f or enhanced 
educational content and upgradation of Edusat programme etc, which had been made by the 
Committee. Therefore, the Committee suggests that the Department submit a 
recommendation-wise action taken status for perusal of the Committee especially 
highlighting the status of Community Radios, Incentives for students towards Data 
Recharge and new technological platforms like use of Podcast/ Edtech etc.   
               (Para 18.3) 
BLENDED (HYBRID) MODE OF EDUCATION FOR THE FUTURE 
The Committee is of the view that integration and propagation of Smart Class 
Programme will be extremely beneficial in Blended learning programmes in the country. 
Besides that roping in social enterprises and Ed Tech Platform (with requisite Tax 
incentives) will be able to provide the necessary encouragement towards such programmes. 

50 
 
The Committee is of the view that National Steering Committee for the development of 
National Curriculum Frameworks should chalk out a policy in this direction too and apprise 
the C ommittee of the same. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should 
ensure that proper infrastructure is available for deemed purpose so as to adequately 
address any dropouts taking place and to apprise the Committee of the efforts taken up by 
the Ministry in this regard and also the steps taken to monitor and inspect the programmes 
to be initiated at the grass root level.  Also, a status report on Integrated Scheme on School 
Education,   Digital Initiatives and other innovative Programmes for monit oring Smart 
Class Set be also submitted for perusal of the Committee.     
                (Para 18.10) 
  
*** 

51 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(EWCY&S)  
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 10:30 A.M. 
on Thursday, 15th December, 2022 in Committee Room No.4, A-Block, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
3. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
4. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
8.  Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
9.  Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
10. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
11. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13. Shri Balak Nath 
14. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
15. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
16. Shri Dharambir Singh 
17. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
18. Shri S. Venkatesan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
7. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 

52 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He 
then informed that the agenda for the meeting was to deliberate upon and adoption of the following 
six draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee: 
a) 342nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Twenty Eighth Report 
on Plans for Bridging the Learning Gap caused due to School Lockdown as well as 
Review of Online and Offline Instructions and Examinations and Plans for Re-Opening 
of Schools; 
b) * * * 
c) * * * 
d) * * * 
e) * * * 
f) * * * 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid six draft Action Taken Reports one by 
one and after a brief discussion, adopted the same with minor changes in 342nd and *  
Reports. 
4. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament during the 
upcoming Session of the Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri Vivek 
Thakur, Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari, M.P. to 
present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi, M.P. were authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on the 
Table of Lok Sabha. 
5. * * * 
   6.   The meeting adjourned at 11:01 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       A.K. Mallick  
15th December, 2022                                                                                               Director 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 