PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 226
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON HUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER, 2010/ASVINA, 1932 (SAKA)SEPTEMBER, 2010/ASVINA, 1932 (SAKA)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 15 NOVEMBER, 2010)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 15 NOVEMBER, 2010)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 15 NOVEMBER, 2010)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 15 NOVEMBER, 2010)
TH
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 30  SEPTEMBER, 2010)TH
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 30  SEPTEMBER, 2010)
TH
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 30  SEPTEMBER, 2010)TH
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 30  SEPTEMBER, 2010)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 30 TH SEPTEMBER, 2010)
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 30 TH SEPTEMBER, 2010)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 15 TH NOVEMBER, 2010)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 15 TH NOVEMBER, 2010)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER, 2010/ASVINA, 1932 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................ 1—6
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 7—9
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 11—18
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 19 —35

DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2010 )
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri P. K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Angadi Suresh Chanabasappa
15. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
16. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
17. Shri Rahul Gandhi
18. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
19. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhao
20. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
21. Shri P. Kumar
22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
23. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
24. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
25. Shri Tapas Paul
26. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
27. Shri Ashok Tanwar
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
30. Shri P. Viswanathan
31. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and
Twenty-sixth Report of the Committee on the National Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill,
2010.*
2. The National Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introduced in the Lok
Sabha on the 15
th April, 2010. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Bill to the
Committee on the 13
th May, 2010 for examination and report within two months.
3. In its sitting held on the 16 th July, 2010, the Committee heard the Secretary, Department
of Higher Education on various provisions of the Bill.
4. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied on the following:
(i) Background Note on the Bill;
(ii) Detailed Clause by Clause Note on the Bill; and
(iii) Response of the Department to the Questionnaire.
5. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on the 23
rd September, 2010.
6. For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters at the end of the Report.
OSCAR FERNANDES
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
September 23, 2010 Department-related Parliamentary
Asvina 1, 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2 dated the 15 th April, 2010.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 47152 dated the 16 th April, 2010

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The National Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introduced in the Lok
Sabha on the 15 th April, 2010 and referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development on the 15 th May, 2010 for examination and report.
1.2 The National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007, which came into force on the 15 th August,
2007, was enacted to declare all the twenty National Institutes of Technology as Institutions of
national importance, make provisions for co-ordination and regulation of their affairs and also
empower them to grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions.
1.3 The Scientific Advisory Council to the Prime Minister has recommended for the
establishment of five new institutions, each named as the Indian Institute of Science Education
and Research  (IISER) at Kolkata, Pune, Mohali, Bhopal and Thiruvananthapuram with the
objective of creation of Institutes of the highest calibre in which teaching and education in basic
sciences will be totally integrated with the state-of-the-art research. The rationale behind the
establishment of these Institutes is that these Institutes will be devoted to under-graduate and
post-graduate teaching in sciences in an intellectually vibrant atmosphere of research and will
actively forge strong relationship with existing universities and colleges and network with
laboratories and institutions, as also to establish advanced research laboratories and central facilities.
1.4 The National Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010 seeks to achieve the
following objectives:
(i) to declare all the five Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research (IISERs)
as Institutions of national importance and for that purpose, insertion of the Second
Schedule in the said Act, enlist these Institutes of Science Education and Research
and consequential amendments in various provisions of the Act;
(ii) insertion of a new section 11A for the constitution of the Board of Governors for
Science and Educational Research Institutes specified in the proposed Second
Schedule;
(iii) insertion of a new section 30A to establish a common Council for all the Institutes
of Science Education and Research specified in the proposed Second Schedule;
(iv) to strengthen the networking of National Institutes of Technology and the Indian
Institutes of Science Education and Research by giving representation in their Board
of Governors to the Indian Institute of Technology in whose “territory” or “zone” the
National Institute of Technology or the Indian Institute of Science Education and
Research falls, and
(v) to bring the appointment procedure of the Deputy Director of the National Institutes
of Technology in line with that of Indian Institutes of Technology.
1.5 The Secretary, Department of Higher Education during her deposition before the Committee
gave an idea about the setting up of the Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research
(IISER). Government of India, based on the recommendation of the Scientific Advisory Council to
the Prime Minister set up five Institutes of Science Education and Research (IISER) at Pune,
Kolkata, Mohali, Bhopal and Thiruvananthapuram. The Central theme of these Institutes is to
integrate science education with research so that under-graduate teaching as well as doctoral and

2
postdoctoral research work are carried out in symbiosis. The Committee was informed that all the
IISERs as of now were registered societies. Land free of cost has been provided by the State
Governments for construction of their campus. Drawing the attention of the Committee to the
Preamble of the Act which mentioned that the legislation aimed to “provide for instructions and
research in branches of engineering, technology, management, education, sciences and arts and for
the advancement of learning and dissemination of knowledge in such branches”, the Secretary
emphasized that IISERs with similar goals as NITs needed to be brought under the ambit of NIT
Act, 2007. The Committee was given to understand that the proposed representation of neighboring
IIT in the Board of Governors of NIT and IISER would result in strengthening the networking of
these Institutions by sharing of knowledge and expertise in the governance structure.
1.6 On a specific query about the need for having a high quality and hassle-free research
environment in our Institutions, specifically in the light of global scenario, Committee’s attention
was drawn to the reports of Yashpal Committee and the National Knowledge Commission which
have underlined the need for inter disciplinary sharing of knowledge without boundaries. Admitting
that the proposed legislation was an initial step in this direction, the Secretary pointed out that this
would lead to inter-disciplinary knowledge regime in which students will be able to move
seamlessly from one area to another. The Committee was informed that all the five IISERs were
supposed to include in their mandate, areas having technological relevance along with the
contribution of IIT experts in the formulation of curricula for courses handled by IISERs. Students
having B.Tech degrees were eligible for pursuing Ph.D in IISERs.
1.7 While appreciating the initiative taken by IISERs, the Committee would like to point
out that the inter-disciplinary knowledge regime as indicated by the Department is not
clearly spelt out in the Bill. The Committee is of the view that this needs to be sustained,
strengthened and expanded further. It hopes that the Department would seriously strive
towards flexibility for freedom and research environment within inter-disciplinary regime so
that the students could practically move seamlessly from one area to another.
1.8 Broadly speaking, the Committee welcomes the inclusion of five IISERs under the purview
of the National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007. The Committee, while agreeing with all the
proposed amendments, takes note of some related issues, very essential for better management and
functioning of the existing as well as new institutions proposed under the legislation  and makes
observations/recommendations as given in the succeeding paragraphs.
II. Inclusion of IISERs under the NIT Act
2.1 Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “the First Schedule and the Second Schedule”
for the words “the Schedule” in Section 2 of the Act. Clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill seek to effect
consequential changes in the Act. This means that the Act shall have two separate schedules for
two separate sets of institutions, i.e., NITs and IISERs respectively.
2.2 The five Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research established at Pune, Kolkata,
Mohali, Bhopal and Thiruvananthapuram are fully centrally funded institutions. The Committee was
given to understand that land free of cost had been allotted by the respective State Governments
for construction of IISER campus.
2.3 On a specific query about the present status of IISERs as to whether they were fully
functional, having the required infrastructure and faculty, certain facts emerged. For IISER, Mohali,
land was given about two years ago. Some of the facilities like the Central Analytical Facility and
other related facilities have been functioning there since 3
rd March, 2010. First hostel in the new
125 acre campus was ready for occupation as on 31 st July, 2010. IISER, Mohali has been
functioning in the transit campus since August, 2007 having the required infrastructure. Status of

3
IISER, Pune was similar. Kolkata campus was also having state of the art facilities. IISER at
Bhopal and Thiruvananthapuram, being only two years old, were having slightly less infrastructure.
2.4 The Committee notes that the first batch of graduates from IISER Kolkata, and Pune will
come out in April-May, 2011, from Mohali in May, 2013 and from Bhopal and Thiruvananthapuram
in 2013. The Committee would like to emphasize that concerted efforts by all concerned, be
it the Department, respective State Governments or the IISER authorities, have to be made
in a time-bound manner so that all the IISERs having state of the art facilities are fully
functional at the earliest. Only then the objective of declaring the five IISERs as the
institutions of national importance will be achieved in the real sense. For reaching this goal,
the Department will have to play a very pro-active role.
III. Impact of NIT Act, 2007 on the existing NITs
3.1 The Department of Higher Education in their Background Note submitted to the Committee
informed that there were twenty NITs which were centrally funded autonomous technical
institutions and were declared “Institutes of National Importance” under the NIT Act 2007. On
being asked about the impact of bringing these twenty NITs under the umbrella legislation of 2007,
the Committee was informed that provision of necessary statutory status to these NITs has enabled
them to maintain uniformity in their functioning. Their academic and administrative functioning has
been clearly spelt out in the Act while providing necessary guidance to the Institutes. Also, with
the coming into force of the first Statutes of the NITs w.e.f. 23
rd April, 2009, necessary powers
have been provided to them so as to function successfully in the changing scenario of technical
education in the country.
3.2 Committee’s attention was drawn to the setting up of ten new NITs in Arunachal Pradesh,
Sikkim, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Goa, Delhi, Uttarakhand and Puducherry. In
order to closely monitor as well as facilitate the work of establishment of these ten new NITs, it
was decided that the existing NITs will monitor the new NITs for the first two to three years or
till such time, new NITs are properly set up. All the NITs have commenced academic operations
from the current academic session. While apprising the Committee about the present status of these
new NITs being administered by the MOA under the Societies Registration Act of the respective
States/Union Territories, the Secretary strongly advocated for bringing these new NITs also under
the NIT Act, 2007.
3.3 The Committee notes that these NITs which have started functioning from the academic
session 2010-2011 are in the initial stage of being set up. While four NITs, i.e. NIT-Delhi, NIT-
Meghalaya, NIT-Nagaland and NIT-Mizoram would start functioning in the campus of their
respective mentor NITs, the remaining six NITs would operate from temporary campus. Except
Delhi, all the respective nine State Governments/UT Administration have identified the land for the
permanent campus. The Committee welcomes the further expansion of NITs which have made
significant contribution in making the outreach of technical education possible to the
remotest corners of the country. The Committee, however, would like to reiterate that like
the IISERs, the process of making the new NITs fully functional in a time bound manner
needs to be ensured by all the stakeholders. Here again, the Department will have to play
a proactive role by being both facilitator and co-ordinator.
3.4 The Committee observes that the first Statutes of each NIT were envisaged to be
framed by the Central Government at the earliest after the NIT Act was enacted on
6
th June, 2007. However, these Statutes pertaining to crucial matters like methods of
appointment and service conditions of teachers/officers of NITs, formation of departments,
establishment and maintenance of halls/hostels etc. could come into force w.e.f. 23
rd April,
2009. Gap of almost two years for bringing in place all the requisite formulations/guidelines,

4
the most essential components for the running of national institutes cannot be considered
an ideal proposition. The Committee, accordingly, would like to emphasize that all the
Statutes for IISERs and the new ten NITs need to be framed at the earliest after the
enactment of the proposed legislation.
IV. Status of Faculty
4.1 Committee has been voicing its serious concern about the non-availability of required
faculty in the higher education institutions. With the massive expansion of higher
education, both in the Government and private sector along with new specialized courses
emerging in the recent years, acute shortage of qualified teachers is showing an
increasingly disturbing trend. In such a scenario, the Committee strongly feels that while
setting up new higher education institutions, specially premier institutions like IISERs and
NITs, this crucial area needs to be paid the maximum attention. The Committee would like
to point out that in a vast country like ours, there is no dearth of experts and scientists
and also fresh pass-outs who can prove to be very good teachers. However, in spite of
Government’s best efforts by formulating many incentive schemes, required qualified
faculty is simply not there .
4.2 The Committee would like to point out that the objective of the proposed legislation is to
create and integrate more and more institutes of science education and research with the inter-
disciplinary approach, which will definitely require inter-disciplinary curriculum courses and trained
faculty. The Committee has been given to understand that so far as IISERs are concerned, no
difficulty is being faced in the recruitment of faculty. Very encouraging response has been received
both from within the country and abroad and as on today, faculty at IISERs can be considered
comparable and better than some of the existing institutions.
4.3 While appreciating the present level of faculty available at the upcoming IISERs, the
Committee would like to point out that this trend not only needs to be sustained but also
strengthened to keep pace with the requirements of a fully functional Indian Institute of
Science Education and Research with newer diverse areas of education being taken up in
future. The Committee has its own doubts about the status of faculty at the existing twenty
NITs. Position would not be encouraging for the upcoming ten NITs. The Committee can
only reiterate that by simply declaring these NITs also as institutions of national importance
through a statutory mechanism, they cannot acquire the status of a premier institute in the
real sense. For achieving this, need of the hour is to have qualified and motivated faculty.
This problem-area needs to be tackled in a mission mode. Present trend of guest faculty /
visiting professors as teachers can only fill up the very visible gaps in a very limited way.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should adopt a coordinated
approach for filling the very tangible gaps in the availability of the faculty. The Committee
would like the Department to provide special incentives to attract more and more trained
faculty for these institutes to achieve academic excellence.
V. Admission Procedure for IISERs
The Committee notes that for admission in the five-year integrated Master’s course
at the IISERs, students have to qualify in IIT JEE or Kishore Vaigyanic Protsahan Y ojana
or have to be among top one per cent of students in 12
th standard examination of CBSE and
other Boards. The Committee is not aware about there being any quota prescribed for the
three different eligibility criteria. If not, the Committee fails to understand as to what
would be the mechanism for deciding the admissibility of number of students qualifying the
different criteria. The Committee also has its reservations about performance level in CBSE

5
Boards and other Boards having varying standards being fixed as the eligibility criteria. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that eligibility criteria for admission in IISERs may be
reviewed and revised accordingly.
VI. Composition of Boards of Governors
6.1 Clause 7  of the Bill proposes to insert Section 11A after Section 11 so as to establish a
Board of Governors  of every Institute i.e. IISER mentioned in the Second Schedule comprising the
following members,:—
(a) the Chairperson to be nominated by the Visitor;
(b) Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Government of India, ex-officio;
(c) Director of the Institute, ex-officio;
(d) Director of Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, ex-officio;
(e) Director of one of the Indian Institutes of Technology, to be nominated by the Central
Government;
(f) three Secretaries to the Government of India, to be nominated by the Central
Government representing its Scientific or Industrial Ministries;
(g) Chief Secretary of the State in which the Institute is located, ex-officio;
(h) two Professors of the Institute to be nominated by the Senate;
(i) four eminent Scientists to be nominated by the Central Government; and
(j) Financial Adviser, Ministry of Human Resource Development, ex-officio.”
6.2 As in the case of NITs, Board of Governors for each IISER is envisaged. However, on
a comparative analysis of the composition of Board of Governors for NITs and IISERs, the
Committee observes that whereas NIT Board is an eleven-member body, IISER Board would be
having sixteen members. When asked to clarify, the Department has informed that broadly
speaking, IISERs are envisaged to carry out research in frontier areas of science and to provide
quality science education at the undergraduate and postgraduate level. As such, eminent scientists,
representatives from the Ministries/Department pertaining to science and industry like Department
of Science and Technology and Director of IISC, Bangalore and ITT have to be associated with
the IISER Board of Governors.
6.3 The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department in making the Board of
Governors of IISERs/NITs broad-based having the representation of eminent scientists, experts and
representatives of industry and also concerned State/Central Department with the objective of
having better governance structure of premier educational institutions. Representation of Director
of IIT in the Board of Governors of NITs and IISERs is a step in the right direction. However,
at the same time, the Committee is constrained to observe that there is a very apparent
difference in the composition of Board of Governors of NITs and IISERs. As per the latest
amendment, against an eleven member Board of Governors of NITs, IISER Board of
Governors will be having sixteen members. Whereas out of the eleven member Board of
Governors of NIT, there are only two Joint Secretary level representatives of Central
Government dealing with technical education and finance, IISER Board is proposed to have,
besides three Secretaries representing scientific or industrial Ministries of Central
Government, Secretary, Department of Higher Education and Financial Adviser, Ministry of
HRD. Secondly, four eminent scientists are to be nominated to the IISER Board by Central

6
Government against two persons (one of them a woman) from education/science/engineering
background being nominated to the NIT Board by its Council. This clearly shows that not
only there is over-representation of Central Government nominees, but experts are also
being nominated by the Central Government, with the Council not having any say in the
selection of experts as in the case of NITs. The Committee would like a change in the
pattern and, accordingly, recommends that composition of the Board of Governors for
IISERs may be reviewed and made more expert specific in line with the mandate of IISERs.
6.4 Another issue related to the composition of the Board of Governors is the availability of
its members for the meeting of the Board. The Committee notes that the Secretary of
Department of Higher Education, the Chief Secretary of the State in which the institute is
located and the Financial Advisor of the Ministry of Human Resource Development shall be
ex-officio  members of the Board. It is understood that these officers may also be nominated
to other similar bodies. Due to their pre-occupation with manifold assignments it may not
be possible for them to attend the meetings. As a result, both the Department and the
concerned State Government invariably remain deprived of useful inputs due to absence of
their representatives on the Board . The Committee, therefore, feels that a viable
alternative could be to authorise designated nominees of such members to attend the
meetings of the Board, in the event of their being not present due to unavoidable
circumstances.
VII. Clause 12 – Composition of IISER Council.
Clause 12 seeks to insert Section 30A relating to establishment of IISER Council. The
Committee observes that composition of IISER Council is similar to the NIT Council, with only
one difference. As per Section 30A (2) (g) five Secretaries representing Central Ministries/
Departments dealing with bio-technology, atomic energy, information technology and space, ex-
officio are to be nominated. The Committee would like to point out that instead of five there
should be four Secretaries nominated to the IISER Council on the pattern of NIT Council.
Clause 12 may be amended accordingly.
8. The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of Bill without any amendments.
9.  The enacting formula and the title are adopted.
10.  The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating the amendments
suggested by it.

7
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTE — AT A GLANCE
I. INTRODUCTION
While appreciating the initiative taken by IISERs the Committee would like to point
out that the inter-disciplinary knowledge regime as indicated by the Department is not
clearly spelt out in the Bill. The Committee is of the view that this needs to be sustained,
strengthened and expanded further. It hopes that the Department would seriously strive
towards flexibility for freedom and research environment within inter-disciplinary regime so
that the students could practically move seamlessly from one area to another. (Para 1.7)
II. Inclusion of IISERs under the NIT Act
The Committee would like to emphasize that concerted efforts by all concerned, be
it the Department, respective State Governments or the IISER authorities, have to be made
in a time-bound manner so that all the IISERs having state of the art facilities are fully
functional at the earliest. Only then the objective of declaring the five IISERs as the
institutions of national importance will be achieved in the real sense. For reaching this goal,
the Department will have to play a very pro-active role. (Para 2.4)
III. Impact of NIT Act, 2007 on the existing NITs
The Committee welcomes the further expansion of NITs which have made significant
contribution in making the outreach of technical education possible to the remotest corners
of the country. The Committee, however, would like to reiterate that like the IISERs, the
process of making the new NITs fully functional in a time bound manner needs to be
ensured by all the stakeholders. Here again, the Department will have to play a proactive
role by being both facilitator and co-ordinator. (Para 3.3)
The Committee observes that the first Statutes of each NIT were envisaged to be
framed by the Central Government at the earliest after the NIT Act was enacted on
6
th June, 2007. However, these Statutes pertaining to crucial matters like methods of
appointment and service conditions of teachers/officers of NITs, formation of departments,
establishment and maintenance of halls/hostels etc. could come into force w.e.f. 23
rd April,
2009. Gap of almost two years for bringing in place all the requisite formulations/guidelines,
the most essential components for the running of national institutes cannot be considered
an ideal proposition. The Committee, accordingly, would like to emphasize that all the
Statutes for IISERs and the new ten NITs need to be framed at the earliest after the
enactment of the proposed legislation. (Para 3.4)
IV. Status of Faculty
Committee has been voicing its serious concern about the non-availability of required
faculty in the higher education institutions. With the massive expansion of higher
education, both in the Government and private sector along with new specialized courses
emerging in the recent years, acute shortage of qualified teachers is showing an
increasingly disturbing trend. In such a scenario, the Committee strongly feels that while
setting up new higher education institutions, specially premier institutions like IISERs and
7

8
NITs, this crucial area needs to be paid the maximum attention. The Committee would like
to point out that in a vast country like ours, there is no dearth of experts and scientists
and also fresh pass-outs who can prove to be very good teachers. However, in spite of
Government’s best efforts by formulating many incentive schemes, required qualified
faculty is simply not there. (Para 4.1)
While appreciating the present level of faculty available at the upcoming IISERs, the
Committee would like to point out that this trend not only needs to be sustained but also
strengthened to keep pace with the requirements of a fully functional Indian Institute of
Science Education and Research with newer diverse areas of education being taken up in
future. The Committee has its own doubts about the status of faculty at the existing twenty
NITs. Position would not be encouraging for the upcoming ten NITs. The Committee can
only reiterate that by simply declaring these NITs also as institutions of national importance
through a statutory mechanism, they cannot acquire the status of a premier institute in the
real sense. For achieving this, need of the hour is to have qualified and motivated faculty.
This problem-area needs to be tackled in a mission mode. Present trend of guest faculty/
visiting professors as teachers can only fill up the very visible gaps in a very limited way.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should adopt a coordinated
approach for filling the very tangible gaps in the availability of the faculty. The Committee
would like the Department to provide special incentives to attract more and more trained
faculty for these institutes to achieve academic excellence. (Para 4.3)
V. Admission Procedure for IISERs
The Committee notes that for admission in the five-year integrated Master’s course
at the IISERs, students have to qualify in IIT JEE or Kishore Vaigyanic Protsahan Y ojana
or have to be among top one per cent of students in 12
th standard examination of CBSE and
other Boards. The Committee is not aware about there being any quota prescribed for the
three different eligibility criteria. If not, the Committee fails to understand as to what
would be the mechanism for deciding the admissibility of number of students qualifying the
different criteria. The Committee also has its reservations about performance level in CBSE
Boards and other Boards having varying standards being fixed as the eligibility criteria. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that eligibility criteria for admission in IISERs may be
reviewed and revised accordingly. (Para 5)
VI. Composition of Boards of Governors
However, at the same time, the Committee is constrained to observe that there is
a very apparent difference in the composition of Board of Governors of NITs and IISERs.
As per the latest amendment, against an eleven member Board of Governors of NITs, IISER
Board of Governors will be having sixteen members. Whereas out of the eleven member
Board of Governors of NIT, there are only two Joint Secretary level representatives of
Central Government dealing with technical education and finance, IISER Board is proposed
to have, besides three Secretaries representing scientific or industrial Ministries of Central
Government, Secretary, Department of Higher Education and Financial Adviser, Ministry of
HRD. Secondly, four eminent scientists are to be nominated to the IISER Board by Central
Government against two persons (one of them a woman) from education / science /
engineering background being nominated to the NIT Board by its Council. This clearly
shows that not only there is over-representation of Central Government nominees, but
experts are also being nominated by the Central Government, with the Council not having
any say in the selection of experts as in the case of NITs. The Committee would like a
change in the pattern and, accordingly, recommends that composition of the Board of

9
Governors for IISERs may be reviewed and made more expert specific in line with the
mandate of IISERs. (Para 6.3)
The Committee notes that the Secretary of Department of Higher Education, the
Chief Secretary of the State in which the institute is located and the Financial Advisor of
the Ministry of Human Resource Development shall be ex-officio members of the Board. It
is understood that these officers may also be nominated to other similar bodies. Due to
their pre-occupation with manifold assignments it may not be possible for them to attend
the meetings. As a result, both the Department and the State Government invariably
remain deprived of useful inputs due to absence of their representatives on the Board . The
Committee, therefore, feels that a viable alternative could be to authorise designated
nominees of such members to attend the meetings of Board, in the event of their being not
present due to unavoidable circumstances. (Para 6.4)
VII. Clause 12 – Composition of IISER Council
The Committee would like to point out that instead of five there should be four
Secretaries nominated to the IISER Council on the pattern of NIT Council. Clause 12 may
be amended accordingly. (Para VII)

MINUTES

XXIV
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the
16th July, 2010 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare — in the Chair
2. Shri Prakash Javadekar
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Suresh Angadi
4. Shri Kirti Azad
5. Shri P.K. Biju
6. Shri Jitendrasingh Bundela
7. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
8. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
9. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
10. Shri P. Kumar
11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
13. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
14. Shri Joseph Toppo
15. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
LIST OF WITNESSES
** *
13
*** Relates to other matter.

14
I. Experts on the National Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010
Department of Higher Education
1. Shrimati Vibha Puri Das, Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Thakur, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Sunil Kumar, Additional Secretary (HE)
4. Shri S.K. Ray Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
5. Shri N.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary
6. Prof. P.N. Singh, Chairman, BOG, NIT – Agartala
7. Shri H.R. Joshi, Director
8. Prof. Sandeep Sancheti, Director, NITK – Surathkal
9. Prof. S.S. Gokhale, Director, VNIT – Nagpur
10. Prof. N. Sathyamurthy, Director, IISER – Mohali
11. Dr. V .P. Goel, DDG
2. Shri Janardan Waghmare, M.P., Rajya Sabha and a member of the Committee presided over
the sitting, as authorized by Shri Oscar Fernandes, Chairman of the Committee. He welcomed the
members to the meeting and apprised the members about the day’s agenda.
3. The Committee first heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on
the National Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The members raised certain queries
which were replied to by the Secretary. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire to the
Department for replies within fortnight.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 1.10 
P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the
22nd July, 2010.
*** Relates to other matter.

15
15
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the
23rd September, 2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri N.K. Singh — In the Chair
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kirti Azad
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Shri Angadi Suresh Chanabasappa
10. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
12. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
13. Shri P. Kumar
14. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
15. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
16. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
17. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
18. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
19. Shri P. Viswanathan
20. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer

16
LIST OF WITNESSES
I. Department of Higher Education
Ministry of Human Resource Development
(i) Shrimati Vibha Puri Das, Secretary (HE)
(ii) Shri Sunil Kumar, Additional Secretary
(iii) Shri R.P. Sisodia, Director, UGC
II. Legislative Department
(i) Shri V .K. Bhasin, Secretary (Legislative Deptt.)
(ii) Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary, Legislative Deptt.
(iii) Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. Shri N.K. Singh, M.P., Rajya Sabha and a member of the Committee presided over the
sitting, as authorized by Shri Oscar Fernandes, Chairman of the Committee. He welcomed the
members to the meeting and apprised them about the day’s agenda.
3. The Committee first considered the draft 226
th Report on the National Institutes of
Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and adopted the same with minor modifications.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M. to meet again on Friday, the 1 st October, 2010.
*** Relate to other matters.

17
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Friday, the
1st October, 2010 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes —  Chairman
2. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
3. Shri Prakash Javadekar
4. Shri Pramod Kureel
5. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
6. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
7. Shri P.K. Biju
8. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
9. Shri Rahul Gandhi
10. Shri P. Kumar
11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
13. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
14. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
15. Shri Ashok Tanwar
16. Shri Joseph Toppo
17. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
18. Shri P. Viswanathan
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
17

18
LIST OF WITNESSES
I. Department of Higher Education
Ministry of Human Resource Development
(i) Shrimati Vibha Puri Das, Secretary
(ii) Shri S.K. Ray, Addl. Secretary & F.A.
(iii) Ms. Pratima Dixit, Director
(iv) Prof. K.P. Singh, Director, Institute of Technology (BHU)
(v) Prof. A.K. Tripathi, Professor, Institute of Technology (BHU)
(vi) Prof. P.K. Mukherjee, Professor, Institute of Technology (BHU)
2. * * *
3. The Chairman, then, apprised the members about the presentation of 226
th Report on the
National Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010 by him to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on the 30
th September, 2010. The manner in which the Committee had been deliberating on
the legislations before it and completing its assignments within tight schedule had been appreciated
by the Hon’ble Chairman.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. During the course of interaction with the Secretary, a very crucial issue of shortage of
faculty in the new IITs was raised by the members. Committee was of the view that with massive
expansion of higher education in the recent years, the problem of lack of qualified teachers was
being observed in all categories of higher educational institutions. The Committee, therefore,
decided to take up this subject for detailed study.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
10. * * *
*** Relate to other matters.

19
ANNEXURES

TO BE INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 39 of 2010
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to amend the National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the National Institutes of
Technology (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the National Institutes of Technology
Act, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the
words “the Schedule”, the words “the First Schedule and the
Second Schedule” shall be substituted.
21
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 2.29 of 2007.

22
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause ( c), for the words “the Schedule” at both
the places where they occur, the words “the First Schedule
and the Second Schedule” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( d), after the word and figures “section
30”, the words, brackets, figures and letter “or sub-
section ( 1) of section 30A, as the case may be,” shall be
inserted;
(iii) in clause ( g), for the words “the Schedule”, the
words “the First Schedule and the Second Schedule” shall be
substituted;
(iv) in clause ( k), for the words “the Schedule”, the
words “the First Schedule and the Second Schedule” shall be
substituted;
(v) in clause ( m), for the words “the Schedule”, the
words “the First Schedule and the Second Schedule” shall be
substituted.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the
words “the Schedule”, the words “the First Schedule and the
Second Schedule” shall be substituted.
5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), in
clause ( h), the words “and the Deputy Director” shall be omitted.
6. In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the word “Institute” wherever it occurs, the
words “Institute mentioned in the First Schedule” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in clause ( e), the word “and” occurring at the end
shall be omitted;
(iii) after clause ( f), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(g
) the Director of the Indian Institute of
Technology in whose zone the Institute is located, or
his nominee, not below the rank of a Professor.”.
7. After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“11 A. The Board of every Institute mentioned in the
Second Schedule shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(a) the Chairperson to be nominated by the
Visitor;
(b) Secretary, Department of Higher Education,
Government of India, ex officio;
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 11.
Insertion of
new section
11A.
Board of
Institutes of
Second
Schedule.

23
(c) Director of the Institute, ex officio;
(d) Director of Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, ex officio;
(e) Director of one of the Indian Institutes of
Technology, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(f) three Secretaries to the Government of India,
to be nominated by the Central Government
representing its Scientific or Industrial Ministries;
(g) Chief Secretary of the State in which the
Institute is located, ex officio;
(h) two professors of the Institute to be
nominated by the Senate;
(i) four eminent scientists to be nominated by the
Central Government; and
(j) Financial Adviser, Ministry of Human
Resource Development, ex officio.”.
8. In section 12 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause ( c), after the figures “11”, the words,
brackets, letters and figures “and clause ( h) of section 11A”
shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause ( d), after the word and figures “section
11”, the words, figures and letter “or section 11A, as the case
may be,” shall be inserted;
(iii) in clause ( f), after the figures “11”, the words,
brackets, letters and figures “and clauses ( c) and ( h) of
section 11A” shall be inserted.
9. In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(a)
 in sub-section ( 1), the words “and Deputy Director”
shall be omitted;
(b) for sub-section ( 5), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(5) The Deputy Director of every Institute shall
be appointed in such manner and on such terms and
conditions as may be laid down by the Statutes and
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as
may be assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or
by the Director.”.
10. In section 24 of the principal Act, the words “and Deputy
Director” shall be omitted.
11. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for
the word “Schedule”, the words “First Schedule” shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 12.
Amendment of
section 17.
Amendment of
section 24.
Amendment of
section 30.

24
12. After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“30A. ( 1) With effect from such date as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify in this
behalf, there shall be established for all the Institutes of
specified in column 3 of the Second Schedule, a central
body to be called the Council.
(2) The Council under sub-section ( 1) shall consist of
the following members, namely:—
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government having
administrative control of the technical education, ex-
officio, Chairman;
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in
charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government having administrative control of the
technical education, ex officio, Vice-Chairman;
(c) the Chairperson of every Board of the
Institutes mentioned in the Second Schedule, ex officio;
(d) the Director of every Institute mentioned in
the Second Schedule, ex officio ;
(e) the Chairman, University Grants Commission,
ex officio;
(f) the Director-General, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research, ex officio ;
(g) five Secretaries to the Government of India to
represent the Ministries or Departments of the Central
Government dealing with bio-technology, atomic energy,
information technology and space, ex officio;
(h) the Chairman, Defence Research and
Development Organisation, ex officio;
(i) not less than three, but not more than five
persons to be nominated by the Visitor, at least one of
whom shall be a woman, having special knowledge or
practical experience in respect of education, industry,
science or technology;
(j) three members of Parliament, of whom two
shall be chosen by the House of the People and one by
the Council of States:
Provided that the office of member of the
Council shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen
as or for being, a member of either House of Parliament;
Insertion of
new section
30A.
Establishment
of Council for
the Institutes of
Second Schedule.

25
(k) two Secretaries to the State Government,
from amongst the Ministries or Departments of that
Government dealing with technical education where the
Institute is located, ex officio;
(l) financial adviser, dealing with the Human
Resource Development Ministry or Departments of that
Government dealing with technical education where the
Institute is located, ex officio; and
(m) one officer not below the rank of Joint
Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government having
administrative control of the scientific or technical
education, ex officio, Member-Secretary.”.
13. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), after
the word and figures “section 30”, the words, brackets, letters and
figures “and clause ( j) of sub-section ( 2) of section 30A” shall be
inserted.
14. In section 37 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (a), after the words “every Institute”, the
words “mentioned in the First Schedule” shall be inserted;
(ii) after clause ( b), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“( c) recruitment process and disciplinary
proceedings, which had commenced before the
commencement of the National Institutes of Technology
(Amendment) Act, 2010, shall be completed, mutatis
mutandis, in accordance with the relevant provisions in
force immediately before such commencement.
Explanation .— Recruitment process for a post
may be taken to have commenced from the date of
publication of the advertisement inviting application for
the post, and disciplinary proceedings against an
employee of the Institute may be taken to have
commenced on the date of issue of charge sheet for
major penalty or show cause notice for minor penalty
to such employee;
(d) all matters, which are meant to be provided
through Statutes and Ordinances under sections 25 and
27, respectively, shall, till such Statutes and Ordinances
are made, be governed, mutatis mutandis, by the
corresponding provisions in force immediately before
the commencement of this Act.”.
15. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act—
(a) the Board of every Institute specified in the Second
Schedule functioning as such immediately before the
commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until
Transitional
provision in
respect of
Institutes of
Second
Schedule.
Amendment of
section 37.
Amendment of
section 31

26
a new Board is constituted for th at Institute under this Act,
but on the constitution of new Board under this Act, member
of the Board holding office before such constitution shall
cease to hold office;
(b) every Senate constituted in relation to every
Institute before the commencement of this Act shall be
deemed to be the Senate constituted under this Act unless a
Senate is constituted under this Act for that Institute but on
the constitution of new Senate under this Act, members of the
Senate holding office before such constitution shall cease to
hold office.
16. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of the National Institutes of Technology (Amendment)
Act, 2010, the Central Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of
a period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
17. The Schedule to the principal Act shall be numbered as
the First Schedule and after the First Schedule as so numbered, the
following Schedule shall be inserted, namely:
“THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 3(g), (m), 4(1) and 11A]
L
IST OF I NDIAN I NSTITUTES OF S CIENCE E DUCATION AND R ESEARCH
Sl. Society Corresponding Institute
No.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Amendment of
Schedule.
1. Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research,
Kolkata Society
2. Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research,
Pune Society
3. Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research,
Mohali Society
4. Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research,
Bhopal Society
5. Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research,
Thiruvananthapuram Society
Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research,
Kolkata.
Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research,
Pune.
Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research,
Mohali.
Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research,
Bhopal.
Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research,
Thiruvananthapuram.”.

27
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, there are twenty National Institutes of Technology
which are governed by the National Institutes of Technology
Act, 2007 (29 of 2007). The said Act came into force on
15th August, 2007. This Act declares these Institutions as
Institutions of national importance. Admissions in National Institutes
of Technology are based on the ranks secured by the candidates
appearing at the All India Engineering Entrance Examination
conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education.
2. On the recommendation of the Scientific Advisory Council
to the Prime Minister, five new institutions, each named as
the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research have
been established at Kolkata, Pune, Mohali, Bhopal and
Thiruvananthapuram. The vision of these institutes encompasses
creation of Institutes of the highest caliber in which teaching and
education in basic sciences will be totally integrated with the state-
of-the-art research. These Institutes will be devoted to
undergraduate and postgraduate teaching in sciences in an
intellectually vibrant atmosphere of research and will actively forge
strong relationship with existing universities and colleges and
network with laboratories and institutions, as also to establish
advanced research laboratories and central facilities.
3. For the aforesaid purposes, it has been felt that it is
necessary to bring all the five Indian Institutes of Science Education
and Research under the said Act and to declare them as Institutions
of national importance. Further, it is proposed to strengthen the
networking of National Institutes of Technology and the Indian
Institutes of Science Education and Research by giving
representation in their Board of Governors to the Indian Institute of
Technology and also to bring the appointment procedure of the
Deputy Director of National Institutes of Technology in line with
that of Indian Institutes of Technology. Therefore, it is necessary to
amend the said Act. The Bill, inter alia, provides:—
(i) to declare all the five Indian Institutes of Science
Education and Research to be the Institutions of national
importance and for that purpose, insertion of the Second
Schedule in the said Act, enlisting therein the Indian Institutes
of Science Education and Research and consequential
amendments in various provisions of the Act;
(ii) insertion of a new section 11 A for the constitution
of the Board of Governors for Science and Educational
Research Institutions specified in the proposed Second
Schedule;
27

28
(iii) insertion of a new section 30A to establish a
common Council for all the Institutes of Science Education
and Research specified in the proposed Second Scheuled;
(iv) to strengthen the networking of National Institutes
of Technology and the Indian Institutes of Science Education
and Research by giving representation in their Board of
Governors to the Indian Institute of Technology in whose
“territory” or “zone” the National Institute of Technology or
the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research falls;
(v) to bring the appointment procedure of the Deputy
Director of the National Institutes of Technology in line with
that of Indian Institutes of Technology.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI;
The 7th January, 2010. KAPIL SIBAL.

29
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
There are twenty National Institutes of Technology in the
country at present and these are located in various States. Cent
percent, Central assistance is provided to these Institutes under both
Plan, Non-Plan and Plan (OSC) heads, respectively, by the
Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development. The requirement of funds by National Institutes of
Technology is determined each year on the basis of their
requirements in the beginning of the year.
2. There is only one Budget Head for all National Institutes of
Technology. The budget provision for these Institutions during the
year 2009-2010 is Rs.87.00 crore, Rs.523.90 crore and Rs.776.00
crore under the head Plan, Non-Plan and Plan (OSC), respectively.
Out of this, a sum of Rs. 52.50 crore, Rs. 265.42 crore and
Rs. 491.30 crore, respectively, have since been released up to
31-10-2009.
3. Clause 12 of the Bill proposes to insert a new section 30A
for establishment of Council for the Institute of Science Education
and Research. There are five Indian Institutes of Science Education
and Research in the country at present and these are located at
Kolkata, Pune, Mohali, Bhopal and Thiruvananthapuram. Now, the
Bill proposes to declare these Indian Institutes of Science Education
and Research as “Institutions of National Importance” under the
National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007 (29 of 2007). Cent
percent. Central assistance is provided to these Institutes under Plan
heads by the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human
Resource Development. The requirement of funds by Indian
Institutes of Science Education and Research is determined each
year on the basis of their requirements in the beginning of the year.
4. There is only one Budget Head for all Indian Institutes of
Science Education and Research. The budget provision for these
Institutions during the year 2009-2010 is Rs. 215.00 crore and out
of this, Rs.153.83 crore has been released up to 31-12-2009. During
the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the total outlay is Rs. 2000 crore for
all the five Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research.
29

30
30
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the Deputy Director of
every Institute is to be appointed in such manner and on such terms
and conditions as may be laid down by the Statutes and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned
to him by the National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007 (29 to
2007) or the Statutes or by the Director.
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
notify the date of establishment of the Council for all the Indian
Institutes of Science Education and Research.
The matters, in respect of which Statutes are to be made or
notifications are to be issued, pertain to procedural or administrative
detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

31
31
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE N ATIONAL I NSTITUTES  OF T ECHNOLOGY  A CT, 2007
(29 OF 2007)
** * * *
2. Whereas the objects of the institutions mentioned in the
Schedule are such as to make them Institutions of national
importance, it is hereby declared that each such institute is an
Institution of national importance.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
** * * *
(c) “Corresponding Institute”, in relation to a society
mentioned in column (2) of the Schedule, means the Institute
as specified in column (3) of the Schedule;
(d) “Council” means the Council established under sub-
section ( 1) of section 30;
** * * *
(g) “Institute” means any of the Institutions mentioned
in column (3) of the Schedule;
** * * *
(k) “Schedule” means the Schedule annexed to the Act;
** * * *
(m) “Society” means any of the societies registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and mentioned in
column (2) of the Schedule;
** * * *
CHAPTER II
T
HE I NSTITUTES
4. ( 1) Each of the Institutes mentioned in column (3) of the
Schedule shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and
a common seal and shall, by its name, sue and be sued.
Declaration of
certain
Institutions as
Institutions of
national
importance.
Definitions.
21 of 1860.
Incorporation
of Institutes.

32
** * * *
6. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute
shall exercise the following powers and perform the following
duties, namely:—
** * * *
(h) to institute academic and other posts with the prior
approval of the Central Government, and to make
appointments thereto excluding the Director and the Deputy
Director;
** * * *
11. The Board of every Institute shall consist of the following
members, namely:—
(a) the Chairperson to be nominated by the Visitor;
(b) the Director, ex officio;
(c) two persons not below the rank of the Joint
Secretary to the Government  of India to be nominated by the
Central Government from  amongst persons dealing with
technical education and finance;
(d) two persons to be nominated by the Government
of the State in which the Institute is situated, from  amongst
persons, who, in the opinion of that Government, are
technologists or industrialists of repute;
(e) two persons, at least one of whom shall be a
woman, having special knowledge or practical experience in
respect of education, engineering or science to be nominated
by the Council; and
(f) one professor and one assistant professor or a
lecturer of the Institute to be nominated by the Senate.
12. Save as otherwise provided in this section,—
** * * *
(c) the term of office of a member nominated under
clause ( f) of section 11 shall be two years from the date of
his nomination;
(d) a casual vacancy shall be filled up in accordance
with the provisions of section 11;
** * * *
Powers of
Institutes.
Board of
Governors.
Term of office
of,  vacancies
among, and
allowances
payable to,
members of
Board.

33
(f) the member of the Board shall be entitled to such
allowances, if any, from the Institute as may be provided for
in the Statutes but no member other than the members
referred to in clauses ( b) and ( f) of section 11 shall be entitled
to any salary by reason of this clause.
** * * *
17. ( 1) The Director and Deputy Director of an Institute shall
be appointed by the Visitor, on such terms and conditions of service
and on the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted
by him in such manner, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
** * * *
(5) The Deputy Director of every Institute shall exercise such
powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned to him
by this Act or the Statutes or by the Director.
** * * *
24. All appointments of the staff of every Institute, except
that of the Director and Deputy Director, shall be made in
accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes, by—
(a) the Board, if the appointment is made on the
academic staff in the post of Lecturer or above or if the
appointment is made on the non-academic staff in any cadre
the maximum of the pay scale for which exceeds rupees ten
thousand five hundred;
(b) the Director, in any other case.
** * * *
CHAPTER III
T
HE C OUNCIL
30. ( 1) With effect from such date as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf, there shall be established
for all the Institutes specified in column ( 3) of the Schedule, a
Central body to be called the Council.
** * * *
31.(1)* * * * *
(2) The term of office of  a member elected under clause ( j)
of sub-section ( 2) of section 30 shall expire as soon as he ceases
to be member of  the House, which elected him.
** * * *
37. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act—
(a) the Board of  Governors of  every Institute
functioning as such immediately before the commencement
Director and
Deputy
Director.
Appointments.
Establishment
of Council.
Term of
office of,
vacancies
among, and
allowances
payable to
members of
Council.
Transitional
provisions.

34
of this Act shall continue to so function until a new Board is
constituted for that Institute under this Act, but on the
constitution of a new Board under this Act, the member of
the Board holding office before such constitution shall cease
to hold office;
** * * *

35
35
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to amend the National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007.
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.