 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July/ Ashadha, 1939 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
292 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
THE TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT ON 
 PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND AND 
RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION OF SPORTSPERSONS (PART-II) 
. 
 (Presented To The Rajya Sabha On20th June, 2017) 
(Laid On The Table Of Lok Sabha On20th June, 2017) 
 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available.  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July/ Ashadha, 1939 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT ON 
PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND AND 
RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION OF SPORTSPERSONS(PART-II) 
 
 (Presented To The Rajya Sabha On20th June, 2017)  
(Laid On The Table Of Lok Sabha On20th June, 2017) 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
                           
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................   (i) –(ii) 
2. PREFACE ........................................................................................................................   (iii) 
3. REPORT ..........................................................................................................................  1- 14 
 
CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations which have been    
 accepted by the Government ................................................... 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not              
 desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply .................. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the         
 Government have not been accepted by the Committee ............   
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are still awaited…………………………… 
 
4. *OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE.....   
5. *MINUTES .............................................................................................................................  
6. *ANNEXURES .....................................................................................................................  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*Will be appended at printing stage. 

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2016) 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Shri V.P Sahasrabuddhe 
 
LOK SABHA 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13. Shri Nihal Chand 
14.      Shrimati Bhawana Gawali Patil 
15.      Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16.      Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.      Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.      Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.      Shri Chand Nath 
20.      Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.      Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.      Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.      Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.      Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.      Shri Sumedanand Sarswati 
26.      Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.      Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.      Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.      Shri P.R. Sundaram 
30.      Smt Neelam Sonkar 
31.      Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher 
 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
Shr K.P Singh,  Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary 
Shri R.K Mecolt Singh, , Under Secretary 
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Human Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety Second Report on 
Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 
Two Hundred Seventy First Report on “Performance of National Sports Development 
Fund and  Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons (Part-II).   
 
2. The Two Hundred Seventy First Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha  on 
22nd December, 2015 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 22 nd December, 2015.  
Replies of the Government to the recommendations/observations contained in the Report, 
were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 30th June, 2017. 
 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting 
held on the 30th June, 2017. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     SATYANARAYAN JATIYA 
July 30, 2017                                               Chairman,                  
Ashadha, 1939 (Saka)    Department-related Parliamentary 
                            Standing Committee on 
                           Human Resource Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

REPORT 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Human Resource Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in its Two hundred seventy first Report on “Performance of 
National Sports Development Fund and  Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons 
(Part-II).  The 271 st Report was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 22 nd 
December, 2015.  The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (Department of Sports) vide 
its communication dated 23 rd September, 2016 furnished  its Action Taken Replies to the 
Committee. 
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the 271st Report have been categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government – paras 53  
 (Chapter-I) Total – 1 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government ’s reply – paras 30, 31, 37, 51, 117 and 
119.   
 (Chapter-II) Total – 6 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee – paras  18, 25, 28, 
86, 102, 116 and 118. 
 (Chapter-III) Total – 7 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are still awaited- Nil 
 (Chapter-IV) Total -  NIL 

 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation/Observations  
1.1 The Committee directed the Chief Engineer (NZ-1) and the Superintending 
Engineer, CPWD, who were also present, to prepare a proposal for renovation/repair of 
sports Infrastructure at NSNIS, Patiala by taking inputs from the coaches concerned and 
to see that it is as per International standards and submit to the Department of Sports for 
approval.                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                            (Para 53) 
 
Action Taken 
Institute has already taken action to get the renovation/up gradation works of sports 
infrastructure executed. R
epair/renovation of following buildings have been completed:- 
i. Renovation / up gradation of Dhyan Chand Internation al Hostel. 
ii. Renovation / Up gradation of Change rooms, cum toilets &stores in different 
outdoor playfields. 
iii. Renovation & upgradation in two of the four toilet blocks in silver jubilee 
hostel for women. 
iv. R e n o v a t i o n  & up gradation of Sauna / SteamBath Comple x. 
v. Renovation & up gradation of Guest House. 
vi. Annual repairs of staff quarters. 
vii. Annual repair of Main Palace building. 
 
In addition to above, the work of renovation/up gra dation of Yadavindra Hostel & 
Sports Sciences building are under progress. 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
Recommendation/Observations  
2.1          The Committee attention was drawn t o  G y m n a s t i c s  s t u d e n t s  o f  
Hyderabad, who are taking coaching in Sports Authority of India Cent re. It was pointed 
out that recently this SAI centre including Hostel was shifted f rom Saroonagar 
Indoor Stadium, LBB Nagar to Gachibowli except sports of Gymnastics and 
Badminton. Nearly 30 students are taking coaching i n Gymnastics as day boarders and 
10 students (State and National Level medalists) are residing in S AI Hostel to 
takecoaching while continuing their studies in nearest schools at LB Nagar. It was 
informed that due to shifting of this centre to Gac hibowli, these 10 students are facing 
severe problem to attend the collage, practice, and  for mess due to lack of 
accommodation.  They had requested Regional Directo r and Deputy Director, SAT 
to facilitate them at Saroonagar Indoor Stadium for  their training, at least for this 
academic year. However, no response has been received from their end. Now these 
students are facing hardship due to lack of accommodation, as they have  to attend the 
collage for their education at Saroonagar and then to rush back to report at Gachibowli 
for their training ad practice.  They all belong to very  poor families.  It was brought to 
the notice of Committee that though these students are perusing gymnastics since 
eight years
, due to the prevailing conditions they are being forced to leave the game. It 
was, therefore, requested to help the students to s urvive in this game while 
continuing their studies.                                            (Para 30) 
Recommendation/Observations  
2.2 The Committee took serious note of this fact. The Committee feels that these 
budding sportspersons who have been pursuing the Gymnastics from the very young age 
need to be nurtured and encouraged. The Committee is surprised to note this sorry state 
of affairs in management and recommends that the respective authorities of SAI are 
required to take cognizance of the plight of budding Gymnastic sportspersons and make 
sure that these students are shifted back to the Saroornagar Indoor Stadium or should be 
provided hostel facilities at Gachibowli itself so that they pursue their studies and games 
simultaneously.             
                                                                                                                           (Para 31) 
 
Action Taken 
The Secunderabad Centre was established in the year 1988 as a Sports Hostel                                    
and later it was converted under SAI Operational Scheme namely                                     
SAI Training Centre (STC). This scheme has since be en functioning                                   
from the space provided by the concerned State Government. The STC                                     
centre from Secunderabad was shifted 4 times as per  the convenience                                      
of the State Government. The facilities at STC Secunderabad at Saroor nagar                                
were also provided by the State Government of Telangana. Howev er,                                    
the facilities for Hockey and Athletics were not available at the Centre.                                   

In addition to this, the residential accommodation was also  not sufficient. Sports 
Authority of Telangana offered to provide the facili ties at                                   
Gachibowli Stadium for STC,      where sufficient accommodation    and playing facilities 
for Hockey, Athletics, and Indoor hall are   available in be tter condition. As the 
Indoor stadium at Gachibowli is not sufficient for Gymnastics    training, the training of 
Gymnastics inmates is being held at Saroornagar Centre.   Keeping in view the 
availability of better sports infrastructure and detailed discussion, with the officials of 
State Government  
of Telangana, it was decided to shift STC Secunderab ad to  Gachibowli  stadium, 
where it will benefit maximum sports  disciplines viz., Athlet ics, Hockey, Kabaddi, 
Handball, Judo, etc. 
  On request of some of the Gymnastic trainees who had approached SAI for allowing them 
to stay at the hostel at Gachibowli till their exams  are completed, the same was agreed. 
These gymnasts are residing at STC, Secunderabad, Gachibowli.
 
Recommendation/Observations  
2.3 The Committee felt that the facilities of Wrestling and Boxing are praise worthy, 
which is responsible for this Centre bringing out so many World renowned Sports-
persons. However, this excellence needs to be replicated for other Sports disciplines too. 
The Committee feels that the Athletics Tracks and turf for hockey need to be improved 
and brought at par with the International level incorporating the latest technology and 
sports facilities. The Committee also felt that in view of the forthcoming Rio Olympics in 
2016, the Sports Authorities should focus more on the medal prospective sports 
disciplines like Wrestling, Boxing, Weight-lifting, Athletics etc., where India 
traditionally have been strong, though other disciplines should also be given its fair share 
of attention so as to bring laurels for the Country.                                                                                              
(Para 37) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Athletic Track: There are two athletic tracks at the complex of NRC, Sonepat out of 
which one is synthetic and the other is grassy. The sy nthetic athletic track was laid by 
CPWD in 2010. Since then, the track is being used regularly b y National Campers, SAI 
trainees and players from other institutions.
 
As far as improvement of the facilities is concerne d, constant efforts are being made 
for upgradation of the existing sports facilities. 
Synthetic Hockey Field: The existing synthetic hockey surface was laid by CPW D in 
the year 2008 and taken over by SAI in 2009. Since t hen, the playfield is being used 
regularly by the SAI trainees as well as players from other institutions. After lapse of 
about seven years and regular use, the condition of the turf has deteriorated and it has 
become slippery which may cause injury to the players during practice. Efforts were made 
for watering and cleaning of the same regularly but to no avail. 
In view of above the relaying of Hockey synthetic Tur f is under consideration.
Archery, Athletics, Badminton, Boxing, Hockey, Shooting , Tennis, &Wrestling were 
the key disciplines for the preparation of sportspe rsons for Rio Olympics 2016. The 
National Coaching Camp in these disciplines except T ennis were organized on 
continuous basis wherein sportspersons were provided with all the requisite facilities for 

their preparations, such as wholesome nutritious di et, food supplements, 
equipments, state- of-the-art infrastructure, lodging & travelling facilities, servic es of 
reputed Indian and Foreign Coaches/Supporting staff, Scientific & M edical support, 
Sports Kit etc. besides financial assistance for their abroad tr aining and participation in 
International Competitions in India and abroad. Tennis players being professionals were 
on international circuit as per their specific programmes. 
In addition to the above, Government also provided financial assistance to i ndividual 
sportspersons from the scheme 'Target Olympic Podium' (T OP). Under this scheme 
individualized needs of identified sportspersons fo r the 2016 Rio Olympic Games 
were catered to. There was no shortage of funds und er this scheme; identified 
sportspersons were fully financially assisted for th eir advance training under world 
renowned coaches /experts at reputed training centr es worldwide. Identified 
sportspersons are also being provided with personal equipment and training gears of their 
choice. 
In the 2012 London Olympic Games, a total of 81 sportspersons including Men Hockey 
team had qualified and participated. 119 sportspersons inc luding 16 members each of 
Hockey teams men and women qualified for participat ion in Rio Olympics. This was 
India’s largest ever contingent for Olympic Games. 
Recommendation/Observations  
2.4 The Committee recommends that SAI should provide more funds to NIS, Patiala 
for the purchase of equipments so that there are no short-comings in the efforts being put 
in by these athletes for the upcoming Olympics Games, 2016. The Committee also 
recommends that an Indoor Stadium for Athletics should be built for the year and practice 
for athletes. The Committee also directed NIS, Patiala to have interface with State Bank 
of Patiala (SBP) and other PSUs in Punjab for sponsorship and adoption of certain events 
and players who have been shortlisted for International event. The State Bank of Patiala 
(SBP) had promised to help the centre. The Institutes may identify the areas where these 
PSUs are able to provide financial assistance. The Committee was also apprised that to 
participate in certain international events, players needed coaching in foreign centres. 
However, due to shortage of funds this was not possible. The Committee feels that the 
medal winning prospects should be given coaching in foreign centres and shortage of 
funds should not come in the way. The Committee was also apprised that in Fencing 
there are many medal winning prospects.              
                                                                                                                       (Para 51) 
 
 
Action Taken 
As per requirement of the National Campers in Athle tics &Coaches concerned supply 
order for the procurement of imported Javelin was placed. 
Estimate for the construction of Indoor Synthetic Athletics Track has been obtain ed 
from NPCC Ltd. It is being modified as per requirement of the coac hes concerned. On 
finalizing the same, it shall be submitted for approval of the competent authority. 
Matter regarding seeking sponsorship from PSUs like Banking sector for the training 
equipments, foreign exposure to elite sportspersons  & Infrastructure development 

has been taken up with the General Manager, SBP vid e letter dated 20.11.2015 and 
10.02.2016 respectively. 
The Government also provided financial assistance to individual sportspersons from 
the Scheme Target Olympic Podium (TOP). Under this scheme individualized  needs 
of identified sportspersons for the 2016 Rio Olympic  Games were 
catered to. There 
was no shortage of funds under this scheme; identif ied sportspersons were fully 
financially assisted for their advance training under wor ld renowned coaches /experts at 
reputed training centres worldwide. Identified sportspersons were also prov ided with 
personal equipment and training gears of their choice. 
 
Recommendation/Observations  
2.5 The Committee is seized of the fact that many of the outstanding sportspersons of 
Yesteryears are living in penurious circumstances. The Committee desires that the 
Department of Sports should prepare a database of such players so that initiative may be 
taken by the Department of Sports to alleviate the financial condition of such 
sportsperson of yesteryears who have won medal or participated in National/International 
events/Championships  by providing lump sum financial assistance/lifelong pension 
facility, etc. The Committee expects to send a progress report in this regard within a 
month.  
                                                                                                                       (Para 117) 
 
Recommendation/Observations  
2.6 In a Country of such a humongous sports potential, the Committee hopes that this 
record can only get better. The Committee notes that we have to realize that where we 
stand for Rio 2016. The performance of Indian contingent in the previous participation in 
Olympics is mostly about failure. It is merely a question of when and where our 
sportsperson failed and blame game, as usual, where accusations are exchanged among 
the involved people who refuse to accept any responsibility. The defeat and losses bring 
disappointment. The first and foremost question to be asked is whether team or 
sportsperson fell short of expectations on account of poor training, exposure and lack of 
amenities. The Department of Sports/SAI, National Sports Federations etc., are in the 
Process of zeroing in on the sportspersons possessing the medal winning prospects. 
Keeping in view the breakdown of Indian contingent in past Olympics, the Committee 
expects the Sportspersons to stand up to the pressure of Olympics and not to give a below 
par performance.                                       
                                                                                                                     (Para 119) 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry had launched a scheme called ‘Target Olympic Podium Scheme’ for medal 
prospects identified for 2016 Rio Olympic. Government provided financial assistance to 
individual sportspersons from the Scheme ‘Target Olympic Podium (TOP) ’. Under this 
scheme individualized needs of identified sportsper sons for the 2016 Rio Olympic 
Games were 
catered to. Identified sportspersons were fully financially assisted for their 
advance training under world renowned coaches/experts at r eputed training centres 
worldwide. Under the Scheme of Assistance to National Sports Federations (NS Fs), all 

the requisite requirement including acclimatization of Indian sportspersons were 
planned for Rio-Olympics, 2016 as a part of ACTC plan of different sports disc iplines. 
Identified sportspersons were also provided with personal equipment and training gears of 
their choice.
 
In the last 2012 London Olympic Games, a total of 81 sportspersons including Men 
Hockey team had qualified and participated. 119 sportspers ons including 16 members 
each of Hockey  
teams (men and women) qualified for participation i n Rio Olympics. This was India ’s 
largest ever contingent for Olympic Games. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
Recommendation/Observations  
3.1 From the deliberations of the Committee with CPSUs, it has come to notice that 
CPSUs are not adequately familiar with the existence of the National Sports 
Development Fund (NSDF) and they are by and large linking the NSDF with CSR 
activities. The Committee, therefore, directs the Department of Sports as well as the 
Sports Authority of India to take all possible measures immediately to educate all the 
CPSUs on the difference between NSDF and their role in CSR so that funds can be 
mobilized for NSDF without any further delay. The Committee notes that the way the 
CPSUs are participating on development and promotion of sports can be made more 
rationalized and contributing to the broad-basing of National Sports. The Committee also 
notes with anguish that this issue was also pointed out in its previous Report on the same 
subject, however, no action seems to have been taken in this regard and in case the 
awareness and familiarity about the NSDF among the CPSUs continue to languish as on 
date, the very purpose of the NSDF would be defeated and the Department of Sports 
/Sports Authority of India would be responsible for the failure on their parts to popularize 
the same.                                                                                          
                                                                                                                          (Para 18) 
 
Recommendation/Observations  
3.2 The Committee, after its deliberations with PSBs, feels that though there are 
Sports Control Boards in these Banks, yet they are not aware of the requirement for 
contribution to the National Sports Development Fund for promotion of excellence in 
sports, as well as board-basing of sports. The Committee notes that the Department of 
Sports and the Sports Authority of India have not properly familiarized NSDF to them 
and the role required from them in this regard. The Committee appreciates the periodic 
encouragement given by Banks to sports as well as sportspersons in the form of holding 
tournaments/sports events, cash awards, contribution as sponsorships, etc. However, co-
ordination with Department of Sports/SAI is lacking. The Committee recommends that 
Department of Sports/SAI should make concerted efforts in co-coordinating with them in 
promotion of sports in the perspective of extant National Sports Policy and encouraging 
them to make contribution to the National Sports Development Fund.  
                                                                                                                        (Para 25) 
 
Action Taken 
The Government is regularly interacting with CPSUs/PSBs for contribution to the NSDF. 
They are also encouraged to contribute to the NSDF under CSR (Corporate Social 
Responsibility). Further, the Ministry has decided to organize meetings with important 
PSUs in Delhi in association with the Department of Public Enterprises and also with 
PSBs in association with the Department of Financial Services for creating awareness 
about NSDF and their role in CSR in order to mobilize funds for NSDF. The Ministry has 
also written letters to CMDs of PSUs in Coal Sector, Petroleum Sector and Banks for 
contributing funds to NSDF. 

The Ministry will compile a list of potential donors both in the private sector and public 
sector. The Ministry will write to such potential donors requiring them to contribute to 
NSDF. The Ministry will also organize seminars/workshops in major cities to create 
awareness about NSDF. The Department will also depute its teams to potential donors 
explaining them about existence of NSDF and requesting them to contribute to NSDF. 
The Ministry will also prepare publicity material such as brochures, pamphlets, videos 
etc. about NSDF and distribute the same among donors.  As regards promotion of sports 
and recruitment of sportspersons, the matter has already been taken up by this 
Department with the DOPT and a committee has also been formed to look into this and 
other issues. The Committee ’s specific recommendations on mandatory 5% quota fo r 
employment of sportspersons in Govt. vacancies have been forwarded to DOPT for 
necessary action. 
 
Observation of the Committee: 
The Committee  notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the outcom e of the 
steps initiated by the Department/SAI in educating the Central Public Sector 
Undertakings and Public Sector Banks about the National Sports Development 
Fund and the Corporate Social Responsibility.  The Committee would also like to 
know whether this has resulted in enhancing the contribution to NSDF by the 
CPSUs/PSBs,  The Committee accordingly, directs the Department of Sports is 
provide the Committee details of contributions, to NSDF made in the last three 
years, year wise and company wise.  The Committee further directs the Departme nt 
of Sports to apprise the Committee of the status as to number of potential donors in 
private sector were approached and contributions  received from them.  The  
Committee, however, would like to know the end result from the Departmen t/SAI 
about its specific recommendation of mandatory 5 per cent quota for employment of 
sportspersons in Government vacancies.  The Committee would appreciate if the 
Department/SAI pursues the matter with DOPT vigorously. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observations  
3.3 The Committee notes that the State Governments gets fund assistance for 
promotion of sports from the Central Government through the Department of Sports and 
the need and identification of projects are made under different extant schemes. The 
Committee recommends that it would be an appreciative move if the Department of 
Sports and the SAI interact with the State Governments for encouraging the recruitment 
of sportspersons in vacancies arising out in the domain of State Governments of Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana covering their autonomous units as well. The Committee directs 
to provide a status note in this regard from the Department of Sports within a month.                                        
                                                                                                                         (Para 28) 
 
Action Taken 
Department of Sports has written letters to the State Government of Andhra Pradesh and 
State Government of Telangana to make provisions for recruitment of sportspersons in 
vacancies arising out in their domain and also to make recruitment of meritorious 
sportspersons against vacancies reserved for them in relaxation of the recruitment 

procedure, to the extent these including all other reservations under existing orders do not 
exceed 50% of the total number of vacancies proposed to be filled by direct recruitment. 
If a request is received from the State Government of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, an 
Officer from the Department of Sports can be deputed to Andhra Pradesh and Telangana 
to discuss the issue of recruitment of sportspersons by the State Governments 
Observation of the Committee 
The Committee notes with concern that Department of Sports did not furnish the 
status note as desired by it.  The Committee reiterates its observation and directs 
the Department of Sports to submit the same at the earliest.  Recruitment of 
meritorious  sportspersons against the vacancies reserved for them especially in the 
domain of State Governments has been an area of concern for the Committee f or 
quite sometime.  The Committee feels that the Department/SAI should have a pro-
active approach in the matter.  Department/SAI should coordinate with the State 
Governments to fill in the vacancies reserved for meritorious sportspersons at the 
earliest.  The Committee reiterates that the Department/SAI should also create a 
database covering all the States/UTs having details of number of  posts reserved f or 
meritorious sportspersons, filled up and vacant vacancies alongwith the sports 
disciplines covered. 
 
Recommendation/Observations  
3.4 The Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken by the PSUs and PSBs to 
promote sports. Some of the PSUs like SAIL, BHEL etc. and Banks have invested a lot in 
the development of sports in the Country. However, the Committee observes that most of 
the PSUs and PSBs have no definite sports policy for promotion of sports in the Country 
and recruitment of sportspersons. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that most 
of the PSUs are following the directives of Central Government which are issued from 
time to time. The Committee is unhappy to note that most of the PSUs are not aware of 
National ports Development (NSDF). Also no funds from CSR are allocated for 
promotion of sports. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Sports Authority of 
India (SAI) should undertake efforts to make all PSUs and Banks aware of this fund so 
that more contribution can be put forward for the promotion and development of sports in 
the Country. The Committee also observes that SAI needs to tie up with the concerned 
agencies so that a definite sports policy can be adopted by the PSUs and Banks for 
promotion of sports in the perspective of the National Sports Policy, 2001, which 
envisage promotion of excellence in Sports and also broad-basing of Sports. Further, a 
policy needs to be formulated so that certain percentage of the funds earmarked for CSR 
activities can be allotted for the promotion and development of sports in the Country. The 
recruitment of Sportspersons in PSUs/PSBs is being done as per the Guidelines of DoPT, 
which stipulates reservation upto 5% in existing vacancies. This implies that there is no 
minimum Cap for employment of Sportsperson in the said Guidelines. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that DoPT should make necessary amendments in the 
Guidelines for recruitments of Sportspersons so that the mandatory 5% quota of 
Sportspersons of arising vacancies is filled up. 
                                                                                                                         (Para 86) 
 
Action Taken 

As already stated above in reply to recommendation nos. 5,18 and 25, the Government is 
regularly in touch with CPSUs/PSBs for contribution to NSDF under CSR. Further, the 
Ministry has decided to organize meetings with important PSUs in Delhi in association 
with the Department of Public Enterprises and also with Publics Sector Banks in 
association with Department of Financial Services for creating awareness about NSDF 
and their role in CSR in order to mobilize funds for NSDF. The Ministry has also written 
letters to CMDs of PSUs in Coal Sector, Petroleum Sector and Banks for contributing 
funds to NSDF.  
The Ministry will compile a list of potential donors both in the private sector and public 
sector. The Ministry will write to such potential donors requiring them to contribute to 
NSDF. The Ministry will also organize seminars/workshops in major cities to create 
awareness about NSDF. The Department will also depute its teams to potential donors 
explaining them about existence of NSDF and requesting them to contribute to NSDF. 
The Ministry will also prepare publicity material such as brochures, pamphlets, videos 
etc. about NSDF and distribute the same among donors. 
The matter of recruitment of sportspersons has already been taken up by this Department 
with the DOPT and a committee has also been formed to look into this and other issues. 
The Committee’s specific recommendations on mandatory 5% quota for employment of 
sportspersons in Govt. vacancies have been forwarded to DOPT for necessary action. 
 
Observation of the Committee 
The Committee while appreciating the efforts put in by the Department/SAI in 
educating CPSUs/PSBs on promotion of sports and contribution to NSDF, would  
like to reiterate that its specific  recommendation has been to encourage all 
CPSUs/PSBs to have definite sports policy for promotion and development of 
sports.  The Committee accordingly observes that the Department/SAI should take 
concrete steps in this direction by involving Government organizations, nurturing 
talents, and designing specialized programmes for overall development of sports.  
The Committee is of the concerted opinion that organizing 
meetings/workshops/seminars with CPSUs/PSBs alone  would not make any change 
at the ground level.  If the Department/SAI earnestly desires to create a sports 
culture, it should take a pro-active role in promoting sports by encouraging 
CPSUs/PSBs to, not only invest in sports on a large scale, but also to provide career 
incentives to the sportspersons then only the sports activity will get a required boost.  
Recommendation/Observations  
3.5 The Committee observes that the State of Haryana has not yet submitted the 
utilization certificates amounting to Rs. 3,34,84,178/-. The Committee, therefore, feels 
that the Department of Sports should take up this issue with the State Government of 
Haryana. The Department should insist on the submission of UCs by the State 
Government of Haryana on different policies and schemes in promotion of sports and 
sportspersons on an urgent basis and the Committee expects a status Note in this regard 
within a month. 
(Para 
102) 
 
Action Taken 

The matter has been taken up with the Additional Chief Secretary, Sports & Youth 
Affairs Department, Government of Haryana for expediting the submission of Unutilized 
Certificates(UCs) or refund of the grant along with interest as per provisions of GFRs, 
2005. 
Observation of the Committee  
The Committee is not satisfied by merely taking up the matter with Additional 
Chief Secretary.  The Committee believes that in past also, the Department might  
have taken it up with the State Government.  This is just not enough.  The non-
submissions of UCs by State Governments is not an exception, but this happens in 
large no. of cases.  The Committee impress es upon the Department of Sports  to 
address this problem at level of Minister and ensure  that UCs are received in time 
so that the schemes do not suffer.   The Committee desires that a detailed  note on  
further action taken  by the Department be submitted to the Committee.  
Recommendation/Observations  
3.6 The Committee on the basis of deliberations with PSUs/PSBs for promotion of 
Sports reiterates its views that Public and Private Sector Undertakings as well as Banks / 
Financial Institutions etc., may be encouraged by the Department of Sports/SAI to adopt 
one Sports Discipline or can take total responsibility of scouting talents and its nurturing 
including their participation in various National and International Events. On the 
reciprocal basis, the concerned donor should have its Nominee in the concerned National 
Federal/Association. The Committee is seized of the fact that, GAIL has orally 
committed that they would adopt one Centre of SAI. The ONGC has proposed to support 
Wrestling players. Further M/s Damodar Valley Corporation has also offered to support 
two athletes under Target Olympic Podium (TOP) Scheme for which requisite 
information as requested by them has been furnished to them. The Committee directs that 
the Department of Sports and SAI should nominate an exclusive Nodal Officer in each 
region for co-coordinating with PSUs/PSBs so that they can contribute to the NSDF as 
well as adopt a Sports Discipline/Game or a Centre. The Committee directs the 
Department of Sports/SAI to submit a monthly progress report to the Committee to this 
effect.                                                                               (Para 116) 
 
Action Taken 
It has been decided that Regional Heads of SAI will be nominated as Nodal Officers for 
coordinating with PSUs/PSBs. The Department has decided to organize meetings in 
Delhi with CMDs of PSUs and PSBs for creating awareness about NSDF. The 
Department has already written letters to CMDs of PSUs in Coal Sector, Petroleum 
Sector and Banks for contributing funds to NSDF. 
 
Observation of the Committee 
The Committee desires to know the impact on the PSUs, PSBs with regard to 
contribution towards  NSDF since the regional nodal officers were appointed.  The 
Committee may also be apprised of the efforts made by t hese nodal officers in that 
regard. 
Recommendation/Observations  
3.7 The Committee on the basis of its deliberations with sportsperson and various 
stake holders in the field of sports decided to assess the rate of employability of 

sportspersons in the country. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Department of 
Sports should prepare basic database on the current status of employment in Central 
Government/State Government departments, their PSUs, and PSBs of sportspersons 
representing and winning medals in national/international events/championships. A status 
note is required to be sent to the Committee within a month.                                                                            
(Para 118) 
 
Action Taken 
Regarding preparation of database of sportspersons and current status of employment in 
Central Government/State Government Departments, their PSUs and PSBs of 
sportspersons representing and winning medals in various national/international 
championships, the Ministry has written letters to all State Governments, 
Ministries/Departments to furnish details of sportspersons employed in Central 
Government and State Government Offices. 
Observation of the Committee 
The Committee may be apprised of said details and direct the Department of 
Sports  to pursue with all concerned so as to obtain the requisite details. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 