 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
284 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
Issues and Challenges before Higher  
Educational Sector in India 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2016) 

 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY THIRD REPORT 
 
Issues and Challenges before Higher  
Educational Sector in India 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha 8th February, 2016) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …...........................................................  (i) 
2. PREFACE 
3.  LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ……….......…............................................................  (iii) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…... .........................         
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE ...   
5. *MINUTES ............................................ ..................................................     
6. *ANNEXURES............................................ ......................................................    
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
*Appended on printing stage 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2016) 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13.  Shri Nihal Chand 
14.       Shrimati Bhawana Gawali  Patil 
15.       Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16.       Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.       Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.       Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.       Shri Chand Nath 
20.       Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.       Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.       Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.       Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.       Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
26.       Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.       Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.       Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.       Shrimati Neelam Sonkar 
30.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri K.P Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director 
Shri R.K Mecolt Singh, Assistant Director 
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer 
(i) 

P R E F A C E 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and 
Eighty-fourth Report of the Committee on the subject ‘Issues and Cha llenges before Higher 
Educational Sector In India'.  
2.  The Committee visited various Universities and educational institutes in Kolkata, Mumbai, 
Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Patiala, Thiruvananthapuram , Udaipur, Chennai, 
Vishakapatnam, Bhopal, Ujjain, Indore, Goa and Pune.  The Committee held wide ranging 
discussion with Director, IIMC, Vice Chancellors of University of Kolkata and Jadav University,  
Director, IIT Bombay Vice Chancellors of SNDT and Mumbai University, Directors of IIM, 
Bangalore, Indian Institute of Science, Vice Chancellors of Bangalore University, Central 
University of Hyderabad, Centre for Foreign Languages (CFL), Directors of IIT, Hyderaba d and 
IIT Hyderabad, Vice Chancellors of Panjab University and Central University of Punjab, 
University of Kerala Central University of Kerala, Directors of IISER, IIM Khozikode and Indian 
Institute of Information Technology and Management (IITM), Vice-Chancellors of Central 
University of Rajasthan, Mewar University, Directors of IIT, Jodhpur and IIM, Udaipur, Vice 
Chancellor of Madras University, Anna University, Director, IIT Madras, Vice Chancellors of 
Andhra University, IMU, DS National Law University Director of IIM-Vishakhapatnam, Vice 
Chancellors of Noida International University (NIU), JIIT Noida, Director, IISER, Bhopal, 
Maulana Azad NIT (MANIT), Vice Chancellors of Rajiv Gandhi Technical University, 
Barkatullah University, Atal Bihari Vajpayee Hindi Vishwavidyalaya, Vikram University, Ujjain, 
Director, Ujjain Engineering College, Vice Chancellor of Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya, Directors 
of Goa Institute of Management and NIT Goa, Representatives of Gokhale Institute of Politics and 
Economics, Vice Chancellor of Pune University, Directors of IISER, Pune and College of 
Engineering, Pune along with the officials of State Governments of West Bengal, Maharashtra, 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Kerala, Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Madhya 
Pradesh and Goa on the issues and challenges facing higher educational sector in India a nd the 
steps taken to address them. 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the subject and adopted the same in its 
meeting held on the 14th December, 2016  
4.  For facility of the reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters at end of Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
NEW DELHI 
December 14, 2016 
Agrahayana 23, 1938 (Saka) 
  
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary  
              Standing Committee on  Human Resource 
Development                   

ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
1. AICTE :  All India Council for Technical Education 
2. CBES:  Choice Based Credit System 
3. CEC:  Consortium  of Educational  Communications  
4. EOC:  Equal Opportunity Cells 
5. GER:   Gross Enrolment Ratio 
6.  ICT:  Information and Communication Technology 
7. GIAN:  Global Initiative of Academic networks 
8. HEFA:  Higher Education Financing Agency 
9.   IIIT:  Indian Institute of Information Technology 
10.   IIM :  Indian Institute of Management 
11. IISER:  Indian Institute of Science Education and Research 
12. IIIPRS:  Indian Institute of Intellectual Property Rights Studies 
13.  IIT:  Indian Institute of Technology 
14. IMPRINT: Impacting Research Innovation and Technology 
15. MOOCS: Massive Online Open Courses 
16. NIRF:  National Institutional Ranking Framework 
17. NIT:  National Institute of Technology 
18. NMEICT: National Mission On Education Through  ICT 
19.   NQRI:  National Quality Renaissance Initiative 
20. NSQF:   National Skill Qualification Frameworks  
21. PMMMNT: Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya National Mission on Teachers and Teaching 
22.   PPP:  Public Private Partnership 
23. RUSA:   Rashtriya Ucchatar Shiksha  Abhiyan 
24. SWAYAM: Study Webs Of Active-Learning For Young Aspiring Minds 
25. UAY:  Ucchatar Avishkar Yojana    
26. UBA:  Unnat Bharat Abhiyan 
27. UGC:  University Grants Commission 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

REPORT 
AN OVERVIEW 
1. Education, as we are aware, is vital to the human resource development and empowerment in 
the stages of growth of a nation. In any education system, higher education encompassing 
Management, Engineering, Medicine etc., plays a major role in imparting knowledge, values, and 
developing skills and, in the process, increase the growth and productivity of the nation. The 
higher education segment in India has tremendous potential for growth, and could prove to be 
viable investment avenues for private sector and foreign institutions. The government has pledged 
its efforts to reform the sector over the next one year by overhauling the regulatory framework  and 
enabling access to education for all though the conversion of intention into accomplishment to be 
seen. India has seen tremendous growth in past few years. Theservice sector has become the 
growth driver, with the economy shifting from the manufacturing sector. Information Technology, 
management, Hospitality and Banking industry are the major contributors. The conventional 
courses are now less preferred. This shift also changed the Indian education sector, as these sectors 
require skilled manpower thereby heightening the demand for higher education in India. In this 
process new challenges came to forefronts which have to be overcome. 
 
2. In the light of this background, the Committee decided to examine 'the Issues and challenges 
before Education Sector in India” and felt to get first hand feedback from the stakeholders. It then 
decided to interact with the educational institutions of higher learning, educationists and other 
stakeholders across the country. During its visit to Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Patiala, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Udaipur, Chennai, Vishakhapatnam, Bhopal and Indore it held a number of 
meetings with authorities Higher Educational Institutions, Universities, educationists, different 
stakeholder in the field of education, etc. and also interacted with authority of Public Sector Banks 
(PSBs) concerning the education loan facilities being provided to students in higher education. 
 
3. At Kolkata, the Committee  and held discussion on 1 st July, 2015 with the authorities of 
IIM, Calcutta. The Director of the  institute submitted that IIM, had a vision to be an international 
Centre of Excellence in all aspects of management education.  He informed that the mission of the 
institute is to develop innovative and ethical future leaders capable of managing change and 
transformation in globally competitive environment and to advance the theory and practice of 
management.   
5.  The Director further added that the some facilities were needed for the Institute.  The 
Institute needed new Academic Block, New Hostel Complex which include 345 Rooms, 500 seats 
hostel space and 33KV Substation.  There is a need for constructing peripheral compound wall, 
construction of Student Hostel of 444 Rooms and construction of another hostel for married 
students. 

6. The Committee visited Mumbai and held of discussion with the Vice-Chancellor of SNDT 
Women's University, Mumbai authorities of Ministry of HRD on the subject under consideration.   
7.   The Committee was apprised about the innovations introduced by the university as under:-  
(a) Research being an important component the student, faculty and departmental 
research was encouraged through fellowship, research grants and workshops on 
preparing research; 
(b) Innovation in curriculum design and development; 
(c) Deployment of information and Communication Technologies (ICT) for online 
admissions and student cycle, to connect campuses of Mumbai and Pune and SNDT 
WU,/integrate ICTs into teaching-learning process; 
(d) Internationalization by MoUs signed with many foreign universities, joint 
programmes, research, and student interne ship planned; 
(e) University-Industry Partnership, where industries offer fellowships, industry experts 
act as mentors, interact with students as visiting professors, guide students during 
internship etc. 
8. He further apprised the Committee of the challenges being faced by SNDT Women's 
university as State University as under:- 
(i) Shortage of academic posts in post graduate departments. 
(ii) UGC sanctions posts for 5 years only and State Government takes over the posts 
which does not happen and therefore Universities cannot take advantage of these 
posts even for 5 years. 
(iii) Development grant from UGC is only 50% of the total grant whereas the 
infrastructure requires huge investments. 
(i) The Choice Board Credit System was introduced in 2012-13 at PG Level.  The UG 
level the challenges are on account of availability of faculty and funds. 
9.  Hesuggested the following solutions to the above problems as :- 
(i) The UGC should for number of faculty position in higher education should be made 
mandatory for all State Government. 
(ii) UGC should provide funds for hiring faculty in plan period on tenure basis  
(iii) UGC needs to assess the development plan of each university in the light of its needs and 
provide development grants accordingly. 
(iv)  To meet faculty shortage there was a need to create more posts on tenure basis at UG 
and PG level. 

10.  On the status of filling up of faculty positions in Central Universities, the 
authorities of the Department of Higher Education added that the sanctioned strength of all the 
Central Universities together is just 16,339 of which 6,107 positions are lying vacant.  Central 
Universities were adopting different methods to address faculty shortages which include ad-hoc 
faculty, quest faculty, contract faculty and Re-employed faculty. 
11. Some of the reasons for teaching posts lying vacant were stated as follows:- 
  (i) Non-availability of faculty with requisite qualifications; 
(ii) Non-availability of faculty in certain specified domains of knowledge and non-
availability of faculty belonging to reserved categories; 
(iii)  Vocational difficulties; and  
(iv)  Immobility of the senior level faculty members from one institution to another 
institution as a result of the Career Advancement Scheme which is in vogue. 
13.  The Committee visited Bangalore and held discussion with Directors of IIM, Bangalore, 
Indian Institute of Science and Vice Chancellor, Bangalore University on the subject under 
consideration. 
14.  The Director, IIMB submitted before the Committee that the Institute's Mission was to 
build leaders and Entrepreneurs through Holistic, transformative and Innovative Education. There 
are 3 PG programs which included Public Policy and Management Program for Government and 
20 doctoral graduates have been enrolled in the institute. 
15.  The Director, IIMB highlighted the issues faced by Higher Educational Institutes in 
Management. He submitted that it was difficult to attract and retain high quality faculty and there 
was need to use technology to extend impact to other institutions. The Director also submitted that 
on social impact there was a centre for Public Policy.  This centre was set up to improve 
governance and shape public policy in partnership with DoPT. Tele-education satellite based live 
interactive lessons was started and is now  being extended to 2000 in 1000 schools in rural 
Karnataka. 
16  The Vice - Chancellor of Bangalore University submitted that a lack of adequate 
and State-of-the art infrastructure facility was hindering high quality research in universities. 
17. The Vice Chancellor of Bangalore University suggested the following steps necessary to 
promote research (initiation) at the UG level: 
(i) Inclusion of field study/project work/dissertation/observation studies in the curriculum; 
(ii) Scholarship support at UG level to inspire students to undertake short-term research work. 
He further added that there is generally a decline in the quality of higher education in India due to 
lack of adequate number of quality teacher; lack of adequate infrastructure for teaching and 
learning processes; and lack of adequate funds. 

18.    He also pointed out that inadequate funding is one of the main reasons for hiring quality 
teachers. Non-availability of adequate number of qualified teachers (UGC-NET/SLET/JRF etc) in 
some disciplines was also cited as another reason for shortage in faculty position. Presently, 
Central Government funds few Universities only leaving behind most universities to be funded by 
State Governments which leads to disproportionate progression.  Hence Central Government 
should fund all the Universities fully in the country.  
19.  He further submitted that initiatives are required to be taken to attract bright students 
towards teaching profession like:- 
(i) Salary as per UGC pay scale; 
(ii) Better promotional avenues; 
(iii) Teacher-friendly working environment; 
(iv) Implementation of UGC guidelines regarding pay scales and age of superannuation 
uniformly. 
(v) Efforts may be initiated to bring all the state-owned universities to bring under central 
funding system. 
20. As regards the faculty position, he apprised the Committee as under: 
Posts on July, 2015 Sanctioned Filled Vacant 
Professor 84 18 66 
Associate Professor 163 83 80 
Assistant Professor 351 245 106 
 
He also gave  a picture of the number of students opting for doctoral studies i n various disciplines in the 
country in the past three years can be portrayed as follows:- 
Position in Bangalore University 
Opting PhD Number of PhD registered 
on July, 2015 
Number of PhD registered 
(Not awarded) on July, 2015 
Science 314 496 
Humanities 278 414 
Commerce & Management 42 93 

Engineering & Technology 81 202 
Education 35 67 
Law 17 39 
Total 767 1311 
 
20.  The representatives from the universityfurther added that the initiati ve likes 'Make in India' and 
'Skilled India' are commendable.  However, the effectiveness of these initiativ es in Higher Education needs 
to be debated and endeavours in Higher Educational institutions should not shy away fr om foreign 
collaborations to advance research and innovations. He further pointed out that the indust ry-University and 
technical institutions interactive initiatives require effective functioning of Faculty and to make the courses 
relevant to industrial needs as well.  This would create a better job opportunity situation for the graduates. 
21.  He pointed out that the course contents should have a periodical review with interact ion and 
feedback from industry and suggested that it is necessary to adopt the review of t he course content 
periodically; Employers' feedback on course content, knowledge and skill level of graduates  has to be 
viewed seriously by the institutions; and involvement of industry representativ es in designing and 
development of course content is essential. 
He further added that effective governance in higher education institutions and role of unions and politics in 
imparting education without interruptions in academics.  He also mentioned some cha llenges being faced 
by the institutions as :- 
(i) Political interference in the field of education, especially in Higher Education, is a deterrence; 
(ii) Appointment of the Head of the Higher Educational Institution should not be by a poli tical 
institution. 
22.  He further added that there was need to enhance Teaching Methodology, motivational level 
of teachers, level of teachers, level of research by faculty and role of data requirements reliable and credible 
data collection and maintenance of information system at different levels like, pre -school, primary, upper 
primary, secondary, higher secondary, technical, professional and at research levels for  policy intervention 
and also the adopt following steps:- 
(i) Adopting innovative (technology-embedded) teaching methods; 
(ii) Incentivizing teachers for better teaching and research practices; 
(iii) Evaluation of research contribution of the Faculty; 
(iv) Development of institutional data bases and Management information System (MIS). 
23.  He also highlighted the economic difficulties being faced by students and the role o f 
financial institutions in augmenting resources both at student and at institution al level Educational Loan 
Scheme suggested that scholarship facilities need to be enhanced this can be done by Bank Loan  facilities 
for needy students.  
24.  The Director, Indian Institute of Science submitted that IISc was establishe d in 1909.  
There are 37 Departments with 489 faculty members in all branches of science and engineering.  The 

Director, IISc submitted that the vision of the institute was to be am ong the world's foremost academic 
institutions through the pursuit of research excellence and the promotion of innov ation.  The institute was 
rapidly modernising its infrastructure by up scaling its research equipment and eng aging substantial 
international faculty and students. 
25.  The Committee visited Hyderabad and held discussion with Vice Chancellors of 
University of Hyderabad and Centre for English and Foreign Languages along with the authorities 
of State Government of Telangana. 
26.  The Vice Chancellor of Hyderabad University highlighted the need for quality 
education in India and stated that the Internal Quality Assurance Cell is closely monitoring the 
academic performance of various departments in the university in terms of teaching, research and 
placements.  The establishment of state-of-art research laboratories has also been established for 
the PG and PhD students' and continuous assessment through semester system for evaluation of 
students.   
27.  He further added the state of art infrastructure is necessary for carrying out path-
breaking research.  If proper allocation of funds is made of research in sciences and social sciences 
then the universities in the country will be able to contribute.  He further added that to promote 
research at undergraduate level in science and technology, the university was encouraging the 
students through the Junior Science Club and innovation club to promote research.  Some of the 
students have visited foreign institutions and have been associated with well-known academician 
on summer projects.   
28.  The University further imparts summer research training to UG/PG students 
through science academies-supported summer research fellowship. On the vacant posts in the 
university the Vice-Chancellor submitted that there were 156 faculty positions vacant in 
University of Hyderabad. 
29.  The Vice-Chancellor further submitted that instead of aiming at horizontal growth, 
there was a need to select institutions of excellence and nurture them with aim to promote 
excellence, if necessary by providing incentives.  He further added that there was a need to address 
the challenges like greater transparency and accountability, the role of colleges and unive rsities in 
the new millennium and emerging scientific research. He further added we need to create a sec ond 
wave of institution building and excellence in the fields of education, research and capability 
building and a need to nurture centers of excellence permitting vertical growth in selected areas.  
He further added that the educated people who are skilled were necessary to more our economy 
forward. 
30.  The Vice-Chancellor further added that the Government needed to look at 
allocating enough budgets for education, strengthen the infrastructure in institutions and promote 
active research and development so that our higher education system becomes robust.  A greater 
allocation needs to be made for the Higher Education sector which can help in developing 
infrastructure in Indian institutions.  The recruitment process must be made conducive in line to 
attract foreign/NRI academicians which can help in quality research.  To hire qualit y faculty, 

Central Universities are competing with IITs, NITs, IISERs etc., which work directly under 
Ministry of HRD and pay scales.  He suggested that it may be better if the Government considers 
elevating some of the best performing Central Universities to a higher level similar to IITs, NITs 
and IISERs, so that these Universities can do even better than the current level. The honorarium 
for hiring experienced and high profile faculty should also be enhanced so that the best talent can 
be attached. 
31.  The Vice-Chancellor further added that non-availability of quality and experienced 
academicians is one major factor.  Proper grants also need to be provided to institutions to ensure 
that day today activities don’t suffer.  He further added that to attract talented candidates to 
academics, we need to provide basic infrastructure and good ambience and to retain them, start up 
grants should be provided to attract best faculty from India and abroad. 
32.  The Vice-Chancellor further added that different schools are encouraging science 
clubs wherein every week the students meet and present a research article.  This will be part of the 
curriculum and therefore all students are encouraging to participate.   
33.  The research scholars are encouraged to present their research work in the seminar 
organized by the Department, PG students of several disciplines have to complete project work 
and the dissertation should be presented to the department as course work.  The university is 
encouraging the students to apply for summer projects in IITs and other institutions.  The 
University faculty are also encouraging the students to prepare and quality the SET/NET, JRF, 
CSIR fellowships etc which will enable them to work as faculty in institutions. 
34.  The Vice-Chancellor further submitted that the University was arranging academia 
industry linkages so as to enhance the job opportunities for the students.  The University has 
placement guidance Advisory Bureau which co-ordinates with all the schools/Departments and 
organizes campus placements for the students. He further added that the course context at our 
university is periodically reviewed by the Department councils and schools boards to suit the 
industry needs.  In most of the schools like Management, Physics, Chemistry, Computer Science, 
Life Sciences etc, they have representatives of industry on school Boards. 
35.  The Vice-Chancellor further added that the faculties of university are involved in 
teaching and research.  At present there are 240 plus research projects worth 230 crore rupees.  At 
present the University has filed for 42 patents out of which 17 have been granted. 
36.  On the role of Regulatory bodies like UGC, AICTE etc., in higher education, he 
added that the University Grants Commission can help the institutions through need based 
funding.  They should also look at giving flexibility in budget re-appropriations.  
37.  On the scholarships, the Vice-Chancellor submitted that students faced hardships 
when there is delay in release of fellowships against sanction letters.  He submitted that Financial 
Institutions need to support a student with a  liberal policy in education loans and remove 
hardships to all sections of students in respect of their fees, food and other important requirements. 

38.  He further added that re- oriented courses need to be encouraged in higher 
education.  At periodic intervals there was a need to re-orient out courses in a way to make the 
students industry-ready and constant interaction with the relevant industry will help the institution 
to do this.  In addition to the subject knowledge, students and the institution must make effort to 
stress on the importance of development of soft skills which is a major factor in getting a job. 
39.  The Vice-Chancellor of English and Foreign Languages University (EFL), 
Hyderabad submitted that Indian Higher Education System is inspirational in its dual task of 
enhancing and maintaining quality and balancing it with social justice and equity.  The Vice 
Chancellor pointed out that Indian Universities are generally not able to find mention amongst the 
top in any world rankings partly because funding of the institutes and institutional resources are 
spread over research and teaching.  A dual mechanism needs to be brought into the system 
whereby incentives to grow and deterrents to discourage un-professional environment.  Teachers 
may be tenured for longer periods if not 3or 5 years, so that the impetus to perform and growth 
remains as in the West. 
40.  The Vice-Chancellor further added that for promoting research in the university we 
must create new knowledge and innovate.  Thus, it is imperative that all universities maintain and 
promote a basic and strong focus on research and research culture. 
41.  The Vice Chancellor further added that Infrastructure such as lab facilities and a 
well equipped library with ICT provisions should be a part of institutional mechanism.  In 
promotion of research, it is important to establish international and national collaborations, 
linkages, exchanges and joint-research programmes. The idea of creating research universit ies can 
in this context would do well to take up the mandate of being the repository of all research done in 
a region.  A region based research repository should be done where research should be late r 
connected to national repository which is interconnected both nationally as well as internationally 
to policy makers, the corporate leaders and industry is view of global growth. 
42.  The Vice-Chancellor further added that there needs to be a focus and massive 
expansion of the polytechnic and ITI from so that a robust parallel system which offers alternatives 
exist.  The Vice-Chancellor further added that skill development/vocational courses should not be 
relegated as a by-product of higher education that exists only to accommodate the drop-outs but as 
a system that incentivizes the new and emerging creative fields.  Skills should be encouraged and 
infused at the grass root level so that artisan classes flourish and are trained.  University linkages 
could be possible in terms of infusing newer techniques and technologies in the existing skill-
trades and higher educational institutes may mentor in this reflect rather than involving themselves 
per-se in skill training and vocational enhancement. 
43.  The Vice-Chancellor further added that ICT applications in Indian Universities are 
generally neither acquired nor assimilated.  Technology enabled learning has suffered due to this 
approach wherein static content available in electronic form is passed off as technology enabled.  
There has to be a complete and through integration of this technology in the academic and 
governance structures by the Universities especially on the multiple available platforms of smart 

phones, tablets and applications it is considered that a national task force be established that 
provides for full-fledged ICT Cells in Universities at a senior level which can oversee, co-ordina te 
and implement ICT so that it is fully and compulsorily integrated into university academic and 
governance structure. 
44.  The Vice-Chancellor further added for faculty progression there should be specific 
value-based training modules across the academic staff colleges in Indian Universities.  Faculty 
mobility  across Central Universities that has been envisaged in the Model Ordinances and should 
be promoted and encouraged.  Similarly, expertise from the private sector and industry to should 
be encouraged to be part of teaching through a system like in the West.  The teachers, espe cially 
younger recruits, should be institutionally and structurally allowed to establish a record of 
published research, ability to attract grant funding, academic institutions, teaching excellence and 
administrative or community service. 
45.  In its interaction with the Committee, the State Government of Telangana submitted 
that Indian Higher Education System has been built on the pillars like accessibility, affordability, 
quality and relevance.  However, to improve the overall quality of our education system, concerted 
efforts are needed to bring in reforms concerning all these parameters.  They further added  that 
with greater private participation in Higher Education, the question of balancing accessibility and 
affordable has arisen. To make higher and Technical Education affordable to students from 
marginalized sections, the facility of total fee reimbursement without any condition does not seem 
to be a real solution. 
46.  The officials further added that one of the most important reasons for the lack of 
competitive nature of quality in our Higher Education system is shortage of qualified faculty and 
the pedagogue quality adopted by the existing faculty.  There is also lack of proper system to 
ensure regular Performance Appraisal of the teachers.  The merit promotion scheme of UGC viz., 
the Career Advancement Scheme has to be implemented scrupulously following the UGC 
guidelines.  
47. They further added that engineering Colleges in country are mostly stand alone and not 
integrated with other science, Arts, law and medicine faculties to develop a multi-disciplinary 
approach.  The lack of interaction with other disciplines is affecting the creating and innovative 
capabilities of the youngsters.  
48. The officials further added that teaching and research are to be considered as conjoined but 
research in the State Universities is on the decline.  The Government spending on Research and 
Development (R&D) must increase from the presented .01% of the GDP.  Another point of 
concern was that 80% of the total R&D expenditure in India is met from Government sources and 
only 20% from Private industry.  Serious measures need to be taken to improve the Quality of 
Research by suitably modifying the procedures related to admission into PhD programm es i.e. 
screening the candidates based on qualitative, standardized test and regular evaluation of the 
program of the research work of the students by external experts before PhD is awarded. 

49.  The officials pointed out that there is a serious problem faced by the State 
Universities in shortage of resources.  Bulk of the enrolment in Higher Education is handled by the 
State Universities and their affiliated colleges but, when it comes to distribution of Grants by the 
Central Government, the State Universities receive very small amounts.  They submitted that 
nearly 65% of the UGC budget is utilized for the central universities and their colleges while 
remaining 35% is only distributed to hundreds of the State Universities and thousands of the 
colleges affiliated them.  Funds mobilization in the State Universities through other means such as 
endowments, contributions from industry, alumni etc should also be examined. 
50.  The officials further added that quality of distance education programmes offered 
by the universities is another matter of concern which is affecting the overall quality of Highe r 
Education.  Some of the universities are offering all kinds of programmes in general, Technical, 
Professional etc., in the distance mode both at UG and PG levels.  The quality of such programmes 
needed close review and monitoring.  There is a lot of confusion among stakeholders regarding the 
genuineness of the Degrees awarded by them as it is not clear as to which agency UGC, AIC TE, 
DEC etc., should give approval and authenticate such programmes and degrees. 
51.  The introduction of Choice based credit system (CBCS)isimportant and is a step in 
the right direction.  In this regard there is a requirement of giving greater autonomy to the 
Universities to design their curriculum at the UG level while the UGC can fix uniform learning 
objectives and learning outcomes of various programmes and courses adopted by the Universities.  
Therefore, while fixing a common minimum syllabus, the universities should be allowed at least 
40% deviation.  A uniform number of core papers to the extent of minimum 60% may be adopted 
among various universities, however elective subjects should be specific in meeting the regional 
need. 
52.  The Committee during its visit to Chandigarh held discussion with Vice Chancellor 
of Guru Kashi University and Panjab University on the Issues and Challenges before Education 
Sector in India 
53.   Vice Chancellor of Guru Kashi University, submitted that the education standard at 
school level is very poor in Punjab and more so in rural areas.  In fact the institutions of higher 
education in rural areas have to deal with altogether different quality of students as compared to 
the urbanites and imparting quality education is much more important to deliver the best to the 
future nation builders.  It is a real challenge for the universities in the rural catchments and there 
was need for more emphasis need to be laid on English and communication skills. 
54.  He further added that GER of 30% by 2020 cannot be achieved unless private 
sector institutions significantly contribute in it.  Putting restrictions on Private Universities on 
tuition fee and minimising to the lowest charged by any Public Sector University will not provide  
a level playing field and will be unfair to the Private Universities. 
55.  He also pointed that UGC approves only specified courses as given in its list and it 
is devoid of Diploma Programs and keeping in view the present scenario of unemployment, these 

courses are very important for rural regions when Government of India is giving high priority to 
skill development programs.  He further added that collaboration with foreign universities will 
facilitate educational linkage and faculty exchange, joint research projects, joint Ph. D super vision 
and twinning degree programs it must be made hassle free and without complicated approvals.   
56.  The Vice-Chancellor further added that Government of India must extend financial 
help to the really deserving universities in the rural areas based on their achievements and 
performance.  Grants from State, Centre and UGC must be provided with NAAC accreditation.  
Availability of quality faculty in rural universities is a big issue and a compulsory facult y 
exchange from prestigious institutes would be helpful for the rural universities. 
57.  The Vice-Chancellor submitted that they had divided all Departments of University 
Campus into nine sub-units.  They were conducting seminars, workshops, training programmes as 
per specific requirements of each sub-cluster and Organising Practical Sessions on (Soft Skills and  
Enhancing Employability / Career Guidance)/ Academic Industry Interface / HR Meets. 
58.  He further added that final year students (4500) in all Campus Courses have been 
advised to take the non-credit course, conducted by Central Placement Cell/ Skill Development 
Centre, in association with industry and Sessions on Personality Development, Business English, 
Quantitative Aptitude, Logical Reasoning, etc were organised and Grade awarded was included in 
the Semester Mark Sheet, and a separate Certificate was issued by the Panjab University. 
59.  He further added that a periodic address by Vice Chancellor to academic 
Community to focus on 'Vision 2020' was organic sed at least once every Semester.  Monthly 
Meeting of HODs, Deans, Senior officials with Agenda Items invited from faculty was circulated 
and sent to whole faculty.  The Departments were helped to move to new premises, encouraged to 
make newer beginnings by synergizing together.  New Faculty was inducted at Assistant Professor 
Level (250), almost all CAS cases processed via a satisfactory algorithm and terms and conditions 
of service of Re-employed Faculty extended and improved so that they remain engaged and active 
in research, etc. 
60.  He further added faculty was encouraged to avail Sabbatical Leave, new F aculty 
helped to apply for research grants and INSPIRE Faculty invited to join Departments at PU.  He 
further added that constituted Research Promotion Cell (RPC) headed by Director and Associate 
Director along with four other members.  He submitted that regular monitoring by IQAC Cell 
headed by Director and Associate Director and Research Centers were recognizing in colleges 
and/or Cluster of College to run Pre-PhD Courses.  He also added that proposals for strengthening 
Research in Colleges were submitted via DHE, UT Administration and PSHE, Punjab State to 
RUSA. 
61.  The Vice-Chancellor further added that there were additional Seats for the Single 
Girl Child (2 per course), AIDS, Cancer patients and Blinds Students.  They were encouraged to 
give free ships for deserving students and student Learn by Doing. Students were involved in 
Management of library, computerization, Hospitality, Restructuring of Examination System, E-

governance and leveraging IT for improving delivery systems and 4 constituent colleges were  set 
up for educational spread in rural areas. 
62.  The Vice-Chancellor of Panjab University submitted that as per the provisional 
report of AISHE 2013-14 the GER in Chandigarh is very high i.e., 54.1.  In Punjab the GER of 
Girls is significantly higher (64.4) as compared to boys (46.6).  It was submitted that Panjab 
University gets financial assistance from Government of India as well as from the State of Punjab.   
63.  He pointed out that as per the vision of the Government of India, the GER in Higher 
Education is to be increased to 30% by 2020.  He further added that Population of Punjab (in age 
group of 18-23) is 33, 78,090 and 1013427 were there and current enrolment is 8,10,000 and seats 
required are 2,03,427. So about 294 more institutes of higher education are required in the State of 
Punjab and this would lead to the horizontal growth of the higher education, whereas vertical 
growth is the need of the day so as to improve the quality of education. 
64.  On the issue of faculty position in university, the Vice Chancellor submitted that 
with the introduction of Choice based credit system; the number of faculty required had increased 
as this gives more flexibility to students in choosing their courses.  He further pointed that faculty 
is not interested to serve in rural/backward and remote areas, as a result the institutes were situa ted 
in or around big cities are a preferred destination for placements.  In Punjab alone more than 55% 
of the vacancies of faculty are lying vacant due to various reasons. 
65.  On the issue of accreditations, the Committee was informed that a large number of 
institutes are not accredited due to lack of faculty and infrastructure.  Moreover the criteria of 
accreditation are very stringent which favours the old institutions and new institutions, which are 
progressing and developing fast are at a distinct disadvantage.  The criteria are also more oriented 
towards universities rather than colleges where it is very difficult to do quality research. 
66.  The Committee was further informed that Top 400 universities of the world have 
been permitted to open their campuses across India.  These universities have an impeccable 
reputation and most of Indian universities cannot compete with the brand of these universities.  So, 
there is an urgent need to give liberal grants to our universities so that they can compete with these 
universities. 
67.  The Vice Chancellor further added that teachers in colleges although in small 
numbers were doing some good research in collaboration with the universities under UGC scheme.  
UGC has now discontinued this scheme, which would affect the research output of these colleges.   
68.  He further added that in 1980's UGC started scheme of Grant-in Aid to private 
colleges so that the students studying in these colleges are not asked to pay a hefty fee.  Over the 
years and with the increase of salary structure the Grant -in Aid liability of the States has increased 
manifold.  As a consequence of this, some states have discontinued the scheme while others are 
not releasing the grant in time.  As a result of this the salary of the faculty gets delayed which in a 
way affect their performance and hence the quality of education. 

69. He further added that UGC had a scheme under which teachers working in 
universities/colleges who are to present their research contribution in international conferences 
were reimbursed their travelling expenses and this used to be a good incentive to the teachers to 
present their findings and also get international exposure.  They pointed that the scheme has been 
discontinued affecting a large number of motivated teachers. 
70. The Committee visited Thiruvananthapuram and held discussion with representatives of 
Central University of Kerala and other stakeholder. 
71.  In his presentation before the Committee, the Associate Professor in the Central University of 
Kerala submitted that there were Universities with and without financial support from UGC. Such 
universities are included in the 12b and 2f of UGC regulations. He pointed that degree of one 
university is not approved by the other university even if they both belong to 12b&2f category.   
He pointed that all 12b and 2f institutes must approve their degrees each other as this would to a 
great extent standardize the degrees of universities across India. Students will be the beneficiary of 
this move as they need not run behind recognition certificate, equality certificate, migration 
certificate etc. 
72.   He further added that students and teachers in urban universities receive good exposure in 
academically vibrant campuses. But a student of a university located in a rural area is prohibited 
from such opportunities even if they are intellectually on par with students and teachers of urban 
universities. A teacher in any of the universities in Delhi, Chennai and Hyderabad etc can 
accumulate their API scores by just attending seminars in and around the city.   But in the case of a 
teacher from a remote area in Kerala wants to attend a good quality seminar they may ha ve to 
spend a lot of energy money and time. But unfortunately many teachers working in colleges and 
state universities were deprived. In this context a “Regional imbalance bridge mission in higher 
education” may be formed and students of rural and remote places must get some time to spend at 
great universities. 
73.  He further added that the marginalized sections of the society are getting their due share in 
education through constitutional provisions. But to sustain the students belonging to SC/ST has 
become a big concern for the Central Universities the reason is that the SC ST students from other 
states are not getting their scholarships from their concerned states. As the Central Universities 
have no provision to give SC/ST Scholarship the students of Central Universities are at the mercy 
of their home states. The most unfortunate event in Central University of Kerala is that SC/ST 
students from other states are not getting their scholarships. After processing their application and 
sending to their concerned states no state has responded positively. He suggested that in this 
context a Central University SC/ST Scholarship Fund should be formed so that students can be 
given with scholarship within the university.  
74. He pointed out the quality evaluation criteria of teacher on API scores has spoilt the quality 
of teachers.  The unfortunate thing is that the real teachers suffer from quantification. Quality 
initiatives are leading to only lead us to accumulation 'quantity 'in the form of publications  
certificates etc. Thus our quality initiatives resulted in just accumulation of quantity. He pointed 

out that there was need a National Teacher Quality Improvement Commission for Higher 
Education to sensibly handle the issue of teacher quality. It can be an autonomous body under 
UGC. A new model of teacher quality improvement initiatives needed to be started with.  
75.  He pointed out that an institution which is well settled with beautiful edifice, high quality 
technological devices etc will be rated as a good institution by NAAC and NCTE. But the 
intellectual aspect become undermined and attention goes to material and tangible measures. A 
government college with better quality teaching staff but poor building and other infrastructure 
will be rated low by NAAC and NCTE as well. This is mainly because the criterions set by these 
agencies look for tangible inputs most of which can be purchased from market. The term 
regulatory it is authoritarian for public funded institutions. Regulatory agencies should be set as 
‘quality supporting bodies’ for public funded institutions. Public funded institutions must be 
evaluated using a separate set of criterion. 
76.   He also submitted that institutionalization of pre-service teacher training for collage teachers 
and university teachers are other important measures to be undertaken. At present the qualification 
for a teacher to enter in to university education system is a PG with UGC or PhD. Unfortunately 
nowhere a teacher training course is a basic qualification for a teacher to enter in to a higher 
education institution. It is not the content, but the way content is transferred is important in 
teaching. So an erudite scholar may not be a good teacher but can be a bane for the institution. A 
teacher preparation course may not be a solution for all such issues but it can improve quality of 
teaching understanding the students and thereby improving the teaching learning process. So a 
teacher education programme must be made mandatory for the teachers to work at higher 
education institution. 
77.   He suggested that the Central University special pay in the form of IIT & IIMs should be 
introduced to attract good faculties.    At present the pay of a central university teacher is exactly 
the same a college teacher draws. Since Institutes of national importance give additional  benefits 
to their teachers Central Universities also should be entertained to do the same. 
78. The Committee in its visit to Vishakhapatnam interacted with representatives of Indian 
Maritime University (IMU) on the subject Issues and Challenges before higher education in India. 
79. The representative of Indian Maritime University (IMU) submitted that, IMU is a 
Teaching-cum-Affiliating University established on 14 th November, 2008 to provide quality 
maritime education, training and research.  Headquartered in Chennai, it has 5 Regional Campuses 
at Chenai, Kolkata, Mumbai, Visakhapatnam and Cochin.  IMU has 36 Affiliated Institutes.   
80. He submitted that a peculiarity of the Maritime Disciplines is that there were no P.G. or 
Doctoral Programmes before IMU was established.  In Marine Engineering, Nautical Science, and 
Ship Building and Repair which cover 95% of IMU's students, there are still no P.G. or Doctoral 
Programmes. 
81. He submitted that there has been almost 50% reduction in student admissions between 
2009-10 and 2014-15.  This is due to the prolonged recession/slowdown in the global shipping 

industry since 2009 which is yet to bottom out.  However, admissions are likely to be relatively 
better in 2016-17 judging from the response to IMU's Online Common Entrance Test (CET) and 
Online Counseling. 
82. He submitted that IMU wishes to focus on starting new P.G courses and on making its 
various Campuses centers for doing research leading to Ph.D.  IMU has introduced M. Tech 
(Marine Technology and Management) and M.Sc (Commercial Shipping and Logistics) as new 
P.G courses from the academic year 2016-17.  IMU offers Ph.D in Naval Architecture and Ocean 
Engineering in Visakhapatnam Campus.  IMU is planning to make all its 5 campuses as centers for 
doing research leading to PhD before 2018-19.  Since seafarers are on ship for 6 to 9 months in a 
year, IMU is planning to come up with innovative modular courses/distance-learning programmes 
whereby a seafarer can study various modules partly while at sea and partly while on land, 
accumulate credits, and get a degree even while he is an active seafarer. 
83. IMU switched over from the pen-and -paper mode of Common Entrance Test (CET), 
which was inefficient, time consuming and a logistic nightmare, to the Online CET in June 2014 
for admissions to its various Programmes.  IMU's Online CETs have been a great success and has 
now become the norm. 
84. IMU switched over from the physical mode of Counseling, which required students from 
all over India to come to Chennai and stay there for a couple of days at great expense of time,  
effort and money to Online Counseling in July 2014 for making admissions to IMU Campuses and 
Affiliated Institutes.  IMU has switched over to Online Recruitment Tests (CRTs) for recruitments 
to the entry-level posts such as Assistant Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Registrar, 
Assistant Registrar (Finance), Assistant, Assistant (Finance) etc. 
85. IMU has introduced a Performance-based Reward Scheme for meritorious students of IMU 
Campuses from Academic Year 2015-16 onwards.  'Toppers' of each batch and of each 
programme get Rs. 1,00,000/- each while students coming within the top ten percentile (other than 
toppers) get Rs. 75,000/- each.  The first set of Performance-based Rewards was given to 189 
meritorious students (out of whom 20 were toppers) at an expense of Rs. 1.47 crores. 
86. As part of quality enhancement, the syllabi and regulations of all the U.G. and P.G. 
programmes will be reviewed and updated wherever necessary in consultation with our MOU 
partners so as to be on par with the best international maritime universities.  At the first 
Convocation, the President of India wanted IMU to be a 'Centre of Excellence' within the next 10 
years and they were in pursuit of this goal.    
87. The Committee during its visit to Bhopal, Ujjain and Indore interacted with representatives 
of Rajiv Gandhi Proudhyogiki Viswavidyalaya, Vice Chancellor of Vikram University, Ujjain and 
MP Institute of Social Science research, Teaching and Research (MPISSR) on the subject under  
consideration. 

88. The representative of Rajiv Gandhi Proudyogiki Vishwavidyalaya (RGPV), Bhopal 
submitted that the institute was established in 1998 with a vision to nurture a holistic environment 
for practical and innovation based learning among technical students.   
89. He further added from Drug Discovery to Cutting-edge Technology, research at R GPV 
spans many disciplines.  University has launched several initiatives to promote excellence and 
quality in research.  Some key initiatives were Constitution of a research fellowship of Rs. 25000/ - 
per candidate with each qualified supervisor in the University, creation of a University research 
and Innovation Fund of Rs. 10 Crore to encourage researchers for interdisciplinary projects a nd 
'Best Publication Award' to researchers and faculties and 'Best Project Award' to students in each  
domain of engineering and technology.  A new ordinance for PhD based on MHRD guidelines for 
quality research has been implemented. 
90. In the quest for excellence in research, several initiatives to inculcate research culture 
among students have been taken including singing of MoUs with leading Universities and 
Industries around the world for sharing mutual expertise and to discuss new potential for 
innovations for fostering global research and RGPV has signed an MoU with EMC Corporation, 
one of the global leaders in Cloud. Companies like Big Data and Trusted IT were to begin 
operation of RGPV Corporate School at the campus.  In the quest for excellence in research, 
University has tied-up with Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan for Joint Research in the area of  
Cross Linear Concentrated Solar Power Project (a solar thermal initiative) on its campus.  MoU 
with National Cancer Institute (NCI), NIH, USA, Northeastern Ontario Regional Cancer Centre, 
Canada, AMRC, and Canada, C.N.R.S., France, IIT Chennai and others was signed. RGPV has 
signed a MoU with Texas Instruments (TI) to establish TI Excellence Centre at the University 
campus for fostering training in the domains of core electronics.  Researchers from the School of 
Pharmaceutical Science have also marked an unprecedented discovery followed by patents filing 
for novel anti-cancer molecules and also for bio-degradable Medicated Chewing Gum (MSG). 
91. The University envisions producing globally competent, technically tempered and socially 
responsible technical manpower to meet the ever-growing global challenges.  The University is 
proud to become a leading technical University with affiliating character to implement CBCS for 
all its undergraduate programmes to enable them choose the courses of their choice.  Further, 
RGPV is the only University in the state of Madhya Pradesh to conduct 'Technical Teachers 
Eligibility Test' on national basis for recruitment of teachers in its affiliated colleges.  Introdu ction 
of Online Practical Examination' under CBCS is another feather in the cap of the University.   
92. The Vice Chancellor further added that to promote entrepreneurship among students, 
University has setup a Venture Capital Fund of Rs. 10 crore.  To be a part of Knowledg e Society 
and National Development Program to accelerate economy, RGPV is currently shaping itself as a 
Knowledge Warehouse.  University has organized "Manthan 2012 - Redefining Academic- 
Industry Relationship" in collaboration with FICCI and Government of MP to foster a new era of 
industry academic partnership.  Rural outreach programme is introduced by the university at 
undergraduate level. 

93. The Vice Chancellor informed that the University has also availed the benefits of Faculty 
Recharge Program under UGC.  The University has taken up several initiatives to support 
meritorious and economically challenged students by constituting scholarships like Chancellors 
Scholarships for the meritorious students of the university on the basis of the marks secured in the 
theory exam each year, Research Fellowships for pursuing full time PhD at the university and 
SC/ST scholarship to support livelihood for economically weaker students of the university.  All 
the enrolled students are insured and also support is provided to the student suffering permanent 
disability.  A unique Teachers Welfare Policy is framed for the support of the teachers in which a  
sum of Rs. 2.00 lakh is provided to the family of the teachers in case of death and for support is 
also provided for the teachers suffering with some notified diseases.  A unique women's policy has 
been developed by the university for in campus safety and security. 
94. He further informed that a 'RGPV Service Portal" was started and is a significant initiative 
to instill e-governance in our system using modern technologies.  This is an online portal created 
to infuse responsible, accountable and transparent governance in RGPV. In order to accomplish its 
mission of proliferating quality technical education to the remotest of areas, RGPV has set up two 
new technical Institutes in distant locales of Shahdol and Jhabua with a significant tribal presence 
and University has created a Corpus fund of Rs. 200 Crore. 
95. To create a knowledge society, University has come up with a pristine idea of setting up 
the 'RGPV Innovation Center' that will foster inter-disciplinary collaboration and innovations in 
the identified fields of research and will further glorify the name of RGPV by creating intellec tual 
properties. 
96.  The Vice-Chancellor of Vikram University submitted that the National Assessment and 
Accreditation Council of India has rated the University 'A' Grade in the year 2015.  He further 
informed that Scindia Oriental Research Institute, a unit of the Vikram University is an 
internationally renowned centre and has a collection of more than 20,000 manuscripts including 
Bhurja Patra and Palm-Leaf manuscripts.  A number of rare manuscripts in the collection have 
illustrations painted in bright colors and gold and the library of printed books consists of more than 
15,000 volumes. 
97.  He further submitted before the Committee that an Internal IQAC monitors regular 
assessment on seven quality parameters.  More emphasis was made on practical oriented teaching 
and learning in the class rooms, regular revision of syllabus according to the current market and 
industries needs, implementation of CBCS in UTDs, case based contents in the syllabus, 
compulsory students training programs and continuous evaluation and implementation of RUSA 
Programme in University as well as in Government College. 
98.  He further informed theCommittee that new courses were started in last 10 years.  
In last 10 years, 10 new departments (including Engineering Institute) were established and 
student strength was being increased on a continuous basis.  Due to increase in Self Financing new 
courses, new departments and increasing students' strength infrastructure development and 
maintenance are required for which funds are inadequate.  Additional funds are not being provided 

by the funding agencies. He added that no boy's hostels and residential quarters are constructed in 
last 2 decades and there was there was a need for additional financial support for construction and 
maintenance of boy's hostels, residential quarters and infrastructure and up gradation of sports 
facilities for the students of University. 
99. He further added that additional funds are required to modernize the laboratories/research 
in basic and social science and by and large inadequate faculty strength was there in most of the 
departments and also a lack of inadequate administrative and technical staff.  He added that there 
was limited financial support from the State Government/funding agencies for expansion 
programmes and other facilities and the Block Grant provided by State Government should be 
increased.  He pointed out that 13 out of 60 new affiliated Government colleges do not have their 
own buildings. 
100. He informed the Committee that provision of approx. Rs. 1 crore is earmarked for R&D 
work and allied activities in the University budget.  The faculty and students are encouraged to 
organize and participate in conferences/symposia/seminars/workshops of national and 
international level and for outstanding performance in research; teachers had received awards and 
recognitions by the Government and other academic bodies. He further added that to train the 
faculty and students there are collaborating with some academic bodies.  He further informed that 
coaching classes for NET, SLET and PSC for minority students is being imparted since last 10 
years. 
101. The Vice-Chancellor further added that there was limited financial support from the State 
Government for expansion programmes and other facilities and block Grant provided by State 
Government should be increased.  He further added that 82 teaching positions of UTD's are lying 
vacant and there was Difficulty and delay in the preparation of Roster for recruitment of te aching 
posts due to the changing policies and court judgments.  Due to some legal complications and 
cases pending in the court of law, recruitment process has also been delayed. 
102. The Vice-Chancellor, Vikram University, Ujjain submitted that it has collaboration with 
IIT Bombay for Development initiative Scheme trough ICT Module Courses and Spoken Tutorial 
Courses under the NMEICT project of MHRD, Government of India.  Vikram University, Ujjain 
has collaboration with Microsoft for faculty and employee development under Digital Innovation 
Lab programme. MHRD Government of India provided a grant (75% of the project) under 
NMEICT Project to develop Campus wide LAN area network in the year 2012.  But, BSNL could 
not execute this project till date. 
103. He further submitted about the there wasInitiative taken to attract young students towards 
Teaching Profession by making awareness of career opportunities in teaching profession by 
enhancing the image of teaching through general campaigns in the media and by promoting the 
benefits of teaching. 
104. He further added that the University strictly adhered to UGC Regulations.  The statues and 
ordinances of the University are in consistence with the UGC regulations and guidelines.  The 

University ensures complacence of UGC regulations particularly in the matter of faculty 
recruitment and academic matters of affiliated colleges.  The course curriculum of the University 
was reviewed in accordance with the guidelines of the UGC on continuous basis. 
105. He further added that under Make in India and Skill India Initiativesa postgraduate diploma 
in yoga education and philosophy of one year duration is being run by the University.  A new 
paper on entrepreneurship has been introduced in some programme and short term training 
programme on entrepreneurship are being introduced.  Short term computer training programmes 
are also being organized in collaboration with Microsoft under digital innovation lab for the 
students of the University. Short term yoga training programme are being organized on regular 
basis.  Students of engineering developed level indicator model and planned to register under 
'Make in India' project.  He further added 757 students opted for Ph.D. in various disciplines in last 
3 academic years. 
106. The Vice Chancellor further added that the University has its own Board of Studies in all 
the 50 subjects and at least once in a year the meetings of all the boards are organized to review 
and modify the course curriculum.  In some professional courses inputs of industrial people are 
also taken while modifying the course curriculum.  Recently CBCS and grading system has been 
implemented in UTDs. 
107. He further added that there was an Established framework for implementation of RTI and 
Public grievance redressal functioning.  There was an administrative and financial code of conduct 
rules and regulations were emphasized and IT involvement in almost all sectors of governance. 
108. The Vice Chancellor further added that university had its own School of Law, School of 
Education and School of Distance Education, Integrated Courses in various disciplines like: B-
Pharma-M. Pharma, B.E-M.Tech., B.E.-MBA, BA-LLB, B.Com-LLB, BCA-MCA, BBA-MBA 
etc. University also managed a Medical College, a modern Research Laboratories and an 
Integrated Research and development Centre specifically for Research Scholars, 24x7-IT C entre 
with 200+ Computers and fully Wi-Fi facilities, Sports Complex and Academic Programmes- B.P. 
Ed., M.P.Ed. 
109. The Vice-Chancellor further added that Vikram University was Running RD Gardi 
Medical College regulated by Society, Madhya Pradesh Institute of Social Science and Resea rch 
(MPISSR) imparting research on Social issues, Kaveri Sodh Sansthan, Ujjain, Vikramaditya Sodh 
Sansthan Sitamau and others are imparting research in the field of modern, medieval and ancient 
historical and cultural issues. 
110.  The representative of MP Institute of Social Science Research, Teaching and 
research in higher education are co-terminous and complimentary to each other and therefore 
adequate attention to promote research is essentially required.  Social science research is mainly 
committed to address the academic research, operational problem, specific policy centric issues, 
and input for policy and programme. 

111.  The representative further added that India has had a relatively stronger academic 
tradition in the humanities and social sciences and India's major budget allocation in higher 
education focuses on science and technology and the allocation to research in social sciences are 
very thin.   
112.  He added that promoting social science research is an urgent need for 
understanding the rapidly changing social, economic and political environment.  Social science 
research outcome should be considered by the Government with utmost sincerity for the midcourse 
correction in the policies and programmes.  The MPISSR, Ujjain is one among the 25 research 
institutes of the Indian Council of Social Science Research (Ministry of HRD), New Delhi.  The 
broad vision of MPISSR, Ujjain is to be an institution in dynamic equilibrium with its social, 
political and economic environment striving continuously for excellence in social science research 
to serve as a valuable resource for society and contribute to the nation's development. 
113.  The basic aim of MPISSR, Ujjain is to engage in cutting edge research on relevant 
contemporary issues and disseminate the research findings for the enhancement of the existing 
knowledge and for the well being of the society through policy input.  MPISSR has completed 
over 120 major research projects sponsored by various national and international agencies related 
to thrust areas of the institute. MPISSR is a recognized research centre of Vikram University, 
Ujjain for doctoral research in Political Science, Economics, Geography and Sociology.  At 
present 36 scholars are enrolled at MPISSR, Ujjain for doctoral and post-doctoral research work.   
114.  He submitted that there should be a critical minimum strength of 17 faculty 
members with adequate support staff in the Research Institutes funded by ICSSR.  The ratio of 
matching grant between ICSSR and respective State Government should be 75:25 instead of 
present arrangement of 50:50.  The funding for research and other activities should be made 
available to ICSSR Research Institutes by UGC as well, as ICSSR offers funding to all.  There has 
to be more workable and research oriented relationship between UGC and ICSSR and it would 
percolate down upto Universities and Research Institutes.  
115.  The Committee during its study visits interacted with the representatives of various 
Public Sector Banks (PSBs) on the subject Education Loan to Students. 
116.  The representative of Allahabad Bank, Bhopal submitted that as on 31 st March, 
2016 outstanding under education loan is Rs. 1463 crore in 49142 accounts.  They further added 
that restructuring facility was available and there was provision for increasing moratorium period 
as per IBA guidelines.  They further added that there was a provision for increasing moratorium, 
taking into account of under-employment/unemployment maximum up to three times during the 
life cycle of the loan.   
117.  The Bank further added that to make education loan more affordable the following 
relaxation were given:- 
  (a) Loan up to Rs. 4.00 lac - No security 

(b) Loan up to Rs. 7.50 lac - No security, if loan is covered under Credit 
Guarantee Scheme (CGS) 
(c) Loan up to Rs. 10 lac - No security for premier institutes like IITs/IIMs/ISB 
etc. 
118.  The Bank has reduced rate of interest as low as MCLR for premier institutes like 
IITs/IIMs/ISBs further giving a rebate of 0.5% to girl students and also 1% concession in case 
interest is serviced during moratorium period.  Bank had integrated with Vidya Lakshmi Portal 
since 28 th November, 2015 which makes it easily accessible to all the students.  Bank provides 
education loans, not only for professional courses, but also for various approved courses, but also 
for various approved courses as under:- 
(a) Approved courses leading to graduate/post graduate degree and PG 
diplomas conducted by recognised colleges/universities recognized by 
UGC/AICTE/AIBMS/ICMR/NAAC accredited 'A' rated institutions etc. 
(b) Courses like ICWA, CA, CFA etc. 
(c) Courses conducted by IIMs, IITs, IISc, XLRI, NIFT, ND 
(d) Regular Degree/Diploma courses like Aeronautical, pilot training, shipping 
etc approved by Director General of Civil Aviation/Shipping 
(e) Approved courses offered in India by reputed foreign universities. 
(f) Job oriented courses for studying part-time courses and approved by the 
appropriate authorities. 
(g) Job oriented specialized programmes like maritime courses which are 
offered in collaboration with foreign institutions may not be having 
recognition in India. 
(h) Financial assistance for pursuing research work could also be considered by 
financing on merit. 
(i) Other job-oriented courses leading to technical/professional degrees, post 
graduate degrees/diplomas offered by recognized institutions are also under 
this scheme. 
119.  They further added that Banks also provides loan to individuals for taking skill 
development courses aligned to National occupations standards and Qualification Packs and 
leading to a Certificate/Diploma/Degree by the Training Institutes as per National Skill 
Qualification Framework (NSQF). 
120. They further added that as on 31 st March, 2015, out of total education loan portfolio of Rs. 
1369 crore, the percentage of loan to girl students was 22% (Rs. 301 crores) which is 24% (Rs. 
351 crores) as on 31 st March, 2016 out of total portfolio of Rs. 1463 crore.  The further added that 
under the central Sector Interest Subsidy (CSIS) on education loans, bank has been claiming 

interest subsidy in eligible education loan accounts since the inception of scheme.  They further 
added that financial year (2015-16), subsidy was claimed in 18278 accounts amounting to Rs. 
41.09 crore. 
121. The Committee was informed about the initiatives taken by the AndhraBank for improving 
the sanctions under education loans, bank has given 0.50% concession in rate of interest for 
education loans extended to women beneficiaries.  The Bank also provides 0.50% concession in 
rate of interest to meritorious students with 90% and above marks in intermediate and 80% marks 
it degree level. 
122.  They further informed that it was one of the members Bank for sanction of education loans 
for the students applied online through Vidya Lakshmi portal developed by NSDC.  The Bank is 
giving concession in rate of interest up to MCLR for the students got admission in premier 
educational institutions (ISB, IIIT, IIM, IIT, BITS, XLRI, MDI and SPJJMR). 
123.  The Bank submitted it had disbursed education loan of Rs. 57965 crores in 2014, Rs. 
56036 crore in 2015 and Rs. 53093 crore in 2016.  The Bank further informed that in the State of 
Andhra Pradesh thet Bank had given Rs. 28848 crores in 2014, Rs. 27105 crores in 2015 and Rs. 
24946 crores in 2016. 
124. The representative of Union Bank of India submitted that the Banks education loan scheme 
is to provide need based assistance to students pursuing higher education.  They further added that 
maximum quantum of loan is Rs. 10 lakh for studies in India and Rs. 20 lakh for studies abroad.  
However, with the rise in cost of education, Bank also considers educational loan proposals 
beyond these maximum limits on a case-to-case basis.   
125. The Bank submitted that in order to help reduce the burden on the students, the Bank has 
increased the repayment period from 10/15 years to uniformly to 15 years in March, 2016  in a 
view to provide maximum assistance to a needy and deserving student who desire to pursue higher 
education both in India and abroad.  They further added that upto 4 lakh (the rate of interest is 
MCLR+3.15=12.60%) upto 7.50 lakh (MCLR+2.90=12.38%).   
126. The representative further added that to promote education to girl child, Bank is offering 
0.50% concession in rate of interest across all the above slabs.  Further, with the advent of Vidya 
Lakshmi Portal, it has become easier and accessible for the students to choose banks as per their 
choice and convenience.  The second educational loan was given to students who intend to pursue 
further higher studies by postponing the repayment of the first educational loan availed from bank. 
127. They further added that the Bank offers educational loan for courses that are taken up after 
completion of higher secondary school i.e. 10+2 stage or equivalent and this included all graduate 
and Post-Graduate courses as well as Research oriented courses in India and aboard. 
128. The representative further added that Bank has adopted the revised Skill Development 
Scheme.  They further added that the branches and offices contact educational institutes providing 
skill development courses and liaison with the authorities to set-up stall at these institutes to offer 
educational loans to such students conveniently. 

129. The Bank has submitted that in FY 2015-16, out of total educational loans sanctioned (Rs. 
588 crore), Rs. 210 crore (35.75%) are given to female students.  Out of the total educational loan 
outstanding as on March, 2016 (Rs. 2739 crore), Rs. 942 crore (34.38%) is outstanding in 
educational loans given to female students.  The also gave details submitted the details of students. 
COURSES 2014-15 2015-16 
B Ed. 63 38 
Computer Application 302 385 
Engineering 6727 5792 
Management 2016+ 1697 
Medicine 689 623 
Nursing 741 728 
Other  2452 2691 
Grand Total 12990 11924 
 
They further added that all the guidelines communicated from time to time on Central Sector 
Interest Subsidy Scheme (CSIS) as well as other subsidy. 
130. The representative of Bank of India submitted that the bank extended education loan on the 
basis of Model Education Loan Scheme formulated by IBA.  The Quantum of education loan for 
studies in India is max 10 lakhs and max 20 lakh for studies in abroad.  They further added that for 
loan upto Rs. 705 lacs (3% over base rate) over Rs. 7-5 lac (2.50% over base rate). 
131.  They further added that to make education loan more affordable bank offers for Girl 
Students concession of 0.5% in ROI for loan upto Rs. 50,000 and 1 percent concession in ROI for 
loan over Rs. 50,000 schemes of Centre and State Governments have been implemented by our 
bank.  They submitted that they had created master data of majority of student accounts in which 
subsidy has been claimed.  The detail of subsidy claimed under various schemes is given below:- 
  

 
SCHEME NO. OF CLAIMS AMOUNT (IN 
CRORE) 
Central Sector Interest 
Subsidy Scheme (CSIS) 
212352 299.84 
Padhao Pradesh Scheme 234 0.64 
New Central Sector Interest 
Subsidy Scheme 
6009 17.63 
Dr. Ambedkar CBIB Scheme 5 0.01 
 
QUANTUM OF LOAN SECURITY  
Up to Rs. 4 lakh No Security 
Above Rs. 4 lakh and 
upto Rs. 7.80 lakh 
Suitable third party guarantee acceptable to the 
bank to be taken 
Above Rs. 7 lakh Tangible collateral security of minimum value 
equivalent to the loan amount and interest 
accumulate during where and moratorium period 
acceptable to bank. 
 
132. They further added for Professional Technical courses 0.5% concession was given. They 
further added that besides Education loan is provided at simple rate of interest during study period 
plus moratorium period up to 12 months.  They also added that interest subsidy is provided by 
Central Government during study period plus moratorium period, in respect of loan up to Rs. 10 
lakh to students whose parental income is upto Rs. 4-50 lakhs and who pursue professional or 
technical course in India.  The Bank further added that Bank provide loans for pursuing recognized 
degree or post-graduation degree course after completion of HSC. 
133. The representative further added that Bank has separate scheme viz. Pradhan Mantri 
Kaushal Rin Yojaya for pursuing skill development courses.  They further added that under skill 
loan scheme, upto Rs. 1-5 lakhs loan is offered to Skill Development Courses with repayment 
period upto 7 years.  They also pointed out that accounts are covered under Credit Guarantee 
Scheme and Credit Guarantee fee is borne by the Bank.  
134. The representative of Punjab National Bank (PNB ) further added that PNB is extending 
education loans to students for pursuing studies.  They further added PNB has student friendly 
education loan like PNB-Saraswati for studies in India, PNB- Pratibha for students getting 

admission in IITs/IIMs/Government Medical colleges and other premier educational institutes in 
India, PNB-Udaan for studies abroad and PNB-Kaushal for skill development courses in India.  
They further pointed out that loan upto Rs. 7.50 lacs is sanctioned without any collateral under 
PNB Saraswati and Udaan Scheme and without any collateral under PNB Saraswati and PNB 
Udaan Scheme and without any colletural irrespective of any amount under PNB-Pratibha Scheme 
and under PNB-Kaushal are colletural free.  
135.  The representative of PNB submitted that NPA in education loan is 19.02% as of March, 
2016.  The State-wise NPA portfolio of NPA accounts was where repayment was given:- 
Loan amount NPA portfolio % of NPA portfolio 
‹ Rs. 4.00 lac 354.10 89.72% 
› Rs. 4.00 lac  - 
Rs. 7.50 lac 
20.95 5.30% 
› Rs. 7.50 lac 19.59 4.96% 
 
The representative submitted that the 90% NPA was in loans up to Rs. 4.00 lac. 
136. The representative further added that re-schedulement/restricting in education loan is 
considered by PNB on easy terms and for the same powers are vested with Branch Managers 
Extension in repayment within the maximum permissible repayment period up to 15 years is 
considered. 
137. The representative further added that PNB provides education loan to student for pursuing 
approved courses leading to Graduate/Post Graduate degree conducted by recognized colleges 
/universities.  They further added that Education loan Scheme in the name of PNB Kaushal 
provided education loan to students for pursuing skill development courses in Industrial Training 
Institutes (ITI), Polytechnics in a school recognized by central or State Education B oards or in a 
College affiliated to recognized University, training partners affiliated to National Skill 
Development Corporation (NSDC)/Sector Skill Councils, State Skill Mission preferably leading to 
a certificates/diploma/degree issued by such organization as per National Skill Qualification 
Framework (NSDF) and minimum loan amount is Rs. 5000/- and maximum 1.50 lacs is 
considered under the scheme. 
138.  The representative further added that Bank had extended 21.36% education loans to female 
students for pursuing various courses.  They further added, concession of 0.80 in rate of interest is 
available for priority sector education loans i.e. outstanding upto Rs. 10.00 lacs and 0.25% for 
non-priority sector education loans i.e. outstanding above Rs. 10.00 lac.  They further added that to 
encourage the education of girl child amongst the rural masses, the Bank has launched a scheme 
by the name of 'PNB Ladli' to promote and popularize education among girls of rural/semi -urban 
India. 

139.  The representative of Allahabad Bank submitted as on 31 st March, 2016 outstanding under 
education loan is Rs. 1463 crore in 49142 accounts.  He further added that restructuring facility 
was available and there was provision for increasing moratorium period as per IBA guidelines.  
They further added that there was a provision for increasing moratorium, taking into account of 
under-employment/unemployment up to three times during the life cycle of the loan.   
140. The Bank further added that to make education loan more affordable the following 
relaxation were given:- 
(a) Loan up to Rs. 4.00 lac - No security 
(b) Loan up to Rs. 7.50 lac - No security, if loan is covered under Credit 
Guarantee Scheme (CGS) 
(c) Loan up to Rs. 10 lac - No security for premier institutes like IITs/IIMs/ISB 
etc. 
141.  The Committee in Vishakhapatnam was informed   by Andhra Bankabout the initiatives 
taken by the Bank for improving the sanctions under education loans, bank has given 0.50% 
concession in rate of interest for education loans extended to women beneficiaries.  The Bank also 
provides 0.50% concession in rate of interest to meritorious students with 90% and above marks in 
intermediate and 80% marks it degree level. 
142. They further informed that it was one of the member Bank for sanction of education loans 
for the students applied online through Vidya Lakshmi portal developed by NSDC.  The Bank is 
giving concession in rate of interest up to MCLR for the students got admission in premier 
educational institutions (ISB, IIIT, IIM, IIT, BITS, XLRI, MDI, SPJJMR) 
143. The representative further added that Bank had extended 21.36% education loans to female 
students for pursuing various courses.  They further added, concession of 0.80 in rate of interest is 
available for priority sector education loans i.e. outstanding upto Rs. 10.00 lacs and 0.25% for 
non-priority sector education loans i.e. outstanding above Rs. 10.00 lac.  They further added that to 
encourage the education of girl child amongst the rural masses, the Bank has launched a scheme 
by the name of 'PNB Ladli' to promote and popularize education among girls of rural/semi-ur ban 
India. 
144.  The Committee had interaction with representatives of EPSI, CEPI, EdCIL, JIIT, LPU, NIU 
and SRM University in Delhi. 
145. The EPSI representative further submitted that the NASSCOM and Ministry had conducted 
surveys in past about employability of engineers and MBAs which was less than 28% .  The issu e 
of employability has two dimensions which was the readiness of the graduates to take up 
responsibility in the industry and possessing skills and competitiveness needed by recruiting 
organizations and availability of jobs in the industry and Government, which is subject to rate of 
economic growth. They recommended the following for improving the employability:- 
(a) Taking effective measures to fill up the gap between academia and industry; 

(b) Creating internships and tanning opportunities in the industry and government for 
students; 
(c) Creating training and placements Department in colleges and universities; 
(d) Setting up of Alumini Relationship Cells in all colleges and Universities, so that the 
Alumini members are actively involved in grooming the current students and 
improving their employability. 
146.  The representative of EPSI submitted that the regulatory framework is crippling.  They 
submitted that regulatory body should act as a mentor and facilitator.  They suggested that UGC, 
AICTE and other regulatory bodies should become less regulatory and more nurturing body for 
massive improvement in the quality of higher education. They further added that affiliation system 
is to be discontinued.  They submitted that India has approximately 40,000 colleges majority of 
which are affiliated to State Universities and only few of them has been granted autonomous 
status.  They further added that an affiliated college necessarily follows the curriculum prescribed 
by the affiliating universities and practically does not have any academic autonomy including  the 
academic calendar, examination schedule, setting up of question papers and evaluation of answer 
sheets.  They further added that an autonomous college gets reasonable academic autonomy, 
whereby it is permitted to have its own curriculum, academic calendar, examination schedule, 
evaluation of answer sheet with the only restriction that the degree is finally awarded by the 
University. The only solution for such a pitiable situation is to grant academic autonomy to the 
colleges based upon their capabilities and credentials.  One of the alternatives may be that all 
colleges having accreditation with NAAC with highest grade and Technical Education Colleges 
having more than 50% courses accreditation from NBA may be given autonomous status to begin 
with. 
147. They submitted that establishment and operation of an educational institution requires large 
number of clearance, Note and approvals from large number of government agencies.  The norms 
laid down by most of the agencies are impractical and redundant, which lead to a lot of 
subjectively in approvals at the discretion of the Competent Authority.  This leads to corruption 
and exchange of money for approvals through middle man. He further added that Government can 
ensure that the institutions do not cheat the public, by publishing in their website the facilities and 
faculty available, fees and other details. 
148.   The representative of EPSI further added that large numbers of vacancies in teaching posts 
are existing in both Central and State Government Universities, mainly due to unavailability of 
suitable candidates.  To tackle this problem the solution is to reemploy the experienced, well 
qualified superannuated teachers to fill the vacancies, invite at least 1000 eminent scholars from 
abroad scientists, corporate experts to share their knowledge with the students. 
149. The representative of CEPI submitted that there should be a pan India independent Examinati on 
Commission needed for higher education He pointed out that most State Universit ies and their affiliated 
colleges that account for more than 90 per cent of the enrolment suffer from a poor exa mination system. 
  Most of the states have failed in conducting fair and timely examinations, irrespective of the political party 

in power.  Several incidents have been reported of question papers being leaked, mass copy ing, and 
improper evaluation and announcement of results in various states.  Moreover, the entire process takes 
unreasonable and unpredictable time.  The poor system can be attributed to the exponential gr owth of 
college affiliations in the last 15-20 years, owing to which universities have not been able to cope with the 
requirements of preparing examination papers and conducting examinations. 
150.  Under the circumstances, in spite of best intentions, the state government has lost control 
of the sector. The unfortunate recipients of this system are the students who pass out and often do 
not possess even basic language and mathematical skills.  
151.  They suggested that the job of conducting examinations requires expertise and 
management skills. There was need to have an Examination Commission of India, constituted like 
the Election Commission of India that could be given the authority of scheduling and conducting 
exams, preparing question papers, announcing results, etc without the interference of state and 
central governments, in order to set right the poor examination system currently followed. Its 
jurisdiction should also include private and deemed universities. The universities can choose to 
define their own course contents and provide the same to this body, who can then set the paper 
independently based on the inputs.  Similar to CBSE or UPSC for universities in particular, the 
examination commission would have the competence to handle the numbers as well as conduct 
exams across the country.  
152.  The CEPI representative further pointed out that NAAC accreditation syste m needs change in design 
and process.  They pointed out that the method of assessment adopted by the National As sessment and 
Accreditation Council (NAAC) does not appear to be scientifically designed to fulfill its objective, 
particularly with regard to teaching-learning effectiveness.  The evaluati on criteria for judgment do not 
seem to have been defined objectively as a result of which grading is often both subjective and 
discretionary. They pointed out that the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) is an 
organisation that assesses and accredits institutions of higher education in India, awa rding ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ 
grades to the universities and colleges.  According to a study carried out by the go vernment amongst 4870 
colleges, as many as 2780 are graded by the NAAC.   
153. However, many colleges, which have been granted ‘A’ grade by NAAC, hav e been found to suffer 
from inadequate availability of teaching days due to late admissions and disturbed university calendar and 
lack of teachers’ presence in the classrooms even on teaching days. In many cases, they also suffer from 
improper practices for admissions and untimely examinations. Student attendance requirements are fulfilled 
by false reporting of attendance data.  A college cannot be graded in isolation  of its university as it is the 
universities which decide the syllabus, the criteria for admission, and the time to hold examinations.  Even 
the admissions procedures and the academic calendar are controlled by the universities and t he colleges 
merely follow the same.  Considering that they also prepare question papers and schedule for examinations, 
also appointing examiners, it is the university which controls everything that i s done in colleges. Similarly, 
universities themselves are affected by the quality of governance and poli cies of the state government. For 
example, if the state government is unable to conduct appointment of teachers, principals and staff properly, 
the universities have little in their hands. Hence, it is usually difficult  to have good education output of the 
state universities and its affiliated colleges.   

154.  They suggested that assessment should start from the quality, procedure and timeliness 
adopted in admissions.  It should also take into account if a time-table was prepared and followed 
the number of hours allotted to a subject made available; whether teachers were available for those 
lectures; the quality of lectures imparted by teachers and the books they consulted and referred and 
also the method adopted in imparting lectures.  NAAC must also be aware of the quality of 
examination papers prepared for internal examinations; the quality of examiners who marked 
internal exams copies; and the ways and means of communications of results to students.  These 
checks and balances should be put in place so that the infrastructure, money and other extraneous 
considerations are not into play while granting grades.  Such measures would help NAAC to earn 
faith and respect of all concerned. 
155.  The CEPI representative further added that in Appointment of Teachers for self -financed courses in 
colleges attached to State Universitythere is an unhealthy environment and class barrier between teachers in 
government aided colleges.   In the 1970s, the government decided to stop financing f urther expansion of 
higher education.  Aided colleges wanting to add new courses or additional classes we re required to do so 
in “self-finance” mode.  Hence, new colleges coming up were required to be completely self-financed. This 
meant that new teachers required by the colleges were to be appointed by the management themselves.  
156.   They pointed out that the colleges are allowed to charge a fixed amount of fee for such additional 
courses, a matter that is decided by the university. The total fee generated i s insufficient to meet out the 
salary expenses. As a result, the teachers appointed for these additional courses earn a salary which is much 
lower in comparison to the salaries of the teachers who are government appointed.  This has caused conflict 
in the colleges. The teachers earning a low salary for teaching similar or even higher courses are considered 
inferior to the government teachers, who in some cases are teaching junior classes, whi le enjoying higher 
salaries as well as status. This system creates unhealthy work environment and nee ds to be re-looked at on 
an urgent basis.   
Further, in both aided and unaided colleges, for appointing self-finance teachers, an expert is deputed by the 
university, who is normally a government appointed teacher in any institution other than the one where this 
self-finance teacher is being appointed. Due to the large number of self-finance cour ses in comparison to 
aided courses, the number of government teachers is already small. This exercise put s additional burden on 
them as they are kept busy in travelling to other institutions and holding interviews while their own students 
suffer from their absence. They pointed out that when the basic qualifications and crite ria are laid down by 
the university, the selection must be left with the management of the insti tution. This will remove an 
unnecessary exercise and the government teachers can be used for their main purpose which is teaching and 
research.  
157.  They further added that the quality of government appointed teachers and principals is rather poor and 
inadequate.  The appointment of teachers is exclusively done by the state government s. State governments 
have established different Boards for purposes of appointment of teachers in higher education, secondary 
education and primary education. The political expediency does not let the government remain impartial 
and true to the task of appointments of board members. As a result, inept, unqualified and, sometimes, 
undesirable elements find a place in the appointment Boards and, in turn, they appoint teachers not 
according to their qualification and merit, but on the basis of other extr aneous considerations.  Therefore, a 
lot of litigation follows in respect of appointment of the members of the Board as well as of teachers. The 
entire system is mostly paralyzed. They suggested that the teachers and principal s of higher education 
should be appointed through UPSC.  

158.  The CEPI representative pointed out that the state university controls ever ything that is done in 
colleges. If colleges desire to add new courses or additional classes in an existing course or if they decide to 
drop a course from their curriculum, they need to seek fresh affiliation/pe rmission from the universities to 
which they are affiliated. That is certainly a lengthy procedure involving vari ous elements. Further, the 
procedure for granting permission for a new course addition for a UGC approved and NAAC  accredited 40 
year old college is similar to that of a new college.  
159.  They suggested that colleges should be granted freedom to seek and get affiliation from 
any other university e.g. a college can have different affiliations for different subjects fr om more 
than one university. In addition to this, a central body like CBSE for higher education may be 
established at the central level which can grant affiliation for different courses and the choice 
should be left to the college.  The procedure for addition of subjects usually involves an expert 
committee formed by the university and consists of government teachers. Thus, the government 
teachers have lot of additional burden in myriad processes related to college governance like self-
finance teacher appointment, subject addition, NAAC accreditation, management committee 
election, practical examiners etc. This keeps them busy travelling to other institutions and holding 
interviews while their own students suffer from their absence.  
160. The CEPI representative submitted that while assessing the university, NAAC does not even 
look at the teaching hours left with government teachers because of the university procedures. In 
fact, the NAAC inspection criteria for university should look at all the procedures adopted for 
governance of its affiliated colleges and factor them in award of rating to the university.  
161.  The CEPI representative submitted that there were irregularities in fee reimbursement and 
scholarshipsfee reimbursement by social welfare department of states has created monster 
education mafias.  The task of fee reimbursement and grant and disbursement of scholarships is 
entrusted to Social Welfare departments of states. This has created massive avenues for unfair and 
illegal practices as the department is being used for siphoning off money to unintended recipients. 
Cases have come to light where a single student has taken admission in several institutions at the 
same time and is drawing reimbursement or scholarships in respect of each college where he is 
admitted. The money is sometimes given to persons who do not even exist.  
162.  The CEPI representative further submitted that the fee is reimbursed in respect of private 
educational universities also. The reimbursement amount is equal to the fee decided by the private 
university, which, in fact is many times higher than the fee charged by the government aided 
colleges for similar courses. As a result, the reimbursement of fee charged by the private 
universities is many times more. This has created further scope for corruption and milking the state 
exchequer at a gigantic scale without serving any purpose. They suggested that the fee 
reimbursement should be at a uniform level, which is to be decided by the state government for 
each course. The reimbursement criteria should be fixed age-wise also and should be necessarily 
linked with AADHAR.  
163. The CEPI representative submitted that there was excessive emphasis on research by 
government for all colleges and universities, irrespective of their size, location and campus.  

Research has become a sort of buzzword and attracts too much emphasis by policymakers. In most 
cases, Ph.D. scholars are not even fully aware about their own topic leading to a general reduction 
in the importance of the Ph.D. degree itself.  The representative submitted that research should be 
encouraged for central institutions and state institutions which are residential. It is neither feasible 
nor practical for a small non-residential, non-technical educational institution to have the research 
facilities.  Further, the emphasis should be on quality of research scholars not on quantity.  Non-
residential colleges should be allowed to utilize their precious resources for imparting quality 
education. 
164.  At present minority institutions are those institutions which are run by minority 
communities. They get state privileges and concessions while opening their institutions and are 
even granted full freedom in respect of running the institutions such as appointment of teachers.  
The status of minority institution should only be granted to those institutions which have a 
minimum of 50 per cent students from the minority and not because they are owned by minorities.  
Moreover, the excessive concessions and privileges should be curtailed and brought at par with 
other institutions to bring uniformity in other aspects. 
165.  The representative of EdCIL submitted that the Indian Higher Education system is one of the 
largest of the world, just after the United States and China, and enrolls around 33.3 m illion students. The 
adult literacy rate (15+ age group) is around 72.1% in total. The male and female  literacy rates in the same 
age group are 80.9% and 62.8%, respectively. Whereas the world average literacy rate is 86.3% (UNESCO, 
2015). Total GER (Gross Enrolment Ratio) for the year 2013-14 was 23.0. GER for male and female 
students was 23.9 and 22.0 respectively, which shows that women enrolments ratio is less when compare to 
male. India has a low GER when compared with 26% in China and 36% in Brazil.The tabl e below shows 
the GER for last 3 academic years (AISHE 2014-15 Education at a Glance): 
 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 (P) 
All 
Categories 
21.5 23.0 23.6 
Male 22.7 23.9 24.5 
Female 20.1 22.0 22.7 
SC 16.0 17.1 18.5 
Male 16.9 17.7 19.3 
Female 15.0 16.4 17.6 
ST 11.1 11.3 13.3 
Male 12.4 12.5 14.6 
Female 9.8 10.2 12.0 
 

166.  The representative of EdCIL submitted that India has 757 Universities, 3805 6 Colleges and 11922 
Stand Alone Institutions as per the latest survey by AISHE. India has 52 ‘Instit utions of National 
Importance’ which primarily consist of the Indian Insti tutes of Technology, National Institutes of 
Technology and prominent medical colleges, like the All India Institute of Medical Sci ence (AIIMS).The 
following table shows increase in number of institutes from 2010: 
Year Colleges Universities 
2010-11 32974 621 
2011-12 34852 642 
2012-13 35525 667 
2013-14 36634 723 
2014-15 (P) 38056 757 
 
167.  The representative of EdCIL submitted that only 11.7% of total enrolment is in distance enrolment, 
of which female students are 46% of total distance learning enrolment. About 79.9% of tot al students are 
enrolled in under-graduate, whereas only 11.45% in post-graduate. As listed by the Univer sity Grants 
Commission (UGC), India has 43 central universities, 312 state universities, 183 priv ate universities and 
115 deemed universities. 
168.  They further added that Traditional teaching methods were outdated and rigid cur ricula and 
pedagogy lead to lack of accountability and quality assurance and separation o f research and teaching also 
account for lack of quality in the sector. Different variety of colleges, uni versities, technical institutions 
have produced different types and quality of education. There is a mismatch of quality  among various 
institutions. Many of the universities don’t have adequate infrastructure o r facilities to teach students. 
Access to internet and Wi-Fi is still an issue that is persistent in various colleges. Inadequate interfacing 
between industries and educational institutes is creating a gap. The employability report published by 
Aspiring Mind states that less than 20% engineers are employable for software jobs, and 7.49 % are 
employable for core engineering jobs. Employability also varies enormously across colleg es. Colleges in 
tier 1 cities have 18.26% employable software engineers, whereas for those in tier  2 cities, it goes down to 
14.17%. Similarly, the states at the top have employability as high as 40.42% but those at the bottom have it 
at 12.03%. 
169.  They further added that Regulated Institutions need to be registered as not for  profit Trust/Society/ 
Section 25 Company. Unregulated Institutionscan be registered as private/public companies that can 
legitimately distribute dividends. These institutions do not provide education leadi ng to award of a degree 
or certificate, they can be incorporated as a company, are beyond the regulatory regime descr ibed earlier 
and can distribute profits. There are a number of private companies operating in the unregulated sector, 
some of which Language Training, Tutorials/Coaching, Education services companies, Conten t providers 
and Corporate Training. 
169.1 They further pointed out that there are various regulatory bodies in India but the major one is the 
University Grants Commission (UGC) under the MHRD, which acts as the coordinator as well as prescriber 
of standards for education in the country. These institutes have their own set of regulations and approval 
procedures which seem cumbersome to foreign institutes, as there are multiple agencies  involved. This 

over-regulation is a deterrent to quality foreign institutes as they perceive it  as an infringement of their 
academic freedom. 
170. They further added submitted that regulations placed by AICTE for foreign uni versities were that 
franchise is not permitted, fee/seats are prescribed by AICTE, Degree/institu tion to be recognized in the 
home country, compliance with affirmative action is  mandatory and for degree gran ting institutions, 
affiliation/tie-up with Indian university is mandatory. 
171.  The representative of EdCIL further added that UGC doesn’t r ecognize foreign universities. Foreign 
Education Institutions (Regulation of Entry and Operation) Bill, 2010 stat es that only institutions with a 
corpus of INR 500 mn (USD 11 mn) - the sum of money universities need to set asi de as a guarantee - 
would be allowed to establish a campus in India. Other proposals include the restriction of  surplus revenue 
usage within India and the investment of at least 51% of total capital r equired for establishing an institution 
in India. Accreditation of higher educational institutions was made mandatory under  UGC (Mandatory 
Assessment and Accreditation of higher Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2012. Insti tutions are 
accredited for a period of five years. 
172. They further added that various autonomous bodies grant accreditation; most impor tant of them are 
National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC), and the National Board of Accreditation (NBA). 
They pointed out there was no recognition for private agencies to operate in the accreditation space in India. 
However, the Indian Centre for Assessment and Accreditation (ICAA) is the fi rst private accreditation 
body, set up in May 2013, and is registered as a non-profit council with T V Mohandas Pai, from Manipal 
University, as chairman and Arun Nigavekar, former chairman of University Grants Commission (UGC) 
and founder director of NAAC, as the chief advisor. Currently, it focuses its efforts towards associating 
with international rating agencies to launch 'Top Indian University Rankings' , a first of- its-kind ranking of 
Indian universities. 
173.  They further added that Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) has been framed and proposed by UGC. 
The guidelines will apply to all the undergraduate and postgraduate-level degree, dip loma and certificate 
programmes awarded by Central, State and deemed- to-be-universities in India. The CBCS guidelines have 
been conceptualized in line with the National Skills Qualification Framework (N SQF), competency-based 
framework that classifies qualifications based on levels of knowledge, skills and aptit ude. The framework 
gives students the freedom to select programmes from a range of disciplines, which will count towards their 
overall degree credits. The system will permit students to transfer credits earned i n one institution to 
another within the country or even abroad giving them mobility and complete freedom o ver choice of 
institutions. Curriculum will be interdisciplinary, enabling the integ ration of concepts, theories, techniques 
and perspectives from two or more disciplines to advance fundamental understanding or to solve problems 
whose solutions are beyond the scope of a single discipline.The completion of a degree wi ll become credit-
based instead of the current time-based.The model focuses on bridging gap between prof essional education 
and employers’ needs, making the student employment ready. 
174. They further submitted some credit transfer systems followed by other countries as: 
a. European Credit Transfer System (ECTS): Sets the standards for comparing the 
academic achievement and performance of higher education students across the EU 
and other collaborating European countries. 
b. Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF): specifies standards for educational 
qualifications. 
175.  They further added that the Government of India (as well as many states) has re cognized the need 
and importance of private-sector participation to meet the overall demands in t he higher and technical 

education sector. Many industrial houses and their promoters have established trus ts and other non-profit 
bodies to build and run universities and institutes in accordance with the cur rent regulations – the not for 
profit approach. Various entrepreneurs as well as other enterprises have setup  institutions focusing on 
training, skill development and employability enhancement – areas that are outside the ambit of regulations 
governing education. Some of the models suggested by K.B. Pawar Committee constituted  by the 
University Grants Commission (UGC) are as follows: 
(i) Private sector invests in the infrastructure and has the responsibility of 
operations and in return is compensated by the government – Outsourcing 
Model 
(ii) Investments are shared among the private sector and the government while the 
operations and management is handled by the private sector – Hybrid Model 
(iii) Government invests in infrastructure and the private sector takes the 
responsibility of operations and management – Reserve Outsourcing Model 
176.  They pointed out that Rasthriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) was started for 
Enhancing Higher Education Quality. State universities receive only a fraction of funding 
compared to the central institutions but cater to a large number of students. As a result, quality of 
infrastructure and teaching is far below in state institutions and shortage of funds cause vacancies 
in faculty positions and compels the institutions to look for other funding options.  They further 
added that State institutes rely heavily on the affiliation fees for funding; this along with the 
introducing courses for revenue-generation has further deteriorated the quality. University Grant 
Commission (UGC) does provide funds to the state institutions, but its mandate allows it to fund 
institutes that are in Section 12B and 2F (UGC Act Compliant), which excludes nearly 33% of 
state universities and 51% of the colleges under such universities. 
177.  They pointed out that RUSA or Rasthriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan will cov er 13,024 colleges 
included in 316 state universities. The funding will be provided in 90:10 (Centre: State) for North-Eastern 
states and Jammu & Kashmir, 75:25 for Other Special category states (Sikki m, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand), and 65:35 for other states and UTs. It is based on performance-based funding model. It will 
incentivize well performing institutions and to be eligible for funding under RUSA, states will have to meet 
certain prerequisites which include academic, sectoral and institutional governanc e reforms, creation of 
State Higher Education Councils, state accreditation agencies funding by committees by states, filling 
faculty positions, etc. Its aim is to provide greater autonomy to universities as well as colleges and focus 
sharply on equity-based development and improvement in teaching-learning quality and research and 
innovation in higher education. The broad component of RUSA would be to create new universities , new 
engineering colleges and new degree colleges by the State Governments. The objective of R USA is to 
achieve the target GER of 30% by 2020, which has been set by the Central Government. 
 
178. They further informed the Committee that RUSA also states some ways in which State Universities 
can seek private investment, such as:  
a. Philanthropic contributions 
b. Donations / grants from private companies / trusts / NRIs 
c. Establishing chairs / schools / departments 
d. Public private partnerships 
e. Knowledge parks / innovation centres / centres of excellence  

f. Two per cent corporate social responsibility funds  
g. Viability gap funding 
h. Specific research grants 
 
179. They further added that the guid elines of the mission specify that while “state Plans should include 
information on all government, government aided and private institutions across dis ciplines, support will 
only be provided to government and government aided institutions. These would include all  government 
and aided colleges including engineering, professional and agricultural, except medical colleges. According 
to CII-Deloitte ASHE 2013, the number of private higher education institutions i ncreased by more than 60 
per cent during 2007 and 2012. The exclusion of private institutions in RUSA is thus iro nical as 64 percent 
of total institutions dealing in higher education in India are private. The problem with this is that CSR funds 
of companies go in various fields – healthcare, elementary education, water, sanitation and now on building 
toilets and they are not adequate for the purpose of higher education. Another issue with t he scheme is that 
the private sector can logically be a part in RUSA in only selected areas, w hich include setting up of new 
model colleges (general); setting up of new colleges (professional); research, innovation and 
vocationalisation of higher education. 
180.  The Committee was informed that Digital India concept can revolutionize education sector. The 
institutes are required to be provided with latest technology and infrastructure and gave various models 
currently being used in other countries and suggested for Indian scenario are: 
 
฀ Flipped Classroom Model:  
o Allows students to listen to the lectures online at home and use class time for coll aborative 
learning and activity-style homework assignments. 
o The in-class discussion, personalized student guidance, team based skill development and 
enrichment activities are allowed by moving content delivery outside of class time. 
o An experiment by Nobel Laureate Carl Wieman in University of British Columbia, f ound 
that students who are introduced to ‘flipped classroom model’ resulted into increase in  
attendance by 20%, class engagement by 40% and interestingly scored more than twice in  
comparison to respective control group (Study by Deloitte, 2015). 
o This model was adopted by Indian School of Business (ISB) in 2012 for a course on 
entrepreneurial decision making. 
฀ Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs):  
o These aim at unlimited participation and open access via the web. 
o Provide interactive user forums to support community interactions between students, 
professors, and teaching assistants. 
o SWAYAM which stands for 'Study Web of Active-Learning for Young Aspiring 
Minds' is MOOC platform for Indian students. 
o It will have 3 courses, 2 from IIT Bombay and 1 offered by UC Berkley. 
o NPTEL is another platform which is quite popular among the engineers. 
฀ ERP for Education Institutions: 
o FRONT DESK MANAGEMENT  : Covers the front desk activities, through following 
modules: 
▪ Admission Management 
▪ Fees Management 
▪ Profile Management 
▪ Inquiries Management 

o CAMPUS MANAGEMENT SOLUTIONS: Cover the following modules: 
▪ Library Management 
▪ Hostel Management 
▪ Canteen/Cafeteria Management 
▪ Classroom Management 
▪ Laboratory Management 
o ADMINISTRATION MANAGEMENT :  Covers administration of institutions by 
integrating the below mentioned modules:  
▪ HR Management 
▪ Events & Activities 
▪ Payroll Management 
▪ User Management 
▪ Store and Purchase 
181.   They further added about the Challenges in Creating ICT Framework 
฀ Policy and Direction (IGNOU nominated)  
฀ Infrastructure (Broadband Connectivity, Network, Data Center etc.) 
฀ Viability 
฀ Commercialization  
฀ Technology Infusion  
฀ Backend Supply chain (Hardware, Content etc.) 
฀ Content creation (NPTEL, SWAYAM etc.) 
฀ Absence of Collaborative Platforms (Institutions as well as Industries)  
฀ Data Collection and Analysis (India- second largest in terms of enrollment)    
 
182.  The following recommendations were given :- 
a. Government should be creating enabling atmosphere for quality improvement and growth 
especially which is private sector led. 
b. Increase of scope of the ranking framework. 
c. Incentivizing of research and industry engagement.  
d. Higher number of PPP projects in education. 
e. Incentivize internationalization of education. 
f. Legislate use of technology at least in areas of admission and administration f or greater 
transparency. 
g. Enhancement of industry-academia interaction; faculties at State Universities shou ld be 
encouraged and allowed to take up consulting works for various industries and for other private 
stake-holders. 
h. Innovation centers/incubators may be established various universities in collaboration with 
industries and private players. 
i. Faster implementation of Choice-based Credit System for creating industry ready students.  
183.  They further added that India already has a well developed ecosystem of higher education 
in which the top 20% of the institutions enjoy the following advantages vis-a-vis competin g 
nations: 
฀ Relative price advantage and hence higher return on investment for students. 
฀ Relevance of education for application in developing countries. 
฀ Industry linked education in terms of placements, especially in services sector. 
฀ Growing start-up culture which makes campus entrepreneurship focused. 
฀ Strong advantage of use of English language. 

They further pointed out that the private sector higher education institutions (e.g., Symbiosis, 
VIT, Manipal, etc.) are presently extremely focused on receiving foreign students and tweaking 
their syllabus and infrastructure to support this objective. With increased role of private sector 
being anticipated and ranking method (NIRF) being introduced by MHRD and several 
initiatives being taken by the Government the overall scenario of higher education in India will 
vastly become industry and services led and qualitatively improved to competitively match with 
those available in some in the developed world. The private sector institutions are highly 
diverse in nature. The best in the class range from BITS, Symbiosis, ISB, VIT and XLRI, etc. 
In the lower end there are also many institutions which are way below the mark. 
184.  They further pointed out that the present NIRF (National Institutional Rating Framework) 
is expected to be a game changer in not only enabling students, employers and other 
stakeholders to make informed choices but would also resultantly make the institutions raise 
their quality and benchmark against each other for overall improvement of the sector. The other 
enabling initiatives of the Government would lay a major role in unleashing a quality revolution 
in the private sector given the projected inadequate investment ability of the government, it is 
desirable that enabling atmosphere is created for private sector institutions to take the higher 
education sector to next level to aid in sustained high two-digit growth for the economy for a 
long period. 
185.   The representative of CII submitted that there was a need improve quality by 
accreditation, compliance, and disclosure of information.  They submitted that rapid growth in 
higher education, especially technical education, in recent years has led to dilution of quali ty at 
every level. They pointed out that while the number of seats and students has grown 30-fold 
since 1983, faculty count has barely doubled because not enough students go on to do Masters 
and still less do PhD. No amount of regulation, policing or laying down of guidelines can bring 
quality back into the system. Hence, a radical approach of allowing market forces to determine  
and sift the good from the bad players will have to be adopted.  
186. Regulatory bodies such as AICTE and UGC should lay the guidelines and ensure that all 
institutes have a proper accreditation and that they disclose all information in a fair manner. It is 
now mandatory for institutes and courses to be accredited by NAAC and NBA, respectively, 
but there are no powers with these two agencies to ensure compliance. Institutes can still choose 
not to go for accreditation if they do not need any funding from the government. The two 
agencies also do not have the bandwidth to accredit all 600+ universities and 35,000+ colleges 
in the country. It is another matter that not all universities and colleges still come within the 
ambit of accreditation as per the criteria set by the government. The government also does not 
recognize accreditation by private bodies. Ever since NBA has become signatory to 
Washington Accord early this year, accreditation by independent private agencies will in fact be 
detrimental to India’s interests. This is so because Washington Accord only recognizes NBA as 
the body which can do accreditation for Indian institutes. In such a scenario, it is recommended 
that NBA be encouraged to outsource its work to independent agencies which can help it in 
carrying out the task of accreditation. UGC and AICTE should gradually move into the sphere 

of ensuring compliance with the accreditation process and should be armed with suitable 
powers to impose curbs on defaulters.  They further suggested that build world-class full 
service universities by converting existing IITs and IISc. 
187.  They further added that excessive focus on professional and technical education in 
recent years has also resulted in neglect of liberal arts and full-service universities. That gap can 
be addressed by immediately converting all IITs and IISc into full-service universities where 
under-graduate and post graduate courses are offered in science, engineering, liberal arts and 
humanities. At present, some old IITs do have liberal arts schools but they offer supplementary 
or elective courses to engineering students. IIMs, IISERs and NITs can be gradually converted 
into full-service universities. The representative further added that taking the gross enrolment 
ratio to 30 per cent in 2020 means, we not only need to expand the existing institutes but also 
add more and more numbers at a rapid pace. While the government is doing its bit by 
announcing more IITs, AIMS and IIITs in more states and regions, it should also give more 
freedom to private players to set up universities by making the processes easier and not 
insisting on a legislative order for somebody to be able to start a university. A simple approval 
formality from UGC should suffice for that and making things easier will also spur more people 
with “good” intentions to enter the field of education.  
188.  They further suggested that there was need to increase autonomy through 
decentralisation of Institutions.  They suggested that more and more institutes need to be given 
autonomy to set their own courses and make changes in the curricula. They should be free to 
offer their own exam and handle other regulatory issues. This will gradually also lessen the 
burden of public universities which are saddled with hundreds of affiliating colleges, at times 
running into 800 or more. Reducing the number of affiliated colleges will also give more 
freedom and time to universities to focus on academic issues. Overdue stress on centralization 
is not desirable as it may end up smothering innovation and curbing heterogeneity and 
excellence.  
189.  They also suggested that there was a need to encourage academic research by 
bridging the gap between research and teaching.  Two separate ministries and two separate 
world view have ensured that teaching and research remain forever disjointed in our country. 
While Science and Technology ministry does all the funding for research, the teaching part is 
handled by the ministry of human resource development which remains detached from the 
research system. To correct this anomaly, all funding to CSIR system (under the S&T ministry) 
can be gradually routed through educational institutes based on competitive bidding. Institutes 
should vie to bag research projects which are funded by the government, the way they do in the 
US.  They pointed out that there was also a need to attract and retain good faculty by giving 
them more power and autonomy.  
190.   They pointed out that the woeful shortage of faculty can only be addressed by 
making teaching an attractive proposition for youngsters. They should also find more freedom 
and autonomy and they should be given greater responsibility in designing their courses the 

way they want to teach, rather than being treated as students themselves by heads of institutes. 
Their promotions should not only depend on the number of papers they produce. Interaction 
with industry and research should fetch them equal rewards and promotion opportunities. 
Government institutes should be allowed to appoint foreign nationals as permanent faculty 
rather than as consultants or for short durations, the way they do at present since only 
permanent faculty can be expected to have long-term vision for the growth of the institute. 
191.   They further added that there should befreedom to charge fee,and pointed out 
thatwhile private institutes are free to charge whatever they want, and can command, from 
students, government funded affiliated institutes do not have the freedom to do so. While giving 
autonomy to institutes they should also be allowed to charge a reasonable fee from students and 
there should be a commensurate increase in the quantum of scholarships so that the subsidy on 
education becomes more need-based. This freedom will ensure that whatever money gets 
exchanged underhand in the form of capitation fee is brought in a clean and clear manner into 
the system and is used to subsidise education for those who need it.  
192. They further added that there was also is need to enable foreign direct investment to flow 
into educational institutions.  Under the extant FDI Policy, FDI is allowed 100% under the 
automatic route in education sector but the holding entities of educational institutions are either 
trusts, societies or section 8 companies. In the case of trusts, FDI is simply not permissible 
while in the case of last two, special approvals are required in each case.  UGC does not 
recognize “foreign universities” in its act and AICTE does not allow foreign investment directly 
or indirectly in the sponsoring body. This anomaly has made joint ventures between foreign 
investors and Indian partners virtually impossible. This is also the primary reason why the 
country has managed to attract only a few million dollars in this sector since 2000 even though 
the requirement is in billions.  A specific exemption from FCRA for investment in education 
sector and changes in UGC & AICTE Act are the need of the hour.  
193.   The representative of JIIT, Noida submitted that Higher education can be made 
more relevant by regularly updating the curricula, by improving the quality of teachers, by 
attracting the persons who wish to join teaching profession by choice and not by compulsion, 
by getting their knowledge update/upgraded as per the status of knowledge in that area in 
present time, by improving the quality of students at college level as they are the inputs to 
higher education system and are the product at the end of the day. Overall processes and 
systems of higher education need remodeling in such a way so that the graduates coming out 
from such institutions posses sufficient domain knowledge and skills with reasonable level of 
competency and quality, as per the expectations of the industry/organizations. 
194.  The representative pointed out that most of the good higher education institutions 
are in and around metros and big cities. They are not easily accessible and affordable to a large  
number of masses living in rural areas in our Country. More institutions with focus on quality 
could be opened in government, private or PPP mode at different locations in rural and semi-
rural areas. This will increase the accessibility to majority of the population, at isolated and 

remote locations. Quality higher educational institutions to young people in nearby places will 
also decrease their cost of education as they can cut on many expenses by staying at their own 
places.   
195.   He further added that affordability can be increased to deserving students of 
economically weaker sections of the society by providing them scholarship and hassle fre e 
loans by the Government/Banks/Trusts/Societies.  The students should get scholarships/loans 
directly at their own levels. However, they should pay the fee to the Institution regularly by 
themselves so that the institutions could meet their expenses without any difficulty.   
196.  The representative pointed out that there was also issue of Employability of Degree 
Holders.  It is rightly being said that about 40 percent degree holders are suitable for some kind 
of employment and about 60 percent are not employable at all. The reason for sub-standard 
quality is insufficient domain knowledge and lack of communication skills possessed by the 
teachers, as they are not able to effectively penetrate in the minds of their students. Most of the 
Institutions do not revise their curricula regularly; thus no current/state of art knowledge is 
passed-on to their students. Thus lack of domain knowledge and deficiencies of skills make 
students unsuitable for employment. Each institution should have clearly defined mechanism in 
place for improving the quality of its teachers with respect to each one of above mentioned 
parameters.  
197.  They also pointed out that the Private Education Providers face a lot of difficulties 
in running the higher education institutions due to insufficient financial resources, non 
availability of quality teachers at the cost they offer and getting students of much lower 
standard. Private sector institutions are not getting any type of financial support from the 
government and are controlled by Regulatory Bodies and Government Policies.  A large 
number of teachers are working in these institutions and their stability and continuation always 
remain an issue and with such type of compensations, they are not satisfied and committed and 
do not deliver upto the expected level.  As the passed out graduates from both public and 
private sectors are serving the nation in industry/organizations, thus private sector institutions 
should also be provided some support to establish the institutions. Land could be provided to 
these institutions by the government on a very nominal lease rent. They could also be supported 
from time to time for modernization and up-gradation of infrastructure/facilities based upon the 
academic performance of their students. 
198.   They also pointed out that Regulatory Bodies like UGC, AICTE and DEC should 
work as the facilitator to higher education institutions in private sector and not merely as 
Controllers and Regulators.  Many times, though the intentions may be good, but in reality at 
ground level, the assessment being carried out of such institutions appears to be as Controller 
and Regulator and not as a facilitator.  At present, for getting the approval for running different 
programmes in an institution, the institution has to separately move to different regulatory 
bodies to get separate approvals for each programme which is quite cumbersome and 
disheartening.  Single window concept should be introduced for the assessment and approval by 

the regulatory bodies. One of regulatory body, having wider and main role to play, could carry 
out complete process of assessment and, thereafter, approval accorded by the higher regulatory 
body could be accepted as the approval by all other concerned regulatory bodies. 
199.   They also submitted that there are a large number of vacancies of teachers in 
Government, Central and State Universities. Private Institutions are able to manage numbers, 
but by compromising on quality, experience & qualifications.  This is due to non availability of 
quality teachers as per the norms and standards laid down by the regulatory bodies.   The 
expected numbers of Professors, Associate Professors and Assistant Professors should be made 
more realistic as per the available trained and qualified manpower with desired experience and 
exposure. They also pointed out that that the traditional Universities are most of the time busy 
in carrying out routine teaching and training processes at undergraduate and postgraduate levels 
and are not able to focus much on research and innovation. There should be judicious mix of 
routine teaching, research and innovation in the assigned responsibilities of each teacher. It 
should be ensured by the University that this happens in practice. 
200. The representative of Lovely Professional University submitted that reforms in regulatory 
framework are required as mentioned below: 
 
(i) Providing autonomy and self-regulation of institutions to enable them to explore new 
and innovative ways to develop and deliver high-quality and relevant study programmes 
according to diverse needs of industry and society. 
(ii) Easing the norms and providing support/relaxations to encourage creation of new 
institutions and additional capacity in existing institutions to promote competition in the 
higher education sector. The increasing demand-supply gap will compel the institutions 
to provide relevant and high quality education at low-cost to produce employable 
students for gaining faith of the students and parents for their survival in the long-term.  
(iii) Rationalization of faculty norms and adequate weightage to industry experience to 
encourage industry professionals to take up faculty positions instead of over-emphasizing 
the need for doctoral degrees.  
(iv) Easing of norms for foreign collaborations with equal applicability to all government 
and private institutions. 
(v) Doing away with unwanted stringent laws/regulations providing for punishment of 
term imprisonment, exorbitant penalty of crores of rupees should not be allowed in the 
holistic higher education sector as these create undue fear among the academicians, 
philanthropists etc. and discourage them from engaging in this sector. For example, The 
Distance Education Council of India Bill, 2014 under consideration of the HRD Ministry 
containing punishment of 3 years imprisonment and penalty of 2 crore fifty lacs. 
(vi) Distance and online modes of education need to be promoted as these are the best 

way for wide spread access of low-cost high quality education with extensive use of ICT 
tools to masses even in far-flung areas who would otherwise have no access to higher 
education. For that purpose also, reforms in regulatory framework are foremostly 
required to do away with the irrational norms limiting the reach and meaning of these 
education modes. The present illogic al restrictions confine the institutions to offer 
distance education and online education programmes to the students within their state 
only and further also mandate the private universities to set up study centres with the 
approval of the UGC for every study centre that too in the affiliated institutions only, 
which is not feasible and also unwanted. So such norms need to be done away with so 
that people having no access to regular education in their nearby areas can be reached 
through these modes.  
(vii) Rationalization of norms of the apex bodies for the opening of institutions and 
enhancing institutional capacity needs to be made rationalized and logical ones by doing 
away with unwanted exorbitant futile expenditures, adding to the cost of education for 
the students/parents. To cite a few norms,  
฀ Initial requirement of 500 books per course-division for engineering courses prescribed  
under AICTE norms seems justified, but annual addition of 250 books per course-division 
of 60 students for B.Tech courses and 400-500 books per division for other courses like  
MBA, MCA, B.Pharm, B.Arch., HMCT etc. after the first batches in all years are pass ed 
out is irrational and a futile expenditure that can be made for other impor tant institutional 
purposes. Moreover, presently teaching-learning through E-books and other online/digital 
study material is preferred over hard bound books and as many editions of good authors 
are also not available. So these norms also need to be revised. 
฀ Similarly, under AICTE norms, Computer:Student ratio of 1:2 is stipulated for MCA 
course, which is a technical course, same norms are also made applicable for non -
technical course like MBA and similar is the case with courses in Engineering, 
Architecture and Applied Arts & Craft for which Computer:Student ratio o f 1:4/1:5 is 
stipulated , which is  totally unwanted. Students as well as the teachers in large number  
now use laptops and other modern gadgets for study/teaching and moreover the UGC 
model curriculum of these courses does not justify the requirement of so many num ber of 
PCs. 
฀ Likewise, under the NCTE (Recognition Norms and Procedures) Regulations, 2014, 
infrastructure requirements are quite excessive and illogical. For intake of 100 students of 
2 years B.P.Ed programme, in addition to the classrooms, ten tutorial specialization class 
rooms are mandated. For B.Ed. alone, initially 1000 titles and 3000 volumes of books are 
mandated and thereafter these are to be augmented with addition of two hundred title s 
annually with three copies of each. 
201.  They further added that quality of higher education needs to be improved as today 
not a single Indian university features in the top 200 world university rankings. They 
suggested the following steps: 

(i) Primarily, higher education needs to be synchronized with the industry with active 
engagement of industry professionals/experts in all the operational areas of institutions. 
Further regular re-evaluation of the curricula, pedagogy, assessment modules, student-
learning etc. with the evolving needs of the economy is also necessary to stay relevant. 
Students are also much needed to be encouraged to take up entrepreneurship by focusing  
on developing entrepreneurial skills among them and by supporting them through 
funding or otherwise during ideation, planning and implementation phases. Various skill-
oriented training modules/courses are also required to be provided to the students in 
collaboration with skill-based training providers to enhance the students’ employability. 
(ii)  Extensive use of a blended learning model needs to be promoted, wherein teaching at 
Indian institutions can be offered in combination with those provided by the top global 
universities. Lectures delivered by local faculty can be supplemented by pre-recorded 
lectures given by best- in-class faculty from the top institutions. Collaboration with 
foreign institutions for faculty exchange should also be promoted.   
(iii) Emphasis is also needed on the Faculty development to enhance the effectiveness of their 
teaching skills. 
(iv) Reforms in regulatory framework are also required for giving level playing field to the 
private institutions.Private institutions in the school education sector has contributed a 
lot towards quality and today people prefer to send their wards to private schools and not 
to the government school even if located nearby. Private participation has mainly 
flourished in North India during last 15 years and in South India during last 25 years. So 
it will take some time for private institutions to improve the quality. As far as 
shortcomings are concerned, government institutions are not an exception to that. 
(v) Inspite of a significant contribution of the private sector in increasing the educational 
opportunities in India, they are not believed upon and rather separate stringent rules and 
regulations are imposed on private institutions and unwanted allegations of indulging in 
malpractices or commercialization of education are made against the private institutions. 
On the other hand, the government institutions enjoy a protected environment. As many 
cases of malpractices like leakage of papers, charging of bribe or donations, shortage of 
staff, deficiency of infrastructure etc. are reported each other day, but no action is taken 
against them. E.g. eight new Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) were established after 
the government's decision in 2008 to increase the number of these premier education 
bodies. Years after their establishment, the new IITs at Gandhinagar, Ropar, Jodhpur, 
Hyderabad, Indore, Mandi, Bhubaneswar and Patna are functioning on tempora ry 
campuses, still they are allowed to operate. Had any such deficiency reported in any of 
the private institution they might not have been even allowed to start.  
(vi)  
 Similarly, while government universities established by the State Legislature are 

allowed to open study centres at their discretion after obtaining approval for offering 
distance education programmes, however private universities established by the State 
Legislature are required to obtain separate approval for opening study centres. 
 Similarly, applicability of unwanted and illogical stringent criteria enforced for 
allowing foreign collaborations is also limited to the private institutions only, and 
government institutions are given an exemption. 
202.  Besides this, while the UGC regulations for mandatory accreditation were framed for the 
purpose of all government and private universities and institutions, however later on extension was 
given to the government universities alone while private universities were not given such 
extension. So, equal opportunities to government and private institutions and equal applicability of 
rules and regulations in all respect is much needed to encourage the private participation in higher 
education so as to promote healthy competition and ultimately to increase the access and quality of 
education. As far as commercialization is concerned, it is a matter of past, due to demand 
exceeding the supply. At present due to supply exceeding the demand, students now themselves 
are the Regulators. As many seats in various institutions are lying vacant, as the students have as 
many options to choose the best institution as per their requirements and affordability. The pointed 
out that at present in market driven education scenario, the institutions are not in a position to 
charge donations, excessive fee etc. from the students for admission, however any institution sti ll 
if indulged in such practice, that will itself loose the students as many other options available to 
the students and will not be able to survive longer. As observed, a large number of private 
engineering colleges have applied for closure. 
203.  They further added that educational programme offering need to be synchronized with the 
needs of industry and the society, with active engagement of industry professionals/experts  in all 
the operational areas of institutions. Further regular re-evaluation of the curricula, pedagogy, 
assessment modules, student-learning etc. with the evolving needs of the economy is also 
necessary to stay relevant.   Students are also much needed to be encouraged to take up 
entrepreneurship by focusing  on developing entrepreneurial skills among them and by supporting 
them through funding or otherwise during ideation, planning and implementation phases. Various 
skill-oriented training modules/courses are also required to be provided to the students in 
collaboration with skill-based training providers to enhance the students’ employability. Further 
rreforms in regulatory framework are foremostly required to give a conducing, level-playing and 
enabling healthy environment to the institutions to deliver their best. 
204.  The representative further added that inspite of a significant contribution of the private 
sector in increasing the educational opportunities in India, they are not believed upon and rather 
separate stringent rules and regulations are imposed on private institutions and unwanted 
allegations of indulging in malpractices or commercialization of education are made against the 
private institutions. On the other hand, the government institutions enjoy a protected environment. 
Further, it is mentioned that the existing regulatory framework does not support the private 
participation in higher education sector. New bills/ regulatory measures are being worked upon to 
regulate the activities of private institutions in specific. To cite a few, restructuring of AICTE and 

UGC as well is ongoing to empower these bodies to regulate the private entities in specific apart 
from other regulatory measures. Similarly, UGC Regulations for private universities, 2014 are also 
framed/finalized though the Constitution does not permit the Union Government to regulate the 
universities, whether private or government. Equal opportunities to government and private 
institutions and equal applicability of rules and regulations in all respect is much needed to 
encourage the private participation in higher education so as to promote healthy competition and 
ultimately to increase the access and quality of education. It is reiterated that private institutions 
are rather compelled to provide high quality education and affordable education to attract more 
students for their survival. As far as commercialization is concerned, it is a matter of past, due to 
demand exceeding the supply. At present due to supply exceeding the demand, students now 
themselves are the Regulators. As many seats in various institutions are lying vacant, as the 
students have as many options to choose the best institution as per their requirements and 
affordability. We understand that in the present market driven education scenario, the institutions 
are not in a position to charge donations, excessive fee etc. from the students for admission, 
however any institution still if indulged in such practice, that will itself loose the students for as 
many other options available to the students and will not be able to survive longer. As observed, a 
large number of private engineering colleges have applied for closure. 
205. Private contribution in educational investments, not-for-profit, so far has been possible due 
to equal treatment with the private and government institutions; and in case separate/tougher 
regulations, norms etc. are enforced for the private universities, that will be sufficient enough to 
discourage the philanthropists and reduce the educational opportunities in the country.  On the 
steps the private education providers are taking to achieve quality in the higher education system 
in the country to make it globally competitive they submitted that a few steps being taken to 
improve quality and relevance of higher education system and make it globally competitive:  
฀ Skill-related training is embedded in the curricula to make the students ready for employability 
soon after their graduation like functional skills that are core to the profession/industry of the 
students’ course, critical thinking skills and problem solving skills to produce well rounded 
leaders and soft-skills such as written and verbal communication.  
฀ Industry-aligned courses are offered.  
฀ Content, pedagogy etc. are developed in a manner that support experiential, interactive, and 
student-centered learning and their regular re-evaluation with the evolving needs of the 
economy to stay relevant. 
฀  Faculty with industry experience is preferred.  
฀ Maximum industry engagement to synchronize the programmes offered with the requirements 
of industry such as in the governing bodies, in designing curricula, seminars/ conferences, 
industry tours, live industry projects, partnerships with industry for offering programmes, 
internships etc., sharing of research facilities etc.  
฀ Students are supported in monetary terms as well as supporting them in ideation, planning and 
implementation of start-ups/ventures. 
฀  Collaborations with the corporations are also made to make industry-relevant research.  
฀ Students and faculty are also sent to visit foreign institutions and industries to get global 
exposure.  

206.  They said that they did not agree with the view that traditional universities in the country, 
being over-burdened with imparting undergraduate and postgraduate education and managing the 
affiliation system, are not able to focus on research and innovation. They further added the existing 
system comprising of affiliating universities, on-campus universities and affiliating as well as on-
campus universities is going well. The universities engaged in teaching along with the research 
have internal pool of expertise to be deployed for research, innovation etc. for which otherwise 
they have to depend upon external sources. Moreover these are in better position to co-relate the 
research and innovation with teaching. 
207.  The Pro-Chancellor of Noida International University (NIU) submitted that  the higher education 
system in India should contain the qualitative approach towards the teaching methodology and mee ting the 
needs of the corporate sector and the nation. As of 2012 there are 152 central universities, 316 state 
universities 191 deemed universities, 33 universities that are of national i mportance and large number of 
private universities in India. The centers of higher education do not get adequate suppo rt from the higher 
education bodies in terms of grants, subsidies and other facilitates related to education, which automatically 
enhances the cost of higher education. To make the working viable, the private higher i nstitutes are bound 
to charge more as compared to those institutions which are getting grant and subsidy from central, state and 
any government local authority. Therefore the government should facilitate the good private higher 
institutions by different ways like providing scholarships, grants and educational equipm ent at the 
subsidized rates. Without the support of government authority, the private higher in stitutions will not be 
able to survive. 
208.   The further added that the higher education in India should focus on the curriculum and teaching 
methodology which should be industry based, cotemporary and indeed have a relevance today. This can 
only be possible when combination of corporate and academic experience based people come under one 
roof. We must synergize the combination of these two specialists. Add on to lectures should be discussions, 
brain storming, generating new thoughts and ideas and more importantantly, to  come out wi th something 
new, which is not written in books and beyond the beaten tracks. He pointed out that the lay great emphasis 
on infrastructural development, rather than creating an environment of academic excellence in the students. 
Teaching, apart from providing knowledge, must equip them to make them industry-r eady, providing 
knowledge as well as self-employment entrepreneur skills. The regular revision and updating of curriculum 
is an imperative. The curriculum should be contemporary, incorporating latest developm ents, making the 
students market/job oriented and also men and women capable of independent thinking, imbued with 
values, ethics and nationalism. The faculty engaged in higher education, should be more resear ch oriented, 
with focus on patenting, wherever possible.. This will help generating new ideas and innovation.  
209. The Pro-Chancellor further added theEstablishment of Private Universities has been a major 
milestone in the field of higher education in India. A number of private universi ties have been established 
in various States as also Central Government of India has granted Deemed Universit y status to a number of 
educational institutions. In this era of liberalization and global education, it is  to attract, encourage and 
promote the private sector investment in the realm of Higher Education and lay the legislative pathway to 
establish and incorporate private self-financing Universities in India. It i s the right time to develop and 
implement a progressive framework that provides for opportunities to deserving private institutions and 
educational promoters, with relevant and sufficient experience and exposure in the fiel d of higher 
education, so as to contribute towards the expansion of higher education and research. 

210.  He also pointed out that the three major regulatory bodies, that is AICTE, U GC and DEC should be 
more flexible and work as a facilitator and one cannot expect the private h igher educational institutions to 
fulfill the norms of applicable bodies without state backing. He submitted that they have to full fill the 
norms and on the other hand have Fee Regulatory Committee which monitors the fees charg ed by the 
higher institutions. The three bodies should consider the compulsions of Private higher inst itutions in terms 
of fund and should have flexible norms for them accordingly so that they instead of investing heavy cost on 
infrastructure, they can utilize the same on the quality of teaching so that they can produce excellent results. 
Though the RTI which came into effect fully on October 12, '05, mandates "access to information under the 
control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and accountability", all information given to  
UGC which is  a public authority is  available to the public.  
211.  He also submitted that students and parents can now demand from institute’s documentary 
evidence, such as certificates to prove their recognition by regulatory and accrediting bodies. Still 
lots of reforms are to be made by keeping unaided private higher education institutions, like time 
should be given to Higher Education Institutions (HEI) to establish themselves in terms of 
infrastructure, faculty and other facilities; the functioning institutions should be given adequate 
guidance to enhance the standards of education. The UGC, AICTE and DEC should conduct their 
seminars and workshops to collect, incorporate and disseminate the best practices of higher 
education. 
212.  The Pro-chancellor further added that the absence of good faculty has assumed epidemic and 
chronic proportion. The unfortunate incidents of fake degrees have only aggravated the problem. 
This problem is confounded by the law of demand and supply. Another dimension is of fake 
degrees and mark sheets. Different scales of marking and evaluation have made the task even more 
complex, Universities grade them high, but their students do not seem to agree.The faculties are, 
primarily, appointed on the basis of their qualifications (I.Q.) rather than their experience, quantum 
of research, their potential to be lifelong learners, patience, integrity etc. He submitted that if there  
are 50 faculties in an institution and if every faculty publishes four research paper in a year, this 
adds to 200 research papers in a year from one HEI. This not only increases the knowledge bank 
but has a snow balling impact. He also added that the serious private educators are keeping their 
benchmark very high to compete globally. They have built excellent infrastructure, motivating the 
faculties to be research oriented, rewarding and recognizing their original and sincere work, 
undertaking academic collaborations with Industry and HEIs outside India for student/faculty and 
exchange program, encouraging their faculties to attend conferences, seminars and Management  
development  programmes (MDPs ) program of various levels for executives in the Industry. The 
HEIs are also doing Faculty development   programmes (FDPs) for their faculty, regularly . Clubs 
like Management, IT, Sports, Quiz,etc  are initiated where the students participate regularly, to 
channelize their energy and harness their talent. 
213.  The representative of NBA submitted that India had a complex multi-tiered, multi-layered 
system, from internationally renowned IIT and equivalent systems to colleges focussing on UG 
education. It was a large part of relatively recent vintage where some were definitely sufferin g 
from resource crunch, leading to infrastructure issues, but improving. They submitted that faculty 

numbers and quality improving remain an area of concern. On the NBA’s Accreditation Policy 
they submitted that NBA was following general policies and the guiding principles for the 
accreditation of programs were : 
    (i) Programs, and not Educational Institutions, are considered for accreditation. 
(ii) Programs from which at least two batches of students have graduated are 
considered for accreditation. 
(iii)  PG Programs: Corresponding UG program must first receive accreditation. 
(iv) Major Changes is Introduction of outcome based accreditation, rather than inputs 
based. 
214.   They further added that following steps were required to improve the quality of education:- 
(a) evolving changed methodology 
(b) Rewriting all the documents to conform to the new system 
(c) Training institutions to reposition their internal processes to effect self-evaluation on the 
new system 
(d) Training and mentoring evaluators who would form the evaluation teams, and important 
committees of NBA. 
(e) Introduction of Two-Tier System based on Types of Institutions. 
(f)  Ranking Autonomous Institutions: applicable to the engineering/technology programs 
offered by academically autonomous institutions and by university departments and 
constituent colleges of the universities. 
(g) Ranking Affiliated Institutions: (also non-autonomous institutions): colleges and 
technical institutions which are affiliated to a university.  
(h) Similar set of criteria to be prescribed for accreditation for above  both institutions , with 
some differences in emphasis and approach. 
236.   They also informed about the quality initiatives taken by NBA:- 
(a) Development of e-NBA portal. 
(b) Constant re-alignment of its accreditation processes with international practices. 
(c) Development of Training Material and Training eco-systems both for evaluators and for 
mentoring institutions. 
(d) Development of a strong system for empanelment of volunteers with sound professional 
background and in-depth knowledge of accreditation systems. 
  The Major Challenges in front of NBA were also given:- 
(a) Build a large pool of volunteers to act as:  
 (1) Evaluators,  
 (2) Visit team Chairs, 
 (3) Mentors to academic institutions. 
215.  The representative of SRM submitted that to make education more relevant Curriculum of 
any program should be application oriented and the application shall be appropriate to Indian 
requirements and ethos. He gave the following suggestions to tackle the issues and challenges in 
higher education: 

a) Industry-University partnership—student internship, faculty sabbatical –some in industries 
in responsible assignments 
b) Faculty autonomy/freedom; faculty development program —teaching/learning 
enhancement—use of master teachers 
c) Research support/expectation of high levels of research; tenure system —faculty to be 
made permanent after a substantial period like 7-10 years 
d) Research must be encouraged at all levels —Research Experience for Undergraduates 
(REU) should be encouraged in addition to graduate and doctoral levels 
e) Qualitative improvement of doctoral programs 
f) There shall be single portal which will contain all the updated basic information about the 
institutes of higher education including the fee structure of different programs offered by 
them, procedure for admission etc. Existing information available with UGC/MHRD 
websites are not current. 
g) Access can be ensured by extending credits at soft terms to students. In doing this, the 
decision is taken by the students and parents considering the needs and interests of the 
students. Institutions compete for their attention via excellence in teaching/learning, 
research and career prospects. Marketplace (or reputation of an institution becomes the 
guiding criterion—competition ensues among the institutions to become the best in class) 
Independent accreditation and Autonomy of educational institutions 
h) Make in India” will only happen if we can educate our children with the right skills for the 
21st century; this will determine if w e end up with “demographic dividend” or 
“demographic disaster”. 
216. They further added that industry’s opinion that only 60% of graduates are employable is 
questionable. Educational institutes cannot churn out graduates to suit the needs of every type of 
industry. Industry should also take up the responsibility of training the graduates to suit its needs. 
The following are the measures to be taken to increase the employability: 
a) Curriculum reengineering—rigor versus relevance —role of group project work, hands-on 
experience. Obsolete courses shall be removed and in their place contemporary ones to be 
added. Case studies / project shall be mandatory as well as seriously implemented. 
b) Courses and programs have to be relevant via close Industry-University collaboration. 
Visiting faculty from industry to be engaged to frame and conduct a few courses. 
c) Faculty to be sent to industry to understand its dynamics. Faculty sabbatical in Industry. 
d) Existing mechanisms to be revamped drastically. Considering the importance of enlarging 
the enrolment ratio, private players to be encouraged to set up institutions without much 
hindrance. They should be asked to publish the details of the institutes in public domain 
through an affidavit and in a competitive environment only the fittest can survive. 

e) As for the students are concerned, in this era of information explosion, they can make 
suitable choices on their own. Banks should advance soft loans to set up infrastructure. 
Higher enrolment is not usually matched by corresponding increase in quality faculty. 
Only way out of this is to train and re-engineer the available faculty by systematic training 
programs. State-wise, region-wise training centres shall be set up and faculty from 
renowned institutes shall be used as resource persons on rotation basis. Use of MOOCs 
may be encouraged and faculty training abroad may be introduced. 
f) Transparency in decision-making and infrastructure requirements must be clearly stated in 
website and meeting this should result in automatic approval 
g) Mandatory for higher educational institutions to obtain independent autonomous body 
accreditation within five years failing which approval must be withheld until remediation 
completed. 
h) MHRD should stay at arm’s length and institutions should be free to experi ment with 
education. Marketplace and accreditation will determine their success or failure. 
 
217. The Committee during its study visit to Goa and Pune interacted with the Vice Chancellors 
of Goa University and Savitri Bhai Phule University, Directors of IISER, Pune, NIT, Goa and 
College of Engineering, Pune and also the representatives of UGC and AICTE. 
 
218. The representatives of IISER, Pune pointed out that at present UG education lacks both 
breadth and depth without any research component.  UG education with research component is 
implemented in the newly established IISERs and other elite institutions such as IISc.  However, 
its implementation in mass scale in science and engineering colleges is difficult at this moment.  
The main issue with UG science education is the lack of quality teachers in colleges who can 
excite students not only in science, but also help them in preparing for a word beyond academics.  
There is a need to bridge the gap between theory and experiments in science and to link teaching 
closely with broad evaluations of students’ abilities rather than their scores in exams.  After 2 
years of UG education, students should be counseled about their aspirations in science to Identify 
and promote a small number of highly motivated students aware of science based social sectors to 
direct their interests and necessary skill development.  He further, added that UG science 
education curricula should be redesigned to broaden the development of science based societal 
skills, at the same time mentoring highly talented ones to take up career in research. 
 
219 . They also pointed out that for India to be an economic power, we need to become 
science-focused rising powers as Korea, Taiwan, Mexico, Brazil and China.  These countries have 

invested heavily in science education and research amounting to 1.5%-3.0% of their GDP.  For 
every  one academic scientist, they have anywhere between 5 to 10 industrial contribution, India 
has to not only increase governmental contribution, but also make schemes attractive to entice 
industry contribution (from the  present 0.9%) to science.  Some of the important features to 
become world-class institutions are Outstanding faculty recruited based only on merit and 
competitiveness, promoting a strong postdoctoral culture and attracting international fellows, 
fundamental research and scholarship should coexist in mutual respect with applied and industry-
relevant research, secured, regular flow of funds and continuous  top-up for new initiatives, 
Endowments and creation of chairs to attract distinguished  and eminent  scientists, 
Internationalization of faculty and students, Increasing  the opportunities for International 
conferences-organizing and participation and Establishing inter institutional consortia to attract 
national and international funding.  Unfortunately, even the best of our research institutions hardly 
meet even half of the above criteria.  
 
220. The representatives further added that research as a part of UG and PG courses are being 
effectively practiced only in the newly set up institutes such as IISERs, NISER, IISc and a few 
IITs.  The quality of students graduating from these institutes is almost at par with international 
levels. Most universities seriously lack research infrastructure even for PhD program, let alone for 
UG and PG programs.  Further, the quality and quantity of faculty passionate about research is 
very low in most universities, leading to lack of an eco system.  In such a situation, universities 
should be organically connected with national laboratories (CSIR, ICMR, DAE etc) that can 
provide research infrastructure to train UG/PG students to some extent. 
 
221. He further informed that India has a paradoxical situation and pointed out that we have a 
number of doctoral students (>8000/year), but have a large number of unemployment of doctoral 
students.  At the same time, more than 10,000 faculty positions are not filled up because of non-
availability of right candidates, in addition to several administrative blockades.  Attracting 
motivated teachers needs a good, healthy academic ambience, which in turn needs good 
institutional management and governing systems.  While some of the private educational institutes 
are rapidly emerging good in this area, most government institutions are lagging behind due to 
outdated and highly bureaucratic recruiting systems and poor leadership. 

222. He further added unless the teachers are given a good status, comfortable salary, 
professional amenities and security, the profession will not attract the best.  Not only, we need to 
address the basic necessities of profession, but also keep updating the teachers with new 
knowledge through well defined systems Faculty training in a systematic manner is neglected in 
Indian education system.  Somehow, teaching has become the last resort for those who cannot get 
any other job, it is such an important profession in society (perhaps most important), we need to 
redefine our education program to encourage quality teachers.  
223. They further informed that the points system introduced is a disaster and quantification of 
performance through numbers (foreign publications, international conferences etc) should be 
disbanded.  The performance appointments should be done through competent committees that are 
unbiased.  They further submitted that research not becoming the first choice of meritorious 
students. The number of scholarships offered by CSIR/UGC is decreasing in numbers and many 
students in universities do not get sufficient money under scholarships.  The schemes for award of 
scholarships needs overhaul, to make sure that interested students get scholarships. All funds 
available with different agencies should be pooled so that there is a one-point scheme for 
scholarships with same rules and regulations for amount of award and monitoring progress etc. 
224. They informed that the industry-academy interactions are very poor in India. Industry 
should take the first step of interfacing with academia, since they are the main beneficiaries of our 
academic system.  Right from supporting faculty with exposure to industry requirements and to 
fund them to cover inadequate government support to taking part in appropriate course design and 
execution are important.  If academia is not exposed to industry challenges, there is no way they  
can train students for effective use of industry.  
225. They further added that the syllabus and teaching methods in UG and PG courses in most 
universities are highly teacher centered and exam-oriented.  They are not learner centered and  
concept driven.  The information is passed on from teachers to students, with neither of them 
understanding the value of the same and unable to convert into knowledge.  We need   “inquiry 
based learning” , teaching through asking questions, which alone will help in stu dents 
understanding concepts and learn how to solve problems.  The teachers should get constant 
training in new forms of teaching to train students in 21st century skills. 
 
226. On the issue of accreditation, the representatives submitted that rules  have become more of 
procedures than the real intention of quality control/evaluation.  Same set of rules are applied to 

different institutions, without consideration of the original objectives and aims of their 
establishment and too many organizations unprofessionally managing the process of regulation 
and accreditation.  Many of the members of these bodies are also heads of institutions, who 
themselves may not have the standards (at their institutes) that they evaluate in other institutes.  
This leads to conflict of interest and erosion of credibility of the process.  The members of such 
committees should be drawn from institutes that have high standards. 
 
227. The representatives further pointed out that significant number of bright students 
originating from rural areas have serious economic problems in affording tuition fees and hostel 
expenses. As such, fees amounts are ridiculously low in government institutes and coupled with 
insufficient and irregular flow of funds from government, quality infrastructure cannot be provided 
in these institutions.  Topping that fee waivers to economically and socially weaker students means 
that more than half of students in many institutes do not pay anything at all.  This issue should be 
linked to CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) policy of the government.  Instead of making 
institutes deficient in funds due to genuine reasons of economic hardship of students, incentives 
are given to promote industry situated locally to absorb such costs, so that institutions are not 
devoid of funds.  The fee structure needs to be revised to enhance the same for affordable sec tion, 
while those who cannot afford should be taken care by CSR.  There should not be a ‘Waiver’ 
which leads to lower fee revenues to already income deficient institutes. 
 
228. They further added that the IITs, IIMs and recently IISERs are reaching world class levels 
because of two factors higher  per student capita investment that has lead to better facilities and 
high quality  faculty and autonomy of governance  and self regulation.   
229. The VC of Savitribai Phule Pune University submitted that following are a few major 
issues before higher education sector in India: 
- Unified Control of Higher Education:   There is multiplicity of Statutory Authorities 
controlling various aspects of Higher Education System in India.  This structure has led the 
education system to rigid compartments  isolated from each other.   The focus on inter-
disciplinary work and trans-disciplinary  work in higher education and research, it would be 
appropriate to have a single apex body controlling the Higher Education Sector in India. 
- Internationalization of Higher Education: It is essential to develop a policy framework 
that encourages and incentivises interactions/collaborations with leading foreign institutions.  

Select higher education institutions in the country may please be allowed to institute joint 
degrees with foreign collaborators.  The legal framework may please be suitably modified in 
this discretion.  Faculty and students mobility needs to be encouraged and a reasonable level 
of foreign hospitability may please be kept out of the provisions of Foreign Contribution 
Regulation Act (FCRA). 
- Enhancement of Access: e-Content Development: Aspiration of the students to pursue 
quality higher education have led to concentration in urban areas and lower enrolments in 
rural institutions.  Universities need to evolve framework to support rural institutions by 
developing e-contents, which could be shared with all.  Open online courses may please be 
incentivised.  Select universities  could be allowed to institute programs in blended mode 
(partially on campus and partially distance  mode) without any additional approvals.  Such 
an arrangement  shall facilitate access for rural students  to quality faculty.  
- Examination reforms: Increasing burden of affiliation system can be relieved to some 
extent by carrying out thorough reforms in the examination system of the universities.  The 
Government may consider  supporting the higher education institutions in the country for 
carrying out examination reforms using ICT.  Some significant steps taken by our 
university in this direction can guide development of such a system. 
- Skill-Development Initiatives: Universities clearly need to underline the 
employment/career prospects of each of the programs  in their portfolio.  Every curriculum 
needs to be supplemented by skill-development components.  Employability audit  of all 
the students need to be carried out to identify gaps for policy inputs. 
- Enhancement of Quality of Research: Quality and impact of research work in India 
has always been a matter of concern.  In my opinion, the issue needs a long-term phase-
wise planned effort to improve the research quality.  It essentially begins with creation of 
research culture amongst the universities and development of necessary research 
infrastructure.  The Government has a major role to play in this area.  Sometimes, rigidity 
of the rules/norms to be a hurdle while attracting researchers of eminence to the 
institutions, for example, recruitment of foreign faculty, flexibility of pay scales etc. 

- Vacancy Faculty Positions: Substantial number of teaching positions are vacant across 
higher education institutions either for want of quality applicants or for permission from 
appropriate authorities to fill the positions.  Considering that, recruitment of quality teachers 
is a challenge; a leniency of policy in this regard will be highly appreciated. 
- Uniformity in service conditions for teachers in central and state universities: It is 
essential to have uniform service conditions including pay and other service related 
conditions.  This would prevent talent-drain from state universities to central or private 
universities. 
- Downsizing of affiliating universities: Most leading universities have very high number of 
affiliated colleges leading  to burdening the entire affiliation system.  This issue has been 
pointed out by many studies and policy documents in this regard.  One of the effective ways 
to resolve the issue is to create and strengthen sub-campuses of these universities at district 
level to eventually evolve them as full-fledged universities.  The kind consideration of the 
Committee is earnestly requested in this regard. 
- Meaningful autonomy of state universities: The state universities though believed to be 
autonomous in their functioning are actually bound by a deep nesting of rules and 
regulations by the apex bodies  and state governments.  Thus, the universities cannot institute 
degrees programs of specialized nature or award degrees other than those specified.  Further, 
specialized efforts for retention of exceptional talent are challenging within the framework of 
rules.  These issues coupled with several circumstantial approvals constrain the autonomy.  It 
is requested to ease out framework of regulations, at least for select performing universities. 
230. The representatives of AICTE submitted before the Committee that the research in the 
required fields of study in Technical Education is affected because of shortage of funding from the 
Ministry.  During the last 2-3 years there is gradual decline in the funding under the Plan Grants 
from the Ministry which is affecting the research project in technical education.  To encourage 
research at under graduate level, AICTE suppor ts funding for “Research Park Scheme” which are 
established at the institutes jointly through the initiative of AICTE and Industry who share 50% of 
funds requirement for innovation centre. The National programme on technology untenable 
over 600 courses on video and are available on the Portal free of cost for institutions imparting 

technical education.  In addition to NPTEL video courses a few new courses are now available in 
selected institutions (i.e IIT Mumbai, IIT Kanpur, IIT Madras etc) on Massive on Online Open 
Courses (MOOCs) platform through which a student can earn credit for the respective courses.  
AICTE has also taken a policy decision to support up to 20%  credit earning in a semester through 
MOOCs.  AICTE has been entrusted with the task of developing SWAYAM MOOCs Portal.   
 
231. The Council  of AICTE has recently approved a new scheme called (Trainee Teache r 
Scheme) for identification  of bright students at graduate level (B-Tech Level) who would be given 
admission to Post-Graduate Programme and their stipend will be paid by AICTE against minimum 
teaching assignment during PG Education.  On completion of PG they will be absorbed as faculty 
members for regular teaching. 
 
232. He further added that Accreditation should have a central role in the regulatory 
arrangements for higher education.  It would be mandatory with clear incentives and 
consequences.  In order to handle large volume accreditation, there is a strong case for Capacit y 
creation in the existing bodies i.e. NAAC (for institutional accreditation) and NBA (for 
programme accreditation mainly technical education.  Each of these accreditation agencies  should 
be professionally strong, independent and capable of using a combination of self-assessment and 
external reviews to accredit institutions.  The present status of barely 5% of the Engineering 
institutions, with their courses being accredited by NBA, presents a grim scenario speaks of the 
quality of technical education offered by our technical institutions and a lot needs to be done in 
this context. 
 
233. The Council is providing grant- in-aids to AICTE approved Technical Institutes to maintain 
quality of education.  Further, in order to maintain he uniformity in the syllabus and keeping in 
view  the requirement of  the industry and to enhance  the employability of graduate, AICTE also 
develops the model curriculum of engineering, management, pharmacy, architecture and  town 
planning  courses at degree level and engineering courses at diploma level.  As per the provision 
under AICTE Act no Institution can offer any technical programme without seeking prior approval 
of AICTE.  A number of Govt./Private  Institutions are offering specialized short duration 
programmes for passed out students like courses in Computer  Programme, Entrepreneurship, 
CAD/CAM, Cyber Security, embedded system etc. Such short duration courses are not under the 
ambit of AICTE. 
[ 

234. The representatives of UGC submitted that the Commission had taken following initiatives 
for Equity & Inclusion .  In accordance with the national policy, the Commission has taken 
measures to ensure that access to higher education in India percolates society thereby facilitating 
the entry of the underprivileged in the mainstream of civic-public life through education.  A few of 
the schemes and regulations launched by UGC which address the principle of equity and inclusion 
are as under: 
 UGC (Promotion of Equity in Higher Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2012 
 Scheme of Women's Hostel 
 Post Doctoral Fellowship of SC/ST 
 PG Scholarship for Professional Courses for SC/ST 
 Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SC 
 Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for ST 
 Maulana Azad National fellowship for Minority Community 
 Indira Gandhi Single Girl Child Scholarship 
 
235. In order to encourage research and development in the country, UGC has laid out a number 
of schemes, awards, fellowships, assistance is provided to institutions of higher education as well 
as faculty members working therein to undertake quality research in almost all areas of knowledge 
across disciplines including revival and promotion of indigenous languages.  The following 
schemes have been initiated:- 
- Universities with Potential for Excellence:   This scheme has continued since IX Plan 
wherein financial assistance is provided to eligible institutions to the tunr of Rs. 60.00 
crores which is increased to Rs. 100 crores after 5 or 10 years.  The grant under the 
schemes is to be utilized partly (50%) on holistic development of the university. 
- Centre with potential for excellence in particular areas: (CPEPA) - UGC introduced the 
scheme of Centre with Potential for Excellence in Particular Area (CPEPA) during IX 
Plan period, which has been continued upto XII Plan period for development of 
academic/research infrastructure to improve the programmes and activities in a chosen 
discipline at the selected university.  The CPEPA Scheme focuses on supporting the 
development of inter-and/or multi-disciplinary areas and specific research projects in these 
areas at the selected Centres.  Under the scheme financial assistance is given as under. 
 Rs. 10.00 Crores for Science/Technology areas; and 
 Rs. 8.00 Crores for Social Sciences/Humanities areas; 
- Special Assistance Programme (SAP): Special Assistance Programme is intended to 
encourage the pursuit of excellence and teamwork in advanced teaching and research as 
well as to accelerate the realization of international standards in specific fields.  The major 
objectives of the SAP are to identify and support university departments that have the 
potential to undertake quality teaching and research in various educational disciplines 
including allied disciplines.  The programme caters to the society needs by facilitating 
interaction and collaboration among universities, industry and eminent research 
organizations.  Further the financial assistance provided under the scheme helps build up 

research infrastructure and human resources. 
- Research Projects:  UGC provides financial assistance to teachers teaching in universities 
and colleges to promote excellence in teaching and research.  Research project may  be 
undertaken by an individual teacher or a group of teachers. 
- Basic Science Research : With a view to providing an opportunity for continuance of 
research contributions in Basic Science Research by talented Science and technology 
scholars/teachres.  The objective of the programme has to give a big boost to scientific 
research.  The scheme provides for: 
 Improvement of Infrastructure in Universities (544 Depts. (SAP) 500 (non-SAP 
Dept.) 
 Support to Colleges (Up gradation of Science Laboratories in Colleges) (617 
Colleges aided so far) 
 Doctoral Fellowship (6860 in last five years) 
 Post Doctoral Fellowships (1242 awarded) 
 Developing Networking Centres (10 Centres) 
 Faculty Recharge Programme (163 awards) 
 
236. The requirements of funds are based on the demand received from different 
Sections/Bureaus in different schemes.  It has also been noticed that the funds received from 
Ministry of HRD are less than the demand raised by the UGC.  There has been more than 100% 
utilization of the by UGC as allocated by the Ministry of HRD, based on actual expenditure. 
 
237. The representatives further added that one of the most evident indices of this growth and 
expansion is the tremendous increase in to number of Universities/University level institutions and 
Colleges over a span of six decades.  While the number of universities has gone up to 727 (about 
34 times) from meagre 20 during this period, the number of colleges has also registered massive 
increase from just 500 in 1950 to as many as 10724 now.  Given below are the details of the 
universities: 
 Central Universities - 46 
 State Universities - 351 
 State Private Universities - 246 
 Institutions Deemed to be Universities - 122 
 
In addition to these institutions, the Government of India has established 51 Institutions of 
National Importance under Act of Parliament for providing globally-competitive, quality education 
while 04 such institutions, have been established under various state legislations. 
 
238. He further submitted that some of the parameters of assessment employed by world 
ranking agencies do not fit in Indian context and as a result Indian Universities loose out 
weightings in terms of International students, international faculty, inbound and outbound 
exchanges etc. given its size and population and the socio-economic and geographical diversities, 
Indian universities countries.  Further, the National Institutional Ranking launched by Honourable 
Minister of HRD on 29 th September, 2015.  This framework outlines a methodology to rank 
institutions across the country.  The parameters broadly cover "Teaching, Learning and Resource," 
"Research and Professional Practices," "Graduation Outcomes," Outreach and Inclusivity," and 
"Perception". Ranking methods have been worked out for Universities and Colleges. 
 

239. The Commission has been constantly striving to develop a system of higher education of 
quality appropriate to the national needs and aspirations and in tune with global trends.  In order to 
encourage research and development in the country, UGC has laid out a number of schemes, 
awards, fellowships, chairs and programmes under which financial assistance is provided to 
institutions of higher education as well as faculty members working therein to undertake quality 
research in almost all areas of knowledge across disciplines including revival and promotion of 
indigenous languages. The maximum limit of financial assistance for a period of five years at 
different levels of the programme will be as under: 
Programme/Status Financial Assistance (Rs. In lakh) 
        Science, Engineering and Technology Maths, Statistics, Humanities & Social 
Science 
CAS 300 200 
DSA 200 150 
DRS 150 120 
 
240. He further added that the introduction of CBCS is the part of the numerous measures taken 
by UGC to enhance academic standards and quality in higher education through innovation and 
improvements in curriculum, teaching-learning process, examination and evaluation systems. The 
introduction of CBCS will help resolve various difficulties faced by the students due to the 
diversity of evaluation system followed by different universities in India.  Further, CBCS would 
ensure seamless mobility of students across the higher education institutions in the country as well 
as abroad where such system is a norm.  
 
241. Further, Ministry of HRD had convened a meeting of the State Education 
Ministers/Principal Secretaries (Education) on 6 th January, 2015 at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi.  
The meeting, chaired by the Hon'ble Union Minister for HRD, deliberated on the two critical areas 
of reforms pertaining to introduction of Choice-based Credit System (CBCS) and adoption of 
credit Framework for Skill Development (CFSD) at the earliest.  During the meeting, a consensus 
emerged on the implementation of CBCS across the universities and colleges from the coming 
academic session i.e. 2015-16, as it will not only provide wider options to students but also ensure 
their seamless mobility across the institutions. 
 
242. Under, CBCS, universities are requested to shift from numerical marking system, which is 
followed presently in universities, to grading system of evaluation.  The grading system is 
considered to better than the conventional marks system and hence it has been followed in the top 
institutions in India and abroad.  So it is desirable to introduce uniform grading system.  This will 
facilitate student mobility across institutions within and across countries and also enable potential 
employers to assess the performance of students.  To bring in the desired uniformity, in grading 
system and method for computing the cumulative grade point average (CGPA) based on the 
performance of students in the examinations, the UGC has formulated detailed guidelines.   
 
243. Further, under CBCS HEIs will move from the conventional annual system to semester 
system.  The semester system accelerates the teaching-learning process and enables vertical and 
horizontal mobility in learning.  The credit based semester system provides flexibility in designing 
curriculum and assigning credits based on the course content and hours of teaching.  The choice 
based credit system provides a 'cafeteria' type approach in which the students can take course s of 
their choice, lean at their own pace, undergo additional courses and acquire more than the required 
credits, and adopt an interdisciplinary approach to learning. 
 

244. On the faculty position the representatives of UGC submitted that the total number of 
sanctioned teaching posts in various Central Universities under the purview of UGC is 16699 
(2383) Professor, 4731 Associate Professor, 9585) Assistant Professor).  Out of the total 
sanctioned teaching posts of 16699, 5925 teaching posts are lying vacant (2183 Associate 
Professor, 2459 Assistant Professor).  Central Universities are adopting different methods/process 
to address faculty shortages in order to ensure that studies of students are not affected, which inter-
alia, include hiring ad-hoc faculty, Guest Faculty, Contract Faculty and Re-employed. 
While approving the Budget Estimate (Non-Plan) and Revised Budget Estimate (Non-Plan), from 
the year 2010-11 onwards twice in a year, all the Central Universities have been requested by the  
UGC to fill up the teaching positions at the earliest. 
 
245. Further, in order to meet the situation arising out of shortage of teachers in universities and 
other teaching institutions and the consequent vacant positions therein, the age of superannuation 
for teachers in Central Educational Institution has already been enhanced to sixty five years; Vide  
Department of Higher Education letter No. F.1-19/2006-U.II dated 23.3.2007.  Chairman, UGC 
requested to all Vice Chancellors of Central Universities, State Universities and Deemed to be 
Universities vide his letter dated 12.11.2014 to make a serious effort to ensure that all vacant 
positions are filled by the University before the start of the next academic session.  Further, UGC 
initiated a scheme called Operation Faculty Recharge for augmenting the research and teachin g 
resources of universities to tackle the shortage of faculty in university system. 
 
246. UGC also framed the guidelines for empanelment of Adjunct Faculty in Universities and 
Colleges.  These guidelines enable higher educational institutions to access the eminent teachers 
and researchers who have completed their formal association with the University/College, to 
participate in teaching, to collaborate and to stimulate research activities for quality research at M. 
Phil and Ph. D levels; and to play mentoring and inspirational role.  As per these guidelines 
Adjunct faculty will be provided travel cost, as per entitlement, from his/her institution/place of 
stay and back, maximum six times per academic year.  No reimbursement for hiring 
accommodation will be permissible.  However, she/he will be provided free lodging and boarding 
in the guest House.  Beside above, an honorarium of Rs. 1000/- per lecture to a maximum of Rs. 
4000/- per day of service subject to a maximum ceiling of Rs. 80,000/-.  The Adjunct Faculty will 
work at the host institution for a minimum of 02 days per visit. 
 
247. The National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology 
(NMEICT) is envisaged as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme to leverage the potential of ICT, in 
teaching and learning process for the benefit of all the learners in Higher Education Institutions at 
any time any where mode.  Its motte being "to provide connectivity up to the last mile", the 
NMEICT aims to extend computer infrastructure and connectivity to over 32000 colleges existing 
at present and each of the departments of over existing 550 universities/deemed universities and 
institutions of national importance in the country.  NMEICT seeks to bridge the digital divide, i.e., 
the gap in the skills to use computing devices for the purpose of teaching and learning among 
urban and rural teachers/learners in higher education domain and empower those, who have 
hitherto remained untouched by the digital revolution and have not been able to join the 
mainstream of the knowledge economy.  This will enable them to make best use of ICT framework 
for teaching and learning.   
 
248. The MHRD has decided to launch the Massive Open Online Courses ((MOOCs) on the 
platform named as SWAYAM (Study Web of Active Learning by Young and Aspiring Minds).  

University Grants Commission is the National MOOCs Coordinator for the Non-Technology PG 
Courses.  UGC has notified the Credit Framework for Online Learning Courses through 
SWAYAM Regulation, 2016 in the Gazette of India on 19 th July, 2016 wherein credit transfer for 
online courses under SWAYAM platform of Government of India has been defined.   
 
249. Further, the UGC has also written a letter to all Vice Chancellors of Indian Universities t o 
peruse the list of MOOCs Courses and UGC Regulations and take appropriate action for 
introduction of MOOCs courses through SWAYAM platform of Government of India for the 
benefit of the students of the University and affiliated Colleges after approval of the various 
academic bodies of the concerned Universities. 
In addition to the above mentioned efforts aiming of making academics an attractive career 
proposition for talent youth, UGC has launched guidelines for establishing University-Industry 
Inter-Linkage Centres in Universities.  The objectives of the scheme are to identify the expertise 
available in the university which can be of use for the industries in the locality/region by way of 
consultancy services, evaluation of R&D activities of the industries, etc. It would also help in the 
following:- 
(a) Take the help of the expertise of the industries to improve/ redesign the curriculum 
periodically in tune with the requirements of the industries; 
(b) Help create skilled manpower for industry requirements at various levels; 
(c) Conduct Management Development Programmes Entrepreneurship Development 
Programme etc. 
(d) Initiate schemes for student/teacher training joint research; 
(e) Undertake R&D in the areas related to skill education and development, entrepreneurship, 
employability, labour market trends, etc. at the postgraduate and research levels; 
(f) Maintain 'Labour Market Information' for the region in coordination with government 
agencies and industry associations; 
(g) Help set up Science and Technology Entrepreneurs Parks (STEPs), Technology Business 
Incubators (TBI) etc. 
(h) Work for coordination between the University and industry/industries in the 
neighbourhood to make the Centre a Centre of Excellence for skill development in 
specified areas; and 
(i) Conduct all other activities as are incidental or conducive to the functioning of the Centre. 
 
250. The University Grants Commission is implementing three schemes namely; community 
College, B. Voc degree programme and Deen Dayal Upadhyay Kaushal Kendras for imparting 
skill based vocational courses at certificate, diploma, advanced diploma degree and masters as well 
as research level. The UGC has framed the guidelines for curricular aspects, assessment criteria 
and credit system for skill based vocational system through which road to understanding is paved 
with the clearly prescribed assessment criteria and requirements of skills competency for specific 
certificate, diploma or degree level programmes. 
 
251. It is further added that the skill component of the programmes will be assessed by the 
concerned sector skills council and the same will be certified for being qualified if found fit 
towards skills abilities this will lead to requisite skill credits. The general education component is 
being assessed as per the university/collegiate education norms.  The courses offered under UGC 
schemes of Community Colleges/B. Voc degree programme/DDU KAUSHAL Kendras have 
provision for multiple entry and exit options.  The students who have certificate/diploma/advanced 

diploma etc awarded by a recognized university/board corresponding to skill competency of NSQF 
level 4/5/ or 6have the option for lateral entry to these programmes to next highest level as pe r 
national Skills Qualification Framework providing vertical mobility. 
 
252. The knowledge-skill mixed programmes of different durations under NSQF are available I 
n CC/B.Voc/KAUSHAL institutions depending on the need of industry leading to a certification at 
various levels of NSQF (4-10) starting from certificate to research degree level.  This would 
enable the graduates completing B. Voc to make a meaningful participation in accelerating India's 
economy by gaining appropriate employment, becoming entrepreneurs and creating appropriate 
knowledge.  The private/self financing institutions recognized by UGC can also run such 
programmes without financial support from UGC. 
 
 
 
253. The UGC supports operation faculty recharge through strengthening high quality research 
in science related disciplines and promote innovative teaching in the universities through induction 
of fresh talent at the level of Professors, Associate Professors, and Assistant Professors.  Many 
universities require the support of professionals and experts beyond those available to the 
university in its regular faculty especially in strengthening high quality research in scien ce related 
disciplines at internationally competitive level and in promoting innovating teaching in 
universities.  Besides, it has provided positions of Adjunct Faculty and Scholars- in-Residence to 
enrich the teaching and research programmes of the university system at M. Phil and Ph. D levels. 
 
254. The representatives of UGC further informed that the Union Cabinet has approved a new 
program titled Global Initiative Academic Networks (GIAN) in Higher Education aimed at tapping 
the talent pool of scientists and entrepreneurs, internationally to encourage to their engagement 
with the institutes of Higher Education in India so as to augment the country's existing academic 
resources, accelerate the pace of quality reform and elevate India's scientific and technological 
capacity to global excellence.  The GIAN initiatives would help in the following:- 
i. To increase the footfalls of reputed international faculty in the India academic 
institutes. 
ii. Provide opportunity to our faculty and students to learn and share knowledge and 
teaching skills in cutting edge areas. 
iii. To create avenue for possible collaborative research. 
iv. To increase participation and presence of international students in the academic 
institutes. 
v. Opportunity for the students of different Institutes/Universities to interact and lean 
subjects in niche areas through collaborative learning process. 
vi. Provide oppoutunity for the technical persons from Indian Industries to improve 
understandings and update their knowledge in relevant areas. 
vii. Motivate the best international experts in the work to work on problems related to 
India. 
 
255. He further added that 26 Universities with 'A' Grade from NAAC and 10 National Law 
Universities were identified by UGC under the 'GIAN' Programme.  All the universities have 
identified the Local Institute Coordinator. A workshop was held on 28 th September, 2015 in the 
UGC office along with Director, IIT Kharagpur and Dr. A.K. Samantha to apprise the Local 
Institute Coordinators of the details of the scheme and the procedure to be followed for active 
participation in the GIAN portal and 34 Local Institute Coordinators attended the workshop; 
 

256. He further added that issues were raised in the workshop with regard to duration of the 
course, minimum number of participants for each course, payment to be made to the foreign 
experts (whether on lump sum basis or against receipts) and the method for selection of foreign 
experts; how to popularize the scheme amongst the scheme amongst foreign participants. 
 
257. UGC has also framed guidelines for the scheme of Joint Appointment for Exchange of 
Human Resource between universities and other Institutions/Organisation.  The objective of the 
scheme is to improve the academic environment in the university system by promoting 
collaboration and formal linkages with other universities, National Laboratories, Institutes of 
national importance and Industrial R&D Laboratories in all branches of knowledge through 
programme of teaching training and research and also to encourage non university institutions to 
benefit from the expertise in the university system.  The scheme aims to provide for and support 
joint appointments of human resources between universities and a university and other 
institutions/organisations and vice versa.  These guidelines have been approved by the 
Commission as well as the Ministry of HRD and have been circulated to all the universities for 
implementation.  These guidelines are also available on the UGC website.  A copy of the 
guidelines is enclosed. 
 
258. The establishment of Academic Staff Colleges is to serve as nodal centres in certain 
identified universities for the purpose to offer orientation and refresher courses for academic and 
professional development of the faculty of universities and colleges to newer concerns in 
educational thought and pedagogy besides advanced level programmes in university disciplines of 
teaching and research. 
The objective of the scheme is that the Tata Institute of Science and Economic Political Weekly 
would formulate a 10 days Modular Course for the Social Scientists to enable them to learn 
Research Methodology and also motivate them for Research Publications.  Eligibility Criteria - 
Each Modular Course may have approximately 50 participants and they may be programmed 4 
times in a year with 2 programmes at each of the Academic Staff College9s).  The 
invitees/participants may be Assistant Professor(s)/lecturer(s) from Undergraduate Colleges and 
Universities. UGC regulations, 2016 on pursuing M. Phil and Ph. D program mandate that the 
dissertations are to be submitted to INFLIBNET for uploading on the electronic depository 
Shodhganga maintained by them.  This system has contributed a lot in the democratization of 
research data and knowledge base across academic fraternity in India. 
259. The Government of India in the recent part has set up the number of central universities, 
IIYs, IIMs and NITs.  In addition, the Government has set up 5 IIERs, 3 SPAs, and 5 IIITs with a 
view to increasing Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) in Higher Education.  The Government has also 
increased the intake capacity of 27%  CEIs by 54% with a view to providing reservation to  OBCs.  
Also the Government has made constant efforts to utilize the residual capacity of existing 
institutions. 
As a result of expansion effort, the GER in Higher Education has reached up to 23.6% in the year 
2014-15 as compared to 23% in 2013-14 as per the AISHE provisional report for the year 2014-15. 
 
260. They further submitted that the main reasons for the shortage of faculty in Central 
Universities, inter-alia, includes: 
i. The expansion of the capacity of existing Centrally Funded Educational Institutions 
(CFETs) due to implementation of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in 
Admission) Act, 2006 

ii. The establishment of new CEFIs and their operation from temporary campuses. 
iii. The slow pace of development of permanent campus of the newly established CEFIs. 
iv. The lack of space in temporary campuses to expand academic activities. 
v. The remoteness of the new locations of some of the CFEIs. 
vi. Non-availability of suitable candidates. 
 
261. The UGC has sanctioned, for expansion and strengthening of teacher education in 19 
Central Universities, various teaching and non-teaching posts and during XII Plan an amount of 
Rs. 110.00 crore was also sanctioned and released to these Central Universities.  He further added 
that the quality of education is dependent on several factors including the quality of teachers, 
pedagogy employed, evaluation and appraisal of students, students learning, periodic up gradation 
of curriculum, thereby keeping it updated and academic and physical infrastructure like Librar y, 
Computer Centre, adequate Academic blocks etc. The quality of faculty requires continuous 
exposure and training of the faculty so that they are attuned to the latest knowledge available 
internationally and remain the part of best academic ecosystem. 
 
262. Cumulative Professional Development Allowance (CPDA) is provided to each faculty to 
the tune of Rs. 3.00 lakh during the period of three years.  The CPDA aims to provide opportunity 
for faculty to participate in international conferences, symposiums and workshops etc., to either 
present their research papers or to deliberate and discuss the research and subject matter.  The 
above funding equips the faculty with latest knowledge, acquisition and also disseminating 
research conducted by him/her. 
264. The Director, NIT, Goa submitted that there are several reports expressing concerns about 
the lack of quality teachers in the institutions of higher learning.  While established institutes could 
somehow manage with existing strength, the key challenge is to fill vacant positions in new IITs 
and NITs.    Among the new, IITs the vacancies were huge.  It was 56.67 per cent   in IIT-Jodhpur, 
21.11  per cent in Patna, 14.44 per cent  in Indore, 20 per cent in Hyderabad, and 10.18 per cent in 
Gandhinagar.  One of the major reasons for this problem might be delay in construction of 
adequate infrastructure in new institutes.  In addition to this, provisions should be made for faculty 
recruited in technical institutes with no  formal training, in education, to take up induction training  
courses designed and offered by institutions like UGC-Academic staff colleges.   This would help 
the new faculty, with only PhD in their respective disciplines, to equip themselves with additional 
skills and aptitude for teaching.   
265. There is also a strong need to motivate teachers based on their performance.  The major 
challenge could be to quantify the teaching and research accomplishments of faculty over a period 
of time.  But, there is a strong need to develop a good mechanism to identify and reward teachers 
based on their performance. The  Priority issues faced by NIT Goa  were that it was operating in 
transit campus near to GEC campus and the process of acquiring land is in progress. There was 
need for development of infrastructure facility to the students as well as faculties and staff at par 
with other NITs and IITs and Inadequate hostel facility to have campus environment. 
  
266. He further submitted the challenges faced by NIT Goa were attracting good students for the 
UG, PG and Research programme because of transit campus and other lack of facilities at NIT 
Goa. The percentage of students interested or continue higher education is less due to the financial 
constraints or better opportunity existing in the industry in terms of remuneration. He submitted 
that to have quality higher education one must have good campus facility to be recognize d 

globally. The support of state governments to have higher publicity towards higher education and 
promoting research projects to support & enhance tourism activity. He further added that problems 
related to society (local/national) should be addressed and need to be solved using engineering 
skills and given higher priority for funding and alternate to B.Tech degree, B.Tech Resea rch 
degree may be introduced to promote innovation at the graduate level. 
Observations/ Recommendations  
267. The Committee has been voicing its concern from time to time on the acute shortag e 
of faculty in higher educational institutions across the country. The Committee is anguishe d 
to find out that right from well established Central Universities to those set up recently, State 
universities as well as private universities, premier institutions like IITs, NITs and IIMs, this 
problem has emerged as the biggest handicap for the development and growth of Higher 
Education vis-a-vis maintaining the quality of education. Situation continues to be grim with  
no improvement foreseen in the near future. The Committee points out that the availability 
of adequate and qualified faculty is a pre-requisite for quality education. Th e Committee 
appreciates the steps taken by Department like increase in the retirement age up  to 65 years, 
improvement of salary structures. The Committee points out that there can be only two 
possibilities, either our young students are not attracted towards the teaching profession or 
the recruitment process is a prolonged one and involves too many procedural formali ties. In 
either case, the Departmentbeing the nodal authority for the entire country so far as higher 
education sector is concerned has to take proactive role so as to expedite the filling up a 
existing vacancies. 
268. The Committee recommends that recruitment process should start well in ad vance 
before the post is vacated so that after retirement the newly recruited person takes up 
position immediately. The Ministry should work in tandem with Institutions to have this 
exercise on yearly basis and recruitment must be done in advance so that shor tage does not 
develop into crisis. While appreciating the steps taken up by the Department for filli ng 
vacancies but recruitment of faulty is a continuous process,the Committee recommen ds that 
to make the teaching profession more attractive, the faculty should be encouraged to 
undertake consultancy and are given start-up financial support. 
269.  The Committee observes that all these Schemes are meant for providing an 
opportunity to students belonging to marginalized sections to get proper coaching so as to 
enable them to compete for higher studies and become eligible for teaching in higher 
educational institutions and for getting gainful employment in Central/States/ private sector 
services. The objective behind all these Schemes is very laudable. The Committe e can only 
emphasize that these schemes need to be administered in the real sense, with the b enefit 
reaching the targeted beneficiaries. The Committee would like to have a status note on all the 
schemes.  
270.  The Committee feels that a major concern is the lack of employable skills in our 
technical education students. We are looking at the country’s large youth population as an 

advantage point. But in order to leverage this demographic factor, we need to ensure that 
our youth are empowered with the right skills to meet the challenges of knowledge based 
market economy. The Committee observes that based on the identification of the skill gaps in 
different sectors, possible approaches, such as, setting up of finishing schools, offer ing 
courses for enhancing employability are proposed. Some strategies for increasing 
employability factor, which are either faculty-centric or student-centric are: Industr y 
Institute Student Training Support, Industrial Challenge Open Forum, Long Term Student 
Industry Placement Scheme, Industry-Institute Continuous Interaction Scheme-Indu stry, 
Industry-Institute Continuous Interaction Scheme-Faculty, Intensive Interaction-Train he 
Teachers, Industry Training Programme and Support Scheme, Centre for Quali fied 
manpower, National Employability Portal, tax Benefit for Teaching Laboratory Support. 
Some strategies for the Skills component with focus either on institution or students are: 
Skills Requirement Assessment Revitalizing the Diploma Education, Lateral Entry of ITIs to 
Diploma programme, Vocation based Certification Programme, Industrial Finishing 
Schools, Bridge Courses for Skill Enhancement, Special Manpower Developme nt 
Programme. The Committee’s concern is how all the above mentioned strategies/measure s 
are translated in action in a structural and result oriented manner. The Committee desires 
that the Department of Higher Education apprise the Committee of the progress made in 
this regard. 
271. The Committee is happy to note that a number of initiatives have been taken for 
integrating the differently-abled students towards mainstream higher education. These 
initiatives are indeed major steps for providing equal opportunities to such students. The 
Committee, however, feels that initiatives will have more impact if awareness about suc h 
facilities is there among the targeted students. Every conceivable effort has to be made to 
sensitize such students towards the kind of opportunities waiting for them. Details of all 
schemes for differently-abled students should be mandatorily displayed on the web sites of 
UGC, the regulatory bodies and also all the categories of universities and institutions. In 
addition, strict and constant monitoring at all level is also required so as to ensure that all 
such initiatives for differently abled students are being implemented in the real sense. For 
both these aspects, higher education department being the nodal authority for highe r 
education in the country will have to take the lead role. 
272. The Committee would like to highlight another area of concern regardin g the quality 
of education being imparted in our universities, colleges etc. The Committee notes that at 
present there is no mechanism for ensuring the accountability and performance of  teachers 
in the universities and colleges. The Committee finds that such a mechanism is a well 
established norm in foreign universities where the performance of college professors/ 
teachers is evaluated by their peers and students. The Committee feels that it is high time  
that such a mechanism is introduced in our University system. The Committee, accordin gly, 
believes that in order to ensure quality teaching, as system of Performance Audit of teachers 
may be evolved which would be based on the feedback given by the students and peer s of 

teachers. Gradually, other inputs like research papers, publication brought out by teachers 
should be added in the Performance Audit. This Committee is of the view that in this w ay, 
the faculty would also try to improve their quality of teaching which would be assessed 
periodically and improve upon their teaching methods. 
273. The Committee considers Higher Education as an increasingly global enterprise; h ence 
Indian institutions should embrace internationalization that could provide them with ne w 
opportunities. While most of our universities and colleges are required to build human  
resources to reach desired levels of competence, we also need to go beyond this to ensure that 
the country has several institutions of higher education that strive to achieve excellence  in 
both teaching and research. Universities and colleges should be encouraged to en gage more 
intensively than before with wider society and contribute to local and regional development 
and provide intellectual leadership to society. 
274. The Committee recommends that certain  universities and institutions  should be 
converted or upgraded by creating centres of excellence within the universities/i nstitutions 
building on their existing strength. Accreditation should be at core of regulatory 
arrangement and must have clear incentives and consequences. There should b e more 
funding for university based research and policies that create right incentives for q uality 
research and promote collaboration among institutions. 
275.  The Committee recommends  that the Government of India may undertake exercise to 
encourage credit rating agencies, reputed industry associations/media houses and 
professional bodies to carry forward the process of rating of Indian Universities/Institution 
in scientific, transparent and fair manner.  A robust rating system would give rise to healthy 
competition amongst the Universities/Institutions to improve their ratings by enhancing their 
performance in the desired fields.  
276. The Committee recommends that this situation could be improved through allocation 
of research funds based on student strength, funds for ICT infrastructure to pr omote better 
research and more scholarship scheme for basic and applied research. 
277. The Committee highlights that Indian Higher Education Scene is very dynamic and  
undergoing rapid strides in quality improvement and has a complex, multi-layered 
structure, with each layer playing a very important need and filling gaps. The Committee 
recommends that there was a need for quality assurance agencies crucial to guarante e basic 
minimum standards of technical education to meet industry demand for quality manp ower 
and NBA should act as a catalyst towards quality enhancement and quality assurance of 
higher technical education. NBA needs to continuously improve its own organisation and 
processes to meet its obligations. 
 
******* 
 