166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED SIXTY - SIXTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE HUNDRED FIFTY-THIRD REPORT ON
GENDER BUDGET ANALYSIS
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 24th  AUGUST, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON  24th AUGUST, 2005)
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2005/ BHADRAPADA, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
         
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                 
2. PREFACE                                                                                                     
3. REPORT                                                                                                      
 
 
 
CHAPTER I                Recommendations/Observations which have been
                                    accepted by the Government……….
 
CHAPTER II               Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
                                    does not desire to pursue in view of the
                                    Government’s reply…………
 
CHAPTER III              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
                                    replies of the Government have not been accepted by
                                    The Committee………..
 
CHAPTER IV              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
                                    replies of the Government are still awaited……….
 

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
 
4.OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
5.MINUTES
6.ANNEXURES
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
 
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
MEMBERS
 
            RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
4. *Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
5.
      Shri S. Anbalagan
6. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
7. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
8. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
9. Shri Anil Dhirubhai Ambani
10. Vacant
 
          LOK SABHA
 
11. Shri Basudeb Barman
12. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
13. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
14. Shri R. L. Jalappa
15. Shri Ramswarup Koli
16. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
17. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
18. Shri Manoj Kumar
19. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
20. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
21.  Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
22. Shri Mohd. Mukim
23. Shri Tukaram R. Patil
24. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
25. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
26. Shri Tufani Saroj
27. Smt. P. Satheedevi
28. Shri A.R. Shaheen
29. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
30. Shri K. Virupaxappa
31. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Ceased to be member of the Committee on expiry of her term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 18th August, 2005.
 

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt, Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
 
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this
Hundred Sixty-sixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Hundred fifty
third Report on ‘Gender Budget Analysis’ of the Department of Women and Child Development, Ministry of Human
Resource Development.
 
2.         The Hundred Fifty-third report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21
st December, 2004. 
Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Women
and Child Development, Ministry of Human Resource Development were considered by the Committee at its meeting
held on the 23rd August, 2005.
 
3.                  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 23rd August, 2005.
 
NEW DELHI 
August 23, 2005
Bhadrapada 1, 1927
VAYALAR RAVI,
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development
 
REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in Committee's One Hundred Fifty-third Report on Gender Budget Analysis of the Department of Women and Child
Development, Ministry of Human Resource Development.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in
the Report.  They have been categorized as follows:-
(i)
                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 10.4
(Chapter-I) Total-1
(ii)                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies: 4.1,5.3,6.4,6.5,7.2,7.3,10.1,10.2, 10.3,11.1, 11.2,11.3,12.1,14.1,
(Chapter II)  Total-14
(iii)
               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
the Committee: 3.5,5.5,6.1,6.3,8.1,8.2,9.1,9.2,13.1
(Chapter-III)  Total-9
(iv)               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited: 
(Chapter – IV) Total- NIL
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
X         NEED FOR IMPACT ASSESSMENT
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
10.4     The Committee therefore, would like the Department to explore the possibility of including a comparative
‘Gender Impact Statement’ as a separate part in Annual Budget of the Government.
ACTION TAKEN
10.4     Committee’s suggestion has been noted for compliance.
 
CHAPTER-II
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENTS’ REPLY
 
V         ISSUES FOR GENDER BUDGETING
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
4.1       The Committee is of the opinion that in view of integration of gender equality with sustainable development,
need and importance of gender budgeting can hardly be over emphasized.  The aim of gender budgeting is to
generate/capture the gender-based data/information, which will be relevant  input for assessing the gender specific
impact of budgetary allocations.  The Committee found that currently gender segregated macro-economic data were not
available in India.  In the absence of such data from different sectors of our economy, the Committee feels it will be
difficult to analyse the budgetary allocations on the basis of gender.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
process of gender budgeting should necessarily contain not only the segregation of gender based data but also aspects
like quantification of contribution of women in the economy; impact of Government budget on women; and policy
alternatives for evolving a gender sensitive social order.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
4.1       Recognizing the need to widen the ambit of gender budgeting, the Department held a consultation on 8
December 2004, with experts and representatives of various Government organizations and para-statal bodies to arrive
at a consensus on the framework of gender budgeting.  The meeting was chaired by Secretary (WCD) and was attended
by Advisor, Planning Commission, Joint Secretary (Budget), Member, NCW, representatives of UNIFEM and UNDP
and a few social experts.  The Department has adopted the following slogan as a mission statement for gender budgeting
–
 
            ‘Budgeting for Gender Equity’
 
The broad-framework recommended for gender budget analysis is as follows
 
Broad framework of activities
Quantification of allocation of resources for women in the Union, States and Local Administration budgets
and expenditure thereof.
q       Refining and standardizing methodology and development of tools.

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
q       Trend Analysis
q       Analysis of change in pattern, shift in priorities in allocation across clusters of services etc
q       Variations in allocation of resources and actual expenditure
q       Adherence to physical targets
 
Gender Audit of policies of the Government- monetary, fiscal, trade etc. at the Centre and State levels
q       Research and micro studies to guide macro policies like credit policy, taxes etc
q       Identification of gender impact of policies/interventions viewed as gender neutral
q       Micro studies to identify need for affirmative action in favour of women towards correcting gender imbalances
 
Impact assessment of various schemes in the Union and State budgets
q       Micro studies on incidence of benefits
q       Analysis of cost of delivery of services
 
Analyzing programmes, strategies, interventions and policy initiatives from the perspective of their impact
on status of women as reflected in important Macro Indicators like literacy, MMR, participation in work
force
q       E.g.- analysis of substance and content of various interventions directed at health of women and correlate the same
with indicator like MMR to establish need for corrective action in formulation of scheme/ approach.
 
Institutionalizing the generation and collection of gender dis-aggregated data
q       Developing MIS for feed back from implementing agencies
q       Inclusion of new parameters in data collection in Census and surveys by NSO, CSO etc
 
Consultations and Capacity building
q       Collation of research and exchange of best practices
q       Developing methodologies and tools for dissemination
q       Forums and Partnerships amongst experts and stakeholders.
 
Review of decision making processes to establish gender equity in participation-  review of extant
participation of women in decision making processes and to establish processes and models aimed at gender
equity in decision making and greater participation of women.
 
Formulation and reflection of satellite accountsto capture the contribution of women to the economy by
way of their activities in areas that go unreported like care economy, unpaid work in rearing domestic
animals etc.
 
It may be seen that various concerns expressed by the   Committee are part of the framework. As a coordinating
Department in Gender matters, we would be pursuing the gender budgeting mandate with all Departments.         This
framework has been communicated to all Ministries of Government of India to guide their further actions in terms of
allocation of resources and review of policy.
 
V         ROLE OF DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
5.3       After looking at these efforts made by the Department, the Committee notes that so far, this exercise had
remained confined mainly to holding Seminars/Workshops since November 1998.  The Committee is of the opinion that
the exercise of gender budgeting was not being carried out with the seriousness that it deserved.  The Committee feels
that the exercises undertaken by the Department so far, were hardly enough to sensitize the other Ministries and
Departments of the Government of India for undertaking this important activity.  Perhaps, the idea of making the
Department of Women & Child Development as a nodal agency for undertaking this exercise was to do the ground
exercise and evolve methodologies, etc. to be later on adopted by other Ministries/Departments for gender budgeting in
an organized and comprehensive manner.  The Committee is constrained to say that unfortunately this has not happened

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
and we have not been able to evolve till today the required tools, methodologies and institutional mechanisms for
segregating gender based data, leave alone the quantification of contribution of women in the economy and the impact
of budgetary allocations on the women in our society.  Unless it is done, the Committee firmly believes, the goal of the
gender budgeting shall remain elusive.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
5.3       The Department of Women and Child Development had commissioned the National Institute of Public Finance
and Policy to undertake a study on gender related economic policy issues to cover: Parameters to identify status of
women; Quantification of contribution of women; Assessing impact of Government Budget on women; Role women
can play in improving institutional framework for delivery of public services.
 
            Based on the interim report of the NIPFP, (January 2001), for the first time, the Economic Survey 2000-01
highlighted issues like, Gender Inequality and Status of Women.  Thus gender equality and empowerment of women
have been recognized as economic goals.  It is continued as regular feature every year.
 
            The second interim report of the NIPFP (August 2001), analysed the Union Budget 2001-02 from a gender
perspective.
 
            The model for analyzing the Union Budget developed by the NIPFP was carried forward by the Department to
analyse the Union Budget 2002-03 and 2003-04.  In 2002-03 a research study was also commissioned to undertake
gender analysis of all State budgets.  The report has since been received and results of preliminary analysis are reflected
in the annual report of 2004-05.
 
The Department of Women and Child Development is actively participating in the inter departmental committee
constituted by the Ministry of Finance for evolving the methodology for analysis of public expenditure from a gender
perspective.  Secretary (WCD) attended the first inter-Departmental Meeting chaired by Secretary, Expenditure on 7
December 2004. Action is thus on to develop a model for gender analysis of public expenditure
 
VI        GENDER BUDGETING IN OTHER MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
6.4       The Committee is of the opinion that gender based analysis of allocations should be done for the entire Budget
of the Government.  This exercise, therefore, will have to be taken up by all the Ministries/Departments of the
Government of India, not only by those identified for this purpose so far.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the remaining ones should also be sensitized to infuse gender aspects into their allocations/expenditure without further
delay.  This is necessary to have holistic idea about gender-based allocations of the entire Budget of the Government of
India.  The Department of Women and Child Development being a nodal agency should assume greater responsibilities
for undertaking this exercise of the gender budgeting by all the Ministries/Departments without further delay.
 
6.5       The Committee notes that the objective of gender budgeting is there, the Ministries/Departments are identified,
but the results are not forthcoming in absence of any guidelines for this purpose.  The Committee fails to understand the
Department’s limitations in this regard.  The Committee recommends to have specific guidelines laid down regarding
gender budgeting to be followed by all the Ministries/Departments.  This would still be quite possible on the basis of
experiences/feedback received on the problems being faced in implementation of gender budgeting.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
6.4 & 6.5         The issue of gender based analysis of allocation being undertaken for the entire budget has been
addressed in the deliberations of the inter-departmental committee set up by the Ministry of Finance.  The Department
of Women and Child Development is an active integral part of this committee and   pressed for setting up of gender
budget cells in all Ministries and Departments so that there is a point of focus for coordinating gender friendly initiatives
for the Department of Women and Child Development.  Instructions have so far been issued for only 18 Ministries so

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
that experiences gathered in this initiative can be suitably expanded to cover the entire Government Budget.
 
            The Ministry of Finance is a nodal Department for issuing all instructions on budgeting and therefore, the
Department of Women and Child Development hopes that instructions issued by them for reflecting gender
disaggregated data will result in reflection of allocation of resources for women in the budgetary documents.
 
Specific guidelines regarding gender sensitive budgeting have been prepared and issued by the Department to all
Ministries and Departments in GOI vide Secretary (WCD)’s letter dated 13.10.2004 (copy enclosed at Annexure I). 
These instructions were also enclosed with the letter sent by the Ministry of Finance for initiating gender budgeting in
select Departments.  With the setting up of Gender Budget Cells in all Departments it would be easier for coordinating
gender budgeting activities and obtaining feed back. It is expected that all this will facilitate gender mainstreaming.
 
VII      LACK OF INTER-MINISTERIAL COORDINATION
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
7.2       The Committee appreciates the idea of having a monitoring and coordination mechanism for the purpose of
gender budgeting exercise.  Such a machinery assumes greater relevance in view of the fact that gender budgeting has to
be ultimately taken up not only by all the Departments/Ministries but by the State Governments and local bodies as
well.  The Committee, however, fails to understand as to why no such inter-ministerial body could be created so far,
despite the specific suggestions made by the two important groups mentioned above.  The Committee is not aware
whether any initiative has been taken by the Department so far.  In view of the importance and urgency of such inter-
ministerial coordinating mechanism, the Committee urges upon the Government to take immediate steps to put such
machinery in place.
 
7.3       The Committee feels that apart from having an inter-ministerial body for coordinating and monitoring, it is
equally important to have intra-ministerial/Departmental cells for coordinating/facilitating this exercise within each
Ministry/Department.  Such cells would certainly provide required impetus for this exercise.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that such monitoring cell should be created in all the Ministries/Departments.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
7.2 & 7.3         The inter-Departmental committee on gender budgeting as recommended by the expert group on gender
budgeting has since been set up under the chairmanship of Secretary Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.   Secretary
(WCD) is member of the Committee.  As per instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance the various Ministries and
Departments are to open up Gender Budget Cells, which will facilitate coordinating the gender budgeting exercises.
 
X         NEED FOR IMPACT ASSESSMENT
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
10.1     The Committee notes that there are still a number of core issues like the increasing burden of poverty on women;
inaccessibility and unequal access to health, family welfare and educational services; inequality in access and control
over assets and resources, both within and outside the family; inequality and inaccessibility to work, employment and
decision-making; and violence against women including domestic and otherwise, which have apparently some direct or
indirect bearing on framing policy relating to gender budgeting.
 
10.2     In view of this, the need for impact assessment of gender allocation, the Committee feels assumes greater
importance.  This impact assessment should not only be restricted to women-specific and pro-women programmes but
also should extend to impact of mainstream expenditure on women.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
10.1 & 10.2     A Needs Assessment exercise was conducted by the Department in consultation with experts and

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
representatives of various government departments and organizations in a meeting held on 8 December 2004. In view
of the plethora of core issues it was felt that priority areas should be identified every year for special attention and
concerted efforts. Four areas of priority were identified for immediate focus in the coming year for empowerment of
women.  These are:
 
a)
                              Food and Nutrition security (for the family with focus on women and girl child) and employment
guarantee
b)                             Water and sanitation
c)                              Adequate Health facilities
d)                             Asset base for women (land, home, livestock etc.)
 
This was followed up by detailed discussions with a few Departments to strategize concentrated action on the
above four areas.
            The first meeting was chaired by Secretary (WCD) on 13.1.2005. Representatives of certain select
Ministries/Departments that are perceived to have significant roles in the areas of food and nutrition security, water and
sanitation and   asset base for women were invited:
i.
                     Department of Rural Development
ii.                   Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
iii.                  Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying
iv.                 Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries
v.                   Department of Food and Public Distribution
vi.                 Department of Land Resources and
vii.                Department of Drinking Water Supply
 
          A meeting with the Health and Water & Sanitation Secretaries was held on 25.2.2005. The purpose of this
consultation was to establish a two-way process for interaction and flow of information between the Departments in the
social sector to achieve synergy in allocation of resources and implementation of schemes. Discussions encompassed
ð
     Identification of schemes which could be made more gender friendly and action thereof
ð     Taking steps to develop suitable MIS proforma including base-line survey, end-line survey etc so that gender
disaggregated data is generated in the course of implementation of the schemes and there is transparency in
impact of the interventions.
ð
     Steps to ensure allocation of adequate funds for women in Annual Plan outlays of the departments
ð     Convergence of initiatives
ð     Spread of best practices
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
10.3     The integration of gender in budgeting policies, Committee feels would not only ensure better transparency and
accountability in the allocations meant for women, it would, at the same time, help evaluate the effectiveness of
resources utilized in delivering the intended results.  Simply focusing on how much money has been allocated for
women-specific and pro-women schemes could be counter-productive, if the outcome and performance of schemes were
far from the desired level.  This would, in fact, help us monitor output as well as input.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
10.3
          Finance Minister in his Budget Speech had indicated that he had included in the Budget documents a separate
Statement highlighting the gender sensitivities of the budgetary allocations under 10 Demands for Grants.  The
total amount in BE 2005-06,is Rs.14, 379 crore.  Although this is another first in budget making in India it is
only a beginning and in course of time, all Departments will be required to present gender budgets as well as
make benefit incidence analyses
 
XI        GENDER BUDGETING IN STATES
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
11.1     The exercise of gender budgeting, the Committee is of the view, would remain woefully incomplete without
extending it to State Budgets as well, because the States and Union Territories accounts for bulk of expenditure on
social sector which relate to welfare/empowerment of women.  The Committee is happy to note that the exercise of
State Budget from gender perspective was already on.  The Committee was informed that data from only ten States-
Assam, Bihar, Meghalaya, Gujarat, J&K, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, MP, Orissa and Manipur were received.  The
committee has learnt that due to wide variation in nomenclature of schemes/programmes across the States and
discrepancies in data, which require further validation, authentic collection of results and a comparative analysis is
difficult to be made.  The Committee, therefore, urges upon the government to formulate uniform procedures pertaining
to gender budgeting and analysis and disseminate these to the States.  The Committee also emphasizes the need for
standardizing nomenclature, terms etc. with a view to avoiding possible ambiguities and confusions across the States.
 
11.2     The committee is aware of the practical difficulties involved in having a meaningful analysis of State budgets,
but at the same time, it cannot ignore to emphasize about the necessity of undertaking and refining the exercise of State
budget analysis.
 
11.3     The Committee notes that of all the States and UTs, only ten have supplied data regarding their budgets, which is
not a very encouraging sign in this regard.  The committee does not know the reasons behind it.  The committee,
therefore, recommends that the States, which have not responded, should be approached and persuaded to under
take/start the exercises at the earliest.  The Department should act as a facilitator and provide necessary help, expertise,
etc for this purpose to the State.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
11.1 to 11.3     As a follow up to the study on ten states, the Department had commissioned a research proposal for
analyzing trend of allocation for women in all 35 State/UT s budgets. The Report has since been received and is under
review. The preliminary analysis of State budgets based on the trend for 1993-94 to 2002-03 is being included in the
Annual Report of 2004-05.  The Department’s findings of the research study on States and UTs will be sent to the
various State Governments for their comments.     The model being developed by the inter Departmental committee
chaired by Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance will be extended to State Governments.
 
XII      GENDER BUDGETING IN LOCAL BODIES
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
12.1     The committee emphasizes the need for taking up gender-based analysis not only for the States but also for local
bodies-nagarpalikas, panchayats etc., which also undertake social expenditure having gender specific benefits.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
12.1     Efforts will be made in this direction.
 
XIV     STRENGTHENING STATUTORY SUPPORT FOR WOMEN
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
14.1     The committee notes that the Task Force had reviewed the whole gamut of legislations concerning women and
had recommended amendment to 22 laws with a view to making them more effective.  The committee is also of the
view that existing states concerning women and girl child need to be reviewed minutely by the experts in the light of
latest developments and emerging scenario with a view to amending them to make them relevant and effective.  This
committee has emphasized this aspect in several of its earlier reports submitted to the Government.  But the committee
is of the opinion that the Department of Women & Child Development has not been able to act timely and sufficiently in
having the exercise of getting these laws amended expedited.  The committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should submit a status report on those 22 laws identified along with latest position regarding the actions so
far taken for amending those laws.  The committee further feels that the Department should try and fix a time schedule

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
for amending every law and impress upon the concerned Ministries along with Ministry of Law & Justice to accomplish
the work within that time.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
14.1     Details are given in the Annexure A.
 
CHAPTER-III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT  BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
III        GENDER BUDGETING IN INDIA
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
3.5       In the context of India, where the gender bias is inherent in a male-dominated society, Gender Budgeting
becomes all the more relevant.  The Committee observes that the trends in sex ratio and other socio-economic indicators
clearly show, how the bias is getting accentuated in many parts of the country.  Over the years, during the course of
examination of various women and girl child related programmes/schemes, one factor which has been constantly
drawing the attention of the Committee is that in spite of well-conceived programmes and the funds allocated, there has
been no noticeable improvement in the status of women/girls.   Recently released State specific sex ratio figures of
Census 2001, do not leave any doubt in this regard.  The Committee is of the view that it is high time that the Budget of
the Government provides a clear indication of how much is earmarked specifically for the benefit of women so as to
ensure effective implementation of women/girl related programmes.  Department of Women & Child Development is
not only the nodal agency for such programmes but also the nodal Department assigned with carrying out the task of
Gender Budgeting, the Committee accordingly decided to make a study on work done so far in this emerging area.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
3.5       The Department of Women and Child Development has been undertaking the role of a coordinating  
Department through monitoring of 27 beneficiary oriented schemes since 1985. The exercise of quantifying resources
earmarked for women was entrusted to the National institute  of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) and they developed
a model for gender analysis of the Union Budget, beginning with the Union Budget for 2001-2002. This model has  
been adopted by the Department to quantify allocation for women in the Union Budget for subsequent years.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee is of the opinion that the model for gender based analysis of the Union Budget developed by
NIPFP in 2001-2002, needs to be refined with a view to making it more precise and wider in scope. This model is not
able to provide adequate insight in the case of mainstream budgets. The Committee, therefore, recommends that steps be
taken to examine the same and a methodology evolved on this aspect at the earliest.
 
V         ROLE OF DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
5.5       It is not clear to the Committee, whether the decision to discontinue the chapter on Gender Budget Initiatives
was advertent or inadvertent.  If it was advertent, the Committee would like to know the reasons for this; and if it was
inadvertent, the Committee expresses its unhappiness in the matter.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
chapter on Gender Budget Initiatives should be restarted in the Annual Report from the year 2004-05, which should also
list the development/steps taken in the year 2003-04.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
5.5       The Chapter on Gender Budgeting initiatives has been restored in the Annual Report for 2004-05.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
            The Committee does not expect such a cryptic reply by the Department to a specific question. It is good that the
chapter on Gender Budgeting has since been reintroduced in its Annual Report after the Committee pointed it out. The
Department should have provided reasons for not doing so earlier, which has not been done.
 
VI        GENDER BUDGETING IN OTHER MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
6.1.      The Committee however, observes that hardly any Ministry and Department had started this exercise so far.  The
Committee feels that the Department had not pursued this matter with other Ministries and Departments effectively. 
The Committee recommends that the Department should make all our efforts to persuade the other Ministries and
Departments to include a chapter on gender budgeting in this Annual Reports highlighting new initiatives/policies on
gender related issues, resources available and their utilization and gender disaggregated statistics for promoting gender
awareness within and outside Government.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
6.1       The Department of Women and Child Development had requested the Cabinet Secretary to issue instructions to
all Ministries and Departments to devote a chapter on gender issues in their annual reports.  While many Departments
have done so, it was seen that the reporting was limited in coverage. Very few Departments gave descriptive
sections/quantification of initiatives taken for enhancing allocation for women or stepping up gender friendly initiatives
or reviewing their respective facilities from a gender perspective.  As advised by the Committee, detailed check lists for
analyzing budgetary allocations and policies and schemes for all Departments in the Government were then drawn up by
the Department of Women and Child Development. (Annexure I).  These have been circulated to all Ministries and
Departments for appropriate action.  The guidelines have also been sent to the State Governments.
 
The Department has been making concerted efforts to mainstream gender and has also written to Ministry of
Finance and the Planning Commission highlighting various measures that required a gender friendly review.  For
instance in the letter addressed to Ministry of Finance (Secretary, Expenditure). Secretary (WCD) had pointed that a
decision like reducing the  debt burden of GOI should be seen from a gender perspective. While revising rate of return
on various debt instruments or retiring these instruments, the gender profile of beneficiaries should be reviewed so that
those instruments favoured by women are not adversely impacted.  The detailed guidelines prepared by the Department
under check list II, (Annexure I), are expected to help guide the mainstream sectors to undertake gender sensitive review
of policies and budgetary allocations. Thus the Department has been undertaking significant advocacy measures for
highlighting the importance of gender friendly and gender responsive action in policy and budget allocation.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
6.3       The Committee appreciates the idea of identifying some Ministries/Departments for impressing upon them to
undertake the process of gender budgeting on a wider scale.  The Committee, however, feels that to the best of its
knowledge, the identified Ministries/Departments have apparently not been able to take up the exercise of gender
budgeting in their respective areas.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take up with

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
these Ministries/Departments to start the exercise of gender-based analysis of their allocations/expenditure from the next
year 2005-06 positively.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
6.3       After deliberations of the inter-Departmental Committee chaired by Secretary, Expenditure, the following
instructions have been issued by the Ministry of Finance on 24.12.2004.
 
i.
                     All Departments/ Ministries to establish a ‘Gender Budgeting Cell’ by 1st January, 2005.
ii.                   Eighteen selected Departments/Ministries to bring out scheme-wise provisions and physical
targets benefiting women in their Annual Reports/Performance Budgets for 2004-05 along
with their Detailed Demands for Grants for 2005-06. 
 
All Departments/ Ministries to prepare incidence analysis from the next financial year for inclusion in their
Annual Reports/Performance Budgets as per instructions/checklist prepared by the Department of Women and Child
Development.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee expresses its satisfaction over reflection of Gender-budgeting in the Annual Budget since the
presentation of its 153
rd Report to the Parliament on 21st December, 2004. Only exception is the two instructions issued
by the Ministry of Finance on 24 th December, 2004. First being to all Departments/Ministries to establish a ‘Gender
Budgeting cell’. The Committee is happy to note that all Departments/Ministries have been instructed to establish a
Gender Budgeting Cell by 1st January 2005. The Committee only hopes that Gender Budgeting cells must have been set
up and made fully functional by now in all Departments/Ministries. Ideal position would have been if the Department
had ensured that this directive of the Ministry of Finance had been complied with by each and every Department.
The second directive was meant for eighteen selected Departments/Ministries to bring out scheme-wise
provisions and physical targets benefiting women in their Annual Reports/Performance Budgets for 2004-05 alongwith
their Detailed Demands for Grants 2005-06. The Committee is disturbed to note that virtually no progress has been
made in this regard inspite of Department pursuing the same since October, 2004. A test check made by the Committee
of some Ministries/Departments out of the selected 18 ones does not reveal a happy scenario. Annual Reports (2004-05)
of Ministries/Departments like Department of Elementary Education and Literacy, Department of Secondary and Higher
Education, Ministry of Labour and Employment, Ministry of Small Scale Industries, Department of Environment and
Forest and Ministry of Home Affairs do not have any chapter on Gender Budget Analysis. There is only a brief mention
in thisregard in the Annual Reports of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare & Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department as a nodal agency must ensure that all the
instructions related to gender budgeting issued by the Ministry of Finance on 24
th December 2004 were carried out in a

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
time bound manner. There is need for an effective interdepartmental coordination to achieve the objectives of gender
budgeting in the true sense.
 
VIII     DEVELOPING SUITABLE METHODOLOGY
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
8.1       The Committee notes that we are yet to evolve suitable methodologies, tools etc. for doing an effective Gender
Budget Analysis.  The Department of Women & Child Development has, with the help of NIPFP, undertaken some
exercise in this regard, which is limited to only few Departments/Ministries
 
The Committee emphasizes the need for developing/refining methodologies and gender tools like gender audit,
gender impact assessment, gender analysis and gender budgeting to monitor implementation and impact of gender
policies.
 
8.2       The Committee also emphasizes the urgent need for undertaking research activities in different aspects of gender
budgeting including gender benefit incidence analysis.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
8.1 & 8.2         The Ministry of Finance through the inter-Departmental Committee is working on development of the
model for analyzing public expenditure. Instructions on conducting impact assessment studies have been issued vide
Ministry of Finance letter dated 24.12.2004 asking all Departments to prepare incidence analysis from the next financial
year for inclusion in their Annual Reports/Performance Budgets as per instructions/checklist prepared by the
Department of Women and Child Development.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Department in association with the Ministry of Finance for
developing the model for analysing public expenditure. However, the aspects of developing methodologies, gender tools
and research activities in different areas of gender budgeting still leave much to be desired. The Committeerecommends
that theDepartment should frame guidelines for the purpose within a stipulated timeframe. The guidelines should be
uniform and the procedure followed should facilitate proper assessment of the impact of gender budgeting.
 
IX        NEED FOR TRAINING/CAPACITY BUILDING
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
9.1       The Committee notes that the exercise of Gender Budgeting, which is in the process of evolving suitable tools,
techniques and methodologies pre-supposes the need for orientation/training for the officials responsible for the job in
different Ministries/Departments.  They can undertake this exercise effectively and efficiently only if they are familiar
or have been adequately trained for the purpose.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the training and capacity
building efforts should be made for the officials working in the Government Department both at the Centre as well as in
States.  Possibility of arranging orientation/training for the people’s representatives in local bodies should also be
considered.
 
9.2       The Committee recommends that government functionaries and financial specialists should be sensitized since it
is with the help of these people that budget is made and auditing of expenditure is done at the end of financial year.  If

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
they would do their job effectively, it will help in further streamlining the gender budget analysis.  This should,
therefore, be specifically trained/sensitized to the importance of the task as their knowledge and motivation becomes
critical in determining the accuracy and validity of such an exercise.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
9.1 & 9 .2
       The Department proposes to liaison   with training institutions like LBSNAA, Mussoorie to develop
focused resource modules on gender budgeting to impart training to public officials.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee recommends that necessary measures should be undertaken to expedite the development of
focused resource module for training all the officials who are directly/indirectly connected with the work.
 
XIII     GENDER BUDGETING IN PRIVATE SECTOR
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
13.1     The committee emphasizes the need for undertaking the exercise of gender analysis of allocations/expenditure in
private sector also.  The committee would like to point out that of the total women workforce, their share in private
sector is far larger than those in the public sector.  In unorganized sector, there are not legitimate and other safeguards
even to claim minimum wages leave aside other benefits.  In view of this situation, the committee feels that no realistic
assessments and conclusions can be made about gender budgeting at the national level without involving private sector. 
The committee is aware of the practical limitations involved in taking up such exercise; it still emphasizes the greater
need for starting gender budgeting in private sector also.
 
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
13.1     Recognizing the need to gender-sensitize the private sector, the Secretary (WCD) vide her letter dated
21.12.2004 had addressed Chairman, Confederation of Indian Industry on the need for gender sensitive review in the
private sector. Attention was drawn to critical areas like providing for women women’s hostels and creches. Further
efforts would be made in the coming year.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts made to sensitize/involve the private sector in the exercise of gender
budgeting. However, it feels that time bound action plan is the need of the hour. The Committee feels that the
Department ought to have taken up the matter with the numerous other Trade/Industry Organisations in the country.    
The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take up the matter with all the major Industry
Organisations.  Follow up actions would further ensure that gender-sensitisation is getting the full attention of the
private sector. Involvement of industry federations/organisations through national level seminars/conferences would
provide the opportunities for regular interactions on gender sensitisation in private sector.
OBSERVATONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT  BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
III        GENDER BUDGETING IN INDIA
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee is of the opinion that the model for gender based analysis of the Union Budget developed by
NIPFP in 2001-2002, needs to be refined with a view to making it more precise and wider in scope. This model is not
able to provide adequate insight in the case of mainstream budgets. The Committee, therefore, recommends that steps be
taken to examine the same and a methodology evolved on this aspect at the earliest.  (Para 3.5)
 
V         ROLE OF DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
            The Committee does not expect such a cryptic reply by the Department to a specific question. It is good that the
chapter on Gender Budgeting has since been reintroduced in its Annual Report after the Committee pointed it out. The
Department should have provided reasons for not doing so earlier, which has not been done. (Para 5.5)
VI        GENDER BUDGETING IN OTHER MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee expresses its satisfaction over reflection of Gender-budgeting in the Annual Budget since the
presentation of its 153
rd Report to the Parliament on 21st December, 2004. Only exception is the two instructions issued
by the Ministry of Finance on 24 th December, 2004. First being to all Departments/Ministries to establish a ‘Gender
Budgeting cell’. The Committee is happy to note that all Departments/Ministries have been instructed to establish a
Gender Budgeting Cell by 1st January 2005. The Committee only hopes that Gender Budgeting cells must have been set
up and made fully functional by now in all Departments/Ministries. Ideal position would have been if the Department
had ensuredthat this directive of the Ministry of Finance had been complied with by each and every Department.
The second directive was meant for eighteen selected Departments/Ministries to bring out scheme-wise
provisions and physical targets benefiting women in their Annual Reports/Performance Budgets for 2004-05 alongwith
their Detailed Demands for Grants 2005-06. The Committee is disturbed to note that virtually no progress has been
made in this regard inspite of Department pursuing the same since October, 2004. A test check made by the Committee
of some Ministries/Departments out of the selected 18 ones does not reveal a happy scenario. Annual Reports (2004-05)
of Ministries/Departments like Department of Elementary Education and Literacy, Department of Secondary and Higher
Education, Ministry of Labour and Employment, Ministry of Small Scale Industries, Department of Environment and
Forest and Ministry of Home Affairs do not have any chapter on Gender Budget Analysis. There is only a brief mention
in this regard in the Annual Reports of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare & Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department as a nodal agency must ensure that all the
instructions related to gender budgeting issued by the Ministry of Finance on 24
th December 2004 were carried out in a
time bound manner. There is need for an effective interdepartmental coordination to achieve the objectives of gender

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
budgeting in the true sense. (Para 6.3)
 
VIII     DEVELOPING SUITABLE METHODOLOGY
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Department in association with the Ministry of Finance for
developing the model for analysing public expenditure. However, the aspects of developing methodologies, gender tools
and research activities in different areas of gender budgeting still leave much to be desired. The Committee recommends
that the Department should frame guidelines for the purpose within a stipulated timeframe. The guidelines should be
uniform and the procedure followed should facilitate proper assessment of the impact of gender budgeting. (Para 8.1 &
8.2)
 
 
IX        NEED FOR TRAINING/CAPACITY BUILDING
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee recommends that necessary measures should be undertaken to expedite the development of
focused resource module for training all the officials who are directly/indirectly connected with the work. (Para 9.1 &
9.2)
 
XIII     GENDER BUDGETING IN PRIVATE SECTOR
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts made to sensitize/involve the private sector in the exercise of gender
budgeting. However, it feels that time bound action plan is the need of the hour. The Committee feels that the
Department ought to have taken up the matter with the numerous other Trade/Industry Organisations in the country.    
The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take up the matter with all the major Industry
Organisations.  Follow up actions would further ensure that gender-sensitisation is getting the full attention of the
private sector. Involvement of industry federations/organisations through national level seminars/conferences would
provide the opportunities for regular interactions on gender sensitisation in private sector. (Para 13.1)
CHAPTER-IV
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
 
 
NIL
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
II
SECOND  MEETING

166th Report of Committee on Human Resource Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/166threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:37]
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 23rd August 2005 in Room
No. 63, First  Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS  PRESENT
 
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
 
LOK SABHA
 
3. Shri Basudeb Barman
4. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
5. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
6. Shri R. L. Jalappa
7. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
8. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
9. Shri Tukaram Ganpatrao Rengepatil
10. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
11. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
12. Shri Tufani Saroj
13. Smt. P. Satheedevi
14. Shri A.R. Shaheen
15.Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
Smt Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the 166
th Report on the action taken on the
recommendation/observation contained in its 153 rd  report on Gender Budget Analysis. The Committee adopted the
same with some modifications.
3.         The Committee decided that the Report may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha on Wednesday, the 24 th August 2005.  The Committee authorized Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah and in his
absence, Shri Uday Pratap Singh to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Smt. P. Satheedevi and in her absence
Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat to lay the Report in the Lok Sabha. 
4.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.30 a.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 12th September 2005.
 
 