 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2017/Ashadha, 1939 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
291 
TWO HUNDRED NINTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN  
THE TWO HUNDRED SEVENTIETH REPORT ON 
FUNCTIONING OF NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND AND 
RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION OF SPORTSPERSONS (PART-I) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th July, 2017) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th July, 2017) 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
TWO HUNDRED NINTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN  
THE TWO HUNDRED SEVENTIETH REPORT ON 
FUNCTIONING OF NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND AND 
RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION OF SPORTSPERSONS (PART-I) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th July, 2017) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th July, 2017) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2017/Ashadha, 1939 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …........................................................... (i)-(ii)   
2.        PREFACE.................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3.  ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................... (iv) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…............................  
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ...................................................................  
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply.............  
Chapter-III -  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee...  
Chapter-IV -  Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of the  
Government is still awaited......................................................... 
   
4. *OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE    
5. *MINUTES........................................................................................................... 
6. *ANNEXURES..................................................................................................     
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
*Appended on printing stage 
 
 
  

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN 
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2016) 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13.  Shri Nihal Chand Chouhan 
14.        Shrimati Bhawana Gawali  Patil 
15.        Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16.        Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.        Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.        Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.        Shri Chand Nath 
20.        Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.        Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.        Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.        Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.        Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.        Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
26.        Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.        Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.        Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.        Shrimati Neelam Sonkar 
30.        Shri P.R. Sundaram 
31.        Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher 
 
 
 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director 
Smt   Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary 
Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
  

 
P R E F A C E 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred Ninty First Report on Action Taken by Government 
on the Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Seventieth Report on Functioning of 
National Sports Development Fund and Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons (Part-I). 
2. The Two Hundred seventieth  Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  
December,2015  and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 22 nd  December,2015.  Replies of the 
Government to the recommendations/observations contained in the Report were considered by the 
Committee at its meeting held on the 30th June, 2017. 
 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 
the 30th June, 2017. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
June 30, 2017 
Ashadha 9,1939 (Saka) 
 
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, Rajya Sabha  
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

REPORT 
 
 The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in its Two hundred seventieth Report of the Committee on the subject 'Functioning of 
National Sports Development Fund and Recruitment and Promotion of Sportspersons (Part-I). The 
270th Report was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 13 th August, 2015.  The Ministry 
of Youth Affairs and Sports (Department of Sports) vide its communication dated 9 th November, 
2015 furnished its Action Taken replies to the Committee.  
2. Action Taken Notes as received from the Government in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the 270th Report have been categorized as follows: 
(i)  Chapter-I:  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government    
Paras - 7 and 60 
Total – 2 
 
(ii) Chapter-II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply – 
Paras - 9, 14, 15, 20, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 70, 71, 72, 73 and 75  
  Total – 14 
 
(iii) Chapter-III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee – 
Paras - 6, 21, 25, 59, 62, 66, 68, 69 and 79 
Total – 9 
(iv)  Chapter-IV:  Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of the Government 
is still awaited. 
 Paras - Nil 
 Total - Nil  
 

CHAPTER - I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT 
PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1.0 The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and Government of India (GOI) had established 
the National Sports Development Fund in 1998. However, since its inception adequate funds could 
not be collected which indicates that the Department did not make sincere efforts to approach the 
Corporate and the Public sector for contribution to the Fund.     
  (Para 7)  
Action Taken 
National Sports Development Fund was established by the Central Government in 1998, under 
Charitable Endowments Act 1890, with a view to mobilizing resources from the Government as 
well as non-governmental sources, including the private/corporate sector and non-resident Indians, 
for promotion of sports and games in the country. To begin with, the Government of India made a 
contribution of Rs. 2.00 crore to the Fund as seed money during the year 1998-99.  NSDF has so 
far received contributions to the tune of Rs. 97.46 crore from corporate entities and individuals.  
The Government has contributed Rs. 76.44 crore to NSDF as its matching contribution to the 
Fund.  For augmenting the contributions to NSDF, the Government is regularly interacting with 
CPSUs/PSBs for contribution to the NSDF. They are also encouraged to contribute to the NSDF 
under CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility). Further, the Ministry has decided to organize 
meetings with important PSUs in Delhi in association with the Department of Public Enterprises 
and also with PSBs in association with the Department of Financial Services for creating 
awareness about NSDF and their role in CSR in order to mobilize funds for NSDF. The Ministry 
has also written letters to CMDs of PSUs in Coal Sector, Petroleum Sector and Banks for 
contributing funds to NSDF. 
The Ministry will compile a list of potential donors both in the private sector and public sector. 
The Ministry will write to such potential donors requesting them to contribute to NSDF. The 
Ministry will also organize seminars/workshops in major cities to create awareness about NSDF. 
The Department will also depute its teams to potential donors explaining them about existence of 

NSDF and requesting them to contribute to NSDF. The Ministry will also prepare publicity 
material such as brochures, pamphlets; videos etc. about NSDF and distribute the same among 
donors. 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress m ade 
further in the matter and the end result. The Committee very strongly recomme nds that the 
Department of Youth Affairs and Sports as well as SAI should take extra efforts to involve 
ex-national champions, especially medal and award winning sportspersons in its efforts to  
convince the PSUs officials about the NSDF and usage of funds for the purpose of sports 
development. It is also recommended that key PSU decision makers could be taken on a 
study visit to show them how NSDF has been utilizing funds in a responsible manner with a 
specific plan to improvise sports facilities. 
RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION OF SPORTSPERSONS 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.1  It has been learnt from the representation of Anju Bobby George that DoPT circular 
dated 26th July, 2012 was being restricted to the appointees from 2012 onwards when the 
guidelines were re-issued and provision of three out of turn of promotions was made. The 
Committee recommends that this circular should be construed as a guideline by all the departments 
and they should have liberal interpretation and should not restrict it and implement it from 
prospective date. This is clarificatory guideline and must be applicable in case of all existing 
players. Hence, the Committee directs the Department of Customs and other Departments that if 
the existing players have not been given out of turn promotions in their career, they must be 
considered for three out of turn promotions in phased manner making the post personal in case the 
player/employee has won medals in the /international sporting events during the course of 
employment even before 2011. Such players should not be counted as normal department 
employees and parity should not be drawn with regular employees. These players are ambassadors 
and pride of concerned organization who are considered as role model. The Committee also 
appreciated Department of Customs for recruiting and retaining such world class players. The 
Department should handle such players with care, dignity and respect and encourage them to 
provide guidance, coaching and lecture to youngsters in schools and colleges and in the sporting 
complexes. They should also be encouraged to establish own academies/coaching centres or 

associate themselves with SAI or Ministry of Sports for sporting activities like coordination and 
motivation etc. The Department may also come forward in establishing academies or adopting 
some coaching centres where their talent could be utilized.     (Para 60) 
Action Taken  
Scheme of ‘out of turn promotions for sportspersons ’ was circulated by the Department of 
Personnel & Training on 26.7.2012. As per this Scheme, the out of turn promotion will be 
effective from the date of conclusion of the event. The concerned Central Government Offices are 
required to process the case for entitlement of a sportsperson for out of turn promotion within a 
period of three months from the date of occurrence of event which entitles him/her for out of turn 
promotion and it will be responsibility of the concerned administrative Ministry/Department to 
consider a sportsperson for out of turn promotion within the prescribed time limit.  Provision of 
upgradation of post personal to the sportsperson being considered for out of turn promotion 
already exists in the existing Scheme of out of turn promotion. As per the existing scheme, 
out of 
turn promotion to sportsperson is to be allowed by upgradation of post personal to the sportsperson 
and no separate post will be created for grant of out of turn promotion to a Sportsperson/Coach. 
Such a post will continue to be upgraded in higher grade till it is vacated by the sportsperson either 
by his/her subsequent promotion, resignation or on retirement. Existing Scheme of out of turn 
promotion does not cover the sports events held prior to 2012.  
The Department of Sports is already extending financial assistance to former sportspersons who 
wish to set up sports academies. The Department of Sports has given financial assistance from 
NSDF for Usha School of Athletics, Pulella Gopichand Academy of Badminton, Mary kom 
Regional Boxing Foundation, Ashwini Sports Foundation.   
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee feels that a mechanism should be put in place to periodically review  - 
say, once in five years, the functioning of Sports Academies established by renowned sports 
persons (e.g. Usha School of Athletics, Pullela Gopichand Academy of Badminton etc) with 
the help of substantial financial aid by the Government so as to ensure judicious use of 
facilities or concessions provided or the aid given by the Government. 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND 
Recommendations/observations 
2.0  The Committee finds that the situation has not improved till now. The NSDF 
corpus is still scarce, not many public and private organizations are coming forward to contribute 
to the Fund and there is a lot of overlapping in promotion of sports as respective organizations are 
following their own pattern so far as development of sports is concerned. Further, the Committee 
notes that even from the scarce resources available with the NSDF, there is laxity on the part of the 
Department in spending the same which shows lack of commitment on the part of the Department 
to promote sports in true earnest. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of 
Sports and SAI should take steps to evolve an effective mechanism for regular dialogue and co -
ordination with the sports boards of the various organizations and federations so that duplication of 
efforts and wastage of precious time and scarce fund is avoided.    (Para 9) 
Action Taken 
As stated in reply to recommendation No. 7 above, NSDF has so far received contributions to 
the tune of Rs. 98.72 crore, as on 30.9.2016, from corporate entities and individuals.  The 
Government has contributed Rs. 76.45 crore to NSDF, as on 30.9.2016, as its matching 
contribution to the Fund.  For augmenting the contributions to NSDF, the Government is regularly 
interacting with CPSUs/PSBs for contribution to the NSDF. Further, the Ministry has decided to 
organize meetings with important PSUs in Delhi in association with the Department of Public 
Enterprises and also with PSBs in association with the Department of Financial Services for 
creating awareness about NSDF and their role in CSR in order to mobilize funds for NSDF. The 
Ministry has also written letters to CMDs of PSUs in Coal Sector, Petroleum Sector and Banks for 
contributing funds to NSDF. 
Further, the Ministry will compile a list of potential donors both in the private sector and public 
sector. The Ministry will write to such potential donors requesting them to contribute to NSDF. 
The Ministry will also organize seminars/workshops in major cities to create awareness about 
NSDF. The Department will also depute its teams to potential donors explaining them about 
existence of NSDF and requesting them to contribute to NSDF. The Ministry will also prepare 

publicity material such as brochures, pamphlets, videos etc. about NSDF and distribute the same 
among donors. 
Sports Authority of India (SAI) also approaches CPSUs and other corporate entities from time to 
time for financial support in implementing its schemes. Recently, Coal India Ltd. (CIL) gave Rs. 
50 lakh support for ‘Run for Rio ’ which was organized prior to Rio Olympics 2016.Earlier CIL 
approved support for construction of a National Table Tennis academy in SAI Regional centre, 
Kolkata at an approximate cost of Rs. 6 crores. SAI will also get support of Rs. 10 crore from M/s 
Glenmark Aquatic Foundation for running a joint program to nurture excellence in swimming. The 
funding is approved at the rate of Rs. 2 crores per annum. SAI also obtained support from IOA and 
selected National Sports Federations for organizing an Olympic Carnival in August 2016.  In a 
new initiative SAI has identified over 36 centres and Nodal Centres to attract CSR funding. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
2.1  From the above discussions the Committee can conclude that most of the Public 
Sector Banks and Public Sector Undertakings were not aware of the existence of the National 
Sports Development Fund or were linking it with the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
activities.           (Para 14)  
Action Taken 
As stated in reply to Recommendation No. 7 above, the Government is regularly interacting 
with CPSUs/PSBs for contribution to the NSDF. Further, the Ministry has decided to organize 
meetings with important PSUs in Delhi in association with the Department of Public Enterprises 
and also with PSBs in association with the Department of Financial Services for creating 
awareness about NSDF and their role in CSR in order to mobilize funds for NSDF. The Ministry 
has also written letters to CMDs of PSUs in Coal Sector, Petroleum Sector and Banks for 
contributing funds to NSDF. 
The Ministry will also compile a list of potential donors both in the private sector and public 
sector. The Ministry will write to such potential donors requesting them to contribute to NSDF. 
The Ministry will also organize seminars/workshops in major cities to create awareness about 
NSDF. The Department will also depute its teams to potential donors explaining them about 
existence of NSDF and requesting them to contribute to NSDF. The Ministry will also prepare 

publicity material such as brochures, pamphlets; videos etc. about NSDF and distribute the same 
among donors. 
Recommendations/observations 
2.2  The Committee also found that the Banks and CPSUs were spending crores of 
rupees every year independently in the name of sports mainly for entertainment purposes or for 
their commercial publicity in the form of giving sponsorship to tournaments, annual meets smaller 
cash awards at local levels, except some of them like ONGC, Indian Oil, Air India, HAL and a few 
banks. There is no coordination/linkage of any kind amongst them in this regard. The Committee 
also found that the direction of and the manner in which sports activities are being done is not 
going to develop sports in the country. The Committee is not for stopping such activities being 
undertaken by banks/PSUs, it feels that the monies currently being spent could be put to much 
better use if a good part of it goes to NSDF, a centralized and specialized mechanism  for the 
development of sports in the country. It also came up during the deliberations with these 
PSUs/Banks that they were ready to put good amount of money to this Fund and some of them 
even promised to do so in future. The Committee was in fact happily surprised to know this and 
felt encouraged to take up this issue with the concerned Secretaries to the Ministries/Departments 
at Delhi to impress upon them to find out if some kind of guidelines/norms, formal or informal 
could laid down and an inter-ministerial body could be created for promoting, coordinating and 
monitoring this Fund. The Committee feels a good amount of funds can be allocated that way to be 
better used for the sports development.   (Para 15) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports has written to Central PSUs to contribute to NSDF. 
The Ministry has also written to Ministries/Departments in the Government of India to impress 
upon the PSUs under their administrative control to contribute to NSDF. The Ministry has also in 
various  such as meetings, seminars and conferences requested corporate entities to contribute to 
NSDF and adopt a specific sports discipline for setting up sports academies in that discipline and 
take care of training and competitive exposure of sportspersons belonging to that sports discipline 
and adopt sportspersons for providing financial support for training, procurement of sports 
equipment and competitive exposure.  

Pursuant to Ministry’s requests, NSDF has received contributions from NSDF. NSDF has received 
contributions to the tune of Rs. 98.72  crore, as on 30.9.2016, from corporate entities and 
individuals since its inception in 1998. 
But apart from contribution to NSDF by a few corporate entities both in public and private sector, 
corporate entities are contributing on their own to promotion and development of sports.  
Corporate houses are associated with the Leagues for various Sports such as Indian Premier league 
(IPL) for Cricket, Hockey India League for Hockey, Indian Super League for Football,  I ndian 
Football League, Pro-Kabaddi League, Premier Badminton League for Badminton, Pro Wrestling 
League  for wrestling. Corporate Houses are also involved in giving financial support directly to 
sportspersons and sports academies. Public Sector Undertakings such as Oil & Natural Gas 
Commission,   Indian Oil Corporation, Steel Authority of India Limited, Air India and many other 
PSUs have set up Sports Promotion Boards and are giving financial support as well as employment 
to sportspersons.  
TATA Group of companies is managing TATA Archery Academy, TATA Football Academy and 
TATA Athletics Academy at Jamshedpur. India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL), 
a Central PSU, has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs & Sports for supporting Badminton and Archery sports disciplines and has agreed to 
contribute Rs. 30 crore to National Sports Development Fund  (NSDF) over a period of three years 
and has already contributed Rs. 10 crore to NSDF.  
Petroleum Sports Promotion Board (PSPB), in which oil and gas PSUs are members, is managing 
Table Tennis Academy at Ajmer.    
National Sports Federations (NSFs) are also directly in touch with corporate entities for seekin g 
sponsorships for National Championships and international tournaments organized by them in 
India.  
The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports has, on its part, requested corporate entities to make 
contributions to NSDF and adopt sports disciplines, but it is for the corporate entities to decide and 
contribute to NSDF and take other measures for promotion and development of sports.  
For further augmenting contributions to NSDF, the Government is regularly interacting with 
CPSUs/PSBs for contribution to the NSDF. The Ministry has decided to organize meetings with 
important PSUs in Delhi in association with the Department of Public Enterprises and also with 
PSBs in association with the Department of Financial Services for creating awareness about NSDF 

and their role in CSR in order to mobilize funds for NSDF. The Ministry has also written letters to 
CMDs of PSUs in Coal Sector, Petroleum Sector and Banks for contributing funds to NSDF. The 
Ministry will also compile a list of potential donors both in the private sector and public sector. 
The Ministry will write to such potential donors requesting them to contribute to NSDF. The 
Ministry will also organize seminars/workshops in major cities to create awareness about NSDF. 
The Department will also depute its teams to potential donors explaining them about existence of 
NSDF and requesting them to contribute to NSDF. The Ministry will also prepare publicity 
material such as brochures, pamphlets, videos etc. about NSDF and distribute the same among 
donors. 
Recommendations/observations 
2.3  From the Committee ’s extensive deliberations with the stakeholders, it clearly 
emerged that many public sector organizations and institutions were not aware of the existence of 
the NSDF, its mandate and purpose. Most of the organizations mixed it with the Corporate Social 
Responsibility. The Committee observes that the Department of Sports should take steps to widel y 
publicize the NSDF, its mandate, function and achievements to attract contribution from all the 
Public and Private Sector Institutions. The Department should publish a booklet on NSDF, 
highlighting its mandate, purpose, mode of contributions to the fund by the stakeholders, and its 
achievements in promoting sports.         (Para 20) 
Action Taken 
Although the Ministry has written to Central PSUs forwarding them NSDF Scheme and also 
written to concerned Ministries/Departments in the Government of India to impress upon the PSUs 
under their control to contribute to NSDF, it seems that awareness about NSDF has not percolated 
down to the regional and field offices. Details about NSDF Scheme are also available on the 
website of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports.  
For giving wide publicity to NSDF, the Ministry has decided to organize meetings with important 
PSUs in Delhi in association with the Department of Public Enterprises and also with PSBs in 
association with the Department of Financial Services for creating awareness about NSDF and 
their role in CSR in order to mobilize funds for NSDF. The Ministry has also written letters to 
CMDs of PSUs in Coal Sector, Petroleum Sector and Banks for contributing funds to NSDF. The 
Ministry will also compile a list of potential donors both in the private sector and public sector. 

The Ministry will write to such potential donors requesting them to contribute to NSDF. The 
Ministry will also organize seminars/workshops in major cities to create awareness about NSDF. 
The Department will also depute its teams to potential donors explaining them about existence of 
NSDF and requesting them to contribute to NSDF. The Ministry will also prepare publicity 
material such as brochures, pamphlets, videos etc. about NSDF and distribute the same among 
donors. 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendations and strongly recomme nds extensive 
and effective use of website and social media to publicize the efforts of NSDF and bui ld trust 
about the proper use of funds. 
Recommendations/observations 
2.4  The Committee notes that another suggestion put forth by the stakeholders was that 
NSDF should be included in schedule VII of the Companies Act. The Committee recommends that 
the Companies Act should be amended accordingly, once it is included in schedule VII, not only 
the government sector companies/PSUs but also private companies will start making contributions 
to this Fund. This will certainly ensure continuous and consistent fund flow to NSDF.              
           (Para 22) 
Action Taken 
  ‘Training to promote rural sports, nationally recognized sports, Paralympic sports and Olympic 
sports’  has been included in the Schedule VII of the Companies Act 2013 vide Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs ’ Notification dated 27 th February, 2014. As the Department of Sports got 
references from the companies like ONGC during meetings and conferences to the effect that most 
of the companies have interpreted the entry on ‘sports’ in CSR in a way that only the money spent 
on ‘training’ of sportsperson shall be considered for the purpose of CSR spending, Ministry of 
Youth Affairs & Sports intimated the Ministry of Corporate Affairs that the word ‘training’ has a 
large ambit and the natural interpretation of it should be that any form of investment in sports that 
improves the performance level of sportsperson(s) should be construed as training and this would 
include financial support to competitive tournaments, providing scholarship to budding talent and 
providing necessary playing equipments and requested the Ministry of Corporate Affairs for 

removing the ambiguity with regard to spending on sports from funds earmarked by corporate for 
CSR and making it more broad-based.   
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has vide its circular No. 21/2014 dated 18 th June 2014 clarified 
that the entries in Schedule-VII must be interpreted liberally so as to capture the essence of the 
subjects enumerated in the said Schedule.  
Thus, contributions to NSDF are covered under spending from the funds earmarked for CSR 
related activities.  
Recommendations/observations 
2.5  The Committee further feels that the Public Sector Banks while contributing their 
funds for the promotion of sports may bifurcate their contribution in two segments. They can 
contribute to the National Sports Development Fund and at the same time can approach 
schools/colleges in rural areas and, if possible, adopt one of the sports by investing in 
infrastructure and other sports facility in the schools/colleges in the rural areas.       (Para 23) 
Action Taken 
  As stated in reply to  Recommendation No. 22 above, ‘Training to promote rural sports, 
nationally recognized sports, Paralympic sports and Olympic sports ’  is included in the Schedule 
VII of the Companies Act 2013 and contributions to NSDF are covered under spending from the 
funds earmarked for CSR related activities. Thus, Public Sector Banks can contribute to NSDF 
under CSR and nothing debars them to 
approach schools/colleges in rural areas at the same time 
and adopt one of the sports by investing in infrastructure and other sports facility in the 
schools/colleges in the rural areas. 
Recommendations/observations 
 2.6  For the management and administration of NSDF, a council is constituted by the 
Central Government. This council has representation from the Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports, SAI and eminent sportspersons representing corporate sector, private foundations and non-
profit voluntary organizations. The Committee feels that if the Department of Sports expects 
adequate funding from the Public Sector Banks and Public Sector Undertakings, it should give 
adequate representation to the other concerned Ministries and organizations on the council. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends that 4-5 PSUs/Banks/Private bodies/Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs, Department of Financial Services and Department of Public Enterprises should be given 

representation in the council. Similarly, day to day working of the Fund is managed by an 
Executive Committee which have representation from the Ministries of Youth Affairs and Sports 
and Human Resource Development only. The Committee feels that the Executive Committee 
should also have wide representations for managing the day to day working of the Fund. 
Accordingly 4-5 PSUs/Banks/Private bodies/Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Department of 
Financial Services and Department of Public Enterprises should be given representation in the 
Executive Committee also.(Para 26) 
Action Taken 
  Although the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports is in agreement with the Standing 
Committee’s recommendation for including representatives of Public Sector Undertakings, Banks, 
Private Bodies, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Department of Financial Services, Department of 
Public Enterprises in the Council of NSDF and Executive Committee of NSDF, but it is felt that 
inclusion of more members in the Council of NSDF and Executive Committee of NSDF may make 
them unwieldy. Further, representatives of Department of Public Enterprises, Federation of Indian 
Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI), Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), Associate 
Chamber of Commerce (ASSOCHAM) are already included in Council of NSDF.  
Further, there is already provision in the NSDF Gazette Notification that the Executive Committee 
shall have the authority to call upon experts to assist in its deliberations. As and when need is felt, 
Executive Committee of NSDF can invite representatives of PSUs/Banks/Private bodies/Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs, Department of Financial Services and Department of Public Enterprises to 
attend its meetings. Further, as per provisions of NSDF Scheme, it is permissible for a donor to 
indicate a project alongwith any specific location/aspect for funding and also an agency for the 
execution of the project while making donations to the Fund.  
In view of these provisions, it is felt that there is no need to include more members in Council of 
NSDF and Executive Committee of NSDF.   
  

Recommendations/observations 
2.7  The Committee also takes this opportunity to point out that the scheme of NSDF 
was framed in the year 1998. At that time, Youth Affairs and Sports was one of the Department 
under the Ministry of Human Resource Development. This explains the presence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development in the composition of the council 
and the Executive Committee. Now that the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports has become a 
full fledged Ministry, the presence of the representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development seems to be inconsistent in the scheme. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports to relook into the provision and amend it accordingly. 
                          (Para 27) 
Action Taken 
Composition of Council of NSDF and Executive Committee of NSDF has already been 
amended. Representatives of Ministry of Human Resource Development are no longer included as 
members in the Council and Executive Committee of NSDF.  
Observations/Recommendation 
2.8  Involvement of sportspersons in the functioning of SAI could go a long way 
increasing good infrastructure and sports facilities at every level as the sportspersons are familiar 
with the kind of facilities infrastructure coaching, diet, training and support service are required for 
the sportspersons.              (Para 70) 
Action Taken 
Services of eminent sportspersons are being utilized as experts in various committees 
constituted for creation of good infrastructure and facilities besides monitoring of services and 
facilities being provided to the sportspersons. 
Observations/Recommendation 
2.9 The Committee further notes that there were nine regional centres of SAI functioning at 
Bengaluru, Kolkata, Gandhinagar, Bhopal, Sonepat, Chandigarh, Lucknow, Imphal and Guwahati. 
The Committee desires that each one of the Regional Centres should be headed by a Regional 
Director with full powers or two executive Directors in Delhi could look after the administrative 
and coordinating works of the organization as well as matters relating to the teams. A full time 

Chairman-cum-managing Director with good sports background should be appointed as the 
Director-General of SAI.           
    (Para 71) 
Action Taken 
As number of posts sanctioned for Regional Directors are 5, it is not possible that all the 
Regional Centres are headed by officers of the level of Regional Director. These aspects have been 
taken care of in the Cadre Restructuring proposal which is under consideration. 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee takes note of the reply and further suggests that the Department of 
Sports and SAI should consider constitution of Regional Advisory Committee  consisting of 
sportspersons from the respective region . This will help in promoting local talents and local 
sports as well. 
Recommendations/observations 
2.10 The Committee was informed that there is lack of good coaches for giving training to 
juniors in the SAI centres. The Committee feels that there have been many outstanding 
sportspersons who had retired from active sports and can work as coaches. The Committee feels 
that such sportspersons with their experience and expertise could nurture and bring up a new 
generation of sports persons besides providing much needed financial help to retired sportsperson. 
                                                              (Para 72) 
Action Taken 
SAI has qualified coaches having Diploma in Coaching and even higher qualification for 
training of budding players at various SAI training centres across the country as well as elite 
athletes at National camps.  
Olympians / Para-Olympians are being directly engaged as Assistant Coaches and Olympic 
medalist as Coaches. Besides, lateral appointments are also being made. SAI is presently recruiting 
around 180 coaches. The process is expected to be completed by December, 2016. For in-service 
training, recently more than 25 coaches and sports scientists were sent for a 2 week course on 
Sports Science at University of Birmingham.  A comprehensive plan is underway for upgradation 
of coaching framework with the help of International Centre of Coaching Excellence. 

Recommendations/observations 
2.11  
While deliberating on the subject it was brought to the notice of the Committee that 
BCCI was giving pension to its retired cricketers. The Committee feels that SAI should also devise 
a mechanism to provide pension to the sportspersons from NSDF after they retire from active 
sports life. This would serve as a social security for the sports person and they would be able to 
level their life independently and with dignity.       
       (Para 73) 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports is already implementing the Scheme of Pension to 
Meritorious Sportspersons, under which medal winners in Olympic Games, World Cup/World 
Championships in Olympics and Asian Games disciplines, Asian Games, Commonwealth Games 
and Para-Olympic Games, are given life-long pension, at following rates, after they retire from 
active sports or they attain the age of 30 years, whichever is later.  
S.  
No.  
Category of meritorious sportspersons  Rate of Pension 
(Rs./per month) 
1 Medallists at the Olympic Games 10000 
2 Gold medallists at the World Cup/World Championships in 
Olympic and Asian Games disciplines  
8000 
3 Silver and Bronze medallists at the World Cup/World 
Championships in Olympic and Asian Games disciplines 
7000 
4 Gold medallists of the Asian/Commonwealth Games 7000 
5 Silver and Bronze  medallists of the Asian/Commonwealth 
Games 
6000 
6 Gold Medallists of Para-Olympic Games 5000 
7 Silver medallists of Para-Olympic Games 4000 
8 Bronze Medallists of Para-Olympic Games  3000 
 
Comments of the Committee  
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Department of Sports and feels that the 
existing scheme needs further improvement and suggests that the existing Scheme of Pe nsion 
to Meritorious Sportspersons be suitably altered in such a way that medal winning 
sportspersons representing India in Para-Olympic games are not discriminated again st and 
are brought at par with other medal winners. 
  

Recommendations/observations 
2.12 The Committee took serious note of the fact that organisations/departments, which are 
recruiting sportsperson, engage them in day to day administrative work of the organisation. The 
Committee feels that recruitment of a sportsperson in an organisation is a value addition to that 
organisation and instead of engaging him/her in Administrative Work, he/she should be given 
opportunity to excel in the sports and also to train and mentor junior sports persons.  
                    (Para 75) 
Action Taken  
Department of Sports is in agreement with the observations of the Standing Committee. 
Department of Sports is of the view that the services of the sportspersons, after their active sports 
career is over, should be utilized for sports related activities only whether it is coaching or other 
technical areas, either within the organization where he/she is employed, or outside the 
organization. The Department of Sports has written to Department of Personnel & Training in 
April 2012 requesting them to issue the necessary instructions in this regard to concerned 
Ministries/Departments and the Public Sector Undertakings where sportspersons are recruited in 
large numbers, as such a move would ensure an effective continuum of the rendering of valuable 
service by sportspersons in sports related activities, which will benefit the sporting community and 
develop a larger sporting culture in the country.  Taking cognizance of the Department of Sports ’ 
view, the Department of Personnel & Training has in its scheme of out of turn promotions for 
sportspersons notified on 26.7.2012 specifically provided that “as far as possible the services of 
the sportspersons should be utilized for sports related activities after their active sports career is 
over, whether it is coaching or other technical areas”.  
As far as Sports Authority of India is concerned, the services of sportspersons recruited as coaches 
by SAI are being utilized for sports training.  Their services are also being utilized in moni toring 
of sports activities etc. 

CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND 
Recommendations/observations 
3.0  The Committee had also recommended that each major industrial house, both 
public and private sector, should be asked to adopt one sports discipline and they should take the 
total responsibility of scouting talent and nurturing the same, including their participation in 
various national and international events. On reciprocal basis, the concerned industrial house 
should have its nominee in the concerned national federation/association. The Committee again 
reiterates its recommendation and also suggests that major industrial house should adopt, at least, 
one sport discipline and nurture the same if sports culture in this country is to be evolved.  
                                         (Para 6) 
Action Taken 
The Government has been regularly interacting with corporate entities, both in the public 
sector and private sector,  for adopting one specific sports discipline for taking the overall 
responsibility including talent scouting, training and competitive exposure of the sportspersons at 
various for a such as meetings, seminars and conferences.  
Response of the corporate entities has not been much encouraging for taking the overall 
responsibility  for promotion and development of specific sports discipline, though they have been 
undertaking sports specific activities, for example, TATA Group of companies is managing TATA 
Archery Academy, TATA Football Academy and TATA Athletics Academy at Jamshedpur. India 
Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL), a Central PSU, has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports for supporting Badminton and 
Archery sports disciplines and has agreed to contribute Rs. 30 crore to National Sports 
Development Fund  (NSDF) over a period of three years and has already contributed Rs. 10 c rore 
to NSDF.  
Petroleum Sports Promotion Board (PSPB), in which oil and gas PSUs are members, is managing 
Table Tennis Academy at Ajmer.  

National Sports Federations (NSFs) are also directly in touch with corporate entities for seekin g 
sponsorships for National Championships and international tournaments organized by them in 
India.  
Comments of Committee 
 The Committee takes note of the reply and recommends that Department should  
pursue continue to pursue the matter with both public and private sector com panies 
vigorously towards adoption of disciplines.  The Committee further recommends that both 
the Department and National Sports Federations (NFS) should also pursue with the 
corporate entities. 
Recommendations/observations 
3.1  The Committee also recommends that once a sportsperson is selected for financial 
support under NSDF or by the PSB/PSU/organizations, that financial support should continue till 
the time the sportsperson attains a certain level. There should be no break in the financial support 
to a sportsperson as the same could lead him/her to drop out of the sports. Thus, financial support 
should be on continuous basis.        (Para 21) 
Action Taken 
Financial support from NSDF to sportspersons for their customized training, procurement of 
sports equipment is given as per the plans submitted by the sportspersons, which are duly 
examined in consultation with the Sports Authority of India (SAI) and the concerned National 
Sports Federations (NSFs).   
Further, National coaching camps are organized by Sports Authority of India (SAI) preparatory t o 
participation in international sports events, wherein all requirements with regard to training, diet, 
food supplements, sports equipments are taken care of under the Ministry ’s Scheme of Assistance 
to NSFs. 
Comments of the Committee 
The thrust of the Committee's recommendations was on the continuity of the financial 
support to Sports persons. However, the Ministry, in its ATR, has not categorically stated 
that in no case such a financial support was discontinued or there was a break. The  
Committee finds the reply of the Ministry incomplete and evasive. The Committee, therefore, 
impresses upon the Ministry to categorically clarify its position on this issue.
 

Recommendations/Observations 
3.2 The Committee also recommends that a certain percentage of Education Cess may be 
earmarked for sports promotion as it is our integral part of education as per the Education Policy. 
This could be around 0.25 percent for sports leaving 2.75 percent for education. The Ministry of 
Youth Affairs and Sports may follow it up with the Ministry of HRD and Ministry of Finance for 
this purpose.            (Para 25) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has taken up the matter with the Ministry of Human Resource Development and 
the Ministry of Finance on the Committee ’s recommendation for earmarking a certain percentage 
of education cess for promotion of sports. Their response is awaited. On receipt of their response, 
the Ministry will take the further action.  
Comments of Committee 
The Committee notes that the reply and would like to be apprised of the progre ss made 
further in the matter and the end results 
RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION OF SPORTSPERSONS 
Recommendations/observations 
3.3  The Committee feels that both recruitments and promotions of sportspersons were 
not being given due importance. Current guidelines prescribe that Boards of Banks/PSUs and other 
organizations set aside upto 5 percent of posts to be filled by sportspersons. In the absence of 
mandatory minimum cap, the banks/PSUs and other organizations have been recruiting 
sportspersons in varying percentage. This is creating confusion. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that DoPT should make at compulsory for all the Ministries/Departments to recruit 5 
percent sportspersons. The Committee would further appreciate if DoPT gives clear instructions to 
all the Ministries/Departments/organizations to effectively implement its promotion policy for the 
sports persons. The Committee further observes as follows:- 
(i) Job reservation for Sportspersons may be made mandatory in Central Government, its 
subordinate offices and undertaking including banks and insurance companies; 

(ii) 2 percent vertical and 3 percent horizontal reservation may be made mandatory in case of 
shortfall in vertical reservation due to 50 percent limit getting breached, it should automatically get 
transfer to horizontal reservation; 
(iii) In pay band II and III reservation for sports person may also be allowed for Olympic medalist 
and equivalent; and 
(iv) SAI can function as nodal agency and work as employment exchange for recruitment of 
sportspersons.           (Para 59) 
Action Taken 
  A Committee under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Establishment), Department of 
Personnel & Training and having representatives of the Department of Sports and the Sports 
Authority of India has been constituted, which among other things, is also required to give its 
recommendations on minimum percentage for reservations for sportspersons in Central 
Government offices, extending reservation for recruitment in categories other than group ‘C’ and 
erstwhile Group ‘D’ posts.     
Observations/Recommendations 
3.4  The Committee notes that most of the sports persons were being recruited in pay 
bands I and II jobs only. The Committee feels that this practice should be rectified. A player  gives, 
the most productive years of his life to sports. Therefore while recruiting these sportspersons they 
should be treated at par with pay band III officers based on their sports achievements at National 
and International level. The Committee would appreciate if this aspect is also considered by the 
DoPT in right earnest.           (Para 62) 
Action Taken  
As stated in reply to recommendation No. 59 above, a Committee under the chairmanship of 
Joint Secretary (Establishment), Department of Personnel & Training and having representatives 
of the Department of Sports and the Sports Authority of India has been constituted, which among 
other things, is also required to give its recommendations on, extending reservation for recruitment 
in categories other than group ‘C’ and erstwhile Group ‘D’ posts.   
Comments of the Committee (Paras 59 and 62) 

 The Committee notes that a Committee under the Chairmanship of Joint Secre tary 
(Establishment), DoPT has been constituted to look into the recruitment and promotion of 
sportspersons in Banks/PSUs.  The Committee would like the Department to submit the 
report and recommendations of the said Committee and the follow on an d action taken 
thereon. 
OTHER IMPORTANT ISSUES 
Observations/Recommendation 
3.5  The Committee recommends that SAI and the Department of Sports should give 
funds for proper maintenance of the sports facilities at SAI centres in India. The Department of 
Sports should also ask the PSUs, PSBs and other organizations to adopt one of the sports 
disciplines and improve the facilities at the SAI centre.      
          (Para 66) 
Action Taken 
SAI Stadia Division is maintaining international level sports infrastructure facilities at its five 
stadia namely, Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium (JNS) Complex, IGSC, Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Range 
(Dr. KSSR), Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium (MDCNS) and Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee 
Swimming Complex (Dr. SPMSPC).  There are huge liabilities towards property tax & OM budget 
requirement for the five stadia.  
Hence it has become imperative to generate internal resources to bridge the gap betwe en the 
expenditure incurred on maintenance of SAI sports stadia and SAI Centres and the grant received 
from the Government. SAI is following a two- pronged strategy for this purpose. First the idle 
space is being given out on lease to government organizations; and second, efforts are being made 
to maximize revenue generation from various sports and non- sports activities. As a result, internal 
revenue generation  from SAI Stadia has increased from about Rs 3.7 crores in 2013-14 to Rs 16.6 
crores in 2015-16 (Feb ’16). A new initiative is under way to introduce online booking, which is 
expected to further enhance revenues due to ease of booking, besides adding transparency.  
The Corporate Affairs Ministry has amended the Companies Act in June 2016 to help better 
utilization of funds for promotion of sports, under the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
scheme and now CSR policy covers a) creation and maintenance of sports infrastructure; b) up 

gradation and renovation of existing sports facilities; and c) sports science support including 
setting up of gymnasium and rehabilitation centres. 
Therefore while efforts are afoot to attract funds through CSR, additional revenue is being 
generated by leasing spaces in which will supplement resources being provided to maintain SAI 
stadia. 
Undoubtedly, funds play a vital role for creation of sports infrastructure and regular maintenance 
subsequently. Sports Authority of India is implementing the following Sports Promotional 
Schemes to identify and nurture sports talent in the age groups ranging from 8-25 years and 
provide them regular sports training based on the approved scheme norms to excel at National and 
International level competition.  
 National Sports Talent Contest Scheme (NSTC) 
 Army Boys Sports Company (ABSC) 
 SAI Training Centre (STC) 
 Special Area Games (SAG) 
 Extension Centre of STC/SAG 
 Centre of Excellence (COE) 
 National Sports Academies (NSA) 
To implement the Sports Promotional Schemes, SAI has established 12 Regional 
Centres/Academic Institutions at Bhopal, Chandigarh, Haryana, Lucknow, Kolkata, Mumbai, 
Gandhinagar, Bangalore, Thiruvananthapuram, Imphal, Guwahati and Patiala across the country. 
During 2015-16, total 11773 talented sports persons (6626 boys and 5147girls) were trained in 27 
sports disciplines under residential and non residential basis in 251 SAI Sports Centres. 
As per the provisions of STC/SAG Schemes, the most of the STC & SAG centers established by 
SAI are on the sports infrastructure provided by the respective State Governments. As per the 
MoU executed between SAI and the State Government, the regular Civil and Electrical 
maintenance/up gradation of the existing sports infrastructure is the responsibility of the concerned 
State Government. Invariably, the sports infrastructure handed over to SAI was not in good 
condition and was not maintained by the State Government due to lack of availability of funds. 
Presently, there are 58 such SAI Training (STC) Centres operational across the country. Sports  
Authority of India while implementing the scheme in these centres, had made a provision of 
Annual Maintenance Grant to carry out the routine civil & electrical repairs in the SAI Training 
Centres so that sports infrastructure could be maintained and utilized for running the schemes. 

Since, the Annual Maintenance Grant contained number of components and also that the financial 
norms were too meager to attend to the regular maintenance of the facilities, SAI has rec ently with 
the approval of the Finance Committee bifurcated and enhanced the funds for meeting the 
requirement of maintenance of facilities of the centre and other provisions.  
The Finance Committee of SAI in its 74 th meeting held on 22.06.2016 has enhanced the existing 
Annual Maintenance Grant of STC/SAG Centres as indicated below: 
1. Annual Operation and Maintenance Grant for STC and SAG Centres:- 
 
SN Number of Trainees Amount 
1. Up to 50 trainees Rs.6.00   lacs 
2. 50-100 trainees Rs.10.00 lacs 
3. 100-150 trainees Rs.15.00 lacs 
4. Above 150 trainees Rs.20.00 lacs 
However, as a special case, considering the larger area of the following STC/SAG centres, the 
Annual Operation and Maintenance Grant has been increased as under:- 
 
SN Name of the Centre Amount 
1. SAI Training Centre, Hazaribagh Rs.24.00 lacs 
2. SAI Training Centre, Kandivali Rs.36.00 lacs 
3. SAI Training Centre, Aurangabad Rs.36.00 lacs 
Further a separate additional provision has been made to procure Consumable and Non-
Consumable for STC/SAG Centres which shall include expenditure towards sports equipment, 
furniture, fixtures and other items required for furnishing the office and hostel building, each 
centre shall get the Annual Grant for consumables and non consumable as indicated below:-  
 
SN Number of trainees Amount 
1. Up to 50 trainees Rs.5.00   lacs 
2. 50-100 trainees Rs.8.00   lacs 
3. 100-150 trainees Rs.10.00 lacs 
4. Above 150 trainees Rs.12.00 lacs 
Considering the dilapidated condition of the Sports infrastructure in some of the STC/SAG 
Centres, as a special case, SAI Head Office has allocated Rs.25 lacs to each to its Regional Ce ntre 
to carry out the immediate civil and electrical repairs including face lifting of the centres.  
SAI has also initiated a project called Mission Model Centre (MMC) to develop at least one Model 
Centre from among the existing STC/SAG Centers in each State which would act as a benchmark 
to develop rest of the STC/SAG Centers on the concept of Model Centre.  The Model Centre shall 
have latest international standard sports facilities.  

As a matter of fact, the availability of funds for development and promotion of sports in the 
country has been found to be the major constraint as the funds provided by the Government are not 
sufficient. Therefore, there is need to rope in various corporate houses, public and private sectors 
(PSUs and PSBs) for financial support so that the requisite sports facilities could be created and 
maintained under the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) for running the Sports Promotional 
Schemes in the country. To this end, SAI has signed agreements with the following Corporate 
houses/PSUs/PSBs under its Sports Promotional Schemes: 
1. Sports Authority of India has signed an agreement with M/s Glenmark Aquatic Foundation 
(GAF) for its National Swimming Academy (SAINSA) at Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee 
Swimming Complex, New Delhi where M/s Glenmark shall help SAI in 
identification/nurturing of talent and advance foreign training and competition. 
2. Similarly, SAI has tied up with M/s. Procam International to provide financial support for 
running SAI National Sports Academy (Middle and long distance) at Bhopal (Madhya 
Pradesh) 
3. Coal India Ltd. has agreed to support the establishment of National Table Tennis Academy 
at SAI Regional Centre, Kolkata. 
4. SAI Regional Centre NSSC Bangalore has submitted a proposal amounting to Rs 1 Crore 
and 10 Lacs to National Mineral Development Corporation, Telangana to sponsor Athletics 
and Hockey discipline of STC Secunderabad where 70 talented sports person will be 
trained. 
5. SAI has also initiated a dialogue with Shriram Group of Companies, Bangalore to help SAI 
for setting up a Special Area Games Centre for Siddi tribes at Dandeli, Karwar District 
Karnataka. 
 Comments of the Committee  
 The Committee notes the reply of the Department and appreciates its efforts to 
generate revenues by leasing out idle spaces. The Committee however would l ike to point out 
that the leasing out of these spaces should not affect the playing and training areas. The 
Committee would also suggest that SAI should pursue the PSUs and corporate entities to 
sponsor stadiums which would bring funds for their upkeep and maintenance. Then 
Committee desires that the details of the steps taken and the outcome therefore be brought to 
the notice of the Committee.  
Observations/Recommendation 
3.6  The Committee in its 34 th Report on the India’s Performance in International Sports 
in 1995 had made the following observations on the restructuring of Sports Authority of India 
(SAI):-- 

‘one of the general complaints received by the Committee was that the sports administrators, 
particularly most of the officials of the Sports Authority of India (SAI) had no sports background. 
It was cited as one of the reasons for lack of direction in the sports arena.’ 
 
‘the Committee observed that there was a lot of dissatisfaction about the structure and functioning 
of the Sports Authority of India (SAI). It was complained that SAI had become a huge and 
unwieldy   organization, with completely bureaucratic characteristics. There are a number of 
Directors, Deputy Directors and other paraphernalia which was not originally contemplated. There 
are a number of square pegs in the round holes. It is a sort of inverted pyramid. All the powers are 
centralized at the headquarters. The Regional Centres some of which like the Bangalore one- doing 
excellent work-are deprived of financial powers due to lack of autonomy. Even for small matters, 
they have to get clearance  from the headquarters of SAI at Delhi, including sanctioning of small 
expenditure. The Committee found that such a bureaucratic functioning of the SAI is proving to be 
a major obstacle in the free and smooth functioning of the Regional Centres. The Committee feels 
that the Regional Centres should be delegated adequate financial and administrative powers so as 
to cater to their day-to-day requirements for the efficient and smooth functioning of these Centres. 
The atmosphere in SAI needs to be made a sports-friendly rather than the existing monolithic 
bureaucratic organization. The Committee feels that unless these Centres are strengthened, we 
cannot expect better results from them. Work and accounts of the Centres should be periodically 
audited and monitored by the competent authority. The SAI in Delhi could be just a coordinating 
authority and should concentrate on policy, planning and monitoring. There should be a Sub-
Regional Centre of SAI in each State, with a Director in charge of it’.     
       (Para 68) 
Observations/Recommendation 
3.7  The Committee finds that there has been no change in the situation till now. The 
Sports Authority of India continues to function in the same bureaucratic manner. Surprisingly, 
sports persons were not being represented at any level in the functioning of SAI even today. Many 
of the Sports Institutes are headed or managed by persons not having any sports background. The 
Committee feels, the situation requires immediate corrective steps.    (Para 
69) 
Action Taken 
SAI is undertaking organizational restructuring. At present SAI has acute shortage at 
managerial level. The present strength is heavily skewed towards Group C & D with very little 
strength at management level. Further new areas like IT & MIS, Sports Science, etc. need to be 
strengthened.  
These are also being addressed in the restructuring proposal which will be finalized soon. With 
regard to Financial delegation, SAI has undertaken extensive revision to delegate adequate powers 

not only to Regional Centres but also to the SAI Training Centres (STCs)and Special Area Games 
(SAG) centres at grassroot level.
 
Sportspersons who had excelled at International level competitions have been included as 
members in the Governing Body, which is the apex body of SAI, to advise the Governing Body on 
matters relating to policy planning and sports development in country.  
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee finds the reply of the Ministry not convincing about the acute 
shortage of staff at managerial level in SAI. The Committee specifies that sportspersons who 
have excelled at international level Competitions should be recruited at managerial  levels 
and also recruitment of talent in SAI for managing IT and MIS, Sports Science etc.    
Observations/Recommendation 
3.8  The Committee was also given to understand that the foreign coaches engaged by various 
bodies/organizations were being paid higher remuneration vis-à-vis the Indian coaches. The 
Committee feels that this practice is uncalled for if we desire to promote sports in the country. The 
Committee would appreciate if grading of coaches is done and equal and uniform remuneration is 
paid to both foreign and Indian coaches.         
   (Para 79) 
Action Taken  
The salary structure of Indian Coaches has been revised suitably.  The revised salaries being 
paid to Indian Coaches is as under:-  
1. High Performance Specialist Coach – up to Rs. 2.00 Lakhs per month. 
2. National Coach - up to Rs. 1.5 Lakhs per month (Higher salary may be allowed in truly 
deserving cases). 
Other Coach - up to Rs 0.75 Lakh per month (Higher salary may be allowed in truly dese rving 
cases). 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee appreciates that the salary structure has been revised but, the reply is 
silent as it does not categorically state whether the revised salary structure of Indian coaches 
are equal to those for foreign coaches .The Committee, accordingly, desires to be inf ormed 
by the Department as to whether both the Foreign and Indian coaches are treated equally.  

CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED. 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
****** 
 