  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
222 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-2011 (DEMAND NO. 58) OF  
THE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29TH APRIL, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 29TH  APRIL, 2010) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2010/VAISAKHA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-2011 (DEMAND NO. 58) OF THE  
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29TH APRIL, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 29TH APRIL, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2010/VAISAKHA, 1932 (SAKA) 


CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …....... ...........................................................…    (i)-(ii) 
2.  PREFACE………………………........... ..........................................................................…     (iii) 
3.  REPORT ....................................................................................................................... ...…    
4. *OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE.      
5. *MINUTES ................................................................................................................... ..........  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*will be appended at printing stage 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD 
(2010-11) 
  
 
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes   Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
4. Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
5. Shri M. Rama Jois 
6. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
8. Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran 
9. Shri N.K. Singh 
10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shri Suresh Angadi 
12.  Shri Kirti Azad 
13.  Shri P.K. Biju 
14.  Shri Jitendrasingh Bundela 
15.   Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
16.  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
17.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
18.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
19.  Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
20.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
21.  Shri P. Kumar 
22.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
23.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
24.  Shri Sis Ram Ola 
25.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 
26.  Shri Tapas Paul 
27.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
28.  Shri Ashok Tanwar 
29.  Shri Joseph Toppo  
30.  Shri P. Viswanathan 
31.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Secretary 
Smt. Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
Smt. Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Human Resource Development, having been au thorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred Twenty Second Report of the 
Committee on the Demands for Grants (Deman d No.58) of the Department of Higher 
Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development for the year 2010-2011. 
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received 
from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development 
and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the said Demands 
for Grants in its meeting held on 25th March, 2010. 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting 
held on 28th April, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

I  INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1   The Department of Higher Education is entrusted with the task of policy 
formulation, programme implementation, co -ordination with other sectors, data 
management, training and capacity building, development of disadvantaged sections, 
women, minorities etc in the backdrop of Government’s vision to expand opportunities in 
higher education and improve the quality of education.  In short, the Department is 
responsible for major policies relating to higher education and research in the country.  
The Department discharges substantial part of its functions through autonomous 
organizations such as IITs, IIMs, NITs, Central Universities etc. 
 
1.2   As the Department aims to provide access to relevant and good quality 
higher education in an equitable manner, it has taken various initiatives like setting up of 
new IITs, IIMs, NITs, IIITs, Central Un iversities, model degree colleges and 
polytechnics.  In order to improve the quality of higher education, the Department has 
initiated major reforms viz setting up of a National Council for Higher Education and 
Research (NCHER) as an overarching body to regulate higher education and research in 
India; establishment of Innova tion Universities, to be world class centres of learning, 
Very Personal Network and broadband connectivity to various colleges across the 
country under the National Mission on Education through ICT, amendment of various 
existing Acts etc.  Emphasis has been laid on educationally backward areas like J&K, 
NER States with a view to achieve the goal of inclusive education. The Department has 
established women hostels, women polytechnics, Equal Opportunities Cells (EOCs) to 
promote women education.  The Department has been committed to provide quality and 
affordable higher education to all. 

 REPORT 
 
II.  BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
2.1  The budgetary allocations of the Department of Higher Education during 
the last three years, ie., 2007-2008, 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 has been as under:- 
(Rs in crores) 
Year Plan Non-Plan Total 
2007-2008 
 
6483.00 2729.00 9212.00 
2008-2009 
 
7600.00 3259.00 10855.00 
2009-2010 
 
9600.00 5833.00 15433.00 
 
  In 2010-11, the Department has received a total outlay of Rs. 16,994 
crores including Rs. 11,000 crore plan and Rs. 5,994 crore non-plan allocation. The 
Committee notes that while there was 17. 32 per cent increase in plan outlay in 2008-09 
in comparison to 2007-08, the plan allocation increased by 26.32 per cent in 2009-10 in 
comparison to previous year.  A hike of 14.58 per cent in allocation for 2010-11 is 
comparatively low.    
 
2.2  The Sector-wise allocations during 2009-10 and 2010-2011 are as under:-                                
(Rs. in crores) 
Sector BE 
(2009-10) 
RE 
(2009-10) 
BE 
2010-2011 
1. 
 
University and Higher  
Education 
4419.00 3630.00 4976.90 
2. Technical Education 3902.00 3687.00 4706.00 
3. 
 
Distance Learning,  
Scholarships and ICT 
1100.00 460.00 1120.00 
4. Languages Development 145.00 142.00 157.00 
 
5. 
 
Others (including Book 
Promotion, copyright and 
planning, etc.).  
34.00 33.00 40.10 
 
 
TOTAL 
 
9600.00 7952.00 11000.00 
 
.   

2.3  It was brought to the notice of the Committee that the Department of 
Higher Education had submitted a proposal to the Planning Commission for a plan 
allocation of Rs.20,947 crores for the financial year 2010-11 but finally an allocation of 
Rs.11,000 crores has been approved. The Department of Higher Education had, therefore, 
to re-work all the schemes. No Plan-Scheme of the Department has, however, been 
dropped.  
 
2.4  The Committee notes that of 3.78 per cent of the GDP, flowing to the 
Education Sector in 2008-09, the share of  the State Governments and the share of 
the Central Government seem to be going for a change while Chapeau clause of the 
Eleventh Plan on education, as a whole, enjoins upon the Government to give six per 
cent of the GDP to the education sector. The Committee is of the view that the 
allocation for Department is definitely lower than the vision statement of the 
Government.  
 
III  UTILISATION OF FUNDS  
 
3.1  The budgetary allocation of the Department, on the other hand, also needs to 
be appropriated in the context of utilization of  funds.  The Committee notes a grim picture 
of fund utilization in the Department so much so  that plan allocation had to be reduced at 
the RE stage every year and even that redu ced allocation remained under-utilised. Plan 
allocation for Higher Education during the first three years of the Eleventh Plan indicate a 
poor pace of utilization as indicated below:- 
     (Rs.in crores) 
2007-2008 2008-2009 2009-2010 
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals 
upto to 
31.12.2009
6479.48 3261.32 3139.26 7593.50 6800.00 6711.96 9596.00 7952.00 5500.00 
 
 
A perusal of the above mentioned figures indicates that during all the first three years of 
Eleventh Plan, the allocation was revised downwards at RE stage and even that reduced 
allocation remained underutilized. The fund util izations has particularly been utterly poor 

in 2009-10 as only Rs. 5500 crore could be spent up to the end of third quarter i.e. 31 st 
December, 2009 against the plan allocation of Rs. 9596 crore. 
 
3.2  The Department has clarified that out of the provision of Rs. 4375.94 crore 
for UGC in 2009-10, a sum of Rs. 827 crore was meant for establishment of new Central 
Universities and Rs. 1033 crore was earmarked for implementation of Oversight 
Committee recommendations in Ce ntral Educational Institutions.  However, due to issues 
of site selection and the transfer of land for Central Universities by State Governments, 
construction activities could not be initiated,  leading to allocation remaining unspent.  
Similarly, due to delay in recruitment of faculty, shortfall of Rs. 213 crore was envisaged 
under Oversight Committee at RE stage.  Delayed approval of the Scheme of National 
Knowledge Network under the National Mission on Education was the other main factor 
leading to reduction in allocation. 
 
3.3 The Committee can presume that but for failure in achievement of physical projects, 
the plan allocations were accordingly reduced at RE stage after the pre-budget review.  
There has been shortfall in non-plan expenditure due to delay in finalisation of the pay 
scales, corresponding to the Sixth Pay Commission recommendations, for faculty of the 
centrally funded Technical Institutions and the consequent delay in pay fixation and 
payment of arrears of salary. A sum of Rs. 250 crore provided for the scheme of 
“Improvement in Salary Scales of University  & College Teachers” remained unutilized in 
the absence of required proposals/ details from the States. The Committee was informed 
that pace of expenditure was being reviewed in the Bureau Heads meeting twice a month 
and necessary steps were being taken to overcome the identified problems.    
 
3.4 The Committee agrees that the infrastructure development for recently 
approved 12 Central Universities may be a ti me consuming affair and for that matter 
the achievement of financial targets would entirely depend on physical targets.  
Similarly, the shortfall in non plan outlay of 2009-10 due to delay in finalization of 
pay and salaries on account of Sixth Pay Commission recommendation is also 
acceptable. The Committee, however, impresses upon the Department to strictly 
monitor the progress of infrastructure development for new Central Universities so 
that at least the plan outlay now available for the purpose is optimally utilized.  
Nobody can deny the fact that function ing of any educational institution from 

temporary site for a prolonged time cannot be considered an ideal proposition.   Our 
Central Universities, envisaged to be role model of higher education functioning from 
temporary campuses is bound to adversely affe ct both the quality of education as well 
as the performance of the students. A time bound completion schedule should, 
therefore, be drawn out to ensure that infrastructure of these universities is in place 
without cost and time overruns.   
 
3.5 The Committee observes that not only under University Education, but also under 
two other major components of Higher Education, i.e. Distance Learning and Technical 
Education, the trend of allocated funds being brought down drastically in the middle of the 
year and that too remaining under-utilised by the end of the year is evident.  Following 
details are self-explanatory:-  
(Rs. in crores) 
     2007-08  2008-09     2009-10  
Scheme BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals 
up to  
1.12.2009
Distance 
Learning 
610.00 108.00 67.66 622.00 511.08 447.79 990.00 390.00 38.26 
Technical 
Education 
324.00 1103.20 1066.79 3205.00 285.22 2833.34 3902.00 3687.00 2557.22 
 
Not only this, the Committee views with s erious concern the low level of utilisation 
by the end of first three quarters during 2009-10.  The Committee is surprised to 
note that smaller schemes lik e Scholarships, Book Promot ion also do not seem to 
have been functioning as envisaged. Scheme  of Scholarships, very crucial for both 
the meritorious and poor students continue s to remain almost non-functional.  
Funds allocated for 2007-08 under this Scheme remained unspent.  Position was the 
same upto third quarter of 2009-10.  Similarly, Scheme of Book Promotion which 
needs to be propagated extensively seems to be the most neglected as year after year 
negligible allocation under this scheme somehow remained gros sly under-utilised.  
The Committee would like to point out that in the process of massive expansion of 
higher/technical education, schemes like Book Promotion and Scholarships should 
not be allowed to be implemented in a rout ine manner.  Their role though smaller is 
equally crucial for our young students. 
 

3.6  Availability of unspent balances an d outstanding utilisation certificates are 
the two basic indicators of achievement level of both physical and financial targets of any 
scheme.  The Committee has been monitoring the status of these two components.  The 
Committee is happy to note that considerab le progress has been made in both bringing 
down the number of pending UCs and the quantum of unspent balances.  From 2914 UCs 
amounting to Rs. 7493.61 crore as on 1 st April, 2009, 2115 UCs amounting to Rs. 834.41 
crore are outstanding as on 31st December, 2009.  Similarly Unspent Balances amounting 
to Rs. 353.91 crore as on 1 st April, 2009 have been brought down to Rs. 35.44 crore by 
30th September, 2009.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that number of 
UCs (2115 as on 31 st December, 2009) is still considerably high.  The Committee also 
notes that unspent balances are available with autonomous bodies / other implementing 
agencies.  As per the latest details furnished by the Department, unspent balances, both 
under plan and non-plan are available with 12 institutions, out of which maximum 
availability is with the following 5 institutions: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Institutions Plan Non-Plan 
ISM University, Dhanbad 1.24 - 
NERIST, Itanagar 3.15 1.37 
ICSSR, New Delhi 2.19 - 
Central Hindi Directorate 2.98 5.13 
CIIL, Mysore 20.53 3.81 
 
The Committee is not convinced by the Department’s clarification that 
unspent balances in itself do not adversely affect the working of institutions as all 
such institutions have also corresponding  liabilities / commitments which are taken 
into account while deciding further releases.  The Committee would like to point out 
that the very fact that small institutions  have unspent balances and corresponding 
liabilities also, indicates that not only fi nancial norms are not being adhered to but 
they are also not functioning as per their mandate.  The Committee would, 
therefore, appreciate if corrective measures are initiated by the Department at the 
earliest.  Committee’s apprehensions are confirmed by pendency of audit paras 
against ICSSR, New Delhi, Central Hindi Directorate and CIIL, Mysore. 
 

3.7  The Committee is of the view that the pace of fund utilization both 
under Plan and Non-Plan during 2009-10 has fa iled to meet the targets. By the end 
of the third quarter (upto December, 2009) only 57.32% of plan and 70.25% of non 
plan funds could be utilised.  The Departme nt’s assertion that some schemes needed 
to be reworked because of lower allocation is  indicative of its failure to utilize the 
allocated funds.  How can the Department claim higher allocation when the fund 
utilization has been so poor.   
 
3.8  The Committee is surprised to find that shortfall is noticed even in the 
projections approved by the Planning Comm ission for the Eleventh Plan.  Out of 
projected outlay of Rs. 89,943 crore, only Rs. 35,504 crore could be spent in the first 
three years of the plan period. The Committee can only conclude that given the poor 
utilization trend, the Depart ment would not be able to meet the shortfall between 
the projected outlay and the budget allocation.  The Department shall have to blame 
itself in case there is an overall cut by  the Planning Commission in the projected 
outlay for Twelfth Plan. Obviously the annual budgetary allocations are also likely 
to be affected adversely.  There appears to be deficiencies in the financial 
management as well.  The Department has got money but it has not been able to 
utilize the same imaginatively and skillfully Though the Department is claiming 
about a number of interventions introduced for access,  excellence and inclusiveness  
and also building a knowledge society, but the pace of expanding higher education is 
not commensurate to the projected outlay approved by the Planning Commission.  
In such a scenario, Department’s vision for investing 6 per cent of GDP for the 
Education Sector, seems to be a distant dr eam.  Given the level of utilization of 
allocated funds, the Committee is apprehensive about the outcome of Departments’ 
efforts for increasing Gross Enrolment Rati o from 12.4 per cent to 15 per cent by 
2010-11.  The Committee hopes the De partment would adopt better fiscal 
management techniques supported by strong monitoring mechanism to ensure that 
the outlays are utilized optimally and the demand for higher allocation could be a 
justifiable preposition.    The Committee recommends that the Department should 
undertake quarterly review of allocation a nd pace of expenditure  as well as 
identifying deficiencies and shortfalls with a view to achieving the target of 15 per 
cent GER at the end of Eleventh Plan.   

 
IV  TARGETS FOR ELEVENTH PLAN  
 
4.1  The Committee has noted that during the first three years of Eleventh  
Plan, Higher Education System of the country has seen a major expansion. Various new 
initiatives have been taken by opening new in stitutions and upgrading the existing ones. 
Many reform measures have also been taken to improve the quality of higher education. 
‘Inclusiveness’ is also one of the major concerns during the Eleventh Plan. Many new 
schemes such as Women’s Hostel; Model Colleg es in Educationally Backward Districts, 
Education Loan Interest Subsidy, etc. have been initiated to ensure inclusiveness apart 
from making special provisions for reservation of seats for the disadvantaged sections.  
 
4.2   Furthermore, the Government has initiated a process of academic reforms 
which includes the introduction of the semester system, regular upgradation and updating 
of syllabi, introduction of the choice-based credit system, which allows students to pick 
and choose courses to earn credit, etc. Apart from encouraging the State Governments to 
make investments for new institutions of higher learning, the Department is also 
expecting them to improve the infrastructure  of the existing institutions as part of 
educational reforms.   
 
4.3  Besides, a number of new laws for bringing major reforms like 
establishment of an overarching authority for Higher Education and Research, mandatory 
accreditation mechanism for higher educational institutions, prevention and prohibition of 
unfair practices and for setting up Educational Tribunals are proposed to be introduced in 
the near future. 
 
4.4  One of the important targets for Eleventh Plan is to achieve 15 per cent of 
Gross Enrolment Ratio.  While it was expected that State Government would also 
allocate more funds for education, the Central Government has taken the following 
measures to achieve the goal of 15 per cent GER:- 
(i) Setting up 16 new Central Universities. 
(ii) Setting up of 7 IIMs 
(iii) Setting up of 8 IITs 
(iv) 10 new NITs 
(v) Setting up of 374 Model colleges in Educationally Backward Districts. 
(vi) Setting up of Hostels for women. 

(vii) 1000 new polytechnics 
(viii) National Mission of Education through ICT 
(ix) Capacity expansion in Central Educational Institutions 
 
 
4.5  To ensure the growth of GER, number of initiatives for the participation of 
private sector in the higher education sector pa rticularly relating to governance issues are 
being taken so that while on the one hand, private participation is encouraged on the other 
hand, quality is also maintained by making accreditation and assessment mandatory for 
all institutions instead of the present system of voluntary accreditation. Scheme of 
scholarships and interest subsidy on educational loans, have also been launched so that 
talented students are not denied opportunity to pursue higher education because of 
financial constraints. 
 
4.6  Closely related with the Gross Enro lment Ratio (GER) is the issue of 
access to education.  In spite of massive expansion in higher and technical education 
both in the Government and private sector in the recent years, the fact remains that 
even meritorious students do not get the opportunity to join course of their liking.  
Every year, students both talented and av erage students compete for admission in 
IITs and IIMs and other premier educationa l institutions.  However, very few get 
admission in institutions of their choice.  For example, during 2009, out of 3,84,977 
students who sat for IIT entrance test, 3,74 ,942 failed to qualify.  Such a trend is 
visible in other Entrance Tests also.  Not on ly this, state-wise details indicate that 
success rate of students from N-E states  like Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, 
Maghalaya and Sikkim in such exams is virtually nil.  Thus, issue of access to higher 
education, in spite of a large number of  significant initiatives taken by the 
Government continues to remain the major challenge.  The Committee can only say 
that more vigorous efforts with focus on weak areas are required to be continued for 
quite some time.  Though, the exact figures of students not able to get admissions in 
different universities in Delhi was not made available to the Committee, gap 
between demand and supply is very wide there also. The Committee would like the 
Department to consider this issue and devise a mechanism by which such category 
of aspiring students get opportunities for hi gher education.  One straight answer to 
this issue could be to open more colleges  and universities in the country but at the 
same time the Department should also focus on diversifying the curriculum to 

include other things that will be of help to  students’ growth.  The focus should be on 
developing students’ entrepreneur skills or  providing vocational education to them.  
Committee feels that it is crucial to improve the supply side response.   
 
V.  UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION   
 
5.1  The UGC was set up under an Act of Parliament in 1956 for the purpose 
of co-ordination, determination and maintenance of standards in universities. Apart from 
providing assistance grants to all eligible Universities and colleges, the Commission also 
advises the Central and State Governments to take measures which are necessary for the 
development of Higher Education. 
 
5.2 Plan Allocation for UGC and utilisation th ereof during the first three years of the 
Eleventh Plan is as follows:- 
(Rs. in crores) 
 2007-08 2008-09 BE 2009-10 
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Actual
s 
2374.00 1805.10 1805.10 3439.95 3105.95 3165.95 4374.95 3584.85 2773.50
 
Although there has been steady increase in th e plan allocation for UGC during the first 
three years of the Eleventh Plan, the same ca nnot be said about the utilisation.  Every 
year, plan allocation had to be brought down at the RE stage.  What is more worrisome is 
that percentage of increase in 2009-10 when compared with 2008-09 has been matched 
with the reduction at the RE stage. 
 
5.3 Explaining the reasons for skewed variations in BE and RE outlay, the 
Department has  clarified that in the BE for 2009-10, a sum of Rs. 827 crore was 
earmarked for the establishment of new Centra l Universities and Rs. 1033 crore were set 
aside for implementation of the Oversight Committee recommendations.  However, due 
to delay in the issue of site selection and the transfer of possession of land identified by 
the State Governments for the Central Universities, the initiation of construction activities 
has to be staggered as a result of which the said sum could not be utilised.  At the RE 
stage, while carrying out an assessment of the expected expenditures in 2009-10, the 
allocation of this component was revised to Rs. 277 crore which was further reduced to 
Rs. 200 crore after re-appropriation. Secondly, under Oversight Committee 

recommendations, recruitment of faculty did not progress sufficiently as a result of which 
a shortfall of Rs. 213 crores was envisaged at RE stage.  The actual expenditure up to 31 st 
December, 2009 against the RE allocation of RE 3589 crore was Rs. 2773.50 crore and as 
on 28th February, 2010, expenditure figures stood at Rs. 3233.45 crore.  The Committee 
appreciates the initial bottlenecks coming across in developing the infrastructure for 
new Central Universities but delay ca n certainly be checked through better 
coordination with the state authorities.  The Committee also expects the desired 
level of cooperation from the states as it is  on their initiatives the decision to open 
the Central Universities was taken by the Central Government.  The Committee is, 
however, not satisfied with slow pace of  faculty recruitment in accordance with the 
implementation of Oversight Committees’ recommendations.  The Committee 
recommends that urgent corrective measu res needed to be taken up for addressing 
the requirement of additional faculty lest the very purpose of legal framework for 
reservation for OBC category might be seriously jeopardized.   
 
5.4  The Committee is not aware about the exact proposed outlay for UGC in 
Eleventh Plan, but from the trend of allocation and pace of utilisation, it can be concluded 
that it would be difficult to match the plan outlay, with only two years of the plan period 
remaining.  The Committee notes that ther e is only marginal increase in the plan 
allocation for UGC from Rs. 4374.95 crore in 2009.10 to Rs. 4390.00 crore in 2010-11.  
Enhanced funds in 2010-11 when compared with RE provision in 2009-10 are meant for 
establishing 374 model degree colleges, one-time support for colleges and state 
universities and for new Centra l Universities.  The Committe e would appreciate if with 
constant monitoring during 2010-11 reduction at the RE stage is avoided and allocated 
funds are utilised as envisaged. 
 
VI.  HIGHER EDUCATION-QUALITY AND NEED FOR REFORMS 
 
6.1 The Committee was informed that even though there is no official ranking of 
institutions according to the Time Higher Education Supplement, the Jawaharlal Nehru 
University has been ranked 183
rd amongst world’s top 200 un iversities list and ranks 47th 
amongst top 50 universities outside the US and Britain. The University of Delhi figures is 
ranked 75 th in the world’s top universities in arts and humanities. All the Central 
Universities have been striving to disseminate and advance knowledge by providing 

instructional and research facilities, thereby improving the quality of  education imparted 
therein vis-a-vis the international standards. In order that the requisite infrastructure in 
terms of faculty and research facilities could be provided to the Central Universities, the 
Eleventh Plan outlay for the  Central Universities has been enhanced to Rs.15,268 crore 
compared to Rs.789.75 crore during the Tenth Plan.  
  
6.2  Research is an important component to ensure quality of higher education 
in the country.  The Committee has noted that in order to promote basic scientific 
research in the Central Universities, greater emphasis is being laid on upgradation of 
infrastructural facilities, creation of networking centres in leading departments of 
Universities for collaborative research with national level institutions, including CSIR 
laboratories. The University Grants Commission has been advised that while releasing 
grants-in-aid to the institutes of higher learning, 20% of the grant may be earmarked 
exclusively for research related activities.  Th e Central universities ha ve also been given 
freedom to enter into Memorandum of Understa nding with foreign universities for joint 
research collaborations. 
  
6.3 The following additional measures have been taken to promote research in 
universities.  
 
(i) Enhancing rates of Junior and Senior Research Fellowships by about 50%; 
(ii) Strengthening science based education and research in Universities; 
(iii) Disbursement of grant for presentation of research papers in international 
fora/conferences; 
(iv) Enhancing the quantu m of research grant to Universities aimed at 
encouraging research; 
(v) Permitting the Universities to enga ge adjunct/guest faculty to meet the 
shortfall; 
(vi) Allowing contractual appointments for Faculty; 
(vii) Introducing Bose Fellowship aimed at strengthening research background of 
the   distinguished faculty serving in India; 
(viii) Allowing consultancy charges to be shared by the faculty; 
(ix) Revamping Academic Staff Colleges; and 
(x) Organizing summer schools to train teachers; etc.  
 
6.4  It was informed to the Committee that to achieve excellence in teaching 
and research activities, UGC identifies universities for granting the status of “Universities 
with Potential for Excellence”.  In the first phase during the Ninth Plan, five universities 
viz. Jawaharlal Nehru University, University of Hyderabad, University of Madras, 

Jadavpur University and University of Pune were identified in 2000 for granting the 
status of Universities with Potential for Excellence.  During the Tenth Plan, four 
universities, viz., Madurai Ka mraj University, North Easter n Hill University, University 
of Mumbai and University of Calcutta were selected. Under the scheme, each university 
is to be provided Rs.30 crore during a Plan period. Out of this, 30% (Rs.9 crore) is to be 
spent on the focused area identified for the university.  The remaining 70% (Rs.21 crore) 
is to be spent on holistic development of the university. 
 
6.5  The Committee observes that higher education in our country is in a 
flux. It does not give a coherent picture because we have various institutions, quality 
institutions and institutions which do not have any quality  a t  a l l .   W e   h a v e  t h e  
institutions which give best  of education and also the institutions which provide 
substandard quality of education.   With  the number of institutions continue to 
grow, a seemingly absence of quality is felt.  We have poor infrastructure in most of 
the universities and colleges.  Our courses are irrelevant and there are very less 
number of quality teachers in the institutions. One of the important reasons for poor 
quality of education is that our librarie s in the colleges and universities are not 
properly equipped.  The Committee is of the firm view that development of work 
culture in our educational system is the need  of time.  We need to develop the talent 
who could infuse the quality aspect.  Our institutions require a visionary 
management, enlightened minds of faculty and inspired students to produce quality 
education. 
 
6.6  Closely related with quality is the aspect of accreditation  of the 
institution.  The National Assessment and Accreditation Council has the mandate to 
assess the standards of higher education ins titutions.  The Committee has been given to 
understand that important institution, like Kumaon University, University of Roorkee and 
IIT are running though their validation expired long back.  The Secretary during her oral 
evidence before the Committee clarified that since accreditation is not mandatory, it is 
not incumbent on the university to apply for re validation.  Once the mandatory nature of 
validation is in force, then the universit ies will be duty bound  to come back for 
revalidation.  She informed the Committee that  80 universities have valid accreditation  
so far. Fifty eight universities have not applied for revalidation of their accreditation.  

Fourteen universities are under the process of revalidation. Of the 80 universities which 
have valid accreditation, 35 are in the first cy cle of validation and they are yet to be ripe 
of validation.  The remaining are in the second cycle.   
 
 6.7 The Committee finds such system of valida tion quite intriguing.  It feels that 
either the system of validation be done aw ay with or it be made mandatory for all 
institutions.  Such slipshod approach with  regard to the validat ion provis ion does 
more harm than good to those institutions  whose existence and credibility becomes 
questionable with the expiry of validation.   The Committee hopes that Department 
would rectify this situation so that the ai r of confusion could be eliminated in the 
interest of both the students as well as th e institutions.  It further expects that the 
Department would take care of  this revalidation aspect in the legislature 
framework concerning accreditation proposes  to be brought befo re the Parliament 
in near future. 
 
6.8 The Committee appreciates the initiatives the Department has taken for the 
much awaited reforms in the field of higher education.  While examining the 
Demands for Grants of the Department of  Higher Education, the Committee also 
took opportunity to deliberate on the im pending educational reforms particularly 
with regard to the opening and recognition of different sets of universities.  In this 
context, the existing provisions of UG C Act and the Regulations came under close 
scanner of the Committee. The Committee has noticed that our university education 
is confronted with lot of practical difficult ies in implementation of those provisions.  
Monitoring of fees and quality of educat ion in private universities being not fully 
under control of the Government, both students as well as parents are facing a lot of 
problems.  The issue of indiscriminate reco gnition of institutions as Deemed to be 
Universities has become quite controversial and the Apex Court is seized of the 
matter.  Recently one more controversy ha s generated in the conversion of Central 
Universities into State Universities and the glaring example is Delhi Technical 
University, formerly known as Delhi College of Engineering (DCE).  The students of 
this University are up in arms against the granting of State University status to DCE 
which before such conversion was part of Delhi University i.e. a Central University.  
The matter is now sub-judice. There are ot her sets of university education in the 

name of foreign universities and also  fake universities which have opened campuses 
across the country.  In a nutshell, a host of teething problems have cropped up due 
to complexities of provisions under UGC Ac t and Regulations.  Needless to mention 
these infirmities have occurred because the existing policy for opening universities is 
not clearly laid down and the regulations are open to different interpretations.  The 
Committee hopes that the Department will ta ke into consideration all these issues 
and formulate a comprehensio n policy / regulation while finalising the proposed 
legislation for National Commission for Higher Education and Research.   
 
6.9  The Committee also takes th is opportunity to urge upon the 
Government to include the aspects of ch aracter building and physical fitness as 
important components in the educational reforms so as to ensure holistic growth of 
our students.  In this connection the Committ ee desires to draw the attention of the 
Department to its recommendations / observations contained in its 86 th Report on 
value based education. 
 
VII. NEW CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES  
 
7.1  The Committee understands that the Department of Higher Education has 
made efforts to have at least one Central University in each State of the Union.  At 
present, there are 40 Central Universities including 17 new Central Universities created 
with effect from 15
th January, 2009.  Out of the 17 ne w Central Universities, three State 
Universities have been converted into Central Universities in Madhya Pradesh, 
Chhatisgarh and Uttarakhand.  For each of the 14 Central Universities, the concerned 
State Government is to provide about 500 acres of land free of cost.  Sites for 5 new 
Central Universities have been identified, la nd has been allotted to 5 such Universities 
out of the remaining 4 universities.  Most  of these Universities have started their 
academic activities from temporary premises during the year 2009-10 pending 
finalization of sites, allotment of lands an d development of their permanent campuses .  
Government decision on recommendation of the Site Selection  Committee for location 
of University in Himachal Pradesh was expected by 15 th April, 2010.  Site Selection 
Committee was to shortly visit the sites for University in Jharkhand.  However, State 
Governments of Bihar and Kerala have been requested to suggest alternate sites.  The 
Committee also notes that while land has been acquired for Central Universities in 

Karnataka, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu, identified land in Gujarat, 
Haryana and Jammu & Kashmir is yet to be acquired  and handed over.  All the 
Universities except those in Himachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir are functioning 
from temporary campuses.  Universities in Himachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir 
were yet to start academic programmes.  The Committee was also given to understand 
that requisite faculty positions for all the Ce ntral Universities have been sanctioned by 
UGC which were expected to be filled up before the academic session 2010-11.  The 
Committee observes that all the New Central Universities created in January, 2009 are in 
the process of identification / allotment of land and thus are operating from temporary 
campuses. 
 
7.2  Most of these Universities are in the process of framing their 
Statutes/Ordinances on establishment of Schools of Studies and teaching Departments 
and on appointment of faculty. The action for appointment of the required faculty will be 
initiated by the respective Universities afte r the requisite Statutes/Ordinances are in 
place. Meanwhile, these Universities are running their academic programmes by 
appointment of contract/guest teachers. 
 
7.3  As things stand today, the Committee can only conclude that it would be a 
long drawn affair for the Central Universities to become fully operational, functioning 
from their permanent campuses with the required faculty and infrastructure in place.  It 
has taken more than a year to identify and ge t allotted the sites for these universities and 
the process is still not complete in respect  of some universities.  As a result, funds 
amounting to Rs. 827 crore earmarked for their establishment in 2009-10 remained 
unspent.  The Committee strongly feels that process of construction should 
commence in respect of all the Central Univ ersities in 2010-11 and got completed in 
a time bound manner.  The Committee is  unhappy that despite the preparatory 
exercise done by the Department and the UGC with regard to arrangements of 
faculty in newly created universities, the vacancies could not be filled up due to 
delay in finalization of statutes by respective universities.  Given the seriousness of 
the issue, the Department should have fixed a time frame for finalizing these 
statutes.  The Committee desires that the framing of statutes may be done without 
further delay so that the process of recruitment for the vacant posts of faculty could 

be started at the earliest.  It would be better if a Central Committee with  
representation from concerned State Government is assigned the task of monitoring 
both the required faculty and infrastructure of these Universities.  This action is 
required to be taken if cost and time overruns are to be avoided.  
 
VIII.  VACANCIES IN FACULTIES OF CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES. 
 
8.1  The Committee notes that about 3761 posts as against 9825 sanctioned 
posts are lying vacant in 15 Central Universities as on 1 st January, 2010.  Delhi 
University alone accounts for – 965 vacancies against 1702 sanctioned posts followed by 
Banaras Hindu University (BHU) having 905 vacant posts against 2395 sanctioned posts. 
 
8.2  On a specific query in this regard it was clarified by the Department that 
so far as BHU is concerned, though the number of reported vacancy is 905, filling up of 
277 vacancies in the Institute  of Technology have been ke pt in abeyance due to the 
proposal for upgradation of the Institute as an IIT being at an advanced stage of 
consideration of the Government. Besides, 492 posts, recently sanctioned for 
implementation of OBC recommendations are to be filled up in a phased manner. The 
number of effective vacancies in the University at present is, therefore, much lower than 
that of the reported vacancies. The University has completed scrutiny and short-listing of 
applications for 296 vacancies at the level of Lecturer and interviews in different 
Faculties are being scheduled one by one. The University has also recently advertised 55 
vacancies at the level of Reader and 23 at the level of Professor in the Institute of 
Medical Sciences and is also in the process of advertising the vacancies at these levels in 
the remaining faculties. These vacancies are planned to be filled up in the next six 
months.  
 
8.3  As regards the University of Delhi, out of the 965 vacancies, 646 posts 
have been sanctioned only recently for implementation of OBC recommendations. The 
posts are to be filled up in a phased manner, over a period of three years.  202 of these 
posts would become available for filling up only w.e.f. 2010-11. The number of 
vacancies to be actually filled up during the current year is, therefore, 763. The 
University has already advertised 729 posts.  It was informed that the interviews for 
several Departments under the Faculties of Arts, Social Sciences, Commerce & Business 

and Mathematical Sciences have been schedu led to be conducted in the coming three 
months.  
 
8.4  The Department while mentioning the reasons for vacancies clarified that 
the process for selection of faculty in Ce ntral Universities is quite lengthy and time 
consuming. These applicants are listed post-wise and category-wise for the Screening 
Committee  constituted by the Executive Counci l to shortlist the candidates to be called 
for the interview. Sometimes it becomes diffi cult for the Visitor’s nominees, particularly 
in multi-department Faculties, to give date s frequently for holding Selection Committee 
meetings which also causes delay in filling up of the vacancies. As a possible solution, 
the feasibility of having more than one nominee for each faculty was proposed but the 
same has not been found acceptable by the Visitor. 
 
8.5   According to the Department, besides other administrative problems like 
non-availability of reserved candidates, litiga tion related to appointments etc., the major 
delay in the filling up of vacancies is the non-finalization of the UGC Notification for 
appointment of teachers.  UGC has on 18 February, 2010 issued instructions to all State/ 
Central/ Deemed Universities informing them that the regulations on service conditions 
of teachers based on Pay Review Committee for Teachers are likely to be finalized 
shortly. 
 
8.6  The Secretary of the Department during her presentation before the 
Committee conceded that the quality of faculty remains a very severe and significant 
challenge.  She added that with the kind of expansion of higher education and increase in 
the number of institutions, the Department is faced with a problem of very serious 
dimension. Still they are making very conscious and concerted efforts to address the 
issue.  She assured the Committee that they would not make any compromise in the 
quality and in the qualification framework prescribed for faculty.  For that matter, a large 
number of teachers are being put through the winter schools and summer schools for 
training exposures.  She also accepted that there are problems in finding the right kind of 
faculty.  The Committee was informed that regular faculty  in new Central Universities 
would be appointed only after the requisite statutes  and establishment of 
schools/Departments are framed and th e school wise Selection Committees are 
constituted in accordance with the relevant statutes. A total under of 70 teachers have so 

far been appointed on ad-hoc/contract/deputation basis.  Besides, teachers/retired teachers 
of other universities are invited by these universities from time to time as guest/visiting 
faculty.  
 
8.7  It has come to the notice of the Committee that earlier the Federation of 
Central Universities Teache rs Association (FEDCUTA) had demanded that for 
promotion of Assistant Professors to Associate Professors in colleges, the requirement of 
publication of three articles should be done away with. The Association had further 
demanded that the process of selection and promotion should be different for direct 
recruitment of Assistant Professors, Associate Professors and Professors from that of 
promotion from Associate Professor and Prof essor, and that weightage should be given 
for “teaching” activities in the matter of promotions, higher AGP of Rs.12000/- to all 
Professors, and increased retirement age of 65 for Librarians. 
 
8.8  Moreover the Federation of Central Universities Teachers Association 
(FEDCUTA) does not favour introduction of  Academic Performance Indicator (API) 
system, particularly in relation to research  and academic contributions on the ground that 
sufficient research facilities are not availabl e in colleges. Representatives of FEDCUTA 
had raised strong objections to the proposed UGC regulations on 30.1.2010 particularly 
against the Academic Performance Indicator (API), Weightage Points (WP) and 
Performance Based Appraisal System (PBAS) and point system for promotion of 
teachers.  The Committee was given to understand that a final decision was to be taken  
after consultation with UGC and others based on the inputs received from FEDCUTA.  
The Committee would appreciate if this issue is resolved at the earliest so that studies are 
allowed to continue in a healthy atmosphere at Delhi University. 
 
8.9  The Committee observes that UGC was advised by the Department to 
notify qualifications for Assistant Professor at the entry level in the first instance, so that 
Universities and colleges which were in th e process of recruiting fresh talent into 
teaching in these positions could do so with out any delay. However, the UGC issued a 
letter to all universities permitting them to go ahead with the recruitment and promotion 
of teachers under the Career Advancement Scheme (CAS) as per UGC Regulations of 
2000 in the interim till the finalization of Re gulations on service conditions for teachers 
based on the recommendations of the Pay Review Committee. The Committee was given 

to understand that the two letters appeared to have crossed each other.  The latest position 
was that the Department was in consulta tion with UGC to resolve the matter.  The 
Committee is not happy with this state of affairs. Both the UGC and the Department 
are mandated to work in coordination so that all the Central Universities continue 
to function smoothly.  
 
8.10  The Committee notes that an operation of Faculty Recharge is being 
launched, under which 1000 fa culty positions are being created and to be filled at 
national level through global advertisement.  Despite seeking details in that regard, 
the feedback was not received from the Department.  The Committee would like to 
know the status of the scheme.   
 
IX. STRENGHTNING OF 6000 COLLEGES IN 150 STATE UNIVERSITIES. 
 
The Eleventh Plan envisages a scheme to extend one-time support for 
strengthening 6000 colleges in 150 State Universities which are not presently declared fit 
to receive grants under Section 12B of the UGC Act.  The Committee was informed that 
the UGC (Fitness of Certain Universities for Grants) Rules, 1974 and the UGC (Fitness 
of Institutions for Grants) Rules, 1975 require certain conditions to be met before grants 
could be provided by UGC which prevented the UGC from implementing the envisaged 
scheme.  The Committee is happy to note that in order to operationalise the scheme, 
amendments to the aforesaid Rules have been notified on 8
th August, 2009.  At 
present the process of formulation of gu idelines for the implementation of the 
scheme by the UGC is going on.  The Committee would like to point out that already 
considerable time has been taken since the notification of the Rules in August, 2009.  
In fact, the guidelines should have been circulated to the concerned State 
Universities by now.  The Committee would appreciate if the process is expedited 
and the scheme is implemented from 2010-11 itself.   
 
X.  DEEMED TO BE UNIVERSITIES 
 
10.1  Deemed to be Universities are the institutions of higher education other 
then universities that are so declared, on the advice of UGC , by th e Central Government 
under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956.  

 
10.2  There are 130 Deemed Universities in the country out of which 58 
institutions were declared as deemed to be universities during the last five years only.  
The Committee is aware of the recent developments with regard to de-recognition of 
Deemed University status in respect of 44 institutions, a decision which was later stayed 
by the Apex Court.  When the Committee desired to know the exact policy with regard to 
awarding status of deemed university, the Department clarified that a Task Force has 
been constituted by the Government to prepare an action plan for implementation of the 
recommendations of the Review Committee which has given its part-final report only, 
i.e., on only one of the two terms of references – protecting the interest of students on 
revoking declaration of the concerned deemed to be university.  The Task Force is yet to 
give its report on regulation of deemed unive rsities, the draft of which was forwarded by 
UGC to the Central Government and had been referred to the Task Force by the 
Government.  The proposed regulations would replace the UGC guidelines, 2000, which 
are currently in force.  The Committee would like the Department to keep the 
interests of students uppermost while revisi ng the regulations. It desires that the 
much awaited UGC regulations may be form ulated after due consultations with all 
stakeholders.  It would also urge upon the Department to expedite the notification of 
regulations without any further delay. 
 
XI.  PRIVATE UNIVERSITIES IN THE COUNTRY 
 
11.1  As on 18.03.2010, there are 59 Universities established by State 
Legislatures without public funding (i.e . Private Universities). Under the UGC 
(Establishment of and Maintenance of Standards in Private Universities) Regulations, 
2003, UGC is supposed to call for information in prescribed proforma for ascertaining the 
norms and standards of Private Universities and constitute Expert Committees for their 
inspection to ascertain the physical and infrastr uctural facilities provided by Universities 
and also to call for their compliance on the deficiencies, if any. 
 
11.2  The Committee was informed the UGC has inspected 23 private 
universities so far.  Status of inspected universities has been posted on the UGC website 
for information of public at large and the student community in particular.  UGC has also 
issued a public notice with regard to the jurisdiction of State Private Universities in which 

the UGC has categorically stated that su ch Universities cannot operate beyond their 
jurisdiction i.e. the State in which their main campus is situated. As a result a number of 
many off-campuses, which were  being operated by  these  Universities earlier, have been 
closed.   
 
11.3  The Committee is aware about the role  of private investment in the field of 
higher education given the existing constraints, the country is confronted  with so far as 
needs of higher education are concerned.  However, the experience of private universities 
has been a mixed one.  We have got some world class universities set up in private sector.  
In contrast, there are private institutions operating at the cost of quality education. In 
either case these institutions are blamed for exorbitant fees being charged from students.  
The quality of education in some cases ha s also been found questionable.  There 
being no firm regulation the students have  been the victims and the education the 
casualty.  In such a scenario, less than half of the private universities being 
inspected by UGC so far cannot be considered a very satisfactory situation.  
Secondly, it is also not known whether serious shortcomings were noticed in the 
functioning of the inspected private universities.  Details of follow-up action are also 
not known.  The Committee would appr eciate if information about private 
universities found wanting is given wide publicity through print and electronic 
media.  The Committee would like to have a status note in this regard along with the 
private universities to be inspected and by when.   
 
XII.  STATUS OF WOMEN IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
12.1  The Committee was informed that the UGC has five schemes for Women 
i.e. (i) ‘Development of Women’s Studies in  Indian Universities an d Colleges’ and (ii) 
Capacity Building for Women Managers in Higher Education (iii) Construction of 
Women Hostel for Colleges (iv) Indira Gandhi Scholarship for Single Girl Child pursuing 
higher education and (v) Post Doctoral Fellowship for Women.  The University Grants 
Commission had promoted, strengthened and given direction to the Women’s Studies 
Programme in the country since the VII Plan period.  Women’s Studies Centres have 
been established in the University System in  the VIII, IX, X and XI Plan periods. They 
have contributed significantly to the expansion of Women’s Studies teaching, research 
and field action.  Now, the thrust is to develop field action projects for action, research, 

evaluation and enhancement of knowledge and partnership across boundaries of caste / 
class / religion, community and occupations and to involve many more people and many 
more organizations in the network as well as to ensure the focus and the quality of newly 
emerging disciplines are maintained. 
 
(i)  Development of Women’s Studies  in Universities and Colleges 
 
12.2  The scheme envisages assistance to Universities for setting up new women 
study centres as well as to strengthen and sust ain the university study centres set up in 
Tenth Plan by establishing them as statutory departments in the university system, as also 
to facilitate their capacity to network with ot her constituents so that they are mutually 
reinforcing  as well as synergizing one and another.  The primary role of these centres is 
to make knowledge stimulation and knowledge transmission through teaching and 
research.  It was informed that prior to Eleventh Plan, 67 Women Studies Centres were in 
existence. During Eleventh Plan, 64 new centres have been established in various 
Universities / Colleges. At present, there are 131 Women Studies Centres (72 in 
universities and 59 in Colleges).  Universities/Colleges with deficient proposals have 
been requested to send their revised proposals for establishment of Women Studies 
Centres. As per Eleventh Plan Guidelines, the UGC provides annual financial assistance 
to Women’s Studies Centres in Universities @ Rs. 5 lakh in Phase –I, Rs. 8 lakh in 
Phase-II and Rs. 12 lakh in phase-III. For the Centres set up in colleges, annual assistance 
is given @ Rs. 3 lakh in phase-I, Rs. 5 lakh in Phase-II and Rs. 8 lakh in Phase-III.  
During the Eleventh Plan so far grants amounting to Rs. 11.53 crore have been released 
to the Universities/Colleges for Women Studies Centres. 
 
12.3  The women study centres have played a prominent role in achieving 
the objective of increasing women’s enrolment in higher education.  The present 
number of 131 centres, in the opinion of th e Committee, is not commensurate to the 
number of universities which is at presen t 504.  That means only 22 per cent 
universities have women study centres while remaining 78 per cent are yet to set up 
these centres.  The Committee would like the Department to devise a time bound 
action plan to cover all the universities and even expand the scheme to all 
institutions of technical education in view of increasing enrolment of women in these 
institutions as well. 

 
 
(ii)  Capacity Building for Wome n Managers in Higher Education  
 
12.4  The scheme for the Capacity Building of Women Managers in Higher 
Education is focused on women in higher education in the academic and administrative 
streams to sensitise and motivate them and,  subsequently, equip them for decision-
making positions in the higher education system where currently they occupy very few 
such positions. The purpose of this scheme is  to develop a critical mass of gender 
sensitised women administrators to create a gender friendly environment and to remove 
the glass ceiling.  Capacity building is thr ough activities like Se nsitization  Awareness 
Motivation Workshops, developments and distribution of resource material, research 
stimulation workshops, management skill workshop etc.  
 
12.5  During Eleventh Plan, 15 Training of Trainers Workshops, 4 Refresher 
and 109 Sensitisation Awareness Motivation Workshops have been organized by various 
universities and colleges.  During Eleventh Plan , the grants released to the Universities / 
Colleges for this scheme are Rs. 0.54 crore in 2007-08, Rs. 3.00 crore in 2008-09 and Rs. 
1.63 crore in 2009-10. 
 
12.6  The Committee would like to have an idea about the level of 
participation, university-wise during  Eleventh Plan. The Committee would 
appreciate if an evaluation of scheme is also undertaken so that an assessment about 
its impact can be made and necessary corrective measures initiated, wherever 
required. 
 
(iii)  Construction of Women Hostels for Colleges 
 
12.7  The main objective of the scheme is  to support all the eligible colleges for 
construction of hostels for women in order to provide accommodation for women 
students / researchers / teachers and other staff.  Preference is given to women colleges 
located in rural areas, followed by colleges located in urban areas, co-education colleges 
in rural areas, co-education colleges located in urban areas and women colleges and co-
education colleges located in metro cities.  Rate of assistance is from Rs. 40 lakh to Rs. 

80 lakh in non-metro cities and from Rs. 80 lakh to 120 lakhs in metro cities, depending 
on the size of women enrolment in the colleges.   
 
12.8 The Committee notes that out of 2208 colleges assisted for women hostels  during 
the Eleventh Plan, maximum number of such  hostels getting grant is in Maharasthra 
(607), Karnataka (238), Andhra Pradesh (207), Tamil Nadu (174), Assam (164) and U.P. 
(107).     The Committee would like to be appr ised about the break-up of women 
hostels set up in urban / rural areas a nd metro / non-metro city-wise.  The 
Committee would also appreciate if an assessment is made about the functioning of 
these women hostels so as to have an idea about the problem areas and corrective 
measures required therefor.   
 
(iv) Indira Gandhi Scholarship for Sing le Girl Child for Pursuing Higher and  
Technical Education. 
 
12.9  There  is an important scheme namely  Indira Gandhi Scholarship for 
Single Girl Child for Pursuing Higher and Technical Education  under which the  girl 
students upto the age of 30 years at the time of admission to Postgraduate courses are 
eligible for a scholarship of Rs.2000/- per month for 20 months. Under this scheme 
1200 scholarships can be awarded every year.  
 
12.10  The selection of the candidates for the scholarship is made on the basis 
of the recommendations of an Expert Committee appointed by the UGC as per the basis 
of the following criteria: 
(i)    The applicant-girl should be the only child in the family. 
(ii)    The applicant-girl should have been admitted to a non-professional 
Master’s Degree course. 
(iii)    The applicant-girl should be less then 30 years of age at the time of 
admission. 
 
 
According to information made available to the Committee, 1538 scholarships were 
awarded during 2009-10 under the Scheme. The Committee notes that the students from 
West Bengal (496), Kerala (287), Tami l Nadu (262), Andhra Pradesh (102) and 
Karnataka (89) have dominated in the number of scholarships awarded under the 
Scheme.  This is the position when wide publicity to the Scheme was given by the UGC 
by publishing advertisements in all Nati onal Dailies (Hindi & English) along with 

regional publications, the Employment News/Rojgar Samachar. The Scheme has also 
been publicised through the website of UGC. During the current year, UGC has received 
over 2500 applications for the award of scholarships under the Scheme. 
 
12.11  The Committee appreciates the initiatives with regard to scholarship 
for single girl child.  However, uneven spread  of this scheme needs to be looked 
into.  A fixed number of scholarships pe r State on the pattern of Scheme of 
Scholarship for College and University Student can be included. The scheme also 
needs more publicity to educate the masses  particularly in ou r rural and remote 
areas about the benefits of the scheme so that they get motivated to send  girl child 
for higher education.  The Committee hopes that Department would adopt a focused 
approach towards this scheme to ensure equal opportunity to women and increasing 
the overall GER in higher education. 
 
(v). Post Doctoral Fellowships for Women 
 
12.12  This scheme is meant for the unemployed women candidates holding Ph. 
D Degree in their respective subject area.  The number of slots available under the 
scheme is 100 per year.  The tenure of the award is five years @ Rs. 6000 per month and 
Rs. 8000 per month.  The Committee notes that an amount of Rs. 9.98 lakhs has been 
released during 2009-10 upto 31-12-2009. 
 
12.13  On a specific query the Committee was informed that the applications for 
2008-09 have been invited by the UGC and the meeting of the Screening Committee for 
short listing of applications was fixed for 5-7 April, 2010.  The Committee fails to 
understand the reasons for undue delay in the award of fellowships.  Action needs to 
be taken on an urgent basis so that the selection process does not become a 
protracted exercise.  The Committee would li ke to have a status report along with 
the details of monitoring mechanism, if any, for the scheme.   
 
XIII.  INCLUSIVENESS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
13.1  The Committee is happy to note that UGC is implementing a number of 
schemes as listed below keeping in view the needs and constraints of students belonging 
to disadvantaged social groups: 

 Establishment of Equal Opportunity Cells for SC / ST / OBCs / Minorities. 
 Establishment of Residential Coaching Academy for SC / ST / Minorities and Women 
in Universities and Colleges. 
 Post Doctoral Fellowship for SC / ST. 
 Post Graduate Scholarships for SC / ST students in professional courses. 
 Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SC / ST 
 
13.2  The Committee has noted that the special component plan allocation 
for these disadvantaged social groups has decreased from 16.2 per cent in 2009-10 to 
13.2 per cent 2010-11.  In terms of amount Rs. 330 crores was denied to the SCP.  
Similarly the allocation for TSP comes out to only 4.5 per cent against 8.1 per cent 
last year which means an amount of Rs. 392 crores has been denied to the TSP.  
Given this declining trend of allocation the Committee is of the opinion that the 
objectives of inclusive education would rema in elusive.  No replies to the query of 
Committee seeking details of Equal O pportunity Cells and the monitoring 
mechanism with regard thereto was received from the Department.  The 
Department has also preferred to remain silent on the status of Residential 
Coaching Academies and the details about post  doctoral fellowship given to SC, ST.  
The Committee, therefore, feels constrained to make any recommendations on these 
two important interventions in the absence of all these details.  It would like the 
Department to furnish the requisite information within one month of the 
presentation of this Report.  The Committee also feels that wide publicity at regular 
intervals through print and el ectronic media and also at university / college level 
needs to be given to such schemes.  Only  then the targeted beneficiaries would be 
covered optimally.  
 
XIV.  SCHOLARSHIP FOR COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY STUDENTS 
 
14.1  Under this scheme financial assistance is given to cover 82 thousand 
meritorious students not belonging to the creamy layer for pursuing higher studies every 
year.  Student getting 80 per cent marks in Cl ass –XII Board exam identified by the State 
Boards are eligible for the assistance.  Scholarship of Rs. 1000 p.m. is paid for the first 
three years of graduation level and Rs. 2000 p.m. for next two years of post-graduate 
level in general courses and for graduation level in professional courses.   

 
14.2  The Committee notes 26,552 students in 2008-09 and 34,172 students in 
2009-10 were granted scholarship under the scheme.  State-wise details indicate an 
uneven spread of the scheme.  While in 2008-09 maximum beneficiaries were from 
Gujrat, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Karnataka and the students recommended by CBSE, 
in 2009-10 majority of the students were  from Gujrat, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Andhra Pradesh and Karnatka along with the students sponsored by CBSE.  The 
Committee notes that th e scholarship allocation to the States has been in the ratio of 
population for the States in 18-25 years age group.  The Committee is not prepared to 
believe that States like U.P. and Bihar having a big concentration of youth in the 18-
25 years  age group do not have students securing 80% marks.  While not even a 
single student from Bihar was covered during 2008-09, only 2 students from the 
State could get the benefit in 2009-10.  Similarly, while 1477 students from U.P. were 
covered in 2008-09, only 39 students from the State could be covered during 2009-
10.  Chhatishgarh is another peculiar case .  While the State failed to submit the 
eligibility list during 2008-09, no student co uld be covered during 2009-10, reason 
being that UCs were not furnished in spite of funds sanctioned for 1387 scholarships 
in 2008-09.  It seems that there is no monitoring mechanism under the scheme and 
even if it is there the same cannot be treated effective enough.  The Committee 
wonders as to why both the State Boards and also the students seem so disinclined to 
get the benefit of the scheme.  The Co mmittee recommends that an effective 
monitoring mechanism needs to be put in place to ensure maximum coverage as per 
the prescribed criteria.  In this age of IT advancement when results are available on 
Internet, it is not a complicated job to get the data of eligible students from the state 
boards which can be then pur sued to approach the selected students for getting the 
formalities completed.   
 
XV.  EDUCATIONAL LOAN INTEREST SUBSIDY 
 
15.1  The Scheme for providing interest subsidy on educational loans obtained 
by students belonging to economically weaker sections of the society for pursuit of 
professional education was approved by the Government in August, 2009.  The objective 
of the scheme is that talented students are not deprived opportunity to pursue higher 
education because of financial constraints.  The scheme is applicable from the academic 

year 2009-10.  The Ministry has written to the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) on 
8.9.2009 to inform all the Scheduled Banks, who are its members, of the Scheme and to 
give wide publicity to it. Under this scheme, it is proposed to provide subsidy on the 
interest on loan borrowed from the banks for pursuing professional education.  Canara 
Bank is the nodal bank for the Department for the implementation of the scheme.  The 
entire amount of interest on loans during the moratorium period (course duration + 1 year 
or date of employment whichever is earlier) will be met by Central Government for 
eligible students. The benefits under the Sc heme would be available to those students 
belonging to economically weaker sections, with an upper limit of annual parental 
income of Rs. 4.5 lakh per year. 
  
15.2  The Committee was informed that a sum of Rs, 500 crore has been 
earmarked in 2010-11 for the scheme.  A sum of Rs. 10 lakh earmarked for 2009-10 
could not be utilized as no advise/claim was received in that regard.  
 
15.3  While the Committee appreciates the noble objectives behind the 
scheme, it is of the opinion that the cut off point of Rs. 4.5 lakh parental income is 
too restrictive and would benefit very few families given the poor income level of 
majority of our countrymen.  Higher educ ation being costlier is getting beyond the 
reach of middle class leave alone the poor masses of the country.  Therefore, the 
ceiling of Rs. 4.5 lakh per annum needs to be raised appropriately in view of 
increasing financial burden due to general inflationary trend.  The Committee 
would like the Department to explore the feasibility of raising the parental income 
ceiling to Rs. 10 lakh per annum considerin g the increased cost and fee structure in 
these institutions so that more and more students get benefit of the scheme.   
 
XVI.  INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY  
 
16.1  IGNOU was established under an Act of Parliament in 1985 to provide 
access  to higher education to all sections of  the population, especially the disadvantaged 
groups, to impart continuing education to upgrade knowledge and skill, and to initiate 
special programmes of higher education for specific target groups like women, people 
living in backward regions, hilly areas, etc. 
 

16.2  Under the existing pattern of funding, IGNOU is supported by Ministry of 
Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) only by way of Plan 
funding.  No non-Plan funds are released to the University which mobilises its own 
resources through academic receipts, income from investments, royalty, publications, 
interest earned and other income, etc.  The details of the receipts (including Budgetary 
allocation by Ministry of Human Resource Development) and expenditure of IGNOU 
during the last three years are indicated below: 
(Rs in crores ) 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
Receipts 
(*includi
ng GIA 
released 
by 
MHRD  
Expenditure Receipts (** 
including 
GIA 
released by 
MHRD ) 
Expenditure Receipts 
(***including, 
GIA released 
by MHRD) 
Expendi-
ture 
280.67 236.24 307.00 261.64 432.20 428.56 
 
* 2006-07   ** 2007-08    ***2008-09  
 Rs.95.05          Rs.67.66                Rs.86.78 
 
16.3  The Annual Plan Outlay for 2010-11 in respect of IGNOU is Rs.91 crore 
which includes Rs. 90 crore as plan allocation of which IGNOU had submitted its new 
Plan Proposals for Eleventh Plan period, which were examined in the Department and 
placed before the EFC on 24.11.2009 wherein IGNOU was asked to modify their new 
schemes viz Skill Development and Community College scheme.  No document/proposal 
form was received from IGNOU.   The Budget outlay as approved in respect of IGNOU 
for 2010-11 will be sufficient for the existing scheme of IGNOU and new schemes shall 
be started only after the approval by EFC during the remaining period of XIth Plan. 
 
16.4  The Committee is quite satisfied to know that more than 2.5 million 
students are enrolled in IGNOU.  It has been possible because of good quality and 
affordable education available to the common people through this renowned 
institution.  The Committee, however, notes that though there is a marginal increase 
of Rs. 10 crores in the outlay for 2010-11, with the surplus receipts the University 
should be in a position to take care of the investment for its diverse activities 
particularly those aimed to improve the qua lity of educational facilities.  In fact 
more similar institutions should be set up to address the growing needs of education 

in the country particularly to help th e poor people.  The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend higher allocation for expansion of open universities and 
institutions in the country.  At the sa me time, the Committee would advise IGNOU 
to monitor its activities in North Eastern Sector where funds are not being utilized.  
IGNOU should also review both its reach as  well as the quality of education offered 
for ensuring both deeper access and improved quality.   
 
XVII.  NATIONAL MISSION IN EDUCATION THROUGH I.C.T.  
 
17.1           The objective of this scheme is to develop system of identification and 
nurture the talent of human resources of the country and providing learning modules to 
address the personalised needs of the learners.  The scheme also envisages effective 
utilisation of intellectual resources, certification of knowledge acquired by the learners 
either through formal or informal system, as also building database of capabilities, 
capacities and talent of country’s human resources.  
 
17.2                The Committee notes that out of Rs. 900 crores plan allocation for 2009-
10, only Rs. 78 crore could be utilised upto 29 th March, 2010.  The budgetary allocation 
of  Rs. 810 crore in BE 2009-10 was revised to 280 crore at RE stage and now Rs. 810 
crores again have been earmarked for year 2010-11.  The Committee  finds that even 
during 2008-09, out of  Rs. 502 cr ores, the Department could manage to utilise only           
Rs. 361 crore.  The Department has clarified that the shortfall was because the scheme 
was approved by the Government in January, 2009 only.  As regards the underutilisation 
in 2009-10, the Ministry has clarified that the universities which were to be provided 
connectivity with the POP of National Kn owledge Network could not be connected 
because the scheme of National Knowledge Network has been recently approved by the 
Government. The Committee fails to understand the inordinate delay in such 
administrative and procedural issues. The Committee is of firm view that corrective 
measures should be taken to ensure opti mum utilisation of fund under this scheme 
during the current financial year. 
 

XVIII.  TECHNICAL EDUCATION 
 
18.1  Technical education plays a vital role in human resource development of 
the country by creating skilled manpower, enhancing industrial productivity and 
improving the quality of life.  It covers courses and programmes in engineering, 
technology, management, architecture town planning, pharmacy and applied arts and 
crafts, hotel management and catering technology.   Technical education in India can be 
broadly classified into three categories vi z: (i) Central Government funded institutions, 
(ii) State Government / State funded instituti ons and (iii) Self-finance d institutions.   As 
per the information made available to the Committee there are 65 Centrally funded 
institutions of technical and science education as per the following details : 
 
Centrally Funded Institutions Number of 
Institutions 
Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) 15 
Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs) 7 
Indian Institute of Science (IISc.) 1 
Indian Institute of Science Education & Research (IISERs) 5 
National Institutes of Technology (NITs) 20 
National Institutes of Technical Teachers Training & Research 
(NITTTRs)  
4 
Others 4 
School of Planning & Architecht ure (SPAs)-3, Indian School of 
Mines (ISM), North-East Regional Institute of Science & 
Technology (NERIST), National Institute of Industrial Engineering 
(NITIE), National Institute of Foundry & Forge Technology 
(NIFFT), Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering & Technology 
(SLIET), Central Institute of Technology (CIT). 
9 
 
 
         In 2009-10 several measures were taken to implement the Government’s 
vision of providing increased access with the quality and excellence.  Setting up of new 
Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), Indi an Institutes of Management (IIMs), Indian 
Institutes of Science Education and Research (IISERs), assisting the State Government in 
setting up new Polytechniques and the initiation of process for setting up of Indian 
Institutes of Information Technology (IIITs) a nd National Institutes of Technology (NIT) 
are the new steps in this direction. Besides the Central Government is also implementing 
two schemes/programmes viz. (i) Technical Education Quality Improvement Programme 

(TEQIP) assisted by the World Bank; and (ii) Indian National Digital Library for Science 
and Technology (INDLST). 
 
18.2  The total allocations for technical education during 2010-11 is Rs. 6011.55 
crore which includes Rs. 4266.03 crore as plan and Rs. 1745.52 non plan outlay.  The 
Committee notes that the plan allocation for 2010-11 has increased by 20 per cent in 
comparison of 2009-10.  However, the non plan outlay has gone down from Rs. 1890 
crore to Rs. 1745. 52 crore. 
 
18.3  The Committee while deliberating upon the budgetary allocations of 
technical education has focused its attention on two issues namely (i) the infrastructure in 
the Indian institutions and (ii) the shortage of  faculty.  Vacancy position in IITs and IIMs 
is as follows:  
 
Name of 
Institute 
Faculty 
sanctioned 
strength 
Faculty in 
position 
Vacant 
positions 
Vacancy as % 
of sanctioned 
strength 
IITs 4367 2982 1345 30% 
IIMs 468 387 81 17% 
 
The Department has informed that the following steps have been taken with 
regard to faculty recruitment, inculcation and retention in Government and Centrally 
funded technical institutes: 
(i) The age of retirement has been increased from 62 to 65 years and can go 
upto 70 years with the approval of the Visitor. 
(ii) The Sixth Central Pay Commission has substantially increased the salary 
of faculty and staff, which is proving to be effective in attracting and 
retaining good faculty. 
(iii) The Directors of IITs have been condu cting special interviews abroad for 
outstanding faculty. 
(iv) The leave rules in these premier institu tions have been relaxed in order to 
encourage the faculty to take research and consultancy work within and  
outside the country. 
(v) Attractive start-up grants are provided by the institutes for research. 
(vi) For attracting outstanding young faculty members, fellowships are offered 
in addition to salary.  Similarly, fo r senior faculty, chairs have been 
instituted which are attractive add-ons to the salary. 

(vii) The Institutes strive to provide good facilities such as good residential 
accommodation as also medical and educational facilities for the family of 
the faculty. 
(viii) The IITs have increased the intake in PhD programmes so that there is an 
increase in the number of eligible persons to take up faculty positions in 
future. 
(ix) The faculty can attend national and international seminars / workshops 
during a block period of 3 years for which a grant of Rs. 3.00 lakhs is 
made available. 
 
18.4  The Department has shared the following  status of faculty recruitment in 
respect of the newly established IITs: 
  
Institute Number of faculty posts 
 Sanctioned intake Joined 
IIT Hyderabad 60 35 
IIT Patna 60 32 
IIT Jodhpur 60 12 
IIT Bhubaneswar 60 34 
IIT Gandhinagar 60 24 
IIT Indore 30 24 
IIT Mandi 30  
IIT Ropar 60 12 
 
The Committee finds that in most of thes e newly established II Ts the faculty in 
position is very low.  Surprisingly no r ecruitment has taken place against the 30 
sanctioned posts in IIT, Mandi.  The Committee is deeply concerned about the 30 to 
80 per cent vacancies of faculty existing in  our IITs.  These institutions are pioneer 
institutions of our country and showcase our intellectual property to the world at 
large.  Therefore, vacancies to that exte nt cannot be allowe d to continue.  The 
Committee calls upon the Department to ensure filling up all such positions within 
the first quarter of the academic session 2010-11.  The Committee would like these 
institutions to constitute a strategic gr oup to monitor every quarter, the progress 
made in filling the existing vacancies and place it before their respective Board for 
guidance on steps needed to substantially bring down the existing vacancies. 
 
18.5  The Department has furnished the following schedule for completion of 
infrastructure with regard to 8 IITs: 
 

Indicators 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
Fixing of  
location 
Done -- -- -- 
Acquisition of 
Land 
Done -- -- -- 
Civil 
Construction 
Started in 3 out 
of 8 IITs 
Start 
construction in 
all 8 IITs 
Continue in all 
8 IITs. 
Will be 
completed in 
all IITs. 
  
It transpires from the above chart that while fixing of location and acquisition  of 
land in respect all eight IIT’s has been don e, the civil construction in respect thereof 
would be completed by 2012-13. Elaborating further, the Department apprised that civil 
construction including construction of boundary walls has started in IITs at 
Bhubaneshwar, Ropar and Hyderabad.  In rest of the IITs, the work will start during   
2010-11.  The Committee would like the Department to strictly adhere to the 
schedule which they have shared with th e Committee.  Any delay in completion 
should not only amount to cost overrun but also deprive the students of the precious 
opportunities to be made available through these premier institutes. 
 
18.6  The Committee observes that out of new six IIMs, four IIMs at 
Raipur (Chhatisgarh), Rohtak (Haryana), Ranchi (Jha rkhand) and Tiruchirappalli 
(Tamil Nadu) would become functional from the academic session 2010-11.  The 
Committee hopes that there would be no hurdles in this regard.  There should be no 
undue delay in finalisation of temporary campuses for the remaining two new IIMs 
proposed for Kashipur (Uttaranchal) a nd Udaipur (Rajasthan).  The Committee 
would also appreciate if process for creation and selection of faculty for all the IIMs 
also starts at the earliest.  Similarly, since land has already been allotted for all the 
IIMs, preparatory exercise for commencement of construction work must have 
started by now.  If not, it should start without further delay followed by 
construction in a time bound manner.  The Committee calls upon the Department to 
prepare a status report at th e end of four months in the fiscal year and furnish the 
same for its consideration.      
 

XIX.  ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION 
 
19.1  All Indian Council for Technical Education (AICTE) grants approval for 
starting new technical institutions and for introd uction of new courses.  It also lays down 
norms and standards for such institutions.  It further ensures quality development of 
technical education through accreditation of technical programmes.  In addition to its 
regulatory role, the AICTE has also a prom otional role which it implements through 
schemes for promoting technical education for women, handicapped and weaker sections 
of the society, promoting innovations, faculty development and research giving grants to 
technical institutions.  Technical institutions  under the AICTE include Post-Graduate, 
Under-Graduate and Diploma in whole spectrum of technical education, covering 
engineering / technology, pharmacy, architecture, hotel management and catering 
technology, management studies, computer applications and applied arts and crafts. 
 
19.2  According to the Department, a provision of Rs. 200 crore has been 
allocated for AICTE during 2009-10 and an allocation of Rs. 220 crore has been made for 
AICTE in BE 2010-11. Elaborating the achievements of AICTE the Department has 
mentioned that AICTE has introduced e-governance in its approval process through a 
web portal which was placed in the public domain on 10 th January, 2010.  The Council 
has also revised the norms and standards for granting various kinds of approvals to the 
technical institutions.  These revised norms have already been notified on 6 th February, 
2010 and uploaded on the AICTE’s portal www.aicte.india.org along with the “Approval 
Process Handbook -2010”.  AICTE has launched another portal www.nba.india.org The 
Department has claimed that both the portals have been very effective in terms of their 
use to the stakeholders.  In two months since launching of AICTE portals over 20 lakh 
users have visited the same.  The entire approval process for establishing new institutions 
has been made online.  2206 applications have been received for setting up new 
institutions in the country which is more than the applications received last year in paper 
mode.  The Department claims that students’ interest was constantly before the 
Government to ensure that the AICTE adheres to the deadlines for granting approvals to 
institutions and address the grievances of students. 
 
19.3  The Committee had extensively deliberated upon the functioning of 
AICTE including the amendments to the AICTE Act in its 211 th Report and gave a 

number of suggestions for improvement in the approval / inspections mechanism, fee 
structure, the issues relating to unapproved institutions, the faculty etc.  The Action 
Taken Notes received from the Department were not found satisfactory and the 
Committee had to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Department along with 
AICTE officials twice.  The Committee intend s to continue its study on those Action 
Taken Notes received from the Department.  The new portals of AICTE have been the 
matter of interest for the Committee during recent deliberations on the Demand for 
Grants.  The Committee pointed out that there are complaints from the applicants that 
although they have been able to upload their registration but failed to make the payment.  
There are instances where payment was made but  the uploading of the application failed.  
Then there are doubts prevailing about the loans applied online.  The Chairman of 
AICTE informed that they have issued 17954 passwords and IDs for people who have 
applied for extension of approval.  He conceded that there are several problems in the 
operation of portal. It was mentioned that the bandwidth that is required at the user end is 
2 mbps and 1:1, not shared line.  The institutions were expected to follow these minimum 
specifications.  He further conceded that there is problem both at user end as well as at 
AICTE end.  As regard the procedure for approvals, he mentioned that the entire 
information about the institutions applied online will be made available in public domain.  
On scrutiny by Screening Committee the applicants through an appeal mechanism will be 
allowed to upload the data subsequently. Each bank has its own scheme and then make 
application to the portal.  As regards students loan AICTE has provided 41 bank links.  
Students can go to these portals, chose their link, go through the entire conditions, and 
accept them depending on their requirement.  He added that the portal has come up only 
on 10
th January, 2010 and all the da ta with an inte rface with the bank will be provided 
probably in three months.   
 
19.4  Whatever changes may occur in the status of AICTE after National 
Council for Higher Education and Research coming into the picture the Committee 
opines that system of approvals and facilities to the students needs to be streamlined 
in the interest of the technical education in its entirety.  The Committee hopes that 
the new system of online applications a nd information about institutions in public 
domain would bring forth the much desire d transparency under the new regulatory 
system.   

RECOMMENDAIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
  
II.  BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
  The Committee notes that of 3.78 per cent of the GDP, flowing to the 
Education Sector in 2008-09, the share of  the State Governments and the share of 
the Central Government seem to be going for a change while Chapeau clause of the 
Eleventh Plan on education, as a whole, enjoins upon the Government to give six per 
cent of the GDP to the education sector. The Committee is of the view that the 
allocation for Department is definitely lower than the vision statement of the 
Government.               (Para 2.4) 
 
III  UTILISATION OF FUNDS  
   
The Committee agrees that the infrastructure development for recently 
approved 12 Central Universities may be a ti me consuming affair and for that matter 
the achievement of financial targets would entirely depend on physical targets.  
Similarly, the shortfall in non plan outlay of 2009-10 due to delay in finalization of 
pay and salaries on account of Sixth Pay Commission recommendation is also 
acceptable. The Committee, however, impresses upon the Department to strictly 
monitor the progress of infrastructure de velopment for new Central Universities so 
that at least the plan outlay now available for the purpose is optimally utilized.  
Nobody can deny the fact that function ing of any educational institution from 
temporary site for a prolonged time cannot be considered an ideal proposition.   Our 
Central Universities, envisaged to be role model of higher education functioning from 
temporary campuses is bound to adversely affe ct both the quality of education as well 
as the performance of the students. A time bound completion schedule should, 
therefore, be drawn out to ensure that infrastructure of these universities is in place 
without cost and time overruns.               (Para 3.4) 
 
Not only this, the Committee views with serious concern the low level of 
utilisation by the end of first three qua rters during 2009-10.  The Committee is 

surprised to note that smaller schemes li ke Scholarships, Book Promotion also do 
not seem to have been functioning as en visaged. Scheme of Scholarships, very 
crucial for both the meritori ous and poor students continues to remain almost non-
functional.  Funds allocated for 2007-08 under this Scheme remained unspent.  
Position was the same upto third quarter of 2009-10.  Similarly, Scheme of Book 
Promotion which needs to be propagated extensively seems to be the most neglected 
as year after year negligible allocation under this scheme somehow remained grossly 
under-utilised.  The Committee would like to point out that in the process of massive 
expansion of higher/techni cal education, schemes li ke Book Promotion and 
Scholarships should not be allowed to be  implemented in a routine manner.  Their 
role though smaller is equally crucial for our young students.                    (Para 3.5) 
 
The Committee is not convinced by the Department’s clarification that 
unspent balances in itself do not adversely affect the working of institutions as all 
such institutions have also corresponding  liabilities / commitments which are taken 
into account while deciding further releases.  The Committee would like to point out 
that the very fact that small institutions  have unspent balances and corresponding 
liabilities also, indicates that not only fi nancial norms are not being adhered to but 
they are also not functioning as per their mandate.  The Committee would, 
therefore, appreciate if corrective measures are initiated by the Department at the 
earliest.  Committee’s apprehensions are confirmed by pendency of audit paras 
against ICSSR, New Delhi, Central Hindi Directorate and CIIL, Mysore.  (Para 3.6) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the pace of fund utilization both under 
Plan and Non-Plan during 2009-10 has failed to meet the targets. By the end of the 
third quarter (upto December, 2009) only 57.32% of plan and 70.25% of non plan 
funds could be utilised.  The Department’s assertion that some schemes needed to be 
reworked because of lower allocation is indicative of its failure to utilize the 
allocated funds.  How can the Department  claim higher allocation when the fund 
utilization has been so poor.            (Para 3.7) 
 
 The Committee is surprised to find that shortfall is noticed even in the 
projections approved by the Planning Comm ission for the Eleventh Plan.  Out of 

projected outlay of Rs. 89,943 crore, only Rs. 35,504 crore could be spent in the first 
three years of the plan period. The Committee can only conclude that given the poor 
utilization trend, the Depart ment would not be able to meet the shortfall between 
the projected outlay and the budget allocation.  The Department shall have to blame 
itself in case there is an overall cut by  the Planning Commission in the projected 
outlay for Twelfth Plan. Obviously the annual budgetary allocations are also likely 
to be affected adversely.  There appears to be deficiencies in the financial 
management as well.  The Department has got money but it has not been able to 
utilize the same imaginatively and skillfully Though the Department is claiming 
about a number of interventions introduced for access,  excellence and inclusiveness  
and also building a knowledge society, but the pace of expanding higher education is 
not commensurate to the projected outlay approved by the Planning Commission.  
In such a scenario, Department’s vision for investing 6 per cent of GDP for the 
Education Sector, seems to be a distant dream.  Given the level of utilization of 
allocated funds, the Committee is apprehensive about the outcome of Departments’ 
efforts for increasing Gross Enrolment Rati o from 12.4 per cent to 15 per cent by 
2010-11.  The Committee hopes the De partment would adopt better fiscal 
management techniques supported by strong  monitoring mechanism to ensure that 
the outlays are utilized optimally and the demand for higher allocation could be a 
justifiable preposition.    The Committee recommends that the Department should 
undertake quarterly review of allocation a nd pace of expenditure  as well as 
identifying deficiencies and shortfalls with a view to achieving the target of 15 per 
cent GER at the end of Eleventh Plan.                      (Para 3.8)  
 
IV  TARGETS FOR ELEVENTH PLAN  
 
 Closely related with the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) is the issue of access 
to education.  In spite of massive expans ion in higher and technical education both 
in the Government and private sector in the recent years, the fact remains that even 
meritorious students do not get the opportunity  to join course of their liking.  Every 
year, students both talented and average students compete for admission in IITs and 
IIMs and other premier educational institut ions.  However, very few get admission 
in institutions of their choice.  For exam ple, during 2009, out of 3,84,977 students 

who sat for IIT entrance test, 3,74,942 faile d to qualify.  Such a trend is visible in 
other Entrance Tests also.  Not only this, st ate-wise details indicate that success rate 
of students from N-E states like Arunach al Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Maghalaya 
and Sikkim in such exams is virtually nil.  Thus, issue of access to higher education, 
in spite of a large number of significan t initiatives taken by the Government 
continues to remain the major challenge.  The Committee can only say that more 
vigorous efforts with focus on weak area s are required to be continued for quite 
some time.  Though, the exact figures of students not able to get admissions in 
different universities in Delhi was not made available to the Committee, gap 
between demand and supply is very wide there also. The Committee would like the 
Department to consider this issue and devise a mechanism by which such category 
of aspiring students get opportunities for hi gher education.  One straight answer to 
this issue could be to open more colleges and universities in the country but at the 
same time the Department should also focus on diversifying the curriculum to 
include other things that will be of help to  students’ growth.  The focus should be on 
developing students’ entrepreneur skills or  providing vocational education to them.  
Committee feels that it is crucial to improve the supply side response.    (Para 4.6) 
 
V.  UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION   
 
The Committee appreciates the initia l bottlenecks coming across in 
developing the infrastructure for new Cent ral Universities but delay can certainly 
be checked through better coordination with the state authorities.  The Committee 
also expects the desired level of cooperation from the states as it is on their 
initiatives the decision to open the Central Universities was taken by the Central 
Government.  The Committee is, however, no t satisfied with slow pace of faculty 
recruitment in accordance with the implementation of Oversight Committees’ 
recommendations.  The Committee recommends that urgent corrective measures 
needed to be taken up for addressing the re quirement of additional faculty lest the 
very purpose of legal framework for reservation for OBC category might be 
seriously jeopardized.               (Para 5.3) 
 
 

VI.  HIGHER EDUCATION-QUALITY AND NEED FOR REFORMS 
 
 
The Committee observes that higher education in our country is in a flux. It 
does not give a coherent picture becaus e we have various institutions, quality 
institutions and institutions which do not have any quality  a t  a l l .   W e   h a v e  t h e  
institutions which give best  of education and also the institutions which provide 
substandard quality of education.   With  the number of institutions continue to 
grow, a seemingly absence of quality is felt.  We have poor infrastructure in most of 
the universities and colleges.  Our courses are irrelevant and there are very less 
number of quality teachers in the institutions. One of the important reasons for poor 
quality of education is that our librarie s in the colleges and universities are not 
properly equipped.  The Committee is of the firm view that development of work 
culture in our educational system is the need  of time.  We need to develop the talent 
who could infuse the quality aspect.  Our institutions require a visionary 
management, enlightened minds of faculty and inspired students to produce quality 
education.               (Para 6.5) 
 
The Committee finds such system of valida tion quite intriguing.  It feels that 
either the system of validation be done aw ay with or it be made mandatory for all 
institutions.  Such slipshod approach with  regard to the validat ion provis ion does 
more harm than good to those institutions  whose existence and credibility becomes 
questionable with the expiry of validatio n.  The Committee hopes that Department 
would rectify this situation so that the ai r of confusion could be eliminated in the 
interest of both the students as well as th e institutions.  It further expects that the 
Department would take care of  this revalidation aspect in the legislature 
framework concerning accreditation proposes  to be brought befo re the Parliament 
in near future.                        (Para 6.7) 
 
The Committee appreciates the initiatives the Department has taken for the much 
awaited reforms in the field of higher education.  While examining the Demands for 
Grants of the Department of Higher Education, the Committee also took 
opportunity to deliberate on the impending  educational reforms particularly with 

regard to the opening and recognition of different sets of universities.  In this 
context, the existing provisions of UG C Act and the Regulations came under close 
scanner of the Committee. The Committee has noticed that our university education 
is confronted with lot of practical difficult ies in implementation of those provisions.  
Monitoring of fees and quality of educat ion in private universities being not fully 
under control of the Government, both students as well as parents are facing a lot of 
problems.  The issue of indiscriminate reco gnition of institutions as Deemed to be 
Universities has become quite controversial and the Apex Court is seized of the 
matter.  Recently one more controversy ha s generated in the conversion of Central 
Universities into State Universities and the glaring example is Delhi Technical 
University, formerly known as Delhi College of Engineering (DCE).  The students of 
this University are up in arms against the granting of State University status to DCE 
which before such conversion was part of Delhi University i.e. a Central University.  
The matter is now sub-judice. There are ot her sets of university education in the 
name of foreign universities and also  fake universities which have opened campuses 
across the country.  In a nutshell, a host of teething problems have cropped up due 
to complexities of provisions under UGC Ac t and Regulations.  Needless to mention 
these infirmities have occurred because the existing policy for opening universities is 
not clearly laid down and the regulations are open to different interpretations.  The 
Committee hopes that the Department will ta ke into consideration all these issues 
and formulate a comprehensio n policy / regulation while finalising the proposed 
legislation for National Commission for Higher Education and Research.  (Para 6.8)   
 
The Committee also takes this opportunity to urge upon the Government to 
include the aspects of character building and physical fitness as important 
components in the educational reforms so  as to ensure holistic growth of our 
students.  In this connection the Commit tee desires to draw the attention of the 
Department to its recommendations / observations contained in its 86
th Report on 
value based education.          (Para 6.9)  
 
 
 
 

 
VIII. NEW CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES  
 
The Committee strongly feels that process of construction should commence 
in respect of all the Central Universities  in 2010-11 and got completed in a time 
bound manner.  The Committee is unhappy th at despite the preparatory exercise 
done by the Department and the UGC with regard to arrangements of faculty in 
newly created universities, the vacancies could not be filled up due to delay in 
finalization of statutes by respective univers ities.  Given the seriousness of the issue, 
the Department should have fixed a time frame for finalizing these statutes.  The 
Committee desires that the framing of statutes may be done without further delay so 
that the process of recruitment for the vacant posts of faculty could be started at the 
earliest.  It would be better if a Cent ral Committee with  representation from 
concerned State Government is assigned the task of monitoring both the required 
faculty and infrastructure of these Universities.  This action is required to be taken 
if cost and time overruns are to be avoided.            (Para 7.3) 
 
VIII.  VACANCIES IN FACULTIES OF CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES. 
 
The Committee is not happy with this state of affairs. Both the UGC and the 
Department are mandated to work in coordination so that all the Central 
Universities continue to function smoothly.            (Para 8.9) 
 
The Committee notes that an operation of Faculty Recharge is being 
launched, under which 1000 fa culty positions are being created and to be filled at 
national level through global advertisement.  Despite seeking details in that regard, 
the feedback was not received from the Department.  The Committee would like to 
know the status of the scheme.           (Para 8.10)  
 
IX. STRENGHTNING OF 6000 COLLEGES IN 150 STATE UNIVERSITIES. 
 
The Committee is happy to note that in order to operationalise the scheme, 
amendments to the aforesaid Rules have been notified on 8 th August, 2009.  At 

present the process of formulation of gu idelines for the implementation of the 
scheme by the UGC is going on.  The Committee would like to point out that already 
considerable time has been taken since the notification of the Rules in August, 2009.  
In fact, the guidelines should have be en circulated to the concerned State 
Universities by now.  The Committee would appreciate if the process is expedited 
and the scheme is implemented from 2010-11 itself.   
 
X.  DEEMED TO BE UNIVERSITIES 
 
The Committee would like the Department to keep the interests of students 
uppermost while revising the regulations. It desires that the much awaited UGC 
regulations may be formulated after due co nsultations with all stakeholders.  It 
would also urge upon the Department to expedite the notification of regulations 
without any further delay.           (Para 10.2) 
 
 
XI.  PRIVATE UNIVERSITIES IN THE COUNTRY 
 
The quality of education in some case s has also been found questionable.  
There being no firm regulation the students have been the victims and the education 
the casualty.  In such a scenario, less than half of the private universities being 
inspected by UGC so far cannot be considered a very satisfactory situation.  
Secondly, it is also not known whether serious shortcomings were noticed in the 
functioning of the inspected private universities.  Details of follow-up action are also 
not known.  The Committee would appr eciate if information about private 
universities found wanting is given wide publicity through print and electronic 
media.  The Committee would like to have a status note in this regard along with the 
private universities to be inspected and by when.     (Para 11.3)  
 
  

XII.  STATUS OF WOMEN IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
The women study centres have played a prom inent role in achieving the objective of 
increasing women’s enrolment in higher education.  The present number of 131 
centres, in the opinion of the Committee,  is not commensurate to the number of 
universities which is at present 504.  That  means only 22 per cent universities have 
women study centres while remaining 78 per cent are yet to set up these centres.  
The Committee would like the Department to devise a time bound action plan to 
cover all the universities and even expand the scheme to all instit utions of technical 
education in view of increasing enrolment of women in these institutions as well. 
     (Para 12.3) 
 
The Committee would like to have an idea about the level of participation, 
university-wise during Eleventh Plan. Th e Committee would appreciate if an 
evaluation of scheme is also undertaken so  that an assessment about its impact can 
be made and necessary corrective measures initiated, wherever required. 
   (Para 12.6) 
 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the break-up of women 
hostels set up in urban / rural areas a nd metro / non-metro city-wise.  The 
Committee would also appreciate if an assessment is made about the functioning of 
these women hostels so as to have an idea about the problem areas and corrective 
measures required therefor.                 (Para 12.8) 
 
The Committee appreciates the initiati ves with regard to scholarship for 
single girl child.  However, uneven spread  of this scheme needs to be looked into.  A 
fixed number of scholarships per State on the pattern of Scheme  of Scholarship for 
College and University Student can be included. The scheme also needs more 
publicity to educate the masses particularly in our rural and remote areas about the 
benefits of the scheme so that they get motivated to send  girl child for higher 
education.  The Committee hopes that De partment would adopt a focused approach 
towards this scheme to ensure equal opportunity to women and increasing the 
overall GER in higher education.         (Para 12.11) 

 
The Committee fails to understand th e reasons for undue delay in the award 
of fellowships.  Action needs to be taken on an urgent basis so that the selection 
process does not become a protracted exercise.  The Committee would like to have a 
status report along with the details of monitoring mechanism, if any, for the scheme. 
            ( P a r a  1 2 . 1 3 )    
 
XIII.  INCLUSIVENESS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
The Committee has noted that the special component plan allocation for 
these disadvantaged social groups has decr eased from 16.2 per cent in 2009-10 to 
13.2 per cent 2010-11.  In terms of amount Rs. 330 crores was denied to the SCP.  
Similarly the allocation for TSP comes out to only 4.5 per cent against 8.1 per cent 
last year which means an amount of Rs. 392 crores has been denied to the TSP.  
Given this declining trend of allocation the Committee is of the opinion that the 
objectives of inclusive education would rema in elusive.  No replies to the query of 
Committee seeking details of Equal O pportunity Cells and the monitoring 
mechanism with regard thereto was received from the Department.  The 
Department has also preferred to remain silent on the status of Residential 
Coaching Academies and the details about post  doctoral fellowship given to SC, ST.  
The Committee, therefore, feels constrained to make any recommendations on these 
two important interventions in the absence of all these details.  It would like the 
Department to furnish the requisite information within one month of the 
presentation of this Report.  The Committee also feels that wide publicity at regular 
intervals through print and el ectronic media and also at university / college level 
needs to be given to such schemes.  Only  then the targeted beneficiaries would be 
covered optimally. 
          ( P a r a  1 3 . 2 )   
 
XIV.  SCHOLARSHIP FOR COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY STUDENTS 
 
The Committee is not prepared to believe that States like U.P. and Bihar 
having a big concentration of youth in the 18-25 years  age group do not have 

students securing 80% marks.  While not even a single student from Bihar was 
covered during 2008-09, only 2 students from the State could get the benefit in 2009-
10.  Similarly, while 1477 students from U.P. were covered in 2008-09, only 39 
students from the State could be covered during 2009-10.  Chhatishgarh is another 
peculiar case.  While the State failed to s ubmit the eligibility list during 2008-09, no 
student could be covered during 2009-10, rea son being that UCs were not furnished 
in spite of funds sanctioned for 1387 scholarships in 2008-09.  It seems that there is 
no monitoring mechanism under the scheme a nd even if it is there the same cannot 
be treated effective enough.  The Committ ee wonders as to why both the State 
Boards and also the students seem so disinclined to get the benefit of the scheme.  
The Committee recommends that an effective monitoring mechanism needs to be 
put in place to ensure maximum coverage as per the prescribed criteria.  In this age 
of IT advancement when results are available on Internet, it is not a complicated job 
to get the data of eligible students from the state boards which can be then pursued 
to approach the selected students for getting the formalities completed.  
   (Para 14.2) 
 
XV.  EDUCATIONAL LOAN INTEREST SUBSIDY 
 
While the Committee appreciates the no ble objectives behind the scheme, it 
is of the opinion that the cut off point of Rs. 4.5 lakh parental income is too 
restrictive and would benefit very few families given the poor income level of 
majority of our countrymen.  Higher educ ation being costlier is getting beyond the 
reach of middle class leave alone the poor masses of the country.  Therefore, the 
ceiling of Rs. 4.5 lakh per annum needs to be raised appropriately in view of 
increasing financial burden due to general inflationary trend.  The Committee 
would like the Department to explore the feasibility of raising the parental income 
ceiling to Rs. 10 lakh per annum considerin g the increased cost and fee structure in 
these institutions so that more and more students get benefit of the scheme.     
 (Para 15.3)  
 
 

XVI.  INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY  
 
The Committee is quite satisfied to know  that more than 2.5 million students 
are enrolled in IGNOU.  It has been possib le because of good quality and affordable 
education available to the common people through this renowned institution.  The 
Committee, however, notes that though there is a marginal increase of Rs. 10 crores 
in the outlay for 2010-11, with the surplus receipts the University should be in a 
position to take care of the investment for its diverse activities particularly those 
aimed to improve the quality of educatio nal facilities.  In fact more similar 
institutions should be set up to address the growing needs of education in the 
country particularly to help the poor pe ople.  The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend higher allocation for expansion of open universities and institutions in 
the country.  At the same time, the Committee would advise IGNOU to monitor its 
activities in North Eastern Sector where funds are not being utilized.  IGNOU 
should also review both its reach as well as the quality of education offered for 
ensuring both deeper access and improved quality.                                      (Para 16.4) 
 
XVII.  NATIONAL MISSION IN EDUCATION THROUGH I.C.T.  
 
The Committee fails to understand the inordinate delay in such 
administrative and procedural issues. The Committee is of firm view that corrective 
measures should be taken to ensure opti mum utilisation of fund under this scheme 
during the current financial year.           (Para 17.2) 
 
 
XVIII.  TECHNICAL EDUCATION 
 
The Committee notes that the plan allocation for 2010-11 has increased by 20 
per cent in comparison of 2009-10.  Howe ver, the non plan outlay has gone down 
from Rs. 1890 crore to Rs. 1745. 52 crore.            (Para 18.2) 
 
The Committee is deeply concerned about the 30 to 80 per cent vacancies of 
faculty existing in our IITs.  These institutions are pioneer institutions of our 
country and showcase our intellectual property to the world at large.  Therefore, 
vacancies to that extent cannot be allo wed to continue.  The Committee calls upon 

the Department to ensure filling up all such  positions within the first quarter of the 
academic session 2010-11.  The Committee would like these institutions to constitute 
a strategic group to monitor every quarter, the progress made in filling the existing 
vacancies and place it before their respective Board for guidance on steps needed to 
substantially bring down the existing vacancies.       (Para 18.4)  
 
The Committee would like the Department to strictly adhere to the schedule 
which they have shared with the Committe e.  Any delay in completion should not 
only amount to cost overrun but also deprive the students of the precious 
opportunities to be made available through these premier institutes.       (Para 18.5) 
 
The Committee observes that out of new six IIMs, four IIMs at Raipur 
(Chhatisgarh), Rohtak (Haryana), Ranchi  (Jharkhand) and Tiruchirappalli (Tamil 
Nadu) would become functional from the academic session 2010-11.  The Committee 
hopes that there would be no hurdles in this regard.  There should be no undue 
delay in finalisation of temporary campuses for the remaining two new IIMs 
proposed for Kashipur (Uttaranchal) a nd Udaipur (Rajasthan).  The Committee 
would also appreciate if process for creation and selection of faculty for all the IIMs 
also starts at the earliest.  Similarly, since land has already been allotted for all the 
IIMs, preparatory exercise for commencement of construction work must have 
started by now.  If not, it should start without further delay followed by 
construction in a time bound manner.  The Committee calls upon the Department to 
prepare a status report at th e end of four months in the fiscal year and furnish the 
same for its consideration.                          (Para 18.6)  
 
XIX.  ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION 
 
Whatever changes may occur in the status of AICTE after National Council 
for Higher Education and Research coming into the picture the Committee opines 
that system of approvals and facilities to the students needs to be streamlined in the 
interest of the technical education in its entirety.  The Committee hopes that the new 
system of online applicatio ns and information about inst itutions in public domain 
would bring forth the much desired transparency under the new regulatory system. 
              ( P a r a  1 9 . 4 )  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
MINUTES 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.30 A.M. on 
Thursday, the 25th March, 2010 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe 
, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes   Chairman 
2. Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
3. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
4. Shri N.K. Singh 
5. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6.  Shri Kirti Azad 
7.  Shri P.K. Biju 
8.  Shri Jitendrasingh Bundela 
9.  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
10.  Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
11.  Shri P. Kumar 
12.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
13.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
14.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 
15.  Shri Tapas Paul 
16.  Shri Ashok Tanwar 
17.  Shri Joseph Toppo  
18.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
 LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
I. ***  ***  ***  ***  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matter. 

II MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
1.  Smt. Vibha Puri Das  - Secretary 
2.  Sh. Ashok Thakur  - Additional Secretary 
3.  Sh. S.K. Ray   - Additional Secretary & FA 
4.  Sh. Sunil Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
5.  Sh. N.K. Sinha   - Joint Secretary 
6.  Sh. Amit Khare   -  Joint Secretary  
7.  Dr. Anita Bhatnagar Jain  - Joint Secretary 
8.  Dr. Vijay P. Goel   -  DDG 
9.  Sh.  R.C. Meema   - Economic Advisor 
10. Sh. A. N. Bokshi   - CCA 
11. Sh. Ved Praksh   - VC, UGC 
12. Dr. (Mrs.) Niloufer Adikazmi - Secretary, UGC 
13. Prof. S.S. Mantha   - Acting Chairman, AICTE 
14. Prof. R. Govinda   - VC, NUEPA 
15. Prof. V.N. Rajasekharan Pillai - VC, IGNOU 
16. Dr. K. Gunasekaran  - A.S. UGC 
17. Dr. K.P. Singh   - JS, UGC 
   
SECRETARIAT 
Smt.Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
Smt. Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the first meeting in 
connection with the examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2010-11 pertaining 
to the Ministries/Departments under the purview of the Committee.  He mentioned that 
the budgetary documents and the replies to questionnaire were circulated to the members 
and sought their  cooperation for detailed examination of the Demands.  
3. ***  ***  ***  ***  *** 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matter. 

4. The Committee reassembled at 3.30 p.m. to hear the Secretary, Department of 
Higher Education on the Demands for Grants 2010-11 of the Department.  The Secretary 
apprised the Committee on the budgetary allocation as also performance of various 
schemes, the problem areas in hi gher educations and the initiatives of the Ministry in that 
regard. The Members then sought clarifications based on the replies to Committee’s 
questionnaire and also the presentation made by the Department during the meeting.  As 
number of issues were large and needed elaborate feedback, the Committee directed the 
Secretary to send written replies on all the queries within a week for its consideration.    
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.44 p.m. to meet again at 11.30 a.m. on Friday, 
the 26th March, 2010.  

XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on 
Wednesday, the 28 th April, 2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, and New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
    
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes         in the Chairman 
2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchaippan 
3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
4. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
5. Shri N.K. Singh 
6. Shri M. Rama Jois 
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
8. Shri Suresh Angadi 
9. Shri P.K. Biju 
10. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson   
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
12. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
13. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
14. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
15. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
16. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 
17. Shri Tapas Paul 
18.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Smt.Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
Smt. Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
 
 

1. The Committee first took up for consideration the draft 222 nd Report on Demands 
for Grants 2010-11 of Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development and after some discussion, adopted the Report with some minor 
modifications. 
 
2. The Committee then decided to present this  Report to both Houses of Parliament 
on 29th April, 2010.  It was decided that while Shri Oscar Fernandes, Chairman, of the 
Committee and in his absence, Shri M. Ra ma Jois will present the Report in Rajya 
Sabha, Shri P.K. Biju, and his absence, Sh ri P.C. Gaddigoudar will lay the Report in 
Lok Sabha. 
 
3. ***  ***  ***  ***  *** 
 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matter. 