PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
  
HUNDRED THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
  
ON 
  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2003-2004 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
  
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   23RD    APRIL, 2003) 
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON  23RD   APRIL, 2003) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2003/VAISAKHA, 1925 (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
PREFACE 
REPORT 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
MINUTES                                                                                                                                            
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2003) 
  
Shri Arjun Singh                           Chairman 
MEMBERS 
            RAJYA SABHA 
Dr. Abrar Ahmed          
Dr. Akhilesh Das 
Shri B.P. Apte   
Shri Bachani Lekhraj  
Shri Eduardo Faleiro   
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik 
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey 
Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi 
Shri R. Sarath Kumar 
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
Page 1 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

Shri Mrinal Sen 
Smt. Vanga Geetha 
Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
Shri Ambareesha 
Shri Ramakant Angle 
Shri Kirti Jha Azad 
Shri G. S. Basavaraj 
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria 
Prof. Kailasho Devi 
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit 
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal 
Shri R.L. Jalappa 
Shri Baliram Kashyap 
Shri Brij Lal Khabri 
Shri Samik Lahiri 
Shri Y.G. Mahajan 
Shri  G.Mallikarjunappa 
Dr. Manda Jagannath 
Smt. Nivedita Mane 
Shrimati Jas Kaur Meena 
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 29
th   January, 2003 
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja 
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik 
Smt. Renu Kumari 
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao 
Shri Sunil Dutt 
Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
Dr. N. Venkataswamy 
Smt. Ganti Vijaykumari 
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav 
Shri G.J. Javia 
Shri Ali Mohammed Naik  
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer 
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
**  Nominated   w.e.f. 7
th April, 2003. 
Page 2 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

PREFACE 
  
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Hundred Thirty Fifth Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand 
No.46) of the Department of Health,  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2003-2004. 
  
2.         The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the 
Department of Health and also heard the Secretary and other officials of that Department on the said 
Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 26th March, 2003. 
  
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on  
22nd April, 2003. 
  
REPORT 
I           INTRODUCTION 
            The      Ministry of Health & Family welfare consists of three Departments viz. Department of 
Health, Department of Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy and Department of Family 
Welfare. 
            The Department of Health deals with medical and public health matters including drugs control 
and prevention of food adulteration.  It is headed by a Secretary to the Government of India who is 
supported by two Additional Secretaries. The Department has an attached office i.e. Directorate General 
of Health Services. The DGHS renders technical advice on all medical and public health matters and is 
involved in the implementation of various health schemes.  
            The Central Government has the sole executive responsibility in respect of subjects included in 
the Union List such as port quarantine including hospitals connected therewith. In regard to items 
included in the State List, such as Public Health, Hospitals and Dispensaries, the Central Govt's direct 
responsibility is restricted to UTs without legislature and providing  enabling framework for 
development of infrastructures in respect of matter falling under the Concurrent List. 
            The Central Govt.  evolves broad policies and plans through the Central Council of Health, set 
up under Article 263 of the Constitution, arranges for collection and exchange of information and 
renders financial and technical assistance to State Govts., UT Administration and other bodies for the 
implementation of important health programmes and various centrally sponsored schemes, including 
control of epidemics throughout     the country. 
Main objectives of the Department of Health are : 
to undertake national programmes of health and to intensify measures for the prevention, control and 
eradication of communicable diseases; 
to promote education, research and training in various medical disciplines, to reorient the medical 
colleges in the delivery of health services in rural areas; 
to prevent adulteration of food as well as drugs; 
to provide primary health care at the doorsteps of the people and to train the required number of 
personnel for this purpose; 
to take steps for better implementation of Health Care Programmes for tribal and other weaker sections 
of the Society; and 
to collaborate with member countries of United Nations and International Agencies like WHO, UNICEF 
in matters relating to health promotion. 
NEW DELHI  
April 22 , 2003 
Vaisakha 2,  1925 (Saka) 
ARJUN SINGH 
    Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development
Page 3 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

The Department of Health incurs expenditure either directly or through various institutions and 
establishments run by it and by way of grants given to autonomous and voluntary organizations.  Grants 
to States and Union Territory Administrations are mainly for Centrally Sponsored Health Schemes being 
implemented through the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations.  They include 
national programmes for prevention, control and eradication of diseases. 
The Department finances, wholly or substantially, the following autonomous Institutions engaged in 
patient care and/or research; 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences and Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, New 
Delhi; 
Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh; 
All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore; and 
Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi 
The following Schemes are financed by the Central Government on 100 percent basis: 
National Scheme for Prevention of Visual Impairment and Blindness including Trachoma; 
National Leprosy Eradication Programme; 
National Guinea-worm Eradication Programme; and 
National AIDS Control Programme. 
            The Schemes on which the expenditure is shared between the Central Government and State 
Government on 50:50 basis are:— 
National  Malaria Eradication Programme (Rural and Urban); 
National Sexually Transmitted Diseases Control Programme;  
National T.B. Control Programme; and 
Kala-Azar Control Programme 
As already mentioned, the Directorate General of Health Services is an attached office of the Ministry 
which provides technical expertise on Medical and Public Health matters. The Directorate is also 
responsible for implementation of programmes through its subordinate offices including Hospitals, 
Medical Stores Depots, Drug Controller, Training and Research Institutions.  
Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (India) Ltd. New Delhi, a Public Sector Undertaking has 
also been set up by the Department.  Some of the Voluntary Organizations and Institutions substantially 
assisted by the Government are Indian Red Cross Society, New Delhi, Tuberculosis Center, New Delhi, 
Lala Ram Swamp Institute of T.B. and Allied Diseases, New Delhi etc.; 
1.5       National Health Policy-2002 has been announced by the Government during the year.  The main 
objective of the new policy is to achieve an acceptable standard of good health amongst the general 
population of the country. The new policy, it is stated, covers all-aspects of health care and contains 
policy prescriptions covering issues, interalia, financial resources, equity, delivery of national public 
health programmes, state of public health infrastructure, education of  health research care professionals, 
health research, role of various stakeholder-NGOs, civil society, enforcement of quality standards for 
food &. drugs, women’s health etc. This policy has been widely circulated both at the Centre and in the 
States upto the district level. Various concerned organisations and the State Governments have been 
appropriately advised to implement the new policy.  
II         BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
2.1       Plan allocation for the Department of Health for 2003-04 is Rs. 1506.00 crores  showing a 
marginal  increase  over the Plan allocation of Rs. 1493.51  crores for 2002-03.  On a specific query  
about the projected demand of the Department for 2003-04, the Committee was informed that a plan 
outlay of Rs. 1949.35 crores was proposed.   Additional allocation was meant for new initiatives 
emanating from the draft National Health Policy-2002, such as distributing drugs to Primary Health 
Centres, Urban Health, setting up of a Medical Grants Commission.   The Committee was, however,  
given  to understand that the meager increase in 2002-03 would not be sufficient even for maintaining 
the tempo of the existing programmes. The Department has further informed that the  Minister of Health 
and Family Welfare has requested the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission to review the 
budget allocation for the Department of Health for the year 2003-04 to ensure that the implementation of 
Page 4 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

existing programmes / schemes is not put in jeopardy for want of funds. 
2.2       The Secretary, while deposing before the Committee informed that   it is the objective of the 
Government to increase the investment in the health Sector up to 2% of GDP by the year 2010. At 
present,  the level of investment is only approximately 0.8-0.9% of the GDP. The Committee is 
constrained to observe that even the 'priority' area such as Public Health have not been spared 
from the cuts imposed by the planning Commission or the Ministry of Finance as the case may be.  
The Health of the people is of extreme importance. There should be an increase in the budgetary 
allocation every year commensurate with the size of the population and the requirements in 
respect of infrastructure, medication etc which should provide adequate healthcare to people.  
Unless this is done, the Government’s objective to provide primary health care at the door steps of 
the people will stand defeated.  At the same time, Department of Health must ensure optimum 
utilization of funds on plans and activities for which they are meant. 
III        CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH  SCHEME   
3.1       The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) was started in 1954 with the objective of 
providing comprehensive medical care facilities to the Central Government employees and their family 
members.  Now, besides Central Government employees, the scheme also provides services to Members 
and Ex-members of Parliament, Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Court (sitting and retired), 
Freedom Fighters, Central Government Pensioners, employees of semi-autonomous bodies/semi-
government organisations accredited journalists, Ex-Governors and Ex-Vice Presidents of India.  The 
scheme, initially started in Delhi, has subsequently been extended to 22 cities. CGHS dispensaries at 
Bhubaneswar and Ranchi cater only to the employees of the offices of Accountant General of India 
located in those cities. There are 244 Allopathic dispensaries for 10.01 lakh card holders and 43.02 lakh 
beneficiaries of CGHS.  ln addition to the Allopathic dispensaries, CGHS facilities are also available in 
Indian System of Medicine & Homoeopathy through dispensaries/Units in Ayurveda, Homoeopathy, 
Unani, Siddha and Yoga. The number of these dispensaries functioning as on 31.1.2003 is as under: 
1. Ayurvedic dispensaries/Units                         31  
2. Homoeopathic dispensaries/Units                  34 
3. Unani dispensaries/Units                               9  
4.  Siddha dispensaries/Units                             2 
5.         Yoga                                                    3 
In addition, 19 Poly-clinics, 65 Laboratories, 17 Dental Units and 6 Allopathic First Aid Posts are also 
functioning under CGHS. 
Rs. 14.00 crores under plan allocation has been  provided to  CGHS for 2003-2004.  The Committee 
notes that Plan allocation of Rs. 12.00 crores in 2002-03 had to be increased to Rs. 14.13 crores at the 
RE stage.  Explaining the increase, the Department replied that out of the Rs.14.13 crore given under 
Plan allocation for CGHS during the current financial year an amount of Rs.12.93 crore has already been 
spent. The balance amount of Rs.l.20 crore would be fully utilised during March, 2003.  
In reply to a question as to what is the outflow of funds on CGHS, the amount (also in terms of 
percentage) received by way of contribution from employees and the amount (also in terms of 
percentage) spent by Government and the manner in which contribution from employees is utilized, the 
Department replied that the actual amount of outflow of funds for CGHS shown in the book for Demand 
for Grants 2003-2004 in respect of the Department of Health relates to the year 2001-2002 only. During 
2001-2002, the CGHS had spent Rs.11,52,83,000/- under Plan allocation  and Rs.3,44,96,58,000/- under 
Non-Plan allocation. The CGHS contribution paid by the Central Govt. employees working in the 
various Ministries/Departments of the Govt. of India is credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and 
therefore, the said contribution is not directly utilised by the CGHS. 
3.4         The Committee observes that the explanation  given by the government with regard to the 
non-availability of figures in respect of contribution received from CGHS beneficiaries and its 
utilisation etc is not satisfactory.  The Committee observes that without this basic information the 
Department is groping in dark.  The Committee fails to understand how the Department functions 
in the absence  of these statistics.  The entire planning in respect of a department is based on 
Page 5 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

inflow and outflow of funds and such other basic data.  The entire functioning would be 
unrealistic in the absence of these figures.  It should be possible for the Department to compute 
the total inflow and outflow of funds.  
            It appears, with the passage of time, more and more sections of beneficaries have been 
brought under CGHS with the result interests of original beneficiaries are getting sidetracked.  It 
also appears that the benefit of the entire infrastructure is not available to all beneficiaries 
uniformly e.g. the ambulances purchased by CGHS are not provided to bulk of beneficiaries.  
Further, CGHS dispensaries are awfully inequipped to deal with emergencies.  It is an irony that 
the CGHS beneficiaries who, by virtue of their contribution, provide bread and butter to the 
entire CGHS set up are given raw deal in many respects.  They have to run from pillar to post to 
get their medicines recommended by specialists.  In case of emergency treatment, while a 
beneficiary is struggling with his life, CGHS sits comfortably in issuing `No objection Certificate’ 
for pursuing  the treatment from a nearby hospital or clinic.  Then come the unkind cuts in 
reimbursement of bills. The woes of the beneficiaries are endless.  What to speak of these, the 
Department has not even  been able to restore the double shift functioning of CGHS dispensaries 
which was discontinued several years back.  In these circumstances, the Committee feels that 
there is need for organisational management exercise of CGHS from a private preferably an 
international agency. 
            The Committee, therefore, feels that CGHS beneficiaries may be allowed to pursue 
treatment whatsoever in a hospital/clinic etc. of his/her choice in emergency without the 
requirement of any permission/reference from CGHS. The emergency in this context should mean 
any situation where the need for such a treatment is felt. The beneficiary in such cases should not 
be required to meet any expenditure whatsoever from his pocket. The bill for entire expenditure 
should be sent to the office of the beneficiary or in case of pensioners and others to CGHS. The 
beneficiary should only be required to sign the docucments without any conditionalities 
whatsoever. 
 3.5      Explaining the frequency of and reasons for recent strike of chemists in the CGHS dispensaries 
the Department has replied that during 2002 
   -        from 21.1.2002 to 25.1.2002 - Due to delayed payment of their bills. 
    -       from 1.4.2002 to 12.4.2002 -Due to delayed payment of their bills and withholding of 10% of 
their bills on account of Sales Tax. 
-           from 1.11.2002 to 15.1.2003 -Due to withholding of 10% amount from their bills on account of 
Sales Tax and delayed payment of their pending bills by the CGHS. 
3.6       Due to the strike of the authoried local chemists of CGHS Delhi, there was a shortfall in the 
availability of medicines in CGHS dispenaries and therefore the beneficiaries were allowed to purchase 
the medicines from open market on the basis of valid prescription and authorisation by the Medical 
Officer of the dispensary and get reimbursement of the expenses incurred on this account from the Govt. 
Arrangements were also made for making reimbursement to CGHS pensioner beneficiaries in the 
concerned CGHS dispensary itself. The matter relating to overcharging by the authorised local chemists 
of Delhi and payment of Sales Tax to them was referred to the C&AG for their advice. The immediate 
issue relating to Sales Tax has since been settled in consultation with the C&AG. 
3.7       The Committee feels that reimbursement of medical expenses incurred by CGHS 
beneficiaries by their concerned  office during the currency of the chemist`s strike, was an 
unprecedented situation  and with their limited manpower such offices were not geared up for 
disposing of  ever increasing reimbursement cases expeditiously thus resulting in lot of 
inconvenience to the beneficiaries. The Committee also fails to understand as to why the 
Department didn`t sort out the matter in the month of January itself when the chemists went on 
strike for the first time.   The Committee feels that had the matter been settled early, the amount 
of sufferings that the CGHS employees underwent could have been easily avoided.  The 
Committee also finds it difficult to understand as to why the issue of payament of sales tax arose 
after so man
y years after signing of Memorandum of Agreement with the local chemists.  Had this 
Page 6 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

been a part of the agreement, the Department would not perhaps have been required to suddenly 
stop the payment.  The Committee recommends that the Department should make an enquiry as 
to how so much of Government money continued to be paid to the local chemists for such a long 
time  and the  responsibility should be fixed in the matter with a view to punish the culprit. 
3.8       The Department has informed that the CGHS had also prepared a list of 65 commonly indented 
medicines in addition to the 138 Generic medicines available in the formulary of the Government of 
NCT of Delhi. As regards the list containing 203 drug items prepared by CGHS, it was decided by the 
Government to procure the medicines through Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation(HSCC),  
which is a Goverrunent of India Undertaking. The Government has also adopted approved formulary for 
generic drugs of the Government of NCT of Delhi for procurement of drugs.  
The Committee feels that the above-said formulary of the Governnent of NCT of Delhi will serve  
purpose only if the medicines available in the formulary are effective. The experience of the 
Committee is that most of the drugs under the present formulary are totally ineffective. Another 
problem with the existing formulary was that medicines which are very effective but costly are left 
out of it.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should look into all the 
aspects, before adopting the new formulary.   
3.10  In reply to a question relating to rule for  treatment in private recognised Hospitals/ Diagnostic 
Centre the Committee has been informed that CGHS beneficiaries (both serving and pensioners) have 
the option of availing genera1 specia1ized treatment and diagnostic procedure at private 
hospita1/diagnostic centres recognised under CGHS in various CGHS covered cities after obtaining the 
recommendation regarding line of treatment from the specialist of CGHS/Govt. hospita1/CMO in-
charge of the dispensary and prior permission from the concerned office/Department in the case of 
serving employees and from the CMO in-charge of CGHS dispensaries in the case of pensioner 
beneficiaries.  It has also been informed that a Memorandum of Agreement(MOA) has been entered into 
by Director, CGHS with each of the private hospitals recognised under CGHS for the cities of Delhi, 
Ahmedabad, Allahabad, Chennai, Hyderabad, Jabalpur, Jaipur, Kanpur, Meerut, Murnbai, Trivandrurn, 
Patna, Ranchi, Lucknow, Pune and Bangalore. The MOA binds the hospitals not to charge CGHS 
beneficiaries(both serving and pensioners) over and above the ceiling rates for various medical 
procedures/tests/investigations fixed under CGHS. Therefore, for all practical purposes, CGHS 
beneficiaries get full reimbursement for taking treatment in private hospitals recognised under CGHS.  
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that though there is provision for treatment in 
private recognised Hospitals/ Diagnostic Centres, the specialists of CGHS/Govt. hospital/CMOs 
in-charge of the dispensaries are generally reluctant to refer the beneficiaries to private 
recognised Hospitals/ Diagnostic Centres. Instead, the beneficiaries are constantly cajoled to get 
treatment in a Government hospital. Thus, except for few VVIPs and influential  persons, the 
facility for treatment in private recognised Hospitals/ Diagnostic Centres remains largely on  
paper. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that getting treatment   in private 
recognised Hospitals/ Diagnostic Centres should be left to the free will of the beneficiary  and not 
to the whims of the specialists of the CGHS or the CMOs in-charge of the dispensary.  In fact 
there should be no room left for discretion of CGHS functionaries.  Rather, the system should be 
self regulatory to the benefit of CGHS beneficiaries. 
3.11                 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that four private hospitals in 
Hyderabad in collusion with the officials of the CGHS siphoned off a lot of Government money 
through inflated bills, and the Department, taking cognizance in the matter,  has ordered an 
enquiry. The Committee deprecates the criminal misappropriation of Government funds and  
recommends that the enquiry should be completed in a fixed time frame and follow-up action be 
taken  accordingly. 
IV        SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL 
The Plan allocation for Safdarjung Hospital for the year 2003-2004 is Rs. 42 crores. The Committee 
notes that Plan allocation for Safdarjung Hospital in BE 2002-2003 was Rs. 42.00 crores which was 
reduced to Rs. 38 Crores at RE stage.  The Department of Health was informed that the actual 
Page 7 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

expenditure incurred upto 13th March, 2003 was Rs. 29.63 crores.  Safdarjung Hospital was committed 
to spend Rs. 37.50 crores by the end of the financial year. 
The Department has given the proposed utilization of Budget Estimate 2003-2004 subhead wise as 
under  
4.3       In reply to a question, the Department has informed that tap water is used in Safdarjung Hospital 
for Haemodialysis by using de-ionizing machines.  The reverse osmosis and de-ionizing machines are 
used for dialysis purpose and in both the processes tap water is used.  However, procurement of reverse 
osmosis machine is in process.  
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCE 
4.4       All India Institute of Medical Sciences was established in 1956 by an Act of Parliament as an 
institution of national importance .  AIIMS is conceived to be a Centre of excellence in modern 
medicine with comprehensive training facility. 
4.5       Plan allocation for the AIIMS, New Delhi for BE 2003-2004 is Rs. 105.00 crores which is the 
same amount as allocated during the year 2002-2003. Commenting on the fact that the allocation for the 
current year does not reflect the major plan for renovating/expanding medical facilities being provided 
there, the Department has informed that  AIIMS, New Delhi is planning to upgrade their facilities and a 
detailed Master Plan has been submitted to Delhi Urban Art Commission. The Master Plan includes 
expansion of housing facilities, expanded hostel facilities, new institutional buildings like Pay Wards, 
extended OPD, Digestion Centre, Renal Centre, Dental College, Captive Power Plant etc. It is to be 
implemented phasewise as a part of vision 2025. It is still at planning stage and its implementation will 
depend on due clearances and availability of funds. The specialties of Nephrology and Urology would 
be strengthened during the 10th  Plan 
            LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE AND SMT. SUCHETA KRIPLANI 
HOSPITAL. 
4.6       Lady Harding Medical College affiliated to University of Delhi provides Medical Education for 
MBBS and PG Courses.  The Lady Harding Medical College and Smt. Sucheta Kriplani Hospital was 
set up with the objective of imparting medical education for women, patient care for women and 
children and also conduct diploma courses in nursing. 
4.7       Plan allocation for Lady Harding Medical College and Smt. Sucheta Kriplani Hospital in BE 
2003-2004 is Rs. 8.50 crores.   
The Committee is constrained to observe that the state of these hospitals, referral institutions is woefully 
bad. Long queues in OPDs and CGHS sections, wherever they exist, unhygienic conditions in 
Emergency and Wards  --- these are all pointers that Govt. have never sincerely addressed to the 
difficulties faced by visiting patients.  Added to these is hopelessly inadequate parking arrangements, 
particularly in AIIMS, in respect of vehicles. A visiting patient is first of all expected to care for his 
S.No. Sub-Heads   
1. Salaries   1820.00 
2. Wages       65.00 
3. OTA         2.50 
4. DTE       35.00 
5. Office Ex penditure     480.00 
6. RRT         7.00 
7. Publication       25.00 
8. Material & Su pplies     185.00 
9. Advertisement/Publicit y        7.00 
10. Minor Works     210.00 
11. Other Charges       70.00 
12. Motor Vehicle       25.00 
13. Machiner y & Equipment    1568.50 
  Total    4500.00 
Page 8 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

health and if he is able to park his vehicle on the road side without obstructing the traffic that should be 
enough.  But AIIMS authorities have their own definition of disciplining the traffic and have their own 
parking arrangements.  Consequently, cranes  are  always on the lookout for vehicles which are not 
parked in the contractor's parking lot and are seen  removing such vehicles immediately without 
realizing the plight or the age of victims. The Committee is inclined to believe on the possibility of 
connivance among unscrupulous officers of the Institute's Administration,  Parking Contractor and the 
Traffic Police.  This matter needs to be looked into not only in AIIMS but in all other hospitals as it 
would be unwise to trade on the hassles of the visiting patients. Considerations of revenue are not 
always important.  Parking should be totally free and adequate space should be provided therefore. 
The Government must ensure that the waiting time for patients in OPDs/CGHS should not be 
more than half an hour.  Long waiting period breeds corruption and patients are tempted to use 
the influence of hospital staff.  This too must be put to an end.  If necessary, staff and their 
bonafide  relatives may be attended after  normal working hours. 
            The Committee observes that much of the budgetary support is spent on peripheral or 
incidental matters and not for requirements of patients on medicines etc.  The Committee is of the 
view that a realistic assessment of the requirements of patients be made and priorities rearranged 
accordingly. 
            In reply to a question, the Committee has been informed that tap water is used in 
Safdarjung Hospital for Haemodialysis by using de-ionizing machines.  The reverse osmosis and 
de-ionizing machines are used for dialysis purpose and in both the processes tap water is used.  
The Committee has been informed that procurement of reverse osmosis machine is in process.  
The Committee recommends that the procurement of reverse osmosis machine be expedited as use 
of tap water for dialysis does not appear to be safe. 
            The Committee is of the view that mere cosmetic renovation of a hospital is not the remedy 
to patients’ woes.  There is need to address  the unhygienic conditions which exist in all the 
hospitals/institutions.  Wards are seen stinking and totally unclean.  Toilets are found stinking 
which suggests that there is no authority whatsoever in these institutions.  The Committee feels 
that there is dire need to change this scenario and make the entire system user friendly.  At the 
same time attention should also be paid to horticultural aspect with clean and green surroundings. 
            The Committee has been given to understand that the telephone facilities are totally 
inadequate and whatever PCO booths exist in these institutions, the telephones in them are 
deliberately kept out of order to generate business for a nearby private operator.  The Committee 
recommends that an officer be designated for this purpose to ensure that PCOs remain in working 
order round the clock. 
V         CANCER RESEARCH 
5.1       Plan allocation under Cancer Research was Rs. 55.00 crores during RE 2002-2003 which has 
been reduced to Rs. 49.00 crores in BE 2003-2004.   Explaining the reasons for decrease, the 
Department has informed that the allocation for 'National Cancer Control Programme' consists mainly of 
allocation to the Regional Cancer Centres (both existing and proposed), grants-in-aid to State Govts. for 
Oncology Wing Development in Medical College Hospitals, grants-in-aid for Cobalt Therapy Units in 
Govt. and NGO-run Hospitals, and grants to NGOs for IEC activities on early detection and health 
education. Even though the allocation for 2002-03 for Cancer Research was kept at Rs. 55.00 crores, the 
provisions had to be scaled down to Rs. 49.65 crores in the final estimates 2002-03. The provisions 
under National Cancer Control Programme (NCCP) were kept as per norms provided in the EFC 
memorandum on NCCP which is under the consideration of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance. However, the EFC with revised norms has not yet been approved. Moreover, the provisions 
under the subheads of Development of Oncology Wing", "Cobalt Therapy Unit" and "IEC grants to  
NGOs" were made expecting the sufficient number of proposals to utilize the allocated budget would be 
approved by the Standing Committee on Radiotherapy Development. However, because of various 
lacunae in the proposals, the Standing Committee could clear only lesser number of proposals for release 
of grant. In view of these, the provisions had to be scaled down in the final estimates 2002-2003 and BE 
Page 9 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

2003-2004 was also reduced to Rs. 49.00 crores.   
5.2       The Committee notes with concern the reduction in the budgetary allocation in  the field of 
cancer research, whatever be the reasons.  The number of patients suffering from cancer is on the 
increase.  The Committee feels that the situation calls for increased  research facilities irrespective 
of the advances made in this area in countries abroad.  The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that fund allocation should be suitably increased keeping in view the need for such facilities.   
VI        KALA AZAR CONTROL PROGRAMME 
6.1       Plan allocation under  Kala Azar Control Programme in BE 2003-2004 is Rs. 37.00 crores.  The 
Committee notes that plan allocation under the programme for BE 2002-2003 was Rs. 20.00 crores 
which was drastically reduced to Rs. 4.00 crores at the RE stage.  Explaining the reason for the decrease, 
the Department has informed that at BE stage an amount of Rs.20 crores was allocated under Kala-Azar 
Control Programme to provide insecticide (DDT 50% wdp) and anti Kala-Azar drugs to the identified 
States of Bihar, West Bengal, Jharkhand and U P. However the State of Bihar and Jharkhand could not 
lift the allocated DDT due to non provision of freight charge to be met by the States. Hence the 
allocation was cancelled and resulted reduction in R E.   
6.2       The Committee observes that Government is well aware of the resource position of the 
States of Bihar and the newly created State of Jharkhand which are  the most Kala Azar endemic 
states that have failed to lift their allocated  quota of insecticides.   The Committee feels that Govt. 
should not have taken a rigid stand on a relatively insignificant component of freight charges and 
should have helped the States to lift the allocated DDT in the larger interest of the people. 
 VII     NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS 
7.1       The programme was launched in 1976 as a 100% Centrally Sponsored Scheme.  Its aim was to 
reduce blindness in the Country from 1.4% to 3% by 2000 A.D.  The Department has further informed 
that National survey on blindness undertaken in 2001-2002 in 15 randomly selected districts located in 
15 major states indicated that the prevalence of blindness has come down from 1.49% (1986-89 survey) 
to 1.1%. 
7.2       The Committee notes with concern the progress made at snail’s pace  over a period of more 
than 15 years.  The Committee observes that there is a need to speed up the programme.   
VIII     NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME 
8.1       National Aids Control Programme Phase II is being implemented in the entire Country through 
different AIIDS Control Societies w.e.f. April, 1999.  Plan allocation for the Programme in 2003-2004 is 
Rs. 205 crores.  
8.2       The Committee notes that under the National AIIDS Control Programme plan allocation of Rs. 
198 crores was made for 2002-2003, which was increased to Rs. 215 crores at the RE stage to be further 
reduced to Rs. 205 crores in BE 2003-2004.  Explaining the variation the Department has informed that 
a total provision of Rs. 225 crores has been made for the National AIDS Control Programme-II  for the 
financial year 2002-03.  This includes Rs. 27 crores specifically earmarked for the North Eastern States, 
including Sikkim.  This provision had been enhanced to Rs. 242 crores including the Rs. 27 crores for 
North Eastern States, at the Revised Estimates stage.  The augmentation at RE stage was agreed to in 
view of enhanced provision required for release to the different AIDS Control Societies for 
implementation of various activities as per their approved action plans, and also to conduct the Family 
Health Awareness Campaign all over the Country. 
A provision of Rs. 310 crores was sought for the NACP II for the financial year 2003-04.  However, this 
provision has been maintained at Rs. 225 crores.  This includes Rs. 20 crores that are earmarked for the 
North Eastern States, including Sikkim.’ 
8.3       The Committee observes that the number of  AIDS and HIV positive cases in the Country 
are constantly on the increase.  Situation is more alarming in the six states namely Maharashtra, 
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Manipur and Nagaland.  As the state AIDS Control 
societies are instrumental for implementation of the Programmes, the Committee feels that the 
Department should closely monitor the functioning of these societies and identify the states where 
the State AIDS Control Societies are not functioning effectively and take remedial steps in the 
Page 10 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

matter. 
IX        NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME 
9.1       Plan allocation for National Mental Health Programme in BE 2003-2004 is Rs. 28.00 crores.  
The Committee notes that during 2002-2003, allocation for the Programme in BE was Rs. 27.00 crores 
which has been substantially reduced to Rs. 3.50  crores at the RE stage.  Explaining the reasons the 
Department has given the information that “an amount of Rs 27 crores was proposed at BE stage to 
implement a comprehensive National Mental Health Programme during the year 2002-03. However, the 
EFC meeting to consider the said programme for the 10th  Five Year Plan was held only on 26.12.2002 
and the minutes received in February, 2003. Further, the approval of the CCEA for the scheme is being 
taken. Therefore, the activities proposed for the year 2002-2003 viz; expansion of District Mental Health 
Programme, Strengthening of Psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric departments of Medical colleges, 
IEC and Research activities, could not be undertaken during 2002-2003, which led to drastic cut in the 
Revised Estimate stage for the year 2002-2003. However, during the year 2002-2003, as per the decision 
taken by EFC, it is now proposed only to sustain the District Mental Health Programme in districts 
which are already under implementation under IX Plan and which have not received the full five year 
assistance subject to submission of utilization certificate in respect of assistance provided during the 
previous years. Apart from sustaining the District Mental Health Programme, it is proposed to undertake 
further expansion of the programme strengthening or psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric departments 
of Medical Colleges IEC and Research activities during 2003-2004, on receipt of approval of CCEA; 
hence budget allocation has been increased.” 
9.2       The Committee is aware that due to ever increasing materialization, and consequent 
changes in life style, the cases of mental and psychological aberration are on the increase. The 
Committee notes with concern the delay in implementation of the comprehensive Mental Health 
Programme caused solely due to delay in holding the EFC meeting.  The EFC meeting should have 
been held as per the requirements of the situation and not vice-versa.  The Committee deprecates  
such delays  and recommends that all out efforts should be made to ensure that such a situation 
does not recur and the comprehensive Mental Health Programme be fully implemented in the 
current year. 
X         IMPLEMENTATION OF HEALTH PROGRAMMES IN  NORTH EAST SECTOR 
10.1     Plan allocation for Implementation Of Health Programmes In  North East Sector in BE 2003-
2004 is Rs. 155 crores.  The Committee notes that during BE 2002-2003, plan allocation was Rs. 155 
crores which was reduced to Rs. 137.50 crores at the RE stage.  
10.2     The scheme wise expenditure  under Lumpsum Provision for projects /schemes of NEA and 
Sikkim is as follows : 
                  (Rs. in crore) 
S.No. Name of the Programme/scheme Funds 
earmarked 
Amount re- 
appropriated 
for ex
p.
1. National Vector Borne Disease Control 
Programme 
  38.00   29.05 
2. National Le prosy Eradication Programme  2.50     2.50
3. National TB Control Pro gramme  5.00       -
4. National AIDS Control Pro gramme  27.00   26.96
5. Inte grated Disease Surveillance Programme    -       -
6. National Blindness Control Pro gramme  3.50     0.90
7. National Cancer Control Pro gramme  5.00       -
8. National Mental Health Pro gramme  1.00       -
9. Dru g De-addiction Programme  0.50     0.28
10. New Initiatives in the Tenth Plan    -       -
11. National Iodine Deficiency Disorder 
Programme 
  1.00     0.50 
Page 11 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

10.3     The Committee notes that in respect of programmes such  as National TB Control, 
National Blindness Control, National Cancer Control, National Mental Health, Drug De-
addiction, National Iodine Deficiency Disorder and Indian Council of Medical Research the 
amount re-appropriated for expenditure is much below the funds earmarked for them. The 
Committee deprecates the  trend in view of the fact that the NE states, because of their 
inhospitable geography do not  attract much of health care services.  The Committee observes 
that  these border states need to be assured that  they are a part of national mainstream and need 
to be provided what is due to them. At the same time efforts need to made to ensure optimum 
utilisation of funds to bring them at par with the rest of the Country.   
            The Committee observes that the Country is way behind in providing state-of-the-art 
facilities and an efficient and responsive Health Care system in the Country.  There is need for 
tremendous improvement all round and people must have the feeling that  being a welfare state, it 
cares for the people.  
11.       It appears that there is some discontentment among the staff particularly in CGHS 
dispensaries where, the Committee has been given to understand that Pharmacists have not been 
granted Assured Career Progression on a uniform basis.  While Pharmacists of Ayurvedic, 
Homoeopathic and Unani systems of medicine have been given the benefit on completion of 12 and 
24 years of service, the same has been denied to Allopathic Pharmacists.  Hence the legal battles. 
            The Committee is constrained to observe the delay caused in giving the benefit.  The 
Committee recommends that this issue may be settled expeditiously as Govt. stands committed in 
this regard by virtue of its acceptance of recommendations of last Pay Commission. 
12.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Health and assessing the 
progress of various programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that 
the Demands for Grants of Rs. 2467.09 crores as sought by the Department of Health for the year 
2003-2004, under Demand No. 46 may be approved.  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
  
II         BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
The Committee is constrained to observe that even the 'priority' area such as Public Health have 
not been spared from the cuts imposed by the planning Commission or the Ministry of Finance as 
the case may be.  The Health of the people is of extreme importance. There should be an increase 
in the budgetary allocation every year commensurate with the size of the population and the 
requirements in respect of infrastructure, medication etc which should provide adequate 
healthcare to people.  Unless this is done, the Government’s objective to provide primary health 
care at the door steps of the people will stand defeated.  At the same time, Department of Health 
must ensure optimum utilization of funds on plans and activities for which they are meant. (Para 
2.2) 
III        CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH  SCHEME   
 3.4        The Committee observes that the explanation  given by the government with regard to the 
non-availability of figures in respect of contribution received from CGHS beneficiaries and its 
utilisation etc is not satisfactory.  The Committee observes that without this basic information the 
Department is groping in dark.  The Committee fails to understand how the Department functions 
in the absence  of these statistics.  The entire planning in respect of a department is based on 
inflow and outflow of funds and such other basic data.  The entire functioning would be 
unrealistic in the absence of these figures.  It should be possible for the Department to compute 
12. Assistance to States for Ca pacity Building  4.50     4.44
13. C.G.H.S.  3.00     3.00
14. NEIGRIHMS 40.00   40.00
15. Indian Council of Medical  Research.   6.50     3.00
  Total 137.50 110.63
Page 12 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

the total inflow and outflow of funds.   
            It appears, with the passage of time, more and more sections of beneficaries have been 
brought under CGHS with the result interests of original beneficiaries are getting sidetracked.  It 
also appears that the benefit of the entire infrastructure is not available to all beneficiaries 
uniformly e.g. the ambulances purchased by CGHS are not provided to bulk of beneficiaries.  
Further, CGHS dispensaries are awfully inequipped to deal with emergencies.  It is an irony that 
the CGHS beneficiaries who, by virtue of their contribution, provide bread and butter to the 
entire CGHS set up are given raw deal in many respects.  They have to run from pillar to post to 
get their medicines recommended by specialists.  In case of emergency treatment, while a 
beneficiary is struggling with his life, CGHS sits comfortably in issuing `No objection Certificate’ 
for pursuing  the treatment from a nearby hospital or clinic.  Then come the unkind cuts in 
reimbursement of bills. The woes of the beneficiaries are endless.  What to speak of these, the 
Department has not even  been able to restore the double shift functioning of CGHS dispensaries 
which was discontinued several years back.  In these circumstances, the Committee feels that 
there is need for organisational management exercise of CGHS from a private preferably an 
international agency. 
            The Committee, therefore, feels that CGHS beneficiaries may be allowed to pursue 
treatment whatsoever in a hospital/clinic etc. of his/her choice in emergency without the 
requirement of any permission/reference from CGHS. The emergency in this context should mean 
any situation where the need for such a treatment is felt. The beneficiary in such cases should not 
be required to meet any expenditure whatsoever from his pocket. The bill for entire expenditure 
should be sent to the office of the beneficiary or in case of pensioners and others to CGHS. The 
beneficiary should only be required to sign the docucments without any conditionalities 
whatsoever. (Para 3.4) 
            The Committee feels that reimbursement of medical expenses incurred by CGHS 
beneficiaries by their concerned  office during the currency of the chemist`s strike, was an 
unprecedented situation  and with their limited manpower such offices were not geared up for 
disposing of  ever increasing reimbursement cases expeditiously thus resulting in lot of 
inconvenience to the beneficiaries. The Committee also fails to understand as to why the 
Department didn`t sort out the matter in the month of January itself when the chemists went on 
strike for the first time.   The Committee feels that had the matter been settled early, the amount 
of sufferings that the CGHS employees underwent could have been easily avoided.  The 
Committee also finds it difficult to understand as to why the issue of payament of sales tax arose 
after so many years after signing of Memorandum of Agreement with the local chemists.  Had this 
been a part of the agreement, the Department would not perhaps have been required to suddenly 
stop the payment.  The Committee recommends that the Department should make an enquiry as 
to how so much of Government money continued to be paid to the local chemists for such a long 
time  and the  responsibility should be fixed in the matter with a view to punish the culprit. (Para 
3.7) 
The Committee feels that the above-said formulary of the Governnent of NCT of Delhi will serve  
purpose only if the medicines available in the formulary are effective. The experience of the 
Committee is that most of the drugs under the present formulary are totally ineffective. Another 
problem with the existing formulary was that medicines which are very effective but costly are left 
out of it.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should look into all the 
aspects, before adopting the new formulary. (Para 3.8)   
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that though there is provision for treatment in 
private recognised Hospitals/ Diagnostic Centres, the specialists of CGHS/Govt. hospital/CMOs 
in-charge of the dispensaries are generally reluctant to refer the beneficiaries to private 
recognised Hospitals/ Diagnostic Centres. Instead, the beneficiaries are constantly cajoled to get 
treatment in a Government hospital. Thus, except for few VVIPs and influential  persons, the 
facility for treatment in private recognised Hospitals/ Diagnostic Centres remains largely on  
Page 13 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

paper. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that getting treatment   in private 
recognised Hospitals/ Diagnostic Centres should be left to the free will of the beneficiary  and not 
to the whims of the specialists of the CGHS or the CMOs in-charge of the dispensary.  In fact 
there should be no room left for discretion of CGHS functionaries.  Rather, the system should be 
self regulatory to the benefit of CGHS beneficiaries. (Para 3.10) 
3.11     It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that four private hospitals in 
Hyderabad in collusion with the officials of the CGHS siphoned off a lot of Government money 
through inflated bills, and the Department, taking cognizance in the matter,  has ordered an 
enquiry. The Committee deprecates the criminal misappropriation of Government funds and  
recommends that the enquiry should be completed in a fixed time frame and follow-up action be 
taken  accordingly. (Para 3.11) 
IV        SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL 
The Committee is constrained to observe that the state of these hospitals, referral institutions is woefully 
bad. Long queues in OPDs and CGHS sections, wherever they exist, unhygienic conditions in 
Emergency and Wards  --- these are all pointers that Govt. have never sincerely addressed to the 
difficulties faced by visiting patients.  Added to these is hopelessly inadequate parking arrangements,  
particularly in AIIMS, in respect of vehicles. A visiting patient is first of all expected to care for his 
health and if he is able to park his vehicle on the road side without obstructing the traffic, that should be 
enough.  But AIIMS authorities have their own definition of disciplining the traffic and have their own  
parking arrangements.  Consequently, cranes  are  always on the lookout for vehicles which are not 
parked in the contractor's parking lot and are seen  removing such vehicles immediately without 
realizing the plight or the age of victims. The Committee is inclined to believe on the possibility of 
connivance among unscrupulous officers of the Institute's Administration,  Parking Contractor and the 
Traffic Police.  This matter needs to be looked into not only in AIIMS but in all other hospitals as it 
would be unwise to trade on the hassles of the visiting patients. Considerations of revenue are not 
always important.  Parking should be totally free and adequate space should be provided therefore. 
The Government must ensure that the waiting time for patients in OPDs/CGHS should not be 
more than half an hour.  Long waiting period breeds corruption and patients are tempted to use 
the influence of hospital staff.  This too must be put to an end.  If necessary, staff and their 
bonafide  relatives may be attended after  normal working hours. 
            The Committee observes that much of the budgetary support is spent on peripheral or 
incidental matters and not for requirements of patients on medicines etc.  The Committee is of the 
view that a realistic assessment of the requirements of patients be made and priorities rearranged 
accordingly. 
            In reply to a question, the Committee has been informed that tap water is used in 
Safdarjung Hospital for Haemodialysis by using de-ionizing machines.  The reverse osmosis and 
de-ionizing machines are used for dialysis purpose and in both the processes tap water is used.  
The Committee has been informed that procurement of reverse osmosis machine is in process.  
The Committee recommends that the procurement of reverse osmosis machine be expedited as use 
of tap water for dialysis does not appear to be safe. 
            The Committee is of the view that mere cosmetic renovation of a hospital is not the remedy 
to patients’ woes.  There is need to address  the unhygienic conditions which exist in all the 
hospitals/institutions.  Wards are seen stinking and totally unclean.  Toilets are found stinking 
which suggests that there is no authority whatsoever in these institutions.  The Committee feels 
that there is dire need to change this scenario and make the entire system user friendly.  At the 
same time attention should also be paid to horticultural aspect with clean and green surroundings. 
            The Committee has been given to understand that the telephone facilities are totally 
inadequate and whatever PCO booths exist in these institutions, the telephones in them are 
deliberately kept out of order to generate business for a nearby private operator.  The Committee 
recommends that an officer be designated for this purpose to ensure that PCOs remain in working 
order round the clock. (Para 4.7) 
Page 14 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

V         CANCER RESEARCH 
             The Committee notes with concern the reduction in the budgetary allocation in  the field of 
cancer research, whatever be the reasons.  The number of patients suffering from cancer is on the 
increase.  The Committee feels that the situation calls for increased  research facilities irrespective 
of the advances made in this area in countries abroad.  The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that fund allocation should be suitably increased keeping in view the need for such facilities.  
(Para 5.2) 
VI        KALA AZAR CONTROL PROGRAMME 
            The Committee observes that Government is well aware of the resource position of the 
States of Bihar and the newly created State of Jharkhand, which are the most Kala Azar endemic 
states that have failed to lift their allocated quota of insecticides.   The Committee feels that Govt. 
should not have taken a rigid stand on a relatively insignificant component of freight charges and 
should have helped the States to lift the allocated DDT in the larger interest of the people.(Para 
6.2) 
 VII     NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS 
            The Committee notes with concern the progress made at snail’s pace  over a period of more 
than 15 years.  The Committee observes that there is a need to speed up the programme.(Para 
7.2)   
VIII     NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME 
            The Committee observes that the number of  AIDS and HIV positive cases in the Country 
are constantly on the increase.  Situation is more alarming in the six states namely Maharashtra, 
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Manipur and Nagaland.  As the state AIDS Control 
societies are instrumental for implementation of the Programmes, the Committee feels that the 
Department should closely monitor the functioning of these societies and identify the states where 
the State AIDS Control Societies are not functioning effectively and take remedial steps in the 
matter. (Para 8.3) 
IX        NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME 
            The Committee is aware that due to ever increasing materialization, and consequent 
changes in life style, the cases of mental and psychological aberration are on the increase. The 
Committee notes with concern the delay in implementation of the comprehensive Mental Health 
Programme caused solely due to delay in holding the EFC meeting.  The EFC meeting should have 
been held as per the requirements of the situation and not vice-versa.  The Committee deprecates  
such delays  and recommends that all out efforts should be made to ensure that such a situation 
does not recur and the comprehensive Mental Health Programme be fully implemented in the 
current year. (Para.9.2) 
X         IMPLEMENTATION OF HEALTH PROGRAMMES IN NORTH EAST SECTOR 
            The Committee notes that in respect of programmes such as National TB Control, National 
Blindness Control, National Cancer Control, National Mental Health, Drug De-addiction, 
National Iodine Deficiency Disorder and Indian Council of Medical Research the amount re-
appropriated for expenditure is much below the funds earmarked for them. The Committee 
deprecates the  trend in view of the fact that the NE states, because of their inhospitable 
geography do not  attract much of health care services.  The Committee observes that  these 
border states need to be assured that  they are a part of national mainstream and need to be 
provided what is due to them. At the same time efforts need to made to ensure optimum utilisation 
of funds to bring them at par with the rest of the Country.   
            The Committee observes that the Country is way behind in providing state-of-the-art 
facilities and an efficient and responsive Health Care system in the Country.  There is need for 
tremendous improvement all round and people must have the feeling that  being a welfare state, it 
cares for the people. (Para 10.3) 
            It appears that there is some discontentment among the staff particularly in CGHS 
dispensaries where, the Committee has been given to understand that Pharmacists have not been 
Page 15 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

granted Assured Career Progression on a uniform basis.  While Pharmacists of Ayurvedic, 
Homoeopathic and Unani systems of medicine have been given the benefit on completion of 12 and 
24 years of service, the same has been denied to Allopathic Pharmacists.  Hence the legal battles. 
            The Committee is constrained to observe the delay caused in giving the benefit.  The 
Committee recommends that this issue may be settled expeditiously as Govt. stands committed in 
this regard by virtue of its acceptance of recommendations of last Pay Commission. (Para 11) 
            After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Health and assessing the 
progress of various programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that 
the Demands for Grants of Rs. 2467.09 crores as sought by the Department of Health for the year 
2003-2004, under Demand No. 46 may be approved.(Para 12)  
MINUTES 
VIII 
EIGHTH  MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 26th  March, 2003 in Committee Room  `A' 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Shri Arjun Singh                Chairman 
  
            RAJYA SABHA 
  
Shri Bachani Lekhraj  
Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik 
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Vanga Geetha 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
Shri Ramakant Angle 
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal 
Shri Samik Lahiri 
Dr. Manda Jagannath 
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik 
Smt. Renu Kumari 
Dr. N. Venkataswamy 
  
     WITNESSES 
 (I)       REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (MINISTRY OF HEALTH 
AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
             
Shri S.K. Naik, Secretary 
Smt. P. Jyoti Rao, Additional Secretary 
Smt. Meenakshi Datta Ghosh, A.S. & PD, NACO 
Shri Rakesh Bihari, JS & FA 
Shri Deepak Gupta, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Bhavani Thyagarajan, Joint Secretary 
Shri B.P. Sharma, Joint Secretar
y 
Page 16 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

  
SECRETARIAT 
  
 Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer  
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
  
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of 
Health and asked the Secretary to make brief presentation on Demands-for-Grants (2003-2004) of the 
Department. The Secretary made a presentation about the activities and achievements of the Department 
of Health and briefly explained the budgetary allocation on different heads as also the functioning of the 
Department. The Members then sought clarifications, which the Secretary and the officials of the 
Department replied.  
                The witnesses then withdrew. 
3.         The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 12.15 P.M. and reassembled at 3.00 P.M. to hear the 
Secretary, Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy.  
3 A.     A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M.  to  meet again at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, 
the                      27th  March, 2003. 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd  April  2003, in Committee Room  `A' Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
1          Shri Arjun Singh               Chairman 
  
            RAJYA SABHA   
  
Shri Bachani Lekhraj  
Shri Eduardo Faleiro   
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey 
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
  
      LOK SABHA 
  
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria 
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit 
Shri Y.G. Mahajan 
Smt. Nivedita Mane 
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik 
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao 
Shri Sunil Dutt 
Shri .G. J. Javi
a 
Page 17 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm

Shri Ali Mohd. Naik 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer  
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the 135th to 141st draft Reports on the Demands for 
Grants for 2003-2004 of Departments of Health, Family Welfare, Indian Systems of Medicine and 
Homoeopathy, Elementary Education and Literacy, Secondary and Higher Education, Women and Child 
Development and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and adopted the same after certain 
modifications. 
3.The Committee decided that the   Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and /laid on the Table 
of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 23rd April 2003.  The Committee authorized the Chairman, and in 
his absence, Shri Eduardo Faleiro and Shri  Bachani Lekhraj   to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha 
and Shri Sunil Dutt and Shri G.J. Javia   to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha. 
4.The Committee, then, adjourned at  4.30 P.M.  
Page 18 of 18135thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report135th.htm