Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December 9, 2013/Pausha 18, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT
(Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 24th September, 2013)
(Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 24th September, 2013)
REPORT NO. 
258
The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition)
Amendment Bill, 2012
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT
The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition)
Amendment Bill, 2012
(Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on  24 th September, 2013)
(Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 24th September, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December 9, 2013/Pausha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A BBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—21
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 22—28
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 29—40
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 41 —51

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 31st August, 2012)
$1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Shri Tarun Vijay
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
9. Shri Baishnab Parida
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suresh Angadi
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Sivasami C.
15. Shrimati Helen Davidson
*16. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunshi
17. Dr. Charles Dias
18. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
19. Shri Virender Kashyap
20. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
21. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
22. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
23. Capt. Jai Naraian Prasad Nishad
#24. Shri Sis Ram Ola
25. Shri M.K. Raghavan
26. Shri K. Chandrashekar Rao
27. Shri M.I. Shanavas
28. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
29. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
30. Shri Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
31. Shri Manicka Tagore
@32. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
**33. Shrimati Ambika Soni
(i)
$ Shri Oscar Fernandes was elevated to Minister of Road Transport and Highways on 17.06.2013.
* Shrimati Deepa Dasmunshi was elevated to Union Minister of State, Urban Development on 28.10.2012.
# Shri Sis Ram Ola was elevated to Minister of Labour on 17.06.2013.
@ Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f.  09.01.2013.
** Nominated as a member and Chairperson of the Committee w.e.f.  5.8.2013 and resigned from membership and
Chairmanship w.e.f.  7.8.2013.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 31st August, 2013)
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
9. Shri Tarun Vijay
10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suresh Angadi
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Sivasami C.
15. Shrimati Helen Davidson
16. Dr. Charles Dias
17. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
18. Shri Virender Kashyap
19. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
20. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
21. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
22. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
23. Capt. Jai Naraian Prasad Nishad
24. Shri M.K. Raghavan
25. Shri K. Chandrashekar Rao
26. Shri M.I. Shanavas
27. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
28. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
29. Shri Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
30. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana
31. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and
Fifty Eighth Report of the Committee on the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition)
Amendment Bill, 2012
*
2. The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012 was introduced
in the Rajya Sabha on the 13 th December, 2012. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred ** the
Bill to the Committee on 21 st December, 2012 for examination and report.
3. The Bill sought to enlarge the scope of the Indecent Representation Act, 1986 and intended
to bring new forms of communication like internet, mobile etc. within the ambit of the Act so as
to regulate indecent representation of women in the country. The Committee issued a Press Release
on 7 th January, 2013 for eliciting public opinion on the Bill. The Committee received a considerable
number of memoranda in response to the Press Release. The Committee held extensive deliberations
with both Government and private sector stakeholders which included Secretary, Ministry of
Women and Child Development, representatives of various organizations like Breakthrough, Internet
and Mobile Association of India, Confederation of Indian Industry, National Commission for
Women, Conference for Human Rights (India), Lawyers Collective, Women’s Rights Initiative,
Indian Society of Advertisers, Advertising Agencies Association of India, Rakshak Foundation and
Vakul Seema and Associates. Views of the stakeholders and comments of the Department were
taken note of while formulating the observations and recommendations of the Committee.
4. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied on the following:
(i) Background Note on the Bill received from the Ministry of WCD;
(ii) Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the Ministry of WCD;
(iii) V erbatim record of the oral evidence taken on the Bill;
(iv) Presentation made and clarification given by the Secretary Ministry of WCD
(v) Memoranda received from organizations/individuals;
(vi) Replies to questionnaire received from the Ministry of WCD; and
(vii) Replies to questionnaire received from the stakeholders.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in five sittings held on 7
th February, 13 th March, 9 th May,
7th June and 17 th September, 2013.
5. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 17 th September, 2013.
6. For facility of the reference, observations and recommendations of Committee have been
printed in bold letters at end of Report.
NEW D ELHI; BIRENDER SINGH,
17th September, 2013 Chairman,
Bhadrapada 26, 1935 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II Section 2 dated the 13 th December, 2012.
** Rajya Sabha Secretariat Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 50451 dated the 21 st December, 2012.

ABBREVIATIONS
1. CBFC — Central Board for Film Certification
2. PTI — Press Trust of India
3. IPC — Indian Penal Code
4. NCW — National Commission for Women
5. A W AG — Ahmedabad Women’s Action Group
6. CII — Confederation of Indian Industry
7. IRWP — Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act
8. UT — Union Territory
9. NBA — News Broadcasters Association
10. BCCC — Broadcasting Content Complaints Council
11. NCRB — Nation Crime Records Bureau
12. IRW A — Indecent Representation of Women Act
13. IAMAI — Internet and Mobile Association of India
(iv)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012 was introduced
in the Rajya Sabha on the 13 th December, 2012 and referred to the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development on the 21 st December, 2012 for examination
and report thereon.
1.2 The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 was enacted to prohibit
indecent representation of women through advertisements or in publications, writings, paintings,
figures or in any other manner. The Act, however, in its present form, relates primarily to the print
media. Since the enactment of the Act, technological revolution has resulted in development of new
forms of communication, such as, internet and satellite based communication, multi-media
messaging, cable television etc. It has, thus, become imperative to widen the scope of the law so
as to cover such forms of media on the one hand and to strengthen the existing safeguards to
prevent indecent representation of women through any media on the other.
1.3 The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012 seeks to
broaden the scope of the law to cover the audio-visual media and content in electronic form,
prescribing stringent penalties which would act as deterrent to violation of the law. The Bill also
proposes to strengthen the enforcement mechanism under the law by specifically authorizing police
officers not below the rank of Inspector to enter any premises and carry out search and seizure
of any material, if there was reason to believe that an offence under the Act has been or is being
committed.
1.4 The Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development during his presentation before
the Committee on the 7
th February, 2013 stated that the Indecent Representation of Women
(Prohibition) Act, 1986 was basically related to the print media because at that time the electronic
media, internet and other channels were not common. However, it was being observed that the
indecent representation was not just happening in the print media like newspapers and magazines
but was more prevalent in advertisements and serials shown on television channels or on internet
which was within the reach of children. It was strongly felt that in the light of the technological
advancement in the form of internet, satellite based communication, cable television etc., such
instances or cases of indecent representation of women must be brought within the ambit of the
Act so that action could be taken against the offenders. It was further submitted that the existing
legislations such as the Information Technology Act, 2000, Cinematograph Act, 1952 and Sections
292, 293 and 294 of the Indian Panel Code had provisions to address the issue of obscenity but
had limitations as none of them referred specifically to indecent representation of women. Also,
provision relating to indecent representation of women being scattered under different laws lacked
the focus necessary to protect women who tend to be more vulnerable to exploitation.
1.5 The Secretary highlighted the fact that the practical difficulty generally faced in the
implementation of the parent Act was that the people did not come forward to register a complaint
for these matters and even the police did not have power to enter and search and was taken
casually. However, it was emphasized that the rate of success in respect of completion of the
process of trial and conviction was quite high when compared with other criminal cases. The
problem was mainly that complaints were not registered since there was no specialized agency for
registering complaints regarding indecent representation of women and anyone could register a
complaint with whatever evidence the person possessed. He further submitted that the Ministry was

2
unable to take any action directly regarding any offences relating to indecent representation of
women. It was informed that the Ministry had received representations regarding certain
advertisements which were sent to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to see that these
channels were restricted. However, as these channels were not under the purview of the Act so
far, no direct action could be taken against them. Hence, the amendment to the parent Act became
necessary.
1.6 To a specific query about the pendency of cases filed under the Indecent Representation
of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986, the Committee was informed by the Ministry that the total
number of cases registered under the Act were 845, 895 and 453 in the years 2009, 2010 and
2011 respectively as per the NCRB data. During the same period, the number of cases disposed
under the Act were 860, 837 and 429 respectively. It was further submitted by the Ministry that
there were no specific guidelines for handling of cases under the IRW A and as it was a criminal
legislation, any complaint under it would be dealt with as per the judicial process. The Ministry
was also not aware of any monitoring mechanism for expeditious and judicious disposal of such
cases. Since IRWA was a criminal legislation, the police were the right authority to take
cognizance of such offences. Anybody could file a complaint/FIR for implementation of its
legislation in any particular case, as any offence would be taken ahead to its logical conclusion
by the Court. Further, the penalties of its various provisions were expected to have a deterrent
effect.
1.7 The Committee welcomes the proposed amendments to the Indecent Representation
of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 to incorporate new forms of communication which are
being used in indecent representation of women so as to curb the same by widening its
scope and also to make it more effective. The Committee feels that it is the need of the
hour, especially in the backdrop of the present day Indian society and also due to the rapid
technological advancements, indirectly leading to opening of more avenues for cases of
indecent portrayal of women. The Committee also takes note of NCRB data about status of
complaints filed under the Act. It is also a fact that along with addition of new mediums,
number of such cases will indicate an increasing trend. In such a scenario, need for
evolving a strict monitoring mechanism with respect to the implementation of the Act
assumes great importance.
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
2.1 The Committee has been given to understand that the Ministry of Women and Child
Development had consulted the Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting, Ministry of Communications and Information Technology and Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment on the proposed amendments. While the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting supported the proposed Amendment Bill, suggestion of the Ministry of Home Affairs
was agreed to by the Ministry and the draft legislation amended accordingly. It was pointed out
by the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology that some of the clauses dealing
with penalties under the Bill were similar to those included under the IT Act. It was, accordingly,
suggested that the penalty proposed under the Bill needed to be aligned with the relevant provision
of the IT Act. It was clarified by the Ministry of Women and Child Development that higher
penalties had been proposed in the Bill keeping in view the need for more effective deterrence. A
very pertinent suggestion which came from the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment was
for incorporating a suitable provision in the Bill giving the National and State Commissions for
Women an appropriate role in the enforcement of the Act. Contention of the Ministry was that the
provisions of the Bill, being criminal in nature, envisaged enforcement by the police or designated
Government officers. Therefore, it was not feasible to have a specific role for the National and
State Commissions for Women.

3
2.2 The Committee observes that the proposal for amending the law was placed before the
Cabinet in the past, once in 2001 and again in 2007. In 2007, the Cabinet directed that the proposal
be brought before it after carrying out wider consultations. Accordingly, the National Commission
for Women organised three Workshops at Mumbai, Kolkata and Hyderabad, having stakeholders
from regional and national level, including the media and film industry as participants.
2.3 The Committee was informed that one of the major suggestions that came out of these
consultations was the need for a regulatory body which would regulate the media and would also
examine the complaints filed under the law. Accordingly, the draft Bill proposed by the Commission
had a provision for setting up a Central Authority with regulatory powers. However, the Inter-
Ministerial Group which examined the proposal was not in favour of the same. Argument put forth
was that there were already bodies and mechanisms in the fields of advertising, broadcasting, film
certification and information technology with the specific mandate of regulation of content.
2.4 The Committee had the opportunity to go through the minutes of the meetings of the Inter-
Ministerial Group. One line of thinking which was raised in these meetings was that there was a
need to strengthen not only the provisions of the existing law but also to ensure that it was
effectively implemented. Although having a regulatory mechanism under the Act as suggested by
the National Commission for Women was not found acceptable, there was a general consensus for
assigning some role to the Commission. Another major issue raised was that in case of violations
of the law for commercial gains, there was a need for taking measures to make the law more
effective.
2.5 The Committee observes that the process of amendments to the Parent Act started
in 2001, when it was placed before the Cabinet. The matter again came up before the
Cabinet in 2007. It was on a direction from the Cabinet for having wider consultation that
the National Commission for Women held three Workshops involving all the stakeholders.
Based on these wide-ranging consultations, a revised Bill having a regulatory mechanism
was proposed which was not found acceptable by the Inter-Ministerial Group. The
Committee views with serious concern the unduly long process of carrying out amendments
in a law concerned with the protection of the interests of the most vulnerable section of
our society. The process which was initiated in 2001 came to an end in September, 2011. The
four meetings of the Inter-Ministerial Group were spread over a period of more than one
year with first meeting taking place on the 6
th May, 2010 and the last meeting being held
on the 2 nd September, 2011. It took more than one year to bring the revised Bill before the
House. The Committee is quite disturbed to note that not only unduly long time was taken
in deliberating on bringing out the proposed amendments in the law but the modifications
suggested by the nodal body mandated for the welfare of women which were based on very
wide consultations were simply sidelined.
2.6 The Committee observes that the consultation process undertaken by the Ministry
has failed to yield the desired results. Very valid suggestions coming up as a result of
workshops held by the National Commission for Women with various stakeholders have not
led to logical results. Understanding the implications of the proposed amendment Bill, the
Committee feels that a wide process of consultations involving the concerned stakeholders
like those in the fields of advertising, broadcasting, film certification, information
technology etc. was called for and that exercise was duly undertaken by it. The Committee
also made an attempt in this direction by issuing a Press Release on the proposed
amendment Bill to elicit public opinion from stakeholders as well as the general public. The
Committee received many memoranda, notable amongst them were from organisations like
the Indian Society of Advertisers, the Advertising Agencies Association of India,
Confederation of Indian Industry, Internet and Mobile Association of India, Conference for
Human Rights, Rakshak Foundation, Vakul Seema and Associates etc.

4
2.7 The Committee started its deliberations on the Bill by hearing the views of the Secretary,
Ministry of Women and Child Development. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of various
stakeholders like Breakthrough, Internet and Mobile Association of India, Confederation of Indian
Industry, National Commission for Women, Conference for Human Rights, Lawyer’s Collective,
Indian Society of Advertisers, Advertising Agencies Association of India, Vakul Seema and
Associates and Rakshak Foundation. The Committee also forwarded a questionnaire to Central
Board for Film Certification for their written comments on the Bill.
2.8 Expressing her views on the proposed Amendment Bill, the Vice-President of Breakthrough
submitted that it was essential to differentiate between ‘indecent representation’ and ‘exploitation’
because these were two different concepts but often looked together. Exploitation through any form
of media etc. needed to be looked distinctly and could have criminal colour whereas representation
of women needed to be looked in the cultural and social context. It was very important for not
assuming a moralistic stand and at the same time being conscious about the fact that women’s
position in the society was not denigrated. Attempt should be made to avoid even regressive
representation of women which did not necessarily have indecent representation. Indecent
representation of women was subjective but there needed to be certain standards which should not
objectify woman or reduce her to a physical object. She was also of the view that the proposed
Bill had in itself the seeds of creating an environment that would lead towards an openess and
contextualizing the creation of cultural artefacts which were very representative of today’s time and
age.
2.9 Representing the Internet and Mobile Association of India, its President submitted before the
Committee that it was unclear as to how the Act was going to be read against several other existing
provisions which granted certain limited responsibility to the intermediaries. This included
uncertainty as to how it would affect regulatory provisions in legal statutes regarding online content
and publication but also specific protections provided by Parliament towards online and mobile
platforms which acted as intermediaries for user generated content. Attention of the Committee was
also drawn to provisions such as Section 79 of the IT Act and Sections 52(i(b) and 52(i)(c) of
the Copyright Act which recognized that online platforms should be provided a limited safe harbour
immunity against legal claims for content posted by third parties over which they had no control.
2.10 Representatives of CII presented their views on the amendment Bill and submitted that one
of the main reasons for increase in number of cases of indecent representation of women was due
to ineffective implementation of existing penal provisions. Before considering any amendment to
some of the sections of the Act, attempt should be made to look at new forms of communication
and effective steps to be taken to dispose of pending cases. It was also pointed out there were
various standards and cultural practices in a country like India and a particular depiction or
projection which was considered normal in one part of the country may be considered differently
in another part of the country. It was, therefore, necessary that some kind of a central body for
expert determination, most equipped to take cognizance of those kind of things be there. The
absence of such a body and implementation of stringent provisions might lead to unnecessary
harassment of genuine business activity. Hence, the existing self-governing bodies like the
Advertising Standards Council of India could be empowered to deal with such a situation.
Moreover, a reasoned and expert view on the subject was considered essential as the concept of
obscenity was highly subjective depending on a variety of factors, including context, circumstance,
place, time and was subject to changing standards as held by the Supreme Court in Chandrakant
Kakodkar vs. State of Maharashtra in 1970.
2.11 The Committee heard the views of the Member of National Commission for Women on the
proposed amendment Bill. The Member informed that while most of the suggestions of the
Commission were incorporated in the amendment Bill, two points had been left out. First was the

5
need for the formation of a Central Authority under the Act. There was no particular body that
represented the feeling of the women of this country. Emphasizing on the role of NCW, she
submitted that NCW, being a constitutional body needed to be strengthened as it did not have
adequate infrastructure. She also highlighted the fact that NCW did not have adequate powers to
carry out its functions. NCW did not have powers of seizure, penalty etc. because these were
magisterial powers.
2.12 Another aspect highlighted by the Member, NCW was the role of Central Board for Film
Certification (CBFC). Instances of films violating sections 292, 293, 294 of the IPC and Indecent
Representation Act cleared by the CBFC had been seen many a times. The justification of CBFC
was that it was not a Censor Board but only a Certification Board. It was, therefore, required to
completely revamp CBFC as it had many lacunae in its functioning. Not only this, there was a need
to properly monitor the role of CBFC and PTI in the context of regulating indecent representation
of women.
2.13 The Committee also heard the views of Secretary-General, Conference for Human Rights
India on the Bill. She submitted before the Committee that the proposed amendment Bill by
exempting films from its ambit would result in making the amendment redundant. Elaborating on
the impact of films on the society, she highlighted how it adversely affected the minds of people,
especially children and youngsters. Considering this, she suggested that films as under the
Cinematograph Act must be included in clause 4 of the amendment bill. Further, she submitted that
the Censor Board was not properly carrying out its functions in view of films cleared by it
displaying vulgarity and obscenity. Also, accessibility to certain sites having objectionable content
needed to be limited so as to curb the rising incidents of indecent representation and exploitation
of women.
2.14 The President, Advertising Agencies Association of India, deposing before the Committee,
was of the view that the proposed amendment Bill dealt with two parts, one with advertising and
the other with media content, be it print, television, radio, internet etc. He emphasized upon the
fact that decent representation of women in advertising was extremely important as indecent
representation was offensive. He added that if society was exposed to lot of indecent representation
of women, some members might be influenced by it and might treat women in an inappropriate
manner. He expressed reservations about the definition of what would constitute indecent
representation of women which was appropriate but the same continued to be highly subjective and
could vary from place to place. It seemed relevant in the context of advertising where a particular
advertisement could be termed as indecently representing women by the police leading to search
and seizure, thereby becoming a tool of harassment. The freedom of commerce would then be
taken away. He quoted that even the Supreme Court had held that obscenity was highly subjective
and was dependent upon a variety of factors, including context, circumstances, place and time and
subject to changing standards. He, therefore, suggested that judgement on indecent representation
of women should lie with a central body which would be eminent, qualified and experienced. One
such body which was presently existing was the Advertising Standards Council of India which
could be made a central expert body for the field of advertising for determination on whether
something was indecent representation or not. This Council was a self-regulating body which
screened new television commercials and new print Ads that appeared in various languages across
the country. He suggested that this Council should be given a similar status as of the Central Board
for Film Certification so far as advertising was concerned. Further, he suggested that punishment
provision for advertising should be in line with or similar to the provisions made in the Legal
Metrology Act, 2009.
2.15 The representatives of Vakul Seema and Associates submitted before the Committee that
merely substituting and redefining certain definitions under the Act would not change much until

6
and unless the Bill introduced a separate chapter on the Regulator. There could be the appointment
of a regulator under the Act who should be a quasi-judicial person and who could suo moto take
action or do so after a complaint. He should be able to hold inquiry, penalize and even impose
monetary liabilities against such electronic form. Every State could have such a regulator working
as an adjudicating officer. There could be a provision of an appeal against the order of the
adjudicating officer before an appellate authority constituted under this Act itself. Very relevant
suggestions for amendment in the Act were made by the witnesses which have been duly taken
note of by the Committee in the ensuing paragraphs of the Report.
2.16 The representatives of Rakshak Foundation, appearing before the Committee, were of the
view that the term ‘sexual object’ in the Bill was derogatory to womanhood. The Bill was
emphasising more on the physical form and not on general things encountered in society which
were derogatory to the womanhood. Emphasis on effective implementation of law was also made.
2.17 The Committee also heard the views of Executive Director, Lawyer’s Collective on the Bill.
It was submitted by her that the fundamental rights and duties in the Constitution of India
specifically mentioned that the exercise of right was subject to decency or morality. It was also
the duty of every citizen to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women or which led
to objectification of women. There were various laws with regard to indecent representation of
women like the IPC, Cinematograph Act 1952, Press Council Act, 1978, Cinematograph
Certification Rules, 1983, Cable Television Network Rules, 1994, Information Technology Act, 2000
and Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986. It was suggested that there needed
to be a synergy in the process of amending the law.
2.18 Another important point highlighted by the representative of Lawyer’s Collective was that
the provisions of IRW Act did not apply to films. Therefore, it was considered necessary to have
the same level of scrutiny for dettering indecent representation of women. Provisions of the
Cinematograph Act, 1952 must incorporate provisions of IRW Act. Further, the concept of
obscenity was considered to differ from country to country depending on the standards of morals
of contemporary society. Highlighting the case of S.Khushboo vs. Kanniammal and Anr (AIR
2010.SC 3196,) it was pointed out that 23 criminal complaints were filed against her under sections
4 and 6 of the IRW Act, 1986 and sections 499, 500 and 505 of IPC when she expressed her
opinion for societal acceptance of pre-marital sex in India Today Magazine. It was held by Supreme
Court that it would defy logic to invoke offences against the appellant who could not be described
as an advertiser or publisher portraying women in bad light. Further, obscenity should be gauged
with respect to contemporary community standards that reflected the sensibilities as well as the
tolerance levels of an average reasonable person.
III. The Committee makes recommendations/observations on the following provisions of
the Bill:–
Clause 2(a)
3.1 Clause 2(a) of the Bill deals with amendment of the definition of the term ‘advertisement’.
In the light of the fact that advertising has moved beyond the traditional print media to the use of
newer forms of communication and aggressive targeting technologies, the existing definition of the
term ‘’advertisement’ is proposed to be amended. It is proposed to add audio-video representations
made by means of any lights, laser light, sound, smoke, gas or electric form or through any other
media for the purpose of promotion of any goods, service, place, person, event or organization. The
amended definition of the term ‘advertisement’ would then read as the following:–
“advertisement” includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or other document or any
audio or visual representation made by means of any light, laser light, sound, smoke, gas

7
or electric form or through any other media, for the purpose of promotion of any goods,
service, place, person, event or organisation;”
The Ministry of Women and Child Development, justifying the addition to the term
‘advertisement’ submitted that in light of the fact that advertising had moved beyond the traditional
print media to the use of newer forms of communication and aggressive targeting techniques, its
definition was proposed to be amended. The proposed definition would include the depiction of
women in an indecent or derogatory manner in electronic form or through any other media for the
purpose of promotion of any goods, services, places, persons, events or organizations.
3.2 The Confederation of Indian Industries, Indian Society of Advertisers and Advertising
Association of India highlighted the fact that the amended definition of the term ‘advertisement’
pointed towards a niche commercial area and before initiating any stringent penal action, a
preliminary determination about the offence needed to be taken by an expert body. It was also
relevant because due to varying cultural standards in a country like India, a particular depiction or
projection might be considered as normal in one part of the country and obscene in another part
of the country. In cases like this, unless there was a central body for expert determination, the
implementation of these stringent provisions might lead to unnecessary harassment to genuine
business and a fodder to unscrupulous elements. It was, therefore, suggested that before initiating
any action under this Act in relation to ‘advertisements’, it should be sanctioned by an expert body
like Advertising Standards Council of India or the Censor Board.
3.3 Vakul Seema and Associates pointed out that the proposed definition of advertisement in
Section 2(a) did not cover advertisements in electronic or digital form which were visible on
Internet in the form of banner ads, sponsor ads, audio-video combinations, interactive ads or
communication links. Further, the word ‘promotion’ should be used along with ‘or sale’ for wider
reach and regulation. A seller or a purchaser could always take a plea that he was not promoting
the product but merely selling the said product or service. Selling was not promoting. Hence, the
Vakul Seema and Associates proposed the following revised definition of the term advertisement:–
“advertisement includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or other document or any audio
or visual representation or combination thereof made by means of any light, laser light,
sound, smoke, gas or electric form or through any other media or in electronic form, for
the purpose of promotion, or sale of any goods, service, place, person, event or
organization”
3.4 Ahmedabad Women’s Action Group (AWAG) had submitted in its written memorandum that
the definition of the word ‘advertisement’ needed to be broadened further to include other forms
of visual representation like hoardings, bill boards, posters as well as short messaging service
(SMS), multimedia messaging service (MMS) and various applications for mobile devices as these
had lately emerged as inexpensive means of advertisements by public and private entities. It was
also suggested that there was a need to include ‘electronic’ after ‘electric’ as a means of making
advertisement. This would read in consonance with the next insertion namely, clause ‘aa’ which
would provide an explanation to the term ‘electronic’. It was believed that it might be useful to
provide the definition of the term ‘electronic’ in the footnote.
3.5 With a view to widen the scope of the Act and its applicability, NCW in its redrafted Act
suggested to include laser light, fibre optic, electronic or any other media in the definition of the
term ‘advertisement’ which seemed to have been incorporated in the definition.
3.6 The Committee is of the considered view that broadening the scope of the definition
of the term ‘advertisement’ to include newer forms of communication and media is a
welcome step. However, the Committee also agrees with the suggestions of the stakeholders
to include advertisements in digital form or electronic form or hoardings, SMS, MMS etc.

8
within the definition of ‘advertisement’ to bring all forms of advertisement within the ambit
of the Act.
3.7 The Committee would like to emphasize that in the era of globalization and
increasing commercialization and competition, the world of advertisement has witnessed
instances of indecent representation of women to grab the attention of prospective
consumers. Not just this, the Committee also notes that advertisements promoted the
patriarchal set-up by assigning traditional roles to women, thereby being regressive. The
Committee, therefore, firmly believes that all forms of advertisements through any medium
must be regulated to curb indecent representation of women.
3.8 At the same time, attention of the Committee has been drawn to the apprehension
of some stakeholders that what constituted as obscenity was highly subjective and
interpretation of it may lead to unnecessary harassment at the hands of the police. The
Committee agrees with this point and is of the view that obscenity and indecent
representation of women would vary in different places or different cultural contexts.
However, a broad consensus on what is overtly obscene or depicts women indecently or in
bad light needs to be generated or agreed upon so that genuine commercial activity is not
hindered due to unnecessary harassment.
Clause 2(b)
3.9 Clause 2(b) deals with the definition of the term ‘distribution’. This definition is proposed
to be broadened to include within its ambit broadcast, transmission or uploading on websites or
in any other printed or electronic form. It also clarifies that, for the purpose of the Act, such
distribution should be for public access. The amended definition of the term ‘distribution’ would
read as following:
“distribution” includes all methods of distribution, either by way of samples or making
available for public access through broadcast, transmission or uploading on website or in
any other printed or electronic form, whether for profit or otherwise;”
3.10 Representatives of Vakul Seema and Associates submitted that the definition of the term
‘distribution’ needed to be broadened as there were multiple ways and means to distribute material
or content through different media. It was suggested by them to include terms like publication,
license or uploading using computer resource or communication device (same meaning as assigned
to it in clause (ha) of Section 2 of the IT Act, 2000 or in any other printed or electronic form,
whether for profit or otherwise. Hence, the modified definition of the term would read as follows:–
“Distribution includes all method of distribution either by way of samples or display or
making available for public access through broadcast, transmission, publication, license, or
uploading using computer resource, or communication device or in any other printed or
electronic form, whether for profit or otherwise,”
3.11 The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of the stakeholder and believes
that all possible ways of distributing any material or context through any medium needs to
be covered and brought within the ambit of the legislation. This would certainly help in
bringing to book all offences relating to distribution of any material which indecently
represents women.
Clause 2(c)
3.12 Clause 2(c) of the amendment Bill deals with the definition of the term ‘indecent
representation of women’. Elaborating on redefining the term ‘indecent representation of women’,

9
the Ministry had submitted that recognizing that women were more vulnerable to sexual
objectification, particularly in view of the easy accessibility and reach of new technology, the scope
of the existing definition of this term was proposed to be broadened. The proposed definition would
also include depiction of women as a sexual object or which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient
interests. It would read as follows after being amended;
“indecent representation of women” means —
(i) publication or distribution in any manner, of any material depicting women as a sexual
object or which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interests; or
(ii) depiction, publication or distribution in any manner, of the figure of a woman, her
form or body or any part thereof in such a way as to have the effect of being indecent
or derogatory to or denigrating women or which is likely to deprave, corrupt or injure
the public morality or morals;”
3.13 Through the memoranda received and interaction with stakeholders, the Committee was
presented with many aspects regarding the definition of the term ‘indecent representation of
women’. One of the points highlighted was that the use of terms ‘lascivious’ and ‘prurient’ as
defining terms for determining decency of representation of women was too vague and
inconsistent. In the world of advertisements, use of sexually suggestive and ‘lustful’ words was
widely held as an acceptable practice. To completely set aside all lascivious and prurient ads and
representations as indecent was absolutely unnecessary. It was not considered suitable to define
decency of a representation based on its ‘lasciviousness’ or ‘prurient-less’. A different determining
scale needed to be conjured. It was suggested that an objective and pre-determined scale for
estimating the decency of a representation be devised. Clear and explicitly mentioned forms of
representations needed to be tabulated in the proposed amendment Bill and, accordingly, the
intensity of the punitive action be clearly mentioned.
3.14 The Indian Society of Advertisers and the Advertising Agencies Association of India pointed
out that the amendment sought to be made to section 2(c) by inserting sub-clause(i) made the
definition too wide without any guidelines as parameters for determining what all depictions would
come within the said sub-clause. There seemed a good possibility that with the amended definition,
many of the advertisements depicting parts of body to show the functionality of the product, in
health, beauty and fashion magazines would be more vulnerable. In particular, the demonstration of
the functional experience of a product, including applications on the skin and various parts of the
body for which the product was intended was a critical aspect of the promotion of such products
and should not attract penal consequences as provided by the amendment.
3.15 Confederation of Indian Industries submitted to the Committee that prima facie , the
proposed amendments to the definition of ‘advertisement’ and ‘indecent representation of women’
appeared to be acceptable. However, given the penal provisions under the IRWP Act, the proposed
amendments to the said definition could have significant adverse consequences on the advertising
industry which in turn would impact the entir e economy at large. Thus, the proposed amendments
to the definitions of ‘advertisements’ and ‘indecent representation of women’ should not be
analysed in isolation.
3.16 Representatives of the Rakshak Foundation were of the view that the words ‘indecency’,
‘deprave’ and ‘public morality’ were not defined in the amendment Bill. The words ‘public morality’
and ‘deprave’ were based on abstract concept of morality and ethics which did not generally focus
on violent and degrading images of women falling outside the sexually explicit representations. In
the absence of any yardstick to define what exactly was indecent, the term was left open to
subjective interpretation and the power to prosecute would rest on a particular police inspector who
would at his own behest make a judgement to decide what could be considered ‘indecent’.

10
Therefore, the proposed amendment was vague, which may create ample scope for variance in the
implementation of law. Further, it was also pointed out that the amendment in all likelihood would
significantly increase corruption and blatant misuse of the proposed legislation. Since the judgement
would rest with a particular individual with little or no transparency, it may lead to more instances
of police officers demanding bribes in order to acquit the real culprits. The representatives of
Rakshak Foundation made an attempt to define the term ‘indecency’ which is as follows:–
“Dominant impact of which is only horror, cruelty, violence or sexual desire without any
serious literary, artistic, moral, political or scientific value”.
3.17 The Ahmedabad Women’s Action Group (AW AG) suggested the inclusion of a provision that
would also help the authorities to restrain the use of women’s body in a manner that propagated
stereotypes of women. It was considered important to include this as the reinforcement of
stereotypes of women and girls was one of the crucial factors for the continued perpetration of
violence against women and girls right from the time a female foetus was conceived to the time
the woman breathed her last. The prevalent stereotypes of women also denigrated the dignity of
women. It was, therefore, proposed to rewrite this definition as:–
“depiction, publication or distribution in any manner, of the figure of a woman, her form
or body or any part thereof in such a way as to have the effect of being indecent or
derogatory or to denigrating women or to perpetuate discriminatory and biased attitudes
and behaviours towards girls and women or which is likely to deprave corrupt or injure the
public morality or morals.”
3.18 Representatives of Internet and Mobile Association of India had submitted that redefining the
term ‘indecent representation of women’ appeared to be in conflict with the substantive legal
provision meant to be covered by Section 4 of the Principal Act which might lead to legal
confusion. This also appeared to call for expansion of the mandate of section 4 of the Principal
Act beyond its original intention. Section 4 of the Principal Act in its present form mandated only
penalties regarding cases of indecent representation of women. The NCW Report on ‘Review of
Laws and Legislative Measures affecting Women’ looked at the subject of updating the Act but only
recommended that the definition of advertising for the purposes of section 3 be updated.  NCW
in its report did not recommend any changes to section 4 regarding electronic modes of
publication.
3.19 The Committee agrees with the views of the stakeholders that the definition of the
term ‘indecent representation’ was vague and may leave scope for subjective
interpretations. The meaning of the term could very well be interpreted differently in
different regions of the country and in different cultural settings. The purpose of redefining
the term ‘indecent representation’ is to identify such content/material wherein a woman is
seen as a sexual object or which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or is
derogatory to women. Not defining the terms ‘deprave’, ‘public morality’ and ‘morals’ could
also pose a problem. It may leave scope for unnecessary harassment and nuisance by
certain groups who imagine themselves to be the custodians of public morality and engage
in moral policing, thereby causing trouble. The Committee agrees with the suggestion of the
stakeholders that an expert body should decide on the contentious issue of whether any
content/material is objectionable or not. It would then leave no scope for subjective
interpretations by the police authorities or by certain groups upholding public morality.
Clause 2(g)
3.20 Clause 2(g) deals with the definition of the term ‘publish’. The existing law prohibited
publishing of material with indecent representation of women but does not define the expression

11
‘publish’. In order to remove this ambiguity, the proposed Bill sought to define the term ‘publish’
to cover the entire range of activities associated with preparing and making content available to the
public, through print and electronic media. The definition of the term ‘publish’ would read as
follows:
“publish” includes—
(i) to prepare or print in any book, newspaper, magazine, poster, graffiti, periodicals or
any form of printed matter, digital or in any other format; or
(ii) to distribute or broadcast through audio-visual media including cable, computer,
broadband satellite transmission or any other form, to any person so as to
communicate or make it available to the public;”
3.21 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the point highlighted by Vakul Seema and
Associates that section 2(g) (ii) provided use of modern means of communication and information
technology tools for the purpose of publication. The proposed definition did not effectively cover
all such tools, especially mobile communication. An amendment to the definition of the term
‘publish’ was suggested which reads as follow:–
“publish includes –
(i) To prepare or print in any book, newspaper, magazine, poster, graffiti, periodicals or
any form of printed matter, electronic or in any other format; or
(ii) To distribute or br oadcast through audio-visual media by the use of satellite,
microwave, terrestrial line, wire, wireless or any other form, to any person so as to
communicate or make it available  to the public ”
3.22 The Committee finds the suggestion of Vakul Seema and Associates quite appropriate
as it further widens the scope of the definition of the term ‘publish’ and covers all forms
of format through which any material/content could be published and made available to the
public. This would certainly help in bringing within the ambit of the law all mediums of
publishing relating to indecent representation of women in any form, be it a book,
newspaper, magazine, poster, graffiti, electronic medium through cable, computer, satellite,
wire, wireless or any other form.
3.23 Another viewpoint highlighted was that there could be a possibility of a confrontation
between ‘adult entertainment’ and ‘cultural vigilantes’. Pornography was one such aspect which
was believed by some to allow for venting of pent up sexual frustrations in a healthy and culturally
acceptable form but only within the confines of individual privacy. However, it was believed that
guidelines for pornography industry should first be brought out before the proposed addition to the
said Bill.
3.24 The Committee observes that a debate on adult entertainment versus indecent
representation of women in our cultural context is going on. While the society is witnessing
sea change in the perception and attitude of its members, increasing instances of indecent
representation of women is also a reality. The Committee is of the view that a line has to
be drawn which is neither moralistic nor interferes with the personal freedom and privacy
of individual adults. There is a need to regulate the publishing of content/material through
various mediums. The access to pornographic material needs to be restricted in a stringent
matter so that it does not land in the hands of children who can be adversely influenced
by it. Such material should not be viewed in any public place and be used only for private
viewig/use. The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for evolving a
mechanism for curbing such practices.

12
IV. Clause 4
4.1 Section 4 of the Parent Act deals with prohibition of indecent representation of women.
Under this clause, minor consequential amendments have been proposed where “any book,
pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph, representation or figure” has
been replaced with the expression “material” which has now been defined in the Bill. Further, it
is also proposed to delete the use of expression “produce” as it would now be covered under the
definition of the word ‘publish’. Hence, the revised clause would now read as:
“No person shall publish or distribute or cause to be published or cause to be distributed
by any means any material which contains indecent representation of women in any form:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to—
(a) any material,—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good
on the ground that such material is in the interest of science, literature, art or
learning or other objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used for bona fide religious purposes; or
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958; or
(ii) any temple, or any car used for the conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any
religious purpose; or
(c) any film in respect of which the provisions of Part-II of the Cinematograph Act, 1952
will be applicable.”
4.2 The Ahmedabad Women’s Action Group (A W AG) in their written submission requested for
inclusion of sub-clause (d) to apply to representation of women in television channels and serials
or an amendment to the Cinematograph Act to ensure monitoring and evaluation of the content
shown on television. They believed that there was an urgency to review, evaluate and regulate
the content of serials and shows on the television due to its reach and penetration in Indian
homes.
4.3 A similar view had been highlighted by Secretary General, Confederation for Human Rights
(India) that the very purpose of the proposed amendment to clause 4 was being defeated by
keeping sub-clause (c) intact in this provision. Films would be excluded from the ambit of this
provision. This would only create confusion and complications because the film world was
included in the electronic media and should not be made an exception to the main clause. Hence,
the proviso sub-clause (c) of clause 4 needed to be deleted to include films within this Bill. Further,
if sub-clause (c) remained, then the object and purpose of the proposed amendment to clause 4
which was included in the definition of ‘distribution’ would be defeated.
4.4 The Committee is inclined to agree with the contention of the stakeholders for
suggesting inclusion of films within the ambit of the proposed Bill which seems to be
somewhat justified given the quality and content of films/serials being made and viewed by
the public. Nobody can deny the fact that many of the films of contemporary times are
depicting women in an indecent way and many of the TV serials are portraying women in
a regressive manner. However, it is also equally true that the mandate of certification of
films has been given to the Central Board for Film Certification. Bringing films within the

13
ambit of this Bill would mean encroaching upon the jurisdiction of the Board, necessitating
dilution of the role of the Board as envisaged under the Cinematograph Act. The Committee
feels that there is a need to review the role of the Central Board of Film Certification,
especially in the context of increasing trend of indecent representation of women in the
present day films.
4.5 When this issue was taken up with the Central Board of Film Certification, it was
clarified that the Cinematograph Act had its origins in Article 19(2) of the Constitution,
which was more or less a regulator whereas the Indecent Representation of Women
(Prohibition) Act, 1986 was punitive in nature. Hence, the Cinematograph Act could not be
brought under the ambit of the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act. It
was, however, pointed out that some of the provisions could be brought into the
Cinematograph Act for effective regulation. There was no ambiguity in bringing the film
maker, the director and trade bodies under the ambit of the Indecent Representation of
Women (Prohibition) Act. However, actors, script writers, song writers etc. should be left
out. It was also suggested that for reducing the instances of violation under the
Cinematograph Act, a mechanism could be put in place which would deliver speedy and
effective deterrence like seizure of prints throughout the states/country once a violation
was noticed.
4.6 The Committee observes that the above suggestions made by the Central Board of
Film Certification are very relevant and will go a long way so far as the issue of prohibition
of indecent representation of women in films is concerned. The Committee would appreciate
if the Ministry takes up this issue on priority basis with the Board and the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting. There does not seem to be any problem in carrying out these
modifications when the nodal body is willing to do so.
4.7 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the guidelines of the Central Board of Film
Certification wherein it is specifically mentioned that the Cinematograph Act provides that the Board
shall ensure that in a film certified by it:
– human sensibilities are not offended by vulgarity, obscenity or depravity;
– such dual meaning words as obviously cater to baser instincts are not allowed;
– scenes degrading or denigrating women in any manner are not presented;
– scenes involving sexual violence against women like attempt to rape, rape or any form
of molestation or scenes of similar nature are avoided;
– scenes showing sexual perversions shall be avoided.
4.8 The Committee finds that inspite of such categorical guidelines, many of the films
certified by the Board do not adhere to the same, depicting scenes which are regressive in
nature, portray women in bad light and indecently represent them. Nobody can deny the fact
that the increasing number of cases of women exploitation in the country in recent times
is to an extent influenced by the uncalled for projection of women in films which has an
adverse impact on the young minds. The content, lyrics, songs, story etc. of films influence
the behaviour and attitudes of youngsters who tend to imitate and learn from them. It is,
therefore, considered necessary to adopt some remedial or preventive measures, especially
by the Central Board for Film Certification regarding the quality of films. The Committee
is of the view that the Board needs to review its guidelines with respect to indecent
representation of women with an objective outlook. Not just this, all the films must adhere
to these guidelines which can be enforced by the Board by certifying only those films which
do not in any way represent women indecently.

14
4.9 Committee’s attention was persistently drawn to the fact that some of the songs included
in the duly certified films violated the guidelines prohibiting indecent representation of women. Such
songs were being regularly shown through other mediums. When asked to specify the preventive
as well as remedial measures, if any, initiated by the Board in this regard, the Committee was
informed that majority of the songs objected by the audience were either lifted from ‘A’ rated films
or they themselves had been granted ‘A’ rating. It was the nonimplementation of provisions of the
Cinematograph Act by audio-visual media, especially TV and radio channels as the Cable TV
Network Act should be strictly implemented and ‘A’ rated songs should not be telecast on TV . The
Committee was further informed that the Committee of Experts constituted by the Ministry to look
into film certification issues had already taken up for discussion the issue of indecent song lyrics
and how can such songs be prevented to be played in a wider public space. It was admitted that
in the pretext of audio launch and cinema news, lots of objectionable and sometime, uncertified
version of songs got to reach the public. Suggestion of the Board for curbing this practice was
to hold the producer and the lab from which uncertified film content like song got leaked as
responsible and initiate penal action against the errant producers, lab owner, TV channels, Radio
Stations etc. The Committee notes that remedies for curbing indecent representation of
women through film songs being aired through other mediums are already there. The only
thing lacking is initiative or intention to do so. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry
to approach the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and other concerned agencies
without any further delay and come forward with concrete action plan and monitoring
mechanism for curbing such practices.
V . Clause 5
5.1 Clause 5 of the Bill deals with the power to enter and search. The proposed amendment
seeks to substitute the following words “subject to such rules as may be prescribed, any Gazetted
Officer authorized by the State Government may within the local limits of the area for which he
is so authorized” with the following words:
“Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any police officer not
below the rank of Inspector, or any other officer of the Central Government or a State
Government authorised by the Central Government or the State Government may”
5.2 The Committee has been given to understand by stakeholders like the Indian Society of
Advertisers and CII that the search and seizure provision was too broad and could be a tool for
harassment and also result in business rivalry. Also, the power to search and seizure given to
a Police Officer not below the rank of Inspector instead of a Gazetted Officer was not found
to be acceptable. It was apprehended that it could result in the powers relating to search and
seizure being vested in a person who might be inexperienced, ill-trained and who might not have
the requisite expertise or exposure to decide as to on whether there was any contravention of
the provisions of the IRWP Act. Reference was made to the recent spate of instances evidencing
the abuse of power under the controversial section 66A of the IT Act. The Ministry of
information Technology on the 9
th January, 2013 had issued an “Advisory on Implementation of
Section 66A of the IT Act, 2000” to the Chief Secretaries and DGPs of all States and UTs
advising that the ‘concerned police officer or police station may not register any complaints
under Section 66A of the IT Act, unless he has obtained prior approval at the level of an officer
not below the Deputy Commissioner of Police rank in urban and rural areas and Inspector
General level in metropolitan regions’. It was, therefore, submitted that the amendments to the
search and seizure provisions were too broad and did not lay down any guidelines in relation to
their invocation. It was also suggested that search and seizure could be undertaken only with the
specific approval of the Central Body like Advertising Standards Council of India or the Censor
Board.

15
5.3 Rakshak Foundation, in its written submission, highlighted the fact that the amendment Bill
not only widened the scope of the Bill by bringing electronic media within the ambit of law but
also at the same time conferred wider powers on the police for the implementation of law. Such
unfettered powers to a Police Officer was believed to be prone to misuse. It was also feared that
general ignorance of people about law made them vulnerable to becoming victims of corruption as
a corrupt official would use the power for his own personal gains. Secondly, since the amendment
Bill failed to clearly define the term ‘indecency’, subjective interpretations were bound to happen
leading to unnecessary harassment.
5.4 Representatives of Vakul Seema and Associates suggested to include the words ‘or any other
content in printed, audio, visual or electronic form’ in clause 5(1)(b) as it was needed to harmonize
with the definition of material under clause 2(1)(da). Clause 5(1) (b) would then read as follows:–
“seize any advertisement or material or any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing,
drawing, painting, photograph, representation or figure or any other content in printed,
audio, visual or electronic form”.
5.5 The Ministry of Women and Child Development submitted that in view of the larger
geographical spread and infrastructure the police officers possessed, it would be more practical if
police officers, not below the rank of an Inspector, were statutorily authorized to carry out the
search. Further, authorizing an officer from uniformed service also ensured certainty in
enforcement of law. In addition, the State or Central Government might, wherever deemed
necessary, authorize any other officer of the State or Central Government, as the case may be, to
carry out search and seizure under the Act.
5.6 The Committee understands the apprehensions of the stakeholders regarding different
and faulty interpretations of the term ‘indecent’ by police officers and even misuse of powers
vested in them. It might lead to unnecessary harassment and also open a scope for
corruption. On the other hand, the justification given by the Ministry regarding practical
difficulties faced in the implementation of law and therefore authorizing a police officer not
below the rank of an Inspector for the enforcement of law seems to be right too. However,
the fact remains that the content or material of any form may be searched and seized, if the
need be, for the regulation of indecent representation of women. At the same time, the
Committee also feels that the scope for misuse of the provision needs to be plugged. Further,
police officers need to be trained properly for dealing with cases of indecent representation
of women so that there is no room for subjective and personal interpretations of the term
‘indecent’. The most unacceptable and obvious offences relating to indecent representation of
women could be easily identified and the process of search and seizure could be undertaken.
In case of any doubt, the Committee feels that opinion/orders of senior police officers must
be taken and action taken accordingly. Provision for such an eventuality must be provided in
the Bill itself for a better and effective enforcement of the Act.
VI. Clause 6
6.1 Section 6 of the Parent Act deals with penalty. The proposed amendment seeks to make
penalties more stringent by increasing the term of imprisonment and fine for the first and
consecutive convictions. The amended clause would read as follows:
“Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 or section 4 shall be punishable
on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years and also with fine not less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to
one lakh rupees; and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment
for a term of not less than two years but which may extend to seven years and also with
a fine not less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.”

16
6.2 Many stakeholders were of the view that the punishment provisions were disproportionately
stringent. It was suggested that since a similar provision existed in IPC, it may be stipulated that
for ‘advertisements’ under this Act, staggered punishments as provided under the Legal Metrology
Act, 2009 may be stipulated. On the other hand, few stakeholders believed that the penalty provided
for violation of the Act was very light in comparison to the impact of the offence on the status
of girls and women in the country. The undesired impact of advertisements on women and profits
amassed by the person or company by making such representation of women and girls were very
high and the penalty charged should serve as a deterrent. It was, therefore, proposed that the
penalty be increased to 10 per cent of annual income of the accused, whether person or company,
for the first conviction. The same might be increased by 25 per cent of the annual income of the
accused, whether person or company, for the second or subsequent conviction.
6.3 Rakshak Foundation in its written representation submitted that the amendment Bill proposed
increase in penalty to deter people from committing offences under the Act. The possibility of
penalty acting as a catalyst in increasing the misuse of the law had been overlooked. For example,
in case of cyber technology, defaming someone on moral ground was not so tough.
6.4 Representatives of V akul Seema and Associates suggested that the punishment on first
conviction should be imprisonment of three years and also a fine upto ‘5 lakh and in the event
of second or subsequent conviction, imprisonment for a term of 5 years and fine of ‘10 lakh. The
reason given for such a modification suggested was that for similar nature of offence, the IT Act,
2000 under section 67 provided punishment on first conviction with imprisonment of either
description for a term which might extend to three years and with fine which might extend to five
lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either
description for a term which might extend to five years and also with fine which might extend
to ten lakh rupees. Further, it was important to note that under section 67 of the IT Act, an
offence could be personal against an individual whereas under this Bill, indecent representation
could be against the entire community of women. Hence, it would be logical if the proposed Bill
provided for at least similar imprisonment terms as given under Section 67 of IT Act.
6.5 Agreeing with the contention of the stakeholders that the proposed amendment Bill
had wide implications for the entire women community, the Committee is of the view that
the penalties should be very high and stringent so that they act as a deterrent for all and
results in regulating cases of indecent representation of women. The Committee,
understanding the sentiments of the women community, is of the view that women should
be represented with utmost dignity and grace and any attempt to indecently depict or
objectify them needs to be thwarted or dealt with severely. The Committee is, accordingly,
in full agreement with the Ministry of Women and Child Development for modifying the
penalty provision by making it more stringent so as to act as an effective deterrent for
indecent portrayal of women. The Committee also takes note of the fact that the penalties
proposed in the amendment Bill and the IT Act, 2000 would differ and may create confusion.
It would also provide a way to the accused to be convicted under the law prescribing lesser
penalty with respect to imprisonment and fine. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that penalties proposed under the amendment Bill and the IT Act, 2000 should be similar
to avoid any legal and practical difficulties or create any confusion.
VII. GENERAL ISSUES/CONCERNS
7.1 During its deliberations with different stakeholders, some very pertinent issues raising
concerns about areas remaining unaddressed and need for having some regulatory mechanism were
persistently raised. The Committee strongly feels that since these issues are of immense importance
in the proper enforcement of the Act, the same are required to be elaborated and reflected in the
proposed amendment Bill.

17
NEED FOR A CENTRAL AUTHORITY TO REGULATE INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF
WOMEN
7.2 During its deliberations on the proposed amendment Bill, the Committee had time and again
come across the need for having a central regulatory authority in the Bill for a better enforcement
of the legislation. Many stakeholders were of the view that since the term ‘indecent representation’
was not defined, it was subject to numerous interpretations changing from one cultural context to
another. Hence, the need for having an objective and expert body was emphasized upon for taking
necessary action in matters of indecent representation of women.
7.3 The Committee has been given to understand that the National Commission for Women had
held wide ranging consultations at regional as well as national level with various stakeholders and
re-drafted the present Act as ‘Prohibition of Indecent Representation of Women and Children
Act, 2009’.The Commission believed that the existing Act lacked teeth and there was no
institutional mechanism to hear complaints and provide decisions. The legislation was not being
implemented properly by the implementing authorities. The existing mechanisms for regulating
indecent representation of women both under IPC and other self-regulatory mechanisms vested
with the various autonomous agencies had failed. The provisions in IPC dealing with obscenity
were detrimental to the interests of women and let the perpetrator completely free of any liability.
This was a wrong premise of the Act and the relevant provisions in the Penal code. Also, despite
the regulatory and legislative instruments that were available, public debate continued to rage about
commodification of women and there were deep concerns about depiction of women in the
electronic and print media. In this backdrop, the Commission proposed the creation of a nodal
authority to oversee the proper implementation of the Act. Besides that, the Commission also
suggested that there should be fast track courts for speedy disposal of such cases. There was also
a need for sensitization of police, judiciary which would result in reducing acquittal and increase
in conviction ratio in these cases. Further, it was suggested that prohibition of pornography which
was easily available through internet may be brought within the purview of the Act.
7.4 Elaborating on the proposed central authority, the NCW submitted that it would be appointed
by the Central Government and would govern and regulate the manner in which women were
represented in any document published/broadcast/telecast. It would be headed by a Member
Secretary of NCW and would have representatives from Advertising Standards Council of India,
Press Council of India, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and one member experienced in
working on women’s issue to be nominated by the NCW. The central authority would have the
powers/functions to receive appeals/complaints or grievances regarding a programme or an
advertisement broadcast or publication, to investigate or take suo moto notice and examining
matters relating to complaints under Sections 292-294 of the IPC, to consider such complaints and
facilitate their settlements within sixty days etc. This authority could then issue orders to the
defaulter advertiser and the publisher to stop its telecast or advertisement or publishing of the
objectionable programme, direct suitable edition to the advertisement or the programme etc. This
authority would also authorize any Gazetted Officer to enter, search and seize any objectionable
content or material.
7.5 Another stakeholder, Vakul Seema and Associates suggested that until the Bill introduced a
separate chapter on Regulator, as merely by modifying certain definitions, the desired change would
not be there. A Regulator needs to be appointed under the Act, who as a quasi-judicial person
should be able to hold inquiry, penalize and impose monetary liabilities against such ‘gross’ indecent
visual or audio or electronic form material. The Regulator would work as an adjudicating officer.
Every State could have one such Adjudicating Officer having jurisdiction over such issues. An
appeal could be addressed against the order of the Adjudicating Officer before the appellate
authority/bench constituted under this Act.

18
7.6 The Committee has been given to understand that the suggestion of NCW regarding
appointment of Central Authority was not accepted by the Ministry. Reason being that the same
was not found acceptable by the Inter-Ministerial Group. The Committee observes that one
argument given against the proposal was that creating a body under the law to regulate and govern
representation of women in media is contradiction in itself, as the express purpose of the Act was
to prohibit indecent representation of women. The Committee also finds that this issue was raised
again and again in the meetings of the IMG. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting drew
the attention of the members to the existing self-regulatory mechanisms such as the News
Broadcasters Association (NBA) and the Indian Broadcasting Foundation with its newly constituted
Broadcasting Content Complaints Council (BCCC) as also the Programme and Advertising Codes
under the Cable Television Network Rules of 1994. Also there were other autonomous mechanisms
such as the Censor Board and the Press Council of India to regulate and redress the issue of
content in films and print media.
7.7 The Committee finds no merit in the justification of the Ministry regarding not
accepting the suggestion of the National Commission for Women for having a central
regulatory authority. The Ministry is mandated to give due consideration to very valid
observations and recommendations made by the statutory body-based on its interactions
with the real stakeholders working for the welfare of women at the grassroots level. When
the national body representing women was emphatically highlighting the necessity of such
a body, the Ministry has to look at the issue from the perspective of women and their
interests keeping into consideration the realities of our society and the increasing number
of instances/cases of indecent representation of women.
7.8 The Committee, while taking note of the amendment Bill proposed by the National
Commission for Women having a provision of regulatory mechanism, raised this issue with all the
stakeholders appearing before it. The need for having such a mechanism was emphasised by all
of them. The Committee also made an attempt to make an assessment of the status of complaints
filed under the Act. The Committee finds that the disposal rate of such complaints is quite
discouraging as is evident from the ICRB data details indicated below:
Year Total No. of cases Trials completed Pending trial at the
pending including end of the year
pending from the
previous year
Convicted Acquitted
2009 1809 786 74 949
2010 1830 779 58 993
2011 1435 372 57 1006
7.9 The Committee also finds that safeguards against indecent representation of women are
provided under various provisions of IPC, IT Act and the Cinematograph Act. However, as
admitted by the Ministry, there are certain limitations in the existing legal and regulatory framework.
Besides lacking specific provision relating to indecent representation of women, focus is missing
in these laws, which is necessary to protect women who tend to be more vulnerable to
exploitation, particularly in the face of increasing use of advanced technology and media and
communication devices in our everyday life. Thus, it is very clear that the objective behind the Act
is to address adequately the twin issues of indecent representation and derogatory reference to
women, both in print and electronic medium.

19
7.10 The Committee would like to highlight the fact that inspite of the Ministry’s claim
that existing bodies and mechanisms in the fields of advertising, film certification etc. have
the mandate of regulating objectionable content in their respective areas, the desired result
of regulation of indecent representation of women has not been effective as evident from
quite a few advertisements, films, songs, publications etc. appearing from time to time.
Nobody can deny the fact that this increasing trend of indecent representation of women is
adversely affecting the young minds. The Committee strongly believes that a legislation for
regulating and prohibiting the increasing incidence of indecent representation of women
needs to be effectively implemented and must have solid institutional mechanism to deal
with complaints in this regard. The Committee is well aware of the fact that the express
purpose of both the parent Act and the draft Bill is to prohibit indecent representation of
women. The Committee is, however, not inclined to agree with the contention of the
Ministry that creation of a body to regulate and govern representation of women through
various mediums would be contradictory in itself. The fact remains that the objective as
envisaged in the Act has virtually remained on paper. Also, the so-called self regulation
mechanisms are having mainly members having business interests leading to subjectivity in
their approach.
7.11 The Committee is of the considered view that creation of a central authority to
regulate the cases of indecent representation of women and empowering them to receive or
take complaints and decide upon them would be the most effective way to enforce the
legislation. The creation and composition of such an authority as suggested by the National
Commission for Women would be quite appropriate in effectively tackling such cases. The
Committee feels that having a central authority for the regulation of indecent
representation of women would ensure utmost seriousness in such matters. The need of the
hour is to regulate the increasing instances of indecent representation of women and uphold
the dignity of women. Moreover, the increasing cases of exploitation of women in recent
times make it more crucial to avoid portrayal of women in negative and regressive ways and
also altogether stop commodification of women. Hence, the Committee is of the view that
the Ministry should consider including a provision creating a central authority with adequate
powers and functions as proposed by the Commission.
7.12 The Committee would also like to point out that having a central authority would
also allay the apprehensions expressed by various stakeholders regarding subjective
interpretations of ‘indecent representation’ by police officers leading to unnecessary
harassment. The central authority would have members from all important bodies like the
Advertising Standards Council of India, the Press Council of India, Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting headed by Member-Secretary, NCW. This would eliminate any lop-sided or
fautly interpretations of ‘indecent representation’ and would not become a tool for misuse
by any public authority. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Ministry should
contemplate about the very valid proposition made by the nodal body for the welfare of
women and include the mechanism of having a central authority in the Bill itself.
7.13 The Committee can visualize another alternative if the proposed regulatory authority
under the Act is not found feasible. The National Commission for Women is the nodal body
for protecting the interests of women in the country. It was impressed upon the Committee
by majority of the stakeholders that the National Commission for Women should be
assigned a role in such matters. One argument given against this suggestion was that the
Commission is by, by nature, a recommendatory body and while it has the power to suo
moto take up cases of violation of women’s rights, it will not have the mandate to try a
complaint under the law as an offence. The Committee strongly feels that it is high time
that the role and mandate of the National Commission for Women is reviewed and

20
strengthened adequately, particularly in view of rising cases of exploitation of women. One
example of the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights is already there. Nobody
can deny the fact that the National Commission with its presence in the states through
State Commissions would be better equipped to address such cases.
OVERLAPPING BETWEEN ACTS/LEGISLATIONS
7.14 The Committee notes that there are a number of laws with regard to the indecent
representation of women like the Indian Penal Code, Cinematograph Act, 1952, Press Council
Act, 1978, Cable Television Network Rules, 1994, Information Technology Act, 2000 and Indecent
Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986. Section 292, 293 and 294 of IPC, guidelines
of the Central Board for Film Certification, Section 13 and 14 of the Press Council Act, 1978,
Rule 6 of the Cable Television Network Rules, 1994, Section 67 of the IT Act, 2000, all
specifically deal with regulation of indecent representation of women and entail that no content/
material should contain anything obscene, vulgar, derogatory to women, sexually explicit and be
insensitive to the value and standards of society.
7.15 Representative of Lawyer’s Collective submitted to the Committee that all such Acts must
have the same level of scrutiny on the question of what was obscene. There should be a synergy
in the process of amending the law.
7.16 The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion that common terms in all the
Acts concerning indecent representation of women should be defined in a similar fashion.
Hence, there should be synergy among all the concerned legislations when amendments are
made in the Parent Act relating to indecent representation of women. Further, penalties as
specified under the IT Act and in the proposed amendment Bill should not differ but remain
the same. This would avoid all kinds of confusion and complications when an offender is
booked under both the Acts. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry that
steps should be taken to amend the related Acts also so that an eventuality of contradiction
and confusion does not arise.
AWARENESS GENERATION
7.17 The Committee is of the view that society in general and women specifically need to
be made aware about the adverse indecent representation of women which has become so
rampant in our everyday life that instances of indecent representation of women are being
accepted although with reluctance. The Committee feels that women themselves sometimes
fall prey to such wrong and indecent portrayal due to their lack of awareness. Film makers
or advertisers also tend to portray women in such a way so as to grab the attention of the
public with the sole motive of earning profits.
7.18 The Committee is of the firm view that women cannot be viewed as a commodity and
portrayed indecently for commercial interests. Commercial industry needs to realize and
stop depiction of women in an indecent manner. The self-regulating agencies like
Advertising Standards Council of India, Press Council of India, Central Board for Film
Certification etc. need to strictly adhere to their guidelines in respect of indecent
representation of women. They need to have awareness generation programmes to spread
awareness amongst common people, writers, publishers, internet and mobile service
providers, film makers, lyricists, advertisers etc. about such representations and also about
the penalties which could be imposed on them in case of violation of the legislation.
7.19 The Committee believes that the National Commission of Women has an important
role to play in creating and generating awareness amongst people about indecent

21
representation of women. The Commission needs to organize awareness generation camps/
programmes in this regard for the film fraternity, advertisers, writers, publishers, internet
and mobile service providers etc. so that depiction of women in an obscene or objectionable
way is stopped and regulated. Further, the Commission can also make efforts for spreading
awareness amongst the general public about the legislation and the mechanism of filing a
complaint and getting redressal.
INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF CHILDREN
7.20 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the indecent representation of
children including child pornography. The Committee views it as an issue of serious concern
wherein children are portrayed indecently or made to do certain acts which are unbecoming
for their age, thereby corrupting innocent minds. Such offensive depiction of children would
have an adverse impact on the minds of children themselves and also on the minds of
pervert adults who may take advantage of vulnerable children and sexually exploit them.
Also, indecently representing children would influence the attitude and behaviour of
children who may imitate such acts and enter an adult realm too early in their lives. This
would definitely lead to many psychological, physiological and emotional problems in the
child and he/she may not turn out to be a normal adult.
7.21 The Committee notes that the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Bill, 2011
deals with sexual offences against children and having a child-friendly procedure for
investigation and handling of child abuse cases. However, the arena of indecent
representation of children is not dealt with in this legislation. It is, therefore, important to
have a law on such depiction of children. Even though child pornography is banned in the
country, objectionable content/material is often viewed/circulated. The Committee believes
that the Ministry could focus on this area of concern and have suitable mechanisms under
the relevant law to deal with cases of indecent representation of children.
LIVE PERFORMANCE EXCLUDED FROM THE BILL
7.22 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the fact that live performances of songs,
dance or any other kind of shows are not included within the purview of this amendment Bill. The
songs of live performances were also available to the public via You Tube.
7.23 The Committee is of the firm view that live shows indecently representing women in
any manner whether through song, dance, comedy etc. where large number of public gather
together to enjoy the show need to be curbed. The Committee understands that at present
such violations are dealt with under section 294 of IPC which provides lesser punishment
when compared with that provided for indecent representation of women under the present
Act. The Committee strongly feels that such live programmes lead to more adverse impact
on the young minds. The quantum of penalty has to be at par in both the situations. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that relevant provisions of IPC vis-a-vis provision of
the present Act may be reviewed and modification brought out accordingly.
8. The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
9. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the
amendments/additions suggested by it.
10. The Committee would like the Ministry to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions which could be incorporated in the Bill.

22
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
The Committee welcomes the proposed amendments to the Indecent Representation
of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 to incorporate new forms of communication which are being
used in indecent representation of women so as to curb the same by widening its scope and
also to make it more effective. The Committee feels that it is the need of the hour, especially
in the backdrop of the present day Indian society and also due to the rapid technological
advancements, indirectly leading to opening of more avenues for cases of indecent portrayal
of women. The Committee also takes note of NCRB data about status of complaints filed under
the Act. It is also a fact that along with addition of new mediums, number of such cases will
indicate an increasing trend. In such a scenario, need for evolving a strict monitoring mechanism
with respect to the implementation of the Act assumes great importance. (Para 1.7)
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
The Committee observes that the process of amendments to the Parent Act started
in 2001, when it was placed before the Cabinet. The matter again came up before the Cabinet
in 2007. It was on a direction from the Cabinet for having wider consultation that the National
Commission for Women held three Workshops involving all the stakeholders. Based on these
wide-ranging consultations, a revised Bill having a regulatory mechanism was proposed which
was not found acceptable by the Inter-Ministerial Group. The Committee views with serious
concern the unduly long process of carrying out amendments in a law concerned with the
protection of the interests of the most vulnerable section of our society. The process which was
initiated in 2001 came to an end in September, 2011. The four meetings of the Inter-Ministerial
Group were spread over a period of more than one year with first meeting taking place on the
6th May, 2010 and the last meeting being held on the 2
nd September, 2011. It took more than one
year to bring the revised Bill before the House. The Committee is quite disturbed to note that
not only unduly long time was taken in deliberating on bringing out the proposed amendments
in the law but the modifications suggested by the nodal body mandated for the welfare of women
which were based on very wide consultations were simply sidelined. (Para 2.5)
The Committee observes that the consultation process undertaken by the Ministry
has failed to yield the desired results. Very valid suggestions coming up as a result of
workshops held by the National Commission for Women with various stakeholders have not
led to logical results. Understanding the implications of the proposed amendment Bill, the
Committee feels that a wide process of consultations involving the concerned stakeholders
like those in the fields of advertising, broadcasting, film certification, information
technology etc. was called for and that exercise was duly undertaken by it. The Committee
also made an attempt in this direction by issuing a Press Release on the proposed
amendment Bill to elicit public opinion from stakeholders as well as the general public. The
Committee received many memoranda, notable amongst them were from organisations like
the Indian Society of Advertisers, the Advertising Agencies Association of India,
Confederation of Indian Industry, Internet and Mobile Association of India, Conference for
Human Rights, Rakshak Foundation, Vakul Seema and Associates etc. (Para 2.6)
III. The Committee makes recommendations/observations on the following provisions of
the Bill:
Clause 2(a)
The Committee is of the considered view that broadening the scope of the definition
22

23
of the term ‘advertisement’ to include newer forms of communication and media is a
welcome step. However, the Committee also agrees with the suggestions of the stakeholders
to include advertisements in digital form or electronic form or hoardings, SMS, MMS etc.
within the definition of ‘advertisement’ to bring all forms of advertisement within the ambit
of the Act. (Para 3.6)
The Committee would like to emphasize that in the era of globalization and
increasing commercialization and competition, the world of advertisement has witnessed
instances of indecent representation of women to grab the attention of prospective
consumers. Not just this, the Committee also notes that advertisements promoted the
patriarchal set-up by assigning traditional roles to women, thereby being regressive. The
Committee, therefore, firmly believes that all forms of advertisements through any medium
must be regulated to curb indecent representation of women. (Para 3.7)
At the same time, attention of the Committee has been drawn to the apprehension
of some stakeholders that what constituted as obscenity was highly subjective and
interpretation of it may lead to unnecessary harassment at the hands of the police. The
Committee agrees with this point and is of the view that obscenity and indecent
representation of women would vary in different places or different cultural contexts.
However, a broad consensus on what is overtly obscene or depicts women indecently or in
bad light needs to be generated or agreed upon so that genuine commercial activity is not
hindered due to unnecessary harassment. (Para 3.8)
Clause 2(b)
The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of the stakeholder that the
definition of the term ‘distribution needed to be broadened’ and believes that all possible
ways of distributing any material or context through any medium needs to be covered and
brought within the ambit of the legislation. This would certainly help in bringing to book
all offences relating to distribution of any material which indecently represents women.
(Para 3.11)
Clause 2(c)
The Committee agrees with the views of the stakeholders that the definition of the
term ‘indecent representation’ was vague and may leave scope for subjective interpretations.
The meaning of the term could very well be interpreted differently in different regions of the
country and in different cultural settings. The purpose of redefining the term ‘indecent
representation’ is to identify such content/material wherein a woman is seen as a sexual
object or which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or is derogatory to women.
Not defining the terms ‘deprave’, ‘public morality’ and ‘morals’ could also pose a problem. It
may leave scope for unnecessary harassment and nuisance by certain groups who imagine
themselves to be the custodians of public morality and engage in moral policing, thereby
causing trouble. The Committee agrees with the suggestion of the stakeholders that an expert
body should decide on the contentious issue of whether any content/material is objectionable
or not. It would then leave no scope for subjective interpretations by the police authorities
or by certain groups upholding public morality. (Para 3.19)
Clause 2(g)
The Committee finds the suggestion of Vakul Seema and Associates quite appropriate
as it further widens the scope of the definition of the term ‘publish’ and covers all forms
of format through which any material/content could be published and made available to the
public. This would certainly help in bringing within the ambit of the law all mediums of

24
publishing relating to indecent representation of women in any form, be it a book,
newspaper, magazine, poster, graffiti, electronic medium through cable, computer, satellite,
wire, wireless or any other form. (Para 3.22)
The Committee observes that a debate on adult entertainment versus indecent
representation of women in our cultural context is going on. While the society is witnessing
sea change in the perception and attitude of its members, increasing instances of indecent
representation of women is also a reality. The Committee is of the view that a line has to
be drawn which is neither moralistic nor interferes with the personal freedom and privacy
of individual adults. There is a need to regulate the publishing of content/material through
various mediums. The access to pornographic material needs to be restricted in a stringent
matter so that it does not land in the hands of children who can be adversely influenced
by it. Such material should not be viewed in any public place and be used only for private
viewing/use. The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for evolving a
mechanism for curbing such practices. (Para 3.24)
IV. Clause 4
The Committee is inclined to agree with the contention of the stakeholders for
suggesting inclusion of films within the ambit of the proposed Bill which seems to be
somewhat justified given the quality and content of films/serials being made and viewed by
the public. Nobody can deny the fact that many of the films of contemporary times are
depicting women in an indecent way and many of the TV serials are portraying women in
a regressive manner. However, it is also equally true that the mandate of certification of
films has been given to the Central Board for Film Certification. Bringing films within the
ambit of this Bill would mean encroaching upon the jurisdiction of the Board, necessitating
dilution of the role of the Board as envisaged under the Cinematograph Act. The Committee
feels that there is a need to review the role of the Central Board of Film Certification,
especially in the context of increasing trend of indecent representation of women in the
present day films. (Para 4.4)
When this issue was taken up with the Central Board of Film Certification, it was
clarified that the Cinematograph Act had its origins in Article 19(2) of the Constitution, which
was more or less a regulator whereas the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition)
Act, 1986 was punitive in nature. Hence, the Cinematograph Act could not be brought under
the ambit of the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act. It was, however,
pointed out that some of the provisions could be brought into the Cinematograph Act for
effective regulation. There was no ambiguity in bringing the film maker, the director and
trade bodies under the ambit of the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act.
However, actors, script writers, song writers etc. should be left out. It was also suggested that
for reducing the instances of violation under the Cinematograph Act, a mechanism could be
put in place which would deliver speedy and effective deterrence like seizure of prints
throughout the states/country once a violation was noticed. (Para 4.5)
The Committee observes that the above suggestions made by the Central Board of
Film Certification are very relevant and will go a long way so far as the issue of prohibition
of indecent representation of women in films is concerned. The Committee would appreciate
if the Ministry takes up this issue on priority basis with the Board and the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting. There does not seem to be any problem in carrying out these
modifications when the nodal body is willing to do so. (Para 4.6)
The Committee finds that inspite of such categorical guidelines of the Central Board
of Film Certification, many of the films certified by the Board do not adhere to the same,
depicting scenes which are regressive in nature, portray women in bad light and indecently

25
represent them. Nobody can deny the fact that the increasing number of cases of women
exploitation in the country in recent times is to an extent influenced by the uncalled for
projection of women in films which has an adverse impact on the young minds. The content,
lyrics, songs, story etc. of films influence the behaviour and attitudes of youngsters who
tend to imitate and learn from them. It is, therefore, considered necessary to adopt some
remedial or preventive measures, especially by the Central Board for Film Certification
regarding the quality of films. The Committee is of the view that the Board needs to review
its guidelines with respect to indecent representation of women with an objective outlook.
Not just this, all the films must adhere to these guidelines which can be enforced by the
Board by certifying only those films which do not in any way represent women indecently.
(Para 4.8)
Committee’s attention was persistently drawn to the fact that some of the songs
included in the duly certified films violated the guidelines prohibiting indecent representation
of women. Such songs were being regularly shown through other mediums. When asked to
specify the preventive as well as remedial measures, if any, initiated by the Board in this
regard, the Committee was informed that majority of the songs objected by the audience were
either lifted from ‘A’ rated films or they themselves had been granted ‘A’ rating. It was the
non-implementation of provisions of the Cinematograph Act by audiovisual media, especially
TV and radio channels as the Cable TV Network Act should be strictly implemented and ‘A’
rated songs should not be telecast on TV . The Committee notes that remedies for curbing
indecent representation of women through film songs being aired through other mediums are
already there. The only thing lacking is initiative or intention to do so. The Committee
impresses upon the Ministry to approach the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and
other concerned agencies without any further delay and come forward with concrete action
plan and monitoring mechanism for curbing such practices. (Para 4.9)
V . Clause 5
The Committee understands the apprehensions of the stakeholders regarding different
and faulty interpretations of the term ‘indecent’ by police officers and even misuse of powers
vested in them. It might lead to unnecessary harassment and also open a scope for
corruption. On the other hand, the justification given by the Ministry regarding practical
difficulties faced in the implementation of law and therefore authorizing a police officer not
below the rank of an Inspector for the enforcement of law seems to be right too. However,
the fact remains that the content or material of any form may be searched and seized, if the
need be, for the regulation of indecent representation of women. At the same time, the
Committee also feels that the scope for misuse of the provision needs to be plugged. Further,
police officers need to be trained properly for dealing with cases of indecent representation
of women so that there is no room for subjective and personal interpretations of the term
‘indecent’. The most unacceptable and obvious offences relating to indecent representation of
women could be easily identified and the process of search and seizure could be undertaken.
In case of any doubt, the Committee feels that opinion/orders of senior police officers must
be taken and action taken accordingly. Provision for such an eventuality must be provided in
the Bill itself for a better and effective enforcement of the Act. (Para 5.6)
VI. Clause 6
Agreeing with the contention of the stakeholders that the proposed amendment Bill
had wide implications for the entire women community, the Committee is of the view that
the penalties should be very high and stringent so that they act as a deterrent for all and
results in regulating cases of indecent representation of women. The Committee,
understanding the sentiments of the women community, is of the view that women should

26
be represented with utmost dignity and grace and any attempt to indecently depict or
objectify them needs to be thwarted or dealt with severely. The Committee is, accordingly,
in full agreement with the Ministry of Women and Child Development for modifying the
penalty provision by making it more stringent so as to act as an effective deterrent for
indecent portrayal of women. The Committee also takes note of the fact that the penalties
proposed in the amendment Bill and the IT Act, 2000 would differ and may create confusion.
It would also provide a way to the accused to be convicted under the law prescribing lesser
penalty with respect to imprisonment and fine. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that penalties proposed under the amendment Bill and the IT Act, 2000 should be similar
to avoid any legal and practical difficulties or create any confusion. (Para 6.5)
NEED FOR A CENTRAL AUTHORITY TO REGULATE INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF
WOMEN
The Committee finds no merit in the justification of the Ministry regarding not
accepting the suggestion of the National Commission for Women for having a central
regulatory authority. The Ministry is mandated to give due consideration to very valid
observations and recommendations made by the statutory body-based on its interactions
with the real stakeholders working for the welfare of women at the grassroots level. When
the national body representing women was emphatically highlighting the necessity of such
a body, the Ministry has to look at the issue from the perspective of women and their
interests keeping into consideration the realities of our society and the increasing number
of instances/cases of indecent representation of women. (Para 7.7)
The Committee would like to highlight the fact that inspite of the Ministry’s claim
that existing bodies and mechanisms in the fields of advertising, film certification etc. have
the mandate of regulating objectionable content in their respective areas, the desired result
of regulation of indecent representation of women has not been effective as evident from
quite a few advertisements, films, songs, publications etc. appearing from time to time.
Nobody can deny the fact that this increasing trend of indecent representation of women is
adversely affecting the young minds. The Committee strongly believes that a legislation for
regulating and prohibiting the increasing incidence of indecent representation of women
needs to be effectively implemented and must have solid institutional mechanism to deal
with complaints in this regard. The Committee is well aware of the fact that the express
purpose of both the parent Act and the draft Bill is to prohibit indecent representation of
women. The Committee is, however, not inclined to agree with the contention of the
Ministry that creation of a body to regulate and govern representation of women through
various mediums would be contradictory in itself. The fact remains that the objective as
envisaged in the Act has virtually remained on paper. Also, the so-called self regulation
mechanisms are having mainly members having business interests leading to subjectivity in
their approach. (Para 7.10)
The Committee is of the considered view that creation of a central authority to
regulate the cases of indecent representation of women and empowering them to receive or
take complaints and decide upon them would be the most effective way to enforce the
legislation. The creation and composition of such an authority as suggested by the National
Commission for Women would be quite appropriate in effectively tackling such cases. The
Committee feels that having a central authority for the regulation of indecent
representation of women would ensure utmost seriousness in such matters. The need of the
hour is to regulate the increasing instances of indecent representation of women and uphold
the dignity of women. Moreover, the increasing cases of exploitation of women in recent
times make it more crucial to avoid portrayal of women in negative and regressive ways and

27
also altogether stop commodification of women. Hence, the Committee is of the view that
the Ministry should consider including a provision creating a central authority with adequate
powers and functions as proposed by the Commission. (Para 7.11)
The Committee would also like to point out that having a central authority would
also allay the apprehensions expressed by various stakeholders regarding subjective
interpretations of ‘indecent representation’ by police officers leading to unnecessary
harassment. The central authority would have members from all important bodies like the
Advertising Standards Council of India, the Press Council of India, Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting headed by Member-Secretary, NCW. This would eliminate any lop-sided or
fautly interpretations of ‘indecent representation’ and would not become a tool for misuse
by any public authority. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Ministry should
contemplate about the very valid proposition made by the nodal body for the welfare of
women and include the mechanism of having a central authority in the Bill itself.
(Para 7.12)
The Committee can visualize another alternative if the proposed regulatory authority
under the Act is not found feasible. The National Commission for Women is the nodal body
for protecting the interests of women in the country. It was impressed upon the Committee
by majority of the stakeholders that the National Commission for Women should be
assigned a role in such matters. One argument given against this suggestion was that the
Commission is by, by nature, a recommendator y body and while it has the power to
suo moto take up cases of violation of women’s rights, it will not have the mandate to try
a complaint under the law as an offence. The Committee strongly feels that it is high time
that the role and mandate of the National Commission for Women is reviewed and
strengthened adequately, particularly in view of rising cases of exploitation of women. One
example of the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights is already there. Nobody
can deny the fact that the National Commission with its presence in the states through
State Commissions would be better equipped to address such cases. (Para 7.13)
OVERLAPPING BETWEEN ACTS/LEGISLATIONS
The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion that common terms in all the
Acts concerning indecent representation of women should be defined in a similar fashion.
Hence, there should be synergy among all the concerned legislations when amendments are
made in the Parent Act relating to indecent representation of women. Further, penalties as
specified under the IT Act and in the proposed amendment Bill should not differ but remain
the same. This would avoid all kinds of confusion and complications when an offender is
booked under both the Acts. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry that
steps should be taken to amend the related Acts also so that an eventuality of contradiction
and confusion does not arise. (Para 7.16)
AWARENESS GENERATION
The Committee is of the view that society in general and women specifically need to
be made aware about the adverse indecent representation of women which has become so
rampant in our everyday life that instances of indecent representation of women are being
accepted although with reluctance. The Committee feels that women themselves sometimes
fall prey to such wrong and indecent portrayal due to their lack of awareness. Film makers
or advertisers also tend to portray women in such a way so as to grab the attention of the
public with the sole motive of earning profits. (Para 7.17)

28
The Committee is of the firm view that women cannot be viewed as a commodity and
portrayed indecently for commercial interests. Commercial industry needs to realize and stop
depiction of women in an indecent manner. The self-regulating agencies like Advertising
Standards Council of India, Press Council of India, Central Board for Film Certification etc.
need to strictly adhere to their guidelines in respect of indecent representation of women.
They need to have awareness generation programmes to spread awareness amongst common
people, writers, publishers, internet and mobile service providers, film makers, lyricists,
advertisers etc. about such representations and also about the penalties which could be
imposed on them in case of violation of the legislation. (Para 7.18)
The Committee believes that the National Commission of Women has an important
role to play in creating and generating awareness amongst people about indecent
representation of women. The Commission needs to organize awareness generation camps/
programmes in this regard for the film fraternity, advertisers, writers, publishers, internet
and mobile service providers etc. so that depiction of women in an obscene or objectionable
way is stopped and regulated. Further, the Commission can also make efforts for spreading
awareness amongst the general public about the legislation and the mechanism of filing a
complaint and getting redressal. (Para 7.19)
INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF CHILDREN
Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the indecent representation of
children including child pornography. The Committee views it as an issue of serious concern
wherein children are portrayed indecently or made to do certain acts which are unbecoming
for their age, thereby corrupting innocent minds. Such offensive depiction of children would
have an adverse impact on the minds of children themselves and also on the minds of
pervert adults who may take advantage of vulnerable children and sexually exploit them.
Also, indecently representing children would influence the attitude and behaviour of
children who may imitate such acts and enter an adult realm too early in their lives. This
would definitely lead to many psychological, physiological and emotional problems in the
child and he/she may not turn out to be a normal adult. (Para 7.20)
The Committee notes that the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Bill, 2011
deals with sexual offences against children and having a child-friendly procedure for
investigation and handling of child abuse cases. However, the arena of indecent
representation of children is not dealt with in this legislation. It is, therefore, important to
have a law on such depiction of children. Even though child pornography is banned in the
country, objectionable content/material is often viewed/circulated. The Committee believes
that the Ministry could focus on this area of concern and have suitable mechanisms under
the relevant law to deal with cases of indecent representation of children. (Para 7.21)
LIVE PERFORMANCE EXCLUDED FROM THE BILL
The Committee is of the firm view that live shows indecently representing women in
any manner whether through song, dance, comedy etc. where large number of public gather
together to enjoy the show need to be curbed. The Committee understands that at present
such violations are dealt with under section 294 of IPC which provides lesser punishment
when compared with that provided for indecent representation of women under the present
Act. The Committee strongly feels that such live programmes lead to more adverse impact
on the young minds. The quantum of penalty has to be at par in both the situations. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that relevant provisions of IPC vis-a-vis provision of
the present Act may be reviewed and modification brought out accordingly. (Para 7.23)

29
MINUTES

XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the
7th February, 2013 in Committee Room No. ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
2. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
3. Shri Tarun Vijay
4. Shri Baishnab Parida
5. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
6. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
7. Shri P.K. Biju
8. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
9. Shri Virender Kashyap
10. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
11. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
12. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
13. Shri M.K. Raghavan
14. Shri M.I. Shanavas
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012
Ministry of Women and Child Development
(i) Shri Prem Narain, Secretary
(ii) Ms. Rugmini Parmar, Economic Advisor
(iii) Shri Amit Ray, Director
31

32
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to have a clause-by-clause discussion on the Universities for Research and Innovation
Bill, 2012 and also to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development on the
Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

33
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the
13th March, 2013 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Tarun Vijay
5. Shri Baishnab Parida
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Suresh Angadi
7. Shri P.K. Biju
8. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
9. Dr. Charles Dias
10. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
11. Shri Virender Kashyap
12. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
13. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012
I. Breakthrough
Ms. Sonali Khan, Vice-President
II. Internet and Mobile Association of India
(i) Dr. Subho Ray, President
(ii) Ms. Chitrita Chatterjee, Associate Vice-President
33

34
III. Confederation of Indian Industry
(i) Shri Sandeep Kaul, Chief Executive, PCPB ITC Limited
(ii) Shri Hemant Bakshi, Executive Director, Hindustan Unilever
(iii) Shri Sanjeev Kapur, Chief Marketing Officer, Citibank
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the representatives of Breakthrough, Internet and Mobile Association
of India and Confederation of Indian Industry on the Indecent Representation of Women
(Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012.
3. * * *
4. The Committee, then, heard the view of the representatives of Breakthrough, Internet and
Mobile Association of India and Confederation of Indian Industry. The Chairman and Members
raised queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to forward a
questionnaire to each of these organizations for their written comments.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.55. 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

35
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the
9th May, 2013 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
2. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
3. Shri Tarun Vijay
4. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
5. Shri Baishnab Parida
6. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
8. Dr. Charles Dias
9. Shri Virender Kashyap
10. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
11. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
12. Shri M.I. Shanavas
13. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012
I. National Commission for Women (NCW)
(i) Ms. Nirmala Samanth Prabhavalkar, Member
(ii) Ms. Shamina Shafiq, Member
II. Conference for Human Rights (India)
Ms. Nanita Sharma, Secretary General
35

36
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the representatives of National Commission for Women (NCW) and
Conference for Human Right (India) on the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition)
Amendment Bill, 2012.
3. * * *
4. The Committee, then, heard the views of the representatives of the National Commission
for Women (NCW) on the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012.
The Chairman and Members raised queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The Committee
decided to forward a questionnaire for the written comments of the Commission.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary-General, Conference for Human
Rights (India). The Chairman and Members raised queries which were replied to by the witness.
The Committee decided to forward a questionnaire for the written comments of the witness.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

37
XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Friday, the
7th June, 2013 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia — In the Chair
2. Shri Tarun Vijay
3. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
4. Shri Baishnab Parida
5. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Suresh Angadi
7. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
8. Shrimati Helen Davidson
9. Dr. Charles Dias
10. Shri Virender Kashyap
11. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
12. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
13. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
14. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
15. Shri M.K. Raghavan
16. Shri M.I. Shanavas
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012
I. Advertising Agencies Association of India
(i) Mr. Arvind Sharma, President
(ii) Mr. Sam Balsara, Past President
37

38
II. Indian Society of Advertisers
Ms. Beena Koshy, Member, Media Committee of the ISA
III. V akul Seema and Associates
(i) Shri Vakul Sharma, Advocate
(ii) Shrimati Seema Sharma, Advocate
IV. Rakshak Foundation
(i) Ms. Nikita Anand
(ii) Ms. Preeti Goel
(iii) Shri Rohit Agarwal
(iv) Ms. Kritin Jain
(v) Mr. Keshav Gupta
V . Lawyers Collective, Women’s Rights Initiative
(i) Ms. Indira Jaising, Executive Director
(ii) Ms. Gayatri Sharma, Assistant
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia, M.P., Rajya Sabha and a member of the Committee presided
over the sitting, as authorized by Shri Oscar Fernandes, Chairman of the Committee. He welcomed
the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened *** to hear the views of the stakeholders
on the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of five organizations i.e.
the Advertising Agencies Association of India, Indian Society of Advertisers, Vakul Seema and
Associates, Rakshak Foundation and Lawyers’ Collective. The Chairman and members raised
queries which were replied to by the witnesses.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

39
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the
17th September, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Baishnab Parida
6. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
7. Shri Tarun Vijay
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Suresh Angadi
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shrimati Helen Davidson
11. Dr. Charles Dias
12. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
13. Shri Virender Kashyap
14. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
15. Shri M.K. Raghavan
16. Shri M.I. Shanavas.
17. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the first meeting of the newly
reconstituted Committee on Human Resource Development. Apprising the members about the
mandate of the Committee, the Chairman gave an idea about the vision of the Committee. He then
39

40
updated the members about the work undertaken by the Committee during the previous year. He
informed the members that the previous Committee had four Bills for examination, out of which
the Report on one Bill i.e. the Central Universities (Amendment) Bill, 2012 was presented in both
the Houses of Parliament on the 6
th September, 2013.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the draft 258
th Report on the Indecent
Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012 and decided to present the same to
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 1.20 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on the 1 st October, 2013.
*** Relates to other matter.

41
ANNEXURES

TO BE I NTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
ON 26 TH N OVEMBER , 2012
Bill No. LXX of 2012
THE INDECENT REPRESENT ATION OF WOMEN
(PROHIBITION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Indecent Representation of Women
(Prohibition) Act, 1986.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indecent Representation of
Women (Prohibition) Amendment Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition)
Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2,—
(i) for clause ( a), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘(a) “advertisement” includes any notice, circular,
label, wrapper or other document or any audio or visual
representation made by means of any light, laser light,
sound, smoke, gas or electric form or through any
other media, for the purpose of promotion of any
goods, service, place, person, event or organisation;’;
43
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.60 of 1986.

44
(ii) after clause ( a), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(aa) “electronic form” shall have the same
meaning as assigned to it in clause ( r) of section 2 of
the Information Technology Act, 2000;’;
(iii ) for clause ( b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘( b) “distribution” includes all method of
distribution, either by way of samples or making
available for public access through broadcast, transmission
or uploading on website or in any other printed or
electronic form, whether for profit or otherwise;’;
(iv) for clause ( c), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘(c) “indecent representation of women” means—
(i) publication or distribution in any
manner, of any material depicting women as a
sexual object or which is lascivious or appeals to
the prurient interests; or
(ii) depiction, publication or distribution in
any manner, of the figure of a woman, her form
or body or any part thereof in such a way as to
have the effect of being indecent or derogatory to
or denigrating women or which is likely to
deprave, corrupt or injure the public morality or
morals;’;
(v) after clause ( d), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(da) “material” includes any book, pamphlet,
paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting,
photograph, representation in any form, figure or
any other content in printed, audio, visual or
electronic form;’;
(vi) after clause ( f), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(g) “publish” includes—
(i) to prepare or print in any book,
newspaper, magazine, poster, graffiti, periodicals
or any form of printed matter, digital or in any
other format; or
(ii) to distribute or broadcast through
audio-visual media including cable, computer,
broadband satellite transmission or any other
21 of 2000.

45
form, to any person so as to communicate or
make it available to the public;’.
3. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“4. No person shall publish or distribute or cause to be
published or cause to be distributed by any means any
material which contains indecent representation of women in
any form:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to—
(a) any material,—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be
justified as being for the public good on the
ground that such material is in the interest of
science, literature, art or learning or other objects
of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used for bona fide
religious purposes; or
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved,
painted or otherwise represented on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the
meaning of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958; or
(ii) any temple, or any car used for the
conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any
religious purpose; or
(c) any film in respect of which the provisions
of Part II of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 will be
applicable.”.
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) in the opening portion, for the words beginning with
“Subject to such rules” and ending with “for which he is so
authorised”, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“Notwithstanding anything in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, any police officer not below
the rank of Inspector, or any other officer of the Central
Government or a State Government authorised by the
Central Government or the State Government may”;
(ii) in clause ( b), for the words “seize any advertisement
or any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing,
painting, photograph, representation or figure”, the words
“seize any advertisement or material” shall be substituted.
Substitution of
new section
for section 4.
Prohibition of
indecent
representation
of women.
24 of 1958.
Amendment
of section 5.
2 of 1974.
37 of 1952.

46
5. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“6. Any person who contravenes the provisions of
section 3 or section 4 shall be punishable on first conviction
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years and also with fine not less than fifty
thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees;
and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction with
imprisonment for a term of not less than two years but which
may extend to seven years and also with a fine not less than
one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.”.
6. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to,
and not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in
force.
12. The officers authorised under section 5 shall be
deemed, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any
of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.”.
Substitution of
new section
for section 6.
Penalty.
Insertion of
new sections
11 and 12.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
45 of 1860.
Officers to be
public
servants.

47
47
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986
(the Act) was enacted to prohibit indecent representation of women
through advertisements or in publications, writings, paintings,
figures or in any other manner. However, the Act in its present form
relates primarily to the print media. Since the enactment of the Act,
technological revolution has resulted in development of new forms
of communication, such as, internet and satellite based
communication, multi-media messaging, cable television, etc. It has,
thus, become necessary to widen the scope of the Act so as to
cover the above forms of media. Further, considering that the
National Crimes Records Bureau recorded a total number of 845,
895 and 453 cases of violation of the provisions of the Act in the
years 2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively, for the law to be more
effective, stringent punishment which acts as deterrent also
becomes essential. It is also felt that the power to enter any
premises and conduct search and seizure of any material, if there is
reason to believe that an offence under the Act has been committed,
should be made more effective and the officers conducting such
searches are given sufficient protection while carrying out their
duties under the Act.
2. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Indecent
Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 to ensure more
effective protection to women against their indecent representation.
The Bill, inter alia, provides to—
(a) define the “indecent represenation of women” to
mean the depiction of the figure or form or body or any part
thereof, of a woman in such a way as to have the effect of
being indecent or derogatory to or denigrating women or is
likely to deprave, corrupt or injure public morality;
(b) amend the definitions of “advertisement” and
“distribution” and also to define “electronic form”, “material”
and “publish”;
(c) prohibit the publication or distribution of any
material, by any means, which contains indecent representation
of women in any form;
(d) increase the maximum imprisonment from two
years to three years and fine from two thousand rupees to a
fine of not less than fifty thousand rupees which may be
extended to one lakh rupees for first offence; and increase the
minimum imprisonment for second or subsequent offence
from six months to two years and maximum imprisonment

48
from five years to seven years and minimum fine from ten
thousand rupees to one lakh rupees and maximum fine from
one lakh rupees to five lakh rupees;
(e) amend section 5 of the Act so as to authorise any
police officer not below the rank of Inspector to make
investigation of offences under the Act.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; KRISHNA TIRATH
The 30th November, 2012.

49
49
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE I NDECENT R EPRESENTATION OF W OMEN
(PROHIBITION) A CT, 1986
(60 OF 1986)
**** *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “advertisement” includes any notice, circular, label,
wrapper or other document and also includes any visible
representation made by means of any light, sound, smoke or
gas;
(b) “distribution” includes distribution by way of
samples whether free or otherwise;
(c) “indecent representation of women” means the
depiction in any manner of the figure of a woman, her form
or body or any part thereof in such a way as to have the
effect of being indecent, or derogatory to, or denigrating,
women, or is likely to deprave, corrupt or injure the public
morality or morals;
**** *
4. No person shall produce or cause to be produced, sell, let
to hire, distribute, circulate or send by post any book, pamphlet,
paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph,
representation or figure which contains indecent representation of
women in any form:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to—
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing,
drawing, painting, photograph, representation or figure—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be
justified as being for the public good on the ground that
such book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing,
painting, photograph, representation or figure is in the
interest of science, literature, art, or learning or other
objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious
purposes;
Definitions.
Prohibition
of publication
or sending by
post of
books,
pamphlets,
etc.,
containing
indecent
representation
of women.

50
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or
otherwise represented on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of
the Ancient Monument and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958; or
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the
conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any religious
purpose;
(c) any film in respect of which the provisions of
Part II of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 will be applicable.
5. (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, any
Gazetted Officer authorised by the State Government may, within
the local limits of the area for which he is so authorised,—
**** *
(b) seize any advertisement or any book, pamphlet,
paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph,
representation or figure which he has reason to believe
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act;
**** *
6. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 or
section 4 shall be punishable on first conviction with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and in the
event of a second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment for
a term of not less than six months but which may extend to five
years and also with a fine not less than ten thousand rupees but
which may extend to one lakh rupees.
**** *
Powers to
enter and
search.
24 of 1958.
37 of 1952.
Penalty.

51
51
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986.
[Shrimati Krishna Tirath, Minister of State (Independent Charge) in the Ministry of
Women and Child Development]

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.