125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED – TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2002-
2003 (DEMAND NO. 42) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   10TH     APRIL, 2003)
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 10TH    APRIL, 2003)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2003/VAISAKHA, 1925 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                 
PREFACE                                                                                                            
REPORT        
   CHAPTER I  Recommendations/Observations which have been  accepted by the Government
              CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
                                     Government’s replies
              CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been                                 
 accepted by the Committee
  CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final replies of the Government are still
awaited
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  AT A GLANCE                                             
MINUTES                                                                                                                                                      
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2003)
Shri Arjun Singh           ¾        Chairman

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
 
MEMBERS
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Dr. Abrar Ahmed        
Dr. Akhilesh Das
Shri B.P. Apte 
Shri Bachani Lekhraj
Shri Eduardo Faleiro 
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
Shri Lalhmingliana
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi
Shri R. Sarath Kumar
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Shri Mrinal Sen
Smt. Vanga Geetha
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri Ambareesha
Shri Ramakant Angle
Shri Kirti Jha Azad
Shri G. S. Basavaraj
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria
Prof. Kailasho Devi
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
Shri R.L. Jalappa
Shri Baliram Kashyap
Shri Brij Lal Khabri
Shri Samik Lahiri
Shri Y.G. Mahajan
Shri  G.Mallikarjunappa
Dr. Manda Jagannath
Smt. Nivedita Mane
Shrimati Jas Kaur Meena
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* ceased to be member w.e.f 29
th   January, 2003.
(i)
 
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik
Smt. Renu Kumari
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao
Shri Sunil Dutt
Shri Ramsheth Thakur
Dr. N. Venkataswamy

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
Smt. Ganti Vijaykumari
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
Vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this
Hundred  Twenty Fifth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the 116
th 
Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No.42) of the Department of Health,  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
for the year 2002-2003.
 
2.         The Hundred  Sixteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30
th April, 2002.  Replies
of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Health, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 8
th January, 2003. 
 
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
7th April, 2003.
 
NEW DELHI
April  7, 2003 
Chaitra  17,  1925 (Saka)        
ARJUN SINGH
Chairman
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development
REPORT
 
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in its One Hundred-Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No.42) of the Department of Health, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare for the year 2002-2003.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations
contained in the Report.  They have been categorized as follows:-
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:      2.2, 3.6, 4.2, 4.4,5.3,6.6, 7.4, 
8.2, 8.3, 9.2, 9.3, 11.2, 11.3, 12.3, 12.4, 12.9, 13.2, 15.5, 16.4, 17.2, 17.5, 18.4, 18.6, 20.5, 22.3, 23.3, 24.2, 24.3, 24.8. 
(Chapter I) Total-29
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies: 6.2, 6.3to6.5, 14.3, 15.6, 17.6, 18.9, 19.3 and 24.10 
(Chapter II)  Total-8
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee: 3.4, 4.6, 10.2,15.2,15.3,18.2 18.3 and 21.
 (Chapter-III)  Total- 8                                                                                        
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited–  3.3, 3.8
and 12.5                                         
(Chapter – IV) Total- 3

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
 
The final replies in respect of the recommendations/observations made in Chapter IV of the Report are still awaited
from the Department.  The Committee may be apprised of the same as and when action is taken.
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
 2.2    The Committee is, however, not fully inclined to agree with the explanation given by the Department. The
Committee observes that the trend of under-utilization has continued during the Ninth Plan due to variety of reasons like
non-setting up of required infrastructure for implementation of various disease control programmes, non-release of
funds due to unspent balances lying with the implementing agencies, slow performance of district societies, less number
of proposals from NGOs, non-completion of required formalities etc.  During 2001-02, Plan allocation of Rs.1450.00
crores was reduced to Rs.1320.00 crores at the RE Stage, and anticipated expenditure at the end of the year is
Rs.1300.00 crores. The Committee hopes that all procedural formalities under ongoing and proposed
Programmes/Projects during Tenth Plan has been completed so that optimum and judicious utilization of allocated funds
is ensured right from 2002-03, the first year of Tenth Plan
ACTION TAKEN
The Committee’s observation regarding completion of all procedural formalities to ensure optimum utilization of 10
th
Plan funds right from 2002-03, the first year of the Tenth Plan, has been noted. All procedural formalities to the extent
feasible have been completed for various disease control programmes. For example, under National Tuberculosis
Control Programme, the State/District health authorities have been asked to complete the required procedural formalities
well in time, guidelines for NGOs have been finalised and widely circulated to ensure their effective involvement in the
Revised TB Control Programme and the financial ownership of the programme has been decentralised to the State level.
For National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP), all procedural formalities under the 2
nd NLEP have already been
completed. Under National Blindness Control Programme, EFC memo has been prepared and pending approval of EFC
memo, concurrence of the Finance Division has been sought to implement the programme as per the approved scheme
of the Ninth Five Year Plan so that the activities do not come to a halt. Under National Anti-Malaria Programme, some
of the States have constituted State Malaria Control Society and others are being persuaded to expedite formation of
such societies. In so far as National AIDS Control Project is concerned, the formalities for setting up the required
infrastructure for  implementation of the programme  have been completed and implementation of the programme is
proceeding smoothly.
Recommendation/Observation
3.6       It has been observed that the Medical and para-medical staff of CGHS dispensaries are not always responsive
and sensitive towards patients. Not only this, element of punctuality is generally lacking in majority of the CGHS
dispensaries. Instances have come to the notice of the Committee where medical/paramedical staff posted at a
dispensary remain absent from duty by having an internal adjustment with their colleagues. The Committee is of the
view that in addition to regular inspections, surprise inspections will bring out the ground reality. The Committee
welcomes the decision regarding formulation of guidelines for at least one inspection of each CGHS dispensary in the
country. The Committee hopes that these guidelines as and when formulated and implemented will help in the
improvement of functioning of CGHS dispensaries.
 
Action Taken
3.6       Instructions have already been issued vide letter No.H-11021/1/2001-CGHS/Desk-I dated 12/4/2002 along with
a detailed proforma covering all aspects of the CGHS dispensary services to all the CGHS units for conducting regular
inspections and surprise inspections of the CGHS dispensaries.
SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL
Recommendation/Observation
4.2       The Committee notes that the required faculty and infrastructure is being made available for the Vardhaman
Mahavir Medical College (VMMC). As the first session of the new college has already commenced, the Committee

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
urges upon the Department to make concerted efforts to make the college fully functional at the earliest so that the
students are not put to any problem.
Action Taken
Concerted efforts are being made to make the College fully functional. The infrastructure is being made available for the
Vardhaman Mahavir Medical College in Safdarjung Hospital itself. The facilities for teaching Pre-clinical subjects have
been developed. The requisite number of posts of the staff for the college have been created with the approval of
Ministry of Finance. The teaching faculty for the first session has already been recruited. The equipment for teaching
paramedical subjects are in process of procurement.
SAFDARJUNG  HOSPITAL
Recommendation/Observation
4.4       The Committee is of the view that procedural formalities should be expedited so that the 22 posts recommended
by the Screening Committee are filled at the earliest. Besides that, ongoing comprehensive review of various vacant
posts/likely to fall vacant by the Medical Supdt. Should not be unduly delayed in procedural wrangles. The Department
should also impress upon the Ministry of Finance the urgency for filling up the required posts of Safdarjung Hospital
which is the biggest Hospital in the Capital catering to the needs of not only local patients but also from the
neighbouring States.
Action Taken
4.4       After following due procedures, 22 posts have been advertised in the Employment News on 15.6.2002 and
29.6.2002. The last date of submission of applications is 29.7.2002. The applications are being received and the posts
are likely to be filled up by the end of September, 2002. Necessary steps have been initiated to fill up the remaining
vacant posts according to the rules/guidelines issued by DOPT/Ministry of Finance from time to time.
DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL
Recommendation/Observation
5.3       The Committee is happy to note that some progress has been made in this regard during 2001-02 and finally the
project has started taking shape.  However, the Committee is of the opinion that given the increase in number of road
accidents every year in Delhi and also considerable time taken in getting the EFC proposal, the Department should make
concerted efforts to get the Trauma Centre established within the fixed time frame i.e. upto 31.3.2004.
Action Taken
5.3        The drawings of the proposed Expansion and Upgradation of Emergency Services for Dr. RML Hospital, New
Delhi have been cleared by the Delhi Urban Arts Commission and have been sent to NDMC for their approval. On
receipt of the approval of NDMC, work will be started immediately by the CPWD. It is likely to take (at least) 18
months time for completion of the work by the CPWD once the construction starts.
CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, RANCHI
Recommendation/Observation
6.6       The Committee strongly feels that the position is very bad in CIP, Ranchi. Creation of required posts apart, even
sanctioned posts are not filled up. Out of 19 teaching posts of Associate/Assistant/Professor, only 6 are filled up.
Similarly, out of 24 non-teaching posts, only 9 are in position. The Committee is of the view that drastic steps need to be
taken by all the concerned authorities so that the Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi can provide the services in the
area of mental health care which is very much required in the present scenario.
Action Taken
6.6       The Directorate General of Health Services and the Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi have been advised to
take immediate urgent necessary action for filling up all vacant posts, including the 21 newly revived scientific posts.
Action has been initiated to fill up these posts.
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)
Recommendation/Observation
7.4       The Committee has been informed that the proposal for setting up of an Apex Centre for Trauma Care at AIIMS
has been approved at an estimated cost of Rs.54.14 crores. The Centre would be/ multi-disciplinary, which apart from
providing holistic Trauma Care Services would also be used as a role model for other Trauma Centres in terms of
conceptualization, project formulation and operation. The Construction work entrusted to HSCC, New Delhi has started
in the month of January, 2002 and is expected to be completed by January,2003. The Committee is happy to note that
the work of establishing Trauma Centre at AIIMS has finally begun and hopes that it would be completed by the target
date.
Action Taken
7.4       The work at Apex Centre for Trauma Care at AIIMS was started in the month of January, 2002 and is in

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
progress. The work is expected to be completed in 18 month’s time.
POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH
Recommendation/Observation
8.2       The Committee takes a very serious view of the fact that many of the construction activities in PGI could not get
administrative approval only because the Standing Committee could not meet. There was a gap of almost one year
between CCEA approval in July, 2000 and dissolution of Standing Committee in July, 2001. The Committee feels that
public health of this country cannot be held hostage to such procedural formalities. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should make all efforts so that in future such things are not repeated.
Action Taken
8.2       During the 9
th Plan period the continuing schemes of 8th Plan namely, new emergency block and new OPD
Block have been completed and are functioning normally. The building of National Institute of Nursing Education is
complete.
The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) meeting under the chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of
Finance was held on 28
th April 2000 to consider the proposal for augmentation/modernization of some medical facilities
at PGIMER, Chandigarh. The EFC recommended the following projects with the total financial outlay of Rs.121.96
crores:-
Advanced Paediatric Centre Phase-II
Advanced Cardiac Centre
Advanced Eye Centre
Advanced Trauma Centre
Bone Marrow Transplant Centre
Recommendation/Observation
8.3       The Committee is not inclined to agree with the contention of the Department. During 2001-02, construction
activities on many new projects could not be started for want of administrative approval although required funds were
allocated at the beginning of the year. In 2002-03, administrative approval is there, but funds have not been allocated. In
such a scenario, it is very unlikely that new projects will be started. The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that
required funds for these projects should be allocated during 2002-03 itself and utilisation thereof should be closely
monitored both by the Institute and the Department.
Action Taken
8.3       The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has approved in its meeting held on 11
th July 2000 the
five projects at PGIMER, Chandigarh at an estimated cost of Rs.12196.45 lakhs. The projects included in the proposal
were to be completed within three years, i.e. by 2003. Details of the projects included in EFC memo are as under:-
                                                                              (Rs. in Lakhs)
1.  Advanced Pediatric Centre Phase-II                   3305.60
2.  Advanced Cardiac Centre                                   4642.76 
3.   Advanced Eye Centre                                        1600.94      
4.    Advanced Trauma Centre                                 2237.15
5.    Bone Marrow Transplant Centre                        410.00
                               Total:                           12196.45
The work of Advanced Pediatric Centre and Bone Marrow Transplant Centre are nearly complete. Tenders for
Advanced Eye Centre and Advanced Cardiac Centre have been allotted to Omaxe Construction Co. and the construction
work is in progress. Detailed Notice Inviting Tenders of Trauma Centre has been approved.
The Institute has constituted a Committee under the chairmanship of Director, PGIMER, Chandigarh to monitor the
progress of all projects and work out time schedule for completion of the projects. The utilization of funds is being
monitored by the Institute as well as by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT
The Department has further informed that in respect of :
(a) Advanced Paediatric Centre Phase II
            The building in Phase II is complete and functional.   The air-conditioning work is under execution and shall be
completed by March, 2003.
(b) Advanced Cardiac Centre
            Foundation work of all the blocks have been completed.   20% civil cork has been completed and construction of
the building is in progress.  It  is likely to be completed by March, 2004.

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
(c ) Advanced Eye Centre
            The construction work of the Centre is in progress and overall 40%  of civil work stands executed.   Roof slabs
into 3rd Storey of the building have been laid.   The project is likely to be completed  by December, 2003.
(d) Advanced Trauma Centre
            The tender for construction of the Centre has been approved by the Standing Finance Committee of the Institute
in its meeting held on 28.9.2002.   80% of the work of dismantling of night shelter/garage where the  Centre is to be
constructed is complete.    The Advance Trauma Centre is likely to be completed by December, 2004.
 (e) Bone Marrow Transplant Centre
            The  construction work for the Centre is  complete.   The air-conditioning work is to be completed by December,
2002.   The building is ready for occupation.   However, certain items of equipments/ furniture are being procured by
the concerned department.
Lady hardinge medical college and smt. Sucheta kriplani hospital.
Recommendation/Observation
9.2       The Committee notes that an expenditure of Rs.6.50 crores has been incurred upto 18.3.02. Besides that, an
additional requirement of about Rs.3.30 crores has been proposed in Final Estimates by the College in respect of their
pending bills. The Committee is constrained to note accumulation of pending bills amounting to Rs.3.30 crores in the
last quarter of the financial year, which is not a healthy trend.  The Committee,  therefore, recommends that necessary
action should be taken so that such a situation is not repeated again. The Committee hopes that the Medical College and
Hospital will be able to fully utilize Rs.8.20 crores provided for year 2002-03.
Action Taken
After the construction of JICA building in March,2000, there was an increase in the electricity and water supply bill.
However, the provision in the Budget Estimates and the Revised Estimates was not increased proportionately to meet
this expenditure. The Institute receives monthly electricity bill approximately of Rs.35.00 lakhs to Rs.40.00 lakhs.
Besides, they had to make the payment for property tax to the tune of Rs.45.00 lakhs to NDMC who were pressing hard
for making this payment. Therefore, an additional amount was requested at the final estimates stage to make this
payment, which was apparently not on account of purchase of any item. However, the Institute has been advised to take
necessary action so that such a situation is not repeated.
Recommendation/Observation
9.3       The Committee finds that quite a few vacancies are there in the Medical College and Hospital both in the
teaching and non-teaching staff. The Committee urges upon the Department to take necessary steps in this regard at the
earliest.
Action Taken
9.3       The Institute has been requested to approach all concerned for filling up their vacant posts relating to teaching
and non-teaching staff at the earliest.
Further Comments Of The Department
Giving the latest position in the matter, the Department has informed that the Non-Teaching posts in Lady Harding
Medical College, New Delhi are filled up at present.  As regards Teaching posts in the colleges, out of 154 posts in
different specialties, only13 are vacant at present.    In order to fill up these posts requisitions have been sent/are being
sent to UPSC and in some cases the recommendations received from UPSC are under process.
NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
11.2     Assistance to Regional Cancer Centres is one of the schemes under the Programme under which 19 Regional
Cancer Centres in different States have been recognized so far. Last year, the Committee had observed that there was
need for expansion of this scheme, specially in North East Region where only one Regional Cancer Centre in Assam
was recognized. The Committee is happy to note that as a result of NE states being approached in the matter, a proposal
from Mizoram has been received which is under process. The Committee hopes that as a result of endeavours of the
Department, States not covered so far would come forward.
Action Taken
11.2     The proposal for Regional Cancer Centre in Mizoram is at present pending with State Government of Mizoram.
This issue is being vigorously pursued with Mizoram as also with other North-Eastern States including Sikkim.
Recommendation/Observation
11.3     Committee’s attention has been drawn towards another scheme, i.e. District Cancer Control Scheme under which
one time financial assistance of Rs.15.00 lakhs is provided to the concerned State Governments for each district project

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
with a provision of Rs.10.00 lakhs every year for the remaining four years of the project period. Thereafter, the district
project is taken over by the State. As per the information made available to the Committee, about 20 States have been
released funds during the period from 1990-2002. However, only Panchmahal district of Gujarat has been granted three
Grants-1st in 1990-91, 2nd in 1993-94 and 3rd in 1996-97.  Besides that, only three more districts of Gujarat have been
released financial grants twice but not as per the prescribed guidelines. Districts of 19 States have been released funds
only once. Lack of utilization of earlier grants has been given as the main reason for such a dismal situation. The
Committee observes that more than ten years have passed since the beginning of the Scheme and funds are simply being
released without any effort being made for ascertaining the reasons for total lack of interest on the part of State Govts.
The Committee is of the view that drastic steps need to be taken for reviewing the Scheme for its proper
implementation.
Action Taken
The task of evaluation of various schemes under the National Cancer Control Programme has been entrusted to the
National Institute of Health & Family Welfare (NIHFW). The final report of the evaluation is expected to be received
by 15
th November, 2002 after which corrective steps (as necessary) would be initiated.
Further Comments Of The Department:
The Department has also informed that  the National Institute of Health and Family Welfare, Munirka, New Delhi who
had  evaluated the National Cancer Control Programme have since submitted the final report.   It is being examined in
the Department of Health.
NATIONAL MALARIA ERADICATION PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
12.3     The Committee observes that during the Ninth Plan, funds allocated for this programme have invariably
remained under-utilized. During 2000-01, BE allocation of Rs.255.00 crores had to be reduced to Rs.194.00 crores at
the RE stage and actual expenditure incurred was Rs.188.32 crores. Although allocation of Rs.168.00 crores in BE
2001-02 was enhanced to Rs.173.00 crores at RE stage, expenditure reported upto February, 2002 is only Rs.116.92
crores. Seeing the trend in earlier years, the Committee is not inclined to believe the Department’s contention that the
balance amount will be utilized during the remaining part of the financial year.
Action Taken
12.3     The year-wise budget allocation and expenditure during Ninth Five Year Plan for National Anti Malaria
Programme (NAMP) is given below:                                                                         
(Rs. in Crores)
                      YEAR                                        BE                                EXPENDITURE
                     1997-98                                      200.00                              142.50
                     1998-99                                      297.00                              163.93
                     1999-2000                                  250.00                              176.62
                     2000-01                                      255.00                              192.29
                     2001-02                                      225.00                              221.70
It is evident from the above that the utilization of funds has improved significantly towards the later years of the Plan
period and 87.09% Plan allocation was actually utilized in spite of delay in setting up procedures as per requirements of
World Bank funded projects. The reasons of the under-utilization, as mentioned by the Committee, have been taken care
of by identification of procurement agencies, formation of State Malaria/Health Societies to ensure optimal utilization of
available resources.  Some of the States have already constituted such societies and others are also being pursued to
expedite formation of such societies.    
Recommendation/Observation
12.4     World Bank assisted Enhanced Malaria Control Project (EMCP) is operative from 30
th September, 1997 for a
period of five years in 100 districts in eight state of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Chhatisgarh,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Orissa. The Committee observes that utilization position of funds under this Programme is
very poor as all the District Malaria Control Societies are having varying amount of unspent balance with them as on
30.4.2001.  Low utilization of funds during the first year of the Project, non-appointment of Malaria-Link Volunteers
(MLVs) and shortage of staff with the Core Project States have been cited as the main reasons for this position.
Action Taken
To ensure optimal utilization of funds released to District Malaria Control Societies, it has been decided to route the
funds through State Health Society in each of the EMCP State which will closely monitor the timely utilization by the
District Societies. Such State level Societies have been constituted.

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
Recommendation/Observation
12.9     The Committee takes a serious note of this dismal position about  insecticidal  spray.  The Committee strongly
feels that drastic measures need to be taken both by the Centre and concerned State Govt. specially in view of malaria
cases occurring in almost all the States, figures regarding declining trend notwithstanding. The Committee is
constrained to observe that only eight States of Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgarh,
Orissa, Gujarat, Maharashtra, covered by World Bank assisted Enhanced Malaria Control Project and Himachal Pradesh
and Mizoram have constituted State Health Malaria Control Societies. Remaining States are yet to follow suit. The
Committee enjoins upon the Department to vigorously pursue with the defaulter States.
 
Action Taken
12.9     The reasons for shortfall in insecticide spray coverage has been duly noted by the Committee vide para 12.8. In
addition to the States mentioned by the Committee, the Bihar State has also constituted the State Level Society. The
issues mentioned by the Committee vide para 12.6 to 12.9 are being vigorously pursued.
Further Comments Of The Department
            In reply to a question as to the manner in which  the Department plans to increase the coverage of  insecticidal 
spray, it  replied that for effective control of malaria by using limited resources, stratification of areas are done as to
prioritize the areas.  Further, for 100 districts covered under Enhanced Malaria Control Project (PMCP) in 8 States
namely, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan, the
operational cost for all insecticides is being provided through EMCP.  The Central Assistance (100%) to North Eastern
States includes operational cost for spraying.   Other measures for vector control such as use of larvivorous fish are also
being promoted.
KALA-AZAR CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
13.2     Although decling trend in the incidence and deaths in the country has been reported, figures regarding Bihar are
a cause of concern:-
               Year                      Cases                  Death
               2000                        12909                   130
               2001 (upto Nov.)       9032                   178
The Committee notes that until 2000-01, the Programme was operative on cost-sharing basis between Centre and States.
From the year 2001-02 it has been decided in principle with concurrence of Planning Commission to provide
operational cost including wages for insecticide spray to Kala-azar endemic States. The Committee hopes that with the
beginning of the Tenth Plan, things will improve in Bihar. The Committee, however, is of the opinion that mere
provision of enhanced Central assistance will not be sufficient. What is required is intensive monitoring in co-ordination
with the State Govts. of Bihar and West Bengal.
Action Taken
To strengthen implementation of Kala-Azar Control Programme, an increase in the budget allocation has been made to
provide the operational cost including wages for insecticidal spray by the Government of India to Kala-azar endemic
States. The States have been advised to constitute State level societies for overall planning, monitoring, supervision and
funds utilization. Bihar State has already constituted such society and Jharkhand has proposed to include Kala-azar as a
part of the responsibilities of the State malaria Society. West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh are also being pursued to
expedite the constitution of such societies. A Government of India representative, (Regional Director, Regional Office
for Health & Family Welfare, Govt. of India) is also a member in these committees. This will facilitate a close
monitoring by periodic visits by the Central Government Officers besides regular reports and returns. High level
reviews are also being undertaken at the level of DGHS, Secretary(H) and Union Minister for Health & Family Welfare
and the latest review was done by Hon’ble Union Minister for H&FW on 26.4.2002 at Patna with Hon’ble Ministers of
the Govt. of Bihar (Deptt. of Health) besides all Senior level officers from Government of Bihar and Govt. of India.
 
 
NATIONAL T.B.  CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
15.5     The Committee has been given to understand that District Magistrates/DDOs who are Chairpersons of the
District TB Society have been sensitized to RNTCP through special regional workshops. Local public representatives
have also been involved in a big way during World TB day and while inaugurating new Microscopy Centres. The
Committee would like to emphasize that participation of Public Representatives in formal functions will not achieve the

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
desired results. What is required is an exercise to obtain the feedback from the local Public Representative regarding the
various ongoing activities of the Programme in their areas. Besides that, there is need for having random
surveys/surprise inspections by Central teams. Last year the Committee had desired that the Department should take
action for evolving a more effective monitoring mechanism. The Committee strongly feels that mere taking note of the
advice regarding random surveys/surprise inspections does not serve any purpose. The Department has to take initiative
in this direction without any delay
Action Taken
15.5     The performance of the Programme is rigorously monitored through various means – scrutiny of quarterly
performance reports submitted by the Project Districts, feedback from Consultants appointed in field areas with World
Health Organization assistance, regular reviews with DTO, in the States. Surprise inspections by Central team will be
conducted every month henceforth, internal evaluation and evaluation by the independent bodies such as World Bank
missions and World Health Organizations experts are also done. A meeting has been held recently with the Members of
Parliament. The feedback information pertaining to National TB Control Programme in general and specific information
related to their constituency has been sent to them.  Letters are being written to all MPs. The reports submitted by the
Project districts are minutely analysed and feed-back given to the districts/State Health authorities for corrective actions.
The observations of the officers during their visits to the field are recorded and sent to the concerned authorities for
necessary actions. Follow up actions are also strenuously monitored.
NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
16.4     While appreciating the achievement level under the National Leprosy Eradication Programme, the Committee
observes that 60% of globally recorded patients are in the country. States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Chattisgarh, UP, Orissa,
West Bengal, and MP contribute 64% of the Country’s case load, out of which Bihar alone contributes 24% of the
country’s case load. The Committee observes that there is no dearth of funds under the Programme and a large number
of NGOs are also involved with quite a few reported to be doing good work. Special focus under 2
nd Phase of World
Bank Assisted Project is also there on the eight high endemic States. The Committee, however, feels that Bihar being
the most affected State, there is a special need for extensive monitoring of implementation of all the components of the
Project in Bihar. The Committee is of the view that all efforts should be made to provide training in leprosy services to
all General Health Services Staff, specially in the most affected districts of the State. Campaigns for enhancing public
awareness about the disease would also contribute a lot.
Action Taken
16.4     For regular monitoring of the programme in the State, a State Coordinator (NLEP) and three Zonal Coordinators
(NLEP) have been provided with World Health Organization assistance and 35 District Technical Support Teams
(DTSTs) with ILEP support. Besides Monthly Progress Reports sent by the State/Districts to Government of India, with
due feedback in-depth review of districts is undertaken during State Level meetings in which Government of India,
State Authorities and Non-governmental Organizations also participate. The quarterly review of programme
implementation with State/ Districts authoritities and abovementioned Coordinators and District Technical Support
Teams (DTSTs) have also been initiated.
During the three Modified Leprosy Elimination Campaigns (MLECs) held in the State, so far, almost all General Health
Care Staff have been trained in Leprosy. Creating public awareness through Mass Media, Rural and Local educational
efforts through Group Activities and Interpersonal Communications for one month is given special emphasis during the
MLEC, besides continued IEC activities throughout the year.
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
Recommendation/Observation
 17.2    The Committee has been informed that special schemes are being evolved for improvement of coverage in tribal
areas whereby services of eye surgeons, nurses etc. would be tried out on a contract basis. There is also a proposal for
evolving a scheme for implementation of the Programme in pre-dominantly tribal districts through a multi-sector
approach. The Committee recommends that all these proposals should be activated at the earliest so that remote and
tribal areas do not remain deprived of the benefits of National Programme for Control of Blindness.
Action Taken
17.2     Steps taken to increase coverage of eye care services in remote including tribal areas include:
Additional Grant-in-aid of R.50 per cataract surgery (over and above Rs.400 per conventional surgery and Rs.600 per
Intra Ocular Lens implantation) in notified tribal and backward areas;
Non-recurring Grant-in-aid upto Rs.17.75 lakhs to NGOs for setting up or expansion of existing eye care facility in rural

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
including tribal areas. 32 NGOs have been assisted so far under the scheme;
Preparation of village-wise blind registers to identify backlog of persons suffering from cataract and other treatable
causes of blindness, andOrganization of special campaigns and health melas through intensive involvement of
Panchayat grass-root NGOs and local community.
Scheme for engagement of eye surgeons, opthalmic assistants and nurses for underserved areas would be framed in
consultation with the States.
Further Comments of the Department:
The Department has further given information about the steps taken for effective implementation of various schemes
under National Programme for Control of Blindness to increase coverage in remote and tribal areas as follows:-
Village blind registry to identify backlog of untreated cases blind due to cataract and other curable eye diseases;
Organizing screening eye camps in remote including tribal areas with the assistance of voluntary organizations,
panchayats  and primary health centers;
Additional Grant-in-aid of Rs. 50 per cataract  surgery (in addition to Rs. 400 for conventional and Rs. 600 for IOL
surgery)  to voluntary organizations working in remote and tribal areas;
Non-recurring Grant-in-aid up to Rs. 17.75 lakh to voluntary organizations for  strengthening eye care facilities.  For
this purpose, it has been decided to publish an advertisement in leading newspapers of the country in various languages
seeking proposals for financial assistance from qualified voluntary organizations for strengthening eye care facilities for
remote and tribal populations. 
 
Recommendation/Observation
17.5     The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should closely monitor the implementation of
different components of the National Programme for Control of Blindness in States where achievement level
continues to be very low. Every effort should be made to ascertain the inherent constraints being faced by the
implementing agencies.
Action Taken
17.5     The performance of cataract surgery has been low in Bihar, Jharkhand, Assam and other NE States. Following
actions have been taken to enhance the performance in these states:
In depth review of implementation in Assam and other NE States at Agartala in September, 2002 to identify constraints
and take remedial action;
 Review of all National Health Programmes including National Programme for Control of Blindness in Bihar by the
Union Health Minister in April, 2002;
Follow up review and training of District Programme Managers of NE States  was  organized at Aizwal from 20
th to
25th May, 2002;
Constitution of State Blindness Control Societies to strengthen monitoring and regulate flow of funds. Bihar, Jharkhand
and most of the NE States have already constituted the Society.
NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
18.4     The Committee notes the efforts made by the Department in expanding the base NGOs and recommends that the
Department should take up this issue with other States where NGO activity is not there.
Action Taken
18.4     The point made by the Committee has been noted. NACO is making all out efforts to encourage more NGOs to
take up Targeted Intervention Projects in States like Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir etc. where there are comparatively less
number of Targeted Interventions Projects. The situation is reviewed regularly during meetings with the Project
Directors. It is expected that the number of Targeted Interventions Projects would grow at a steady rate in the low-
performing States also.
Recommendation/Observation
18.6     The Committee is constrained to note that there is a very wide gap between target population covered and
population actually attended the camps.  The Committee feels that this low achievement level is a clear indication that
there was a lack of awareness amongst people about the Family Health Awareness Campaign (FHAC).  The Committee,
therefore, recommends that very extensive publicity drive should precede the launching of such Family Health
Awareness Campaigns. Only then maximum coverage would be there.
Action Taken
18.6     Before organizing Family Health Awareness Camps in villages, two rounds of house-to-house visits were made

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
by the area health workers in every village in order to interact with the target population in the age group between 15-49
years about the modes of transmission of Sexually Transmitted Infections including HIV/AIDS, and the ways and
means to prevent such infections. Other IEC activities like wall writing, display of posters, and ‘milking’ in the area
were also done to inform the people about the campaign as well as the place of camps. Despite these efforts, the
attendance in the camps during the last round of FHAC (April-June, 2001) was reported to be 21.22%. The main
reasons for low turnout of the target population in the campaign was social stigma attached with and low felt need of the
community about sexually transmitted infections.  Efforts would be made in future rounds to make vigorous publicity
drives before launching of Family Health Awareness Campaign in order to achieve maximum coverage. Besides, the
services in the camps would be made more broad based in order to include some of the local health problems faced by
the community
PREVENTION OF FOOD ADULTERATION PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
20.5     From the feedback given by the Department, the Committee is left with no alternative but to believe that the
situation is indeed very grim so far as implementation of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act is concerned. It seems
that with the load of so many Disease Control Programmes, this aspect of health management is not getting the
due impetus from any State in the country. The Committee is therefore, of the view that drastic measures are required to
be taken. The Committee recommends that an overall review of Prevention of Food Adulteration Programme with
special focus on status of State laboratories, requirement of more labs and necessary staff therefore should be initiated
without any further delay.
Action Taken
20.5     The Department agrees with the conclusion drawn by the Committee on the administration of Prevention of
Food Adulteration Programme and has noted the recommendations of the Committee. A special effort is being made to
improve the functioning of the State Laboratories. Equipments are now being supplied to State Labs instead of funds
being given to States. The State Labs are being audited and new training programmes initiated. Capacity Building
Project has been posed to the World Bank for assistance which will provide further facilities to the State Laboratories.
World Bank has approved in principle. EFC Memorandum has been circulated. All the three new States will also get
new Labs.
As noted in the report of the Committee, the State Governments are also being advised to improve enforcement of the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act. A meeting of State Food Health Authorities was held in October 2001 to discuss
all these aspects. A presentation was also made to the Health Ministers in the 7
th meeting of the Central Council of
Health & Family Welfare held in July 2001.  State Governments were addressed on these issues vide letter dated
23.11.2001 and again on 3.5.2002. A meeting is also being called in November this year.
Attention of the States have also been drawn to the comments of the Committee.
DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
22.3     The Committee feels that the silence on the part of State Governments in furnishing the required information is
perhaps due to their inability to fill up the vacant posts.  The Committee views this very seriously and recommends that
the Department should pursue this matter relentlessly with the State Governments.    The Committee notes that there are
no drug testing laboratories in Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Pondicherry, Andaman & Nicobar
Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Uttaranchal, Jharkhand and Chattisgarh.    Drug testing labs in States in
general except for the labs in Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh fall below the required
levels.  The Committee finds that a countrywide auditing of all drug testing laboratories including Government testing
laboratories has been initiated.  The Committee welcomes this initiative and hopes that this will result in proper
assessment of requirements in this vital sector and resultant follow-up action.
Action Taken
22.3     The matter regarding filling up of the vacant posts of Drugs Inspectors has been taken up with the concerned
state authorities. They have been requested to take necessary steps to fill up the vacant posts as on 1.4.02. The matter
would be continued to be pursued as recommended by the Committee.
In so far as Drug Testing Laboratories are concerned most of the states in NE region except Tripura do not have a
laboratory because it is felt that laboratories in these small states shall not be technically viable. In the absence of
laboratory of their own, all these states will take the help of the State Laboratory at Guwahati which is likely to be taken
over by the Central Government in 2-3 months time. We have proposed a Capacity Building Project to the World Bank
under which the three newly created states shall have their own laboratory. One new Central laboratory is also coming

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
up at Chandigarh. This project also purposes to further upgrade State laboratory facilities.  It is felt that with the
strengthening of existing laboratory facilities and setting up of several new laboratories and better training and follow up
of audit there shall be qualitative and quantitative improvement in the testing of drug samples
HOSPITAL WASTE MANAGEMENT
Recommendation/Observation
23.3     On the perusal of the list, the Committee is shocked to find that in respect of the States/UT of Bihar, Manipur
and Rajasthan and Chandigarh no action has been initiated by the State Pollution Control Boards or Pollution Control
Committees against the erring hospitals/nursing homes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this matter should
be taken up with the concerned Ministry without any delay.
Action Taken
The matter has been taken up with Ministry of Environment & Forests and Central Pollution Control Board. The Central
Pollution Control Board has furnished latest report in respect of action initiated against defaulter hospitals in the States
by the State Pollution Control Board/Pollution Control Committees, which is annexed as Annexure -I. The Central
Pollution Control Board has informed that they are regularly asking all the State Pollution Control Boards/Pollution
Control Committees to initiate action against healthcare facilities who are not complying with the provisions of Bio-
Medical Waste Rules and also to submit the action taken report to them. Out of the four State/UTs mentioned in the
observation made by the Committee, so far only Bihar has submitted its report to Central Pollution Control Board. The
Central Pollution Control Board has not received the action taken report from Manipur, Rajasthan and Chandigarh yet.
However, Chandigarh Pollution Control Committee reported that Board has issued 39 authorizations to healthcare
facilities out of 60 healthcare facilities who have applied for authorization under the Bio-Medical Waste Rules.
IMPLEMENTATION OF HEALTH PROGRAMMES IN NORTH EAST SECTOR:
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee observes that Cataract Surgery performance rate is low in all States except Tripura. Assam is
one of the lowest performing States in the country with Cataract Surgery rate as low as 162 operations per lakh
population against the national rate of 400. The performance of Cataract operations in N.E. States in 2000-01 is
given below:
                                                                                    2000-2001            
 State Name                                          Target                          Achievement
Arunachal Pradesh                                            950                               450
Assam                                                  42000                           13598
Manipur                                                            2000                                        796
Meghalaya                                                        2000                                        1011
Mizoram                                                           800                                          554
        2000-2001            
 State Name                                          Target                          Achievement
 
Nagaland                                                          450                                           400
Sikkim                                                            1000                            661
Tripura                                                            7000                                        9218
Action Taken
Targets for cataract operations are based on prevalence rates of blindness as revealed in National Survey carried
out during 1986-89. It is generally perceived by State Programme Officers of NE States that the backlog of
bilateral blind persons has reduced substantially. The incidence of new cataract is also believed to be lower in NE
States due to favourable climatic condition. Rapid Assessment of blindness is scheduled to be undertaken during
the current FY 2002-03 to assess the current prevalence rates. However, performance continues to be very low in
Assam due to various reasons. Efforts will be taken to improve the performance during the Xth Plan.
Recommendation/Observation
24.3   The Committee notes that State Blindness Control Societies have been constituted so far in the States of
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura only. The Committee has been given to understand that eye care
infrastructure is weak in NE region, particularly in Assam. Very few NGOs are located in the region. Number of eye
surgeons is also very inadequate. The Committee feels that in spite of adequate funds being provided, the programme is
not functioning well. Non-setting up/non-functioning of District Blindness Control Societies and lack of NGO
involvement seem to be the two major handicaps. The Committee recommends that the Department should vigorously

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
pursue the implementation of the Programme with all the NE States.
Action Taken
24.3  An in depth review of implementation of the programme in NE States was undertaken in September 2001 at
Agartala and main constraints were identified. Remedial measures have already been initiated including
reorientation training of District Programme Managers recently undertaken at Aizawal in May 2002. The
Department would continue to give special attention to implementation of the programme in NE States.
NATIONAL MALARIA CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
24.8     Only the State of Mizoram is reported to have State Malaria Control Society. The allocation of Rs.45.00 crores
in 2001-02 is reported to be fully uitilized. However, the Committee notes that allocation for 2002-03 is only Rs.28.00
Crores. The Committee apprehends that reason for the drastic cut in allocation of funds may be unspent balances lying
with the State Governments. If that be so, it is a cause of serious concern. The Committee would like to be enlightened
on this aspect.
Action Taken
The cash grants released to North Eastern States were computed on the basis of total allocation for the 9
th Plan period
and also the fund earmarked for North Eastern States by Government of India. In the beginning of the 10th Five Year
Plan the cash grants were recalculated on the basis of actual field
 
requirement, keeping in mind the total spray targets, number of spray squads required etc. which resulted in reduction in
the quantum of total allocation to Rs.28 crores for the year 2002-03. However, as noted by the Committee, the
utilization status in respect of the cash grants released in the previous years is also being monitored closely.
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, RANCHI
Recommendation/Observation
6.2       The exercise of purchasing the required equipments for the Institute has been continuing for a considerable
period of time. The Committee has been informed that the amount of Rs.4.80 crores for purchasing equipments was
sanctioned in  December, 2001.  The Committee is, however, constrained to observe that the formal letter conveying the
approval of the Competent Authority in this regard could be issued only on 19
th February, 2002. It is understood that at
that time the Institute was having an unspent balance of Rs.3,01,76,510 against which some of the equipments out of the
sanctioned equipments could have been purchased during 2001-02 itself. The Committee apprehends that this amount
could not have been utilised for want of completion of procedural formalities.  This becomes clear from the request of
the Institute for increased allocation of Rs.8.30 crores for meeting the expenditure towards purchase of equipments
amounting to Rs.4.80 crores. It seems that the Institute will have to wait up to the RE stage as the allocation of only
Rs.3.50 crores has been made for 2002-03. The Committee is deeply anguished at this state of affairs. The Committee,
strongly recommends that the Department should suitably enhance the allocation of CIP, Ranchi so that these
equipments, which are essential to meet the needs of the patients, can be procured at the earliest.
Action Taken
The delay in issue of the formal approval of the competent authority was due to incorrect information submitted by the
Institute regarding the availability of funds at the disposal of the Institute. The Institute was having only Rs.3.34 crores
(Rs.3.29 crores under Plan and Rs. 0.05 crores under Non-Plan) in the Budget Estimates 2001-02 under the sub-head
Machinery & Equipments. During 2002-03 an amount of Rs.1.07 crores (Rs.1.02 crores under Plan and Rs.0.05 crores
under Non-Plan) has been provided to the Central Institute of Psychiatry under sub-head Machinery & Equipments in
the Budget Estimates 2002-03. Additional requirement of funds under sub-head Machinery & Equipments will be taken
up with Budget Division of the Ministry at the RE Stage.
Recommendation/Observation
The Department has further informed that a proposal for creation/recreation of 41 posts at the Central Institute of
Psychiatry based on the reports of the two Study Groups (one under the Chairmanship of Smt.Sunila Basant, then Joint
Secretary in the Ministry and another Expert Group from NIMHANS, Bangalore) has been under the consideration of
DGHS. Out of these 41 posts, Directorate General recommended for creation of only 24 posts, which are primarily

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
required for augmenting the Institute. It was also indicated by the Ministry that 13 posts could be abolished to find some
savings towards creation of the 24 posts, the expenditure for which after abolition of 13 posts was computed at Rs.38.00
lakhs per annum. The proposal was forwarded to the Department of Expenditure on 17.7.2001, which sought some
additional information in a statement showing cases handled in the last 10 years, posts sanctioned in various grades and
in existence, number of posts now to be created discipline-wise. The said information has been sent to the Department
of Expenditure through the Internal Finance in January, 2002 for their approval and the approval is awaited.
Recommendation/Observation
6.4       The issue  of creation of required posts for CIP, Ranchi started with an IWSU study conducted as early as in 
1997.  Thereafter, another study was conducted by NIMHANS IN 2000.   Final outcome has been that out of the
proposal for creation/recreation of 41 posts, only 24 posts have been recommended for creation by DGHS.
Recommendation/Observation
6.5       On a specific query about the scaling down of number of proposed posts, the Department has clarified that
austerity measures and the ban on creation/revival/filling up of posts led to revision of the proposal. The Committee
expresses its serious reservations on this development. What is more shocking is that as a bargain for creating these 24
posts, the Ministry has wished for abolishing 13 existing posts.
Action Taken
6.3 to 6.5         The 41 posts were proposed for creation/re-creation/re-designation, includes Scientific and non-scientific
posts by abolition of 13 posts. Out of these 41 posts, Directorate General of Health Services recommended for creation
of 24 scientific posts, in the first instance, which are primarily required for functioning of the Institute. The proposal
was taken up as recommended by the Directorate General of Health Services and orders for creation of these 21
scientific posts have been issued vide letter No. Z/15018/20/2000-RD Cell/PH dated 15
th May, 2002. The Central
Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi and the Directorate General of Health Services will be requested to submit the proposal
for creation/re-creation/re-designation of non-scientific posts with justification for further taking up the matter with the
Department of Expenditure.
JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS (JE)
Recommendation/Observation
14.3     The Committee finds it rather surprising that there is no separate budget provision available for Japanese
Encephalitis prevention and control. The Committee strongly feels that States tackling these problems out of their
resources does not make any sense due to their generally poor financial position. The Department must be fully aware
about lack of motivation on the part of most of the States in implementation of health programmes in spite of Central
funding. Diversion of need-based support for outbreak containment out of resources available under NAMP cannot be
considered a sound strategy. What is required is a well-planned programme with separate funding for control of JE.
Action Taken
Though no separate funding has been made for JE in the Xth Plan, the component of JE Control has been
included in the draft EFC Memorandum for formation of Integrated National Vector Borne Disease Control
Programme (NVBDCP) during the Xth Plan period. It envisages supply of insecticides to the JE prone States and
more efficient monitoring and surveillance through linkages with the Disease Surveillance Programme.
NATIONAL T.B.  CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
15.6     The Committee strongly feels that in a country like India which accounts for nearly 1/3
rd of the global TB
burden, where every year there are approximately 2 lakh new TB cases, and where one person dies from TB every
minute and more than 5 lakhs every year, all the inherent flaws in the Programme at all levels need to be eliminated at
the earliest.
Action Taken
15.6     Revised National TB Control Programme was launched in the country to cover a population of 271 million by
2002 in a phased manner. As of now about 460 million population is covered under RNTPC. It is now envisaged to
cover 800 million population by 2004 and the entire  country by 2005. This programme has already achieved cure rate
of more than 80% which is more than double achieved earlier. Strict monitoring is being done so that weaknesses and
deficiencies are rectified. Wherever required, infrastructural support has been provided to States and Districts.
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
Recommendation/Observation
17.6     The Committee has been informed that data collected under Blindness Survey in all the  13 Districts in various
parts of the country has been analyzed and the results would be available by 31
ST March, 2002. The Committee would

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
like to be apprised about the findings of the Survey regarding prevalence and causes of blindness and impact of the
Blindness Control Project in these districts.
Action Taken
17.6     Survey has been completed in all 13 districts of the country. The survey was delayed in Malda (West Bengal)
due to floods. Data from Malda are being analyzed. Data from remaining districts indicate the following:
Cataract Blindness continues to be the major cause of blindness though the proportion of blindness due to cataract has
come down from 80% in 1986-90 to 52% in 2000-01. Main causes of blindness in the current survey are as under:
a.      Cataract                                                                52.2%
b.       Refractive Errors                                                   18.3%
c.       Corneal Blindness                                                 4.4%
d.       Glaucoma                                                              3.2%
e.        Surgical Complications                                        2.4%
f.        Posterior Segment Disorders                                 5.9%
g.        Others                                                                    6.9%
Coverage of cataract blind population is 63%.
Proportion of cataract surgeries with Intra Ocular Lens Implantation has increased from less than 3% in 1993-94 to 58%
in 2000-01. This is superior technology with better visual outcomes.
NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
18.9     The Committee is of the view that there is apparent contradiction between the two clarifications given by the
Department. As per the ATN, the World Bank administration has agreed to reduce the requirement for production
capability from 25% to 10% of the tendered quantity. As per the second clarification, World Bank has raised the past
supply criteria to 50% from 25%. In the earlier reply, country has been divided into four regions. However, second
clarification mentions eight regions. The Committee would like to be enlightened in this regard.
Action Taken
18.9     The factual position is summarized below:
The National AIDS Control Organization undertakes bulk procurement of HIV Elisa and HCV Elisa kits as part of its
annual procurement activity. Some other kits are also procured, but they are in  smaller quantities, the largest orders
being the above two kits i.e. HIV Elisa and HCV Elisa. In the first year, kits for 35 lakh tests for each had been
procured. However, after assessing the consumption pattern, the total  requirement was reduced to 30 lakh tests for
subsequent procurement.
The World Bank’s policy on procurement has to be followed by the Project, as per the agreement agreed with it.
The initial tender for procurement of HIV Elisa kits for 3.5 million tests was floated in December, 1999 (inadvertently
mentioned as February, 2001 in the earlier reply). As per the prevailing Bank policy one of the eligibility criteria was
the past supply of 25% of the offered quantity in any one of the last 2 years. It was seen during processing of the bids
received in response to this tender that a large number of firms, including all Indian ones, could not meet this stipulated
criteria of 25% of past supply i.e. 8.75 million tests and were held to be in eligible. The order was ultimately placed on
M/s. Labsystems for a kit made in Finland.
Separately, a bid for procurement of the same number of HIV Elisa Kits had also been floated in March, 2000 with the
same qualifying criteria. However, none of the offers received in response to this bid was accepted and in October, 2000
it was decided to reject all bids and seek fresh invitation thereof. The fresh bid was floated in December, 2000. For this
revised bid, the qualifying criteria was changed in the light of the experience gained while processing the HIV Elisa bid,
and the past supply criteria was reduced to 10%. The entire requirement was also split up into 4 schedules, so that the
quantity of kits for each schedule would also be reduced. This was done with a view to enabling more firms to be
eligible for the bid. The first procurement of HCV Elisa kits for 3.5 million tests did go ahead with this stipulation of
10% of past supply and 4 region wise schedules.
In February, 2001, bids were invited for the next round of HIV Elisa test kits, and the same qualifying  criteria i.e. 10%
and 4 schedules were proposed therein. However when the bidding documents were submitted to the World Bank for
their clearance, it was pointed out by them that  as per the current requirement the past supply criterion had been raised
to 80% of the offered quantity. This issue was strongly taken up with the World Bank on more than one occasion,
pointing out that insistence on a very high qualifying criterion would result in elimination of competition from a large
number of bidders. The Bank however did not agree to relax this past supply criteria to below 50%. Since the Bank did
not agree to relax this criteria to below 50% of past supply despite constant follow up and interaction, it was decided to
divide the entire quantity of 30 lakh tests into 8 region wise schedules instead of 4 schedules finalized earlier. This was

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
done to ensure that the quantity required for each schedule would come down, and thus more bidders, including
domestic ones, would become eligible even with the criteria of 50% of past supply. Domestic manufacturers have been
awarded the contract for supply of kits for two schedules; and even in other they were not disqualified on this account.
The same eligibility criteria of 50% of past supply, with eight region-wise schedules, is being adhered to for the
procurement of HCV Elisa kits for 30 lakh tests also. The bids are being evaluated currently.
NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
19.3     The Committee notes that shortage of trained psychiatric manpower and lack of awareness regarding treatment
are the two main barriers to the provision of mental health services in the country. The Committee has been given to
understand that about 4000 clinical psychologists, psychiatric social workers and psychiatric nurses are working in the
country which is inadequate to meet the total needs of persons with mental disorders in the country. The shortage of
psychiatric manpower is felt in all the States, specially in rural areas. The Committee strongly feels that there is a need
for having systematic evaluation regarding Statewise requirement of manpower. The Committee also observes that
mental health programmes are being implemented in a varying degree by different States. The Committee has been
informed that the District Mental Health Programme is to be enlarged and made more effective covering the entire
country during the Tenth Plan. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for expanding the mental health
services. While appreciating the substantive allocation of funds for this programme for 2002-03, the first year of Tenth
Plan, the Committee would like to emphasise that there should be regular and extensive monitoring at all levels to
ensure optimum and judicious utilization of funds.
Action Taken
19.3     About 1-2% of the population suffer from major mental disorders and about 5% of the population i.e., 50 million
people suffer from minor depressive disorders. It is also estimated that 25% of people who attend primary health care
clinics suffer from various types of psychological problems. However, most of these patients do not require
hospitalization. There are presently 37 specialized mental hospitals in the country in the Government sector with a total
bed strength of over 18,000 beds. In addition, the various medical colleges and general hospitals in the country have
about 200 psychiatry units of varying sizes with bed strength varying 2-200, at an average of 20 beds. There are about
3,500 such beds available in such units. There are about 40 training centers for postgraduate study in psychiatry. In
addition, there are about 40-50 private psychiatric facilities in the country. Availability of psychotropic drugs is
satisfactory and the cost of such drugs is reasonable/affordable. Two mental hospitals namely NIMHANS, Bangalore
and CIP, Ranchi are under the administrative control of the Central Government.
A comprehensive study had been conducted in this regard by this Ministry in two workshops held in February 1999 for
the Medical Superintendents of mental hospitals and in June, 1999 for State Health Secretaries regarding the minimum
standard of care in mental hospitals. Further, the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-sciences, Bangalore an
autonomous body under this Ministry, also undertook a review of the functioning of all the State-run mental hospitals
and psychiatric units in a project commissioned by NHRC in 1999. Another detailed study of mental health care in the
country was also undertaken by this Ministry in November-December, 2001 and in June-July, 2002 by all the State
Governments on the direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
The overall condition of mental health care delivery system in the country as assessed by Union Health Secretary on the
basis of affidavits submitted by all the State Chief  Secretaries, was placed before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. In the
affidavit it was pointed out that the Court’s direction to the Central Government to set up at least one psychiatric
hospital in each State for the purpose of making available increased manpower and facilities in the field of mental
health, may not be proper and be reviewed, since as per the new scientific thinking, community based treatment is
preferable and beneficial to the hospital based ones. The improved psychotic drugs can now be given in the community
itself and the family bond between the patient and family members  is maintained which results in quicker cure and
rehabilitation. The mental health programme will, therefore, popularize community-based treatment required for a large
number of cases of mental illness. It is in this context that the District Mental Health Programme will provide
community care with treatment shifting from custodial to therapeutic. It removes stigmatization and isolation of
mentally ill persons in society. The mental health programme will popularize community based treatment required for
large number of cases of mental illness. Under the District Mental Health Programme, the mental hospitals and medical
colleges which have professional expertise in the field are designated as nodal agencies to build a District Health Team
to provide service to needy mentally ill patients at their families in the district and adjoining areas. In service candidates
and personnel appointed as clinical psychologist, trained social worker, psychiatrist, psychiatric nurse on contract basis
are expected to perform the task of early detection of illness and quick treatment at the community level itself. There are
presently few people choosing the field of psychiatry as a career, but still with the limited availability of personnel,

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
through District Mental Health Programme, the activities have been expanded to cater to larger population. As a sequel
to this approach, there is shift in emphasis from mental hospitals to upgrading psychiatric units in medical
hospitals/colleges closer to the community. Secondly, as to the States’ demand for overcoming shortage of trained
manpower in the categories of psychiatrists, clinical Psychologists, Psychiatric Social Worker and Psychiatric Nurses in
mental hospitals, it was suggested to the State Governments that one of the ways to tide over the problem is that in-
service personnel (Medical Officers, Social Workers and Nurses) may be detailed by the States/UT authorities
concerned, for short-term skill-based training in the disciplines at reputed institutions such as NIMHANS, Bangalore
and CIP, Ranchi.
With the up-gradation of infrastructure of mental hospitals, psychiatric units in medical colleges, expansion of District
Mental Health Programme from 27 districts to 100 districts along-with IEC activities and research in the 10
th Plan
period, the need for proper mental health services with sufficient infrastructure and manpower is expected to be
fulfilled.
IMPLEMENTATION OF HEALTH PROGRAMMES IN NORTH-EAST SECTOR:
NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
24.10   The Committee is shocked to find that not a single North- Eastern State has been able to fully utilize the funds
allocated to them and the States of Assam and Tripura failed to utilize even a single penny. The Committee feels that
there is something seriously amiss in respect of these States and recommends that the Department should make an
enquiry into the matter.
Action Taken
24.10   The table included in Para 24.9 of the Committee’s report indicated that the expenditure reflected therein was as
per the ‘Claims’ submitted by the Society. This claim is in a particular format as per agreement with the World Bank.
There will be generally a time lag between the actual incurring of expenditure and the corresponding claim being
furnished for reimbursement in the prescribed format. Thus it is possible that while a State/Society might have incurred
expenditure yet it had not furnished claims in the prescribed format; and as such the expenditure as per ‘claims’ might
be shown as ‘Nil’.
The actual position of releases and expenditure during the last financial years is as under:-
Rs. in lakhs
State Name                              Releases during                              Total expenditure
            reported
Arunachal Pradesh                          214.88                                                  158.20
Assam                                              653.80                                                  445.45
Manipur                                           708.15                                                  535.86
Meghalaya                                       224.93                                                    64.18
Mizoram                                          246.70                                                   266.86
Nagaland                                         635.50                                                   568.54
Sikkim                                             120.02                                                     73.95
Tripura                                             196.67                                                   128.50
Total :                                              3000.65                                                2241.54
Thus, the States of Assam and Tripura have incurred reasonable expenditure out of the funds released to them, and no
enquiry seems to be called for in this behalf.
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT  BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
3.4       The Committee was apprised that in places where there are no Central Government run hospitals, the
facilities provided for in-patient treatment to CGHS beneficiaries are woefully inadequate. Very few beds are
reserved for them. Consequently, the patients are put to avoidable inconvenience and have to seek treatment
through private facilities which are very expensive.  The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to look
into this aspect and furnish details of the facilities available to the CGHS beneficiaries in private-run hospitals
for CGHS beneficiaries and measures taken to augment the same.

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
Action Taken
3.4       Presently CGHS facilities are available in 22 cities. Out of these 22 cities, CGHS facilities to six cities namely
Trivandrum, Guwahati, Bhuwaneshar, Chandigarh, Bhopal and Shillong have been extended after 1977.
For the convenience of the CGHS beneficiaries and with a view to augmenting the inpatient facilities for CGHS
beneficiaries, it has been decided to recognise more private hospitals/diagnostic centres in various CGHS covered cities.
Orders recognising these private hospitals/diagnostic centres have already been issued in respect of the nine CGHS
covered cities  viz., Allahabad, Ahmedabad, Delhi, Jabalpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Mumbai, Patna and Ranchi.  These
orders also contain the rates of various treatment procedures and the facilities/specialities provided by these
hospitals/diagnostic Centres to the CGHS beneficiaries.  Process of recognition in respect of remaining CGHS coverned
cities is under way and the orders are expected to be issued soon.
Further Comments Of The Committee
            Out of 22 cities in which CGHS facilities are available, Committee notes with concern that the private  hospitals
have been recognized only in those cities which are comparatively  better placed as regards medical facilities are
concerned, and which are located in northern and western parts of the country.   The Committee, therefore, would like
the Department to recognize private  Hospitals/Nursing Homes in other States as well, particularly in the north-eastern
ones where sizeable number of CGHS beneficiaries are  residing.
            The Committee would also like to point out that whenever there is need for in-door treatment in these recognized
hospitals, particularly during emergencies, a Government servant is in a dilemma with regard to his entitlements in
respect of various  facilities, including boarding and lodging, treatment, pathological tests and food etc.   The
Government must ensure that no such questions arise at the time of admission of a Government servant  in these
hospitals.   Government hospitals should be asked to send the entire bill to the employee's office or CGHS for full
payment, thus taking of a burden for the mind of a Government servant of how  to arrange funds when he may have
none at his disposal or of deciding what in his case is admissible or not.
Recommendation/Observation
4.6       On the perusal of the list, the Committee notes that most of the erring employees fall in the category of Para-
medical staff (Class III/IV) i.e. Safai Karamchari or Nursing Attendants etc. It seems that no complaints have been
received by the authorities in respect of other categories of staff which the Committee is not inclined to believe. The
Committee feels that majority of staff in the hospital are not properly oriented towards their duties. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that in-service training with special focus on work culture and approach towards patients may be
conducted on regular basis for them.
Action Taken
4.6       The hospital is already running regular courses of in service training for its employees who are involved in
patient care. Doctors, Specialists etc. are regularly participating in the National/International Seminars/Workshops for
better patient care. Besides, a large number of National/International research papers and journals are procured in the
hospital in order to enhance the skills of the hospital employees as well as to ensure better patient care services.
Comments Of The Committee
The Committee feels perturbed a the seemingly evasive reply given to its observation which was specifically 
about the conduct  of para-medical staff of the Hospital.   The  Committee is amused  at the same time that their
"work culture and approach towards patients" was being improved by subscribing research papers/journals for
them.
            Even if the reply given by the Government is relied, the Committee observes that at least this is not
reflected in the patient care being given in Central Government Hospitals.   The fact remains that a patient
cannot receive treatment, more so in emergencies, till he is accompanied by an attendant.   He is made to run
from pillar to post for registration, for obtaining a stretch  ( for which he as to pay whether he has money or not),
face rude or indifferent nurses or doctors, unhygienic beds, toilets and wards.   If what has been stated by
Government, the reality could have been different at least in some respects.
JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH,
PONDICHERRY (JIPMER)
Recommendation/Observation
10.2     The Committee notes that out of sanctioned strength of 133 teaching posts, the number of posts lying vacant as
on 30.6.2001 was 32. Although the situation has improved somewhat, such a large number of teaching posts lying
vacant cannot be considered to be a healthy trend. The Committee has been given to understand that whenever the
requisitions are being sent to UPSC, the posts are being advertised indicating that the initial posting will be at JIPMER,
Pondicherry, with the liability to serve anywhere in India. However, even this initiative has failed to have the desired

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
impact. The Committee is of the view that some drastic steps need to be taken for having the required faculty at
JIPMER, a premier teaching institution in the country.
Action Taken
JIPMER, Pondicherry are being requested to take up the matter with all concerned for filling up the vacant posts at the
earliest keeping in view the observations of the Committee.
Further Observation By The Committee
            The Committee further observes that "the liability to serve anywhere in India'' could possibility be one of  the
factors to dissuade applicants to respond for the job advertisements. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that in the
application format candidates could be asked to indicate whether they would be willing to serve anywhere in India.  If
the applicant indicates "No" it should be clarified that efforts would be made by the Department to accommodate the
candidates, short time assignments in case of national calamities could not be ruled out.   This would encourage
candidates, at least in some cases for come forward.
 
NATIONAL T.B.  CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
15.2     Plan allocation under the T.B. Control Programme for BE 2001-02 was Rs. 122.00 crores which was
substantially reduced to 100.00 crores at the RE Stage. The Department has clarified that delay in the procurement of
anti-TB drugs to be supplied to various States/districts and non-procurement of binocular microscopes during the
financial year resulted in the reduction of funds meant for this purpose from Rs.44.43 crores to 32.55 crores. Allocation
for grants to State/District TB Societies was also reduced from Rs.56.00 crores to 42.50 crores. Reason being funds
meant to be released to the new 120 districts under the expansion plan could not be fully released due to delayed
approval of the EFC and CCEA. Surplus funds lying with some district societies was another reason for reduction. The
Committee observes that this trend has been there during the entire Ninth Plan period. As per the figures available with
the Committee, out of plan allocation of Rs.581.00 crores from 1997-98 to 2001-02, the total expenditure incurred as on
22.2.02 is only Rs.398.48 crores. The Committee finds that achievement level of Physical Targets under Sputum
Examination and Sputum Positive Detection has also been much below the fixed targets during the Ninth Plan period.
Action Taken
15.2     The Revised National TB Control Programme was launched in the country in March 1997 and the coverage
under the revised strategy was very low in the initial years. Under the conventional programme due to poor
infrastructure, the physical achievements remained below the targets as the targets were fixed uniformly based on the
population. As the coverage under the revised strategy in the later years of the 9
th Five Year Plan increased, the physical
achievements in the later years of the plan also improved.
further comments of the committee       
In view of the poor performance of the conventional T.B. control programme, the Committee apprehends that  the
revised programme also might meet similar fate.     The Committee would, therefore,  like the Department to make
earnest efforts in  implementing RNICP with a view to arresting the incidence of this infectious disease.
Recommendation/Observation
15.3     Last year, the Committee’s attention was drawn towards under-utilisation of funds released as Grants-in-aid to
some State Govts. for procurement of anti-TB drugs for sputum negative cases. The Committee apprehends that
situation may not have improved much. The Committee is constrained to note that Utilisation Certificates are still
awaited from some State Govts. in spite of reminders. Pending Utilisation Certificates, no further funds are being
released to the State Govts. for purchase of anti-TB drugs for sputum negative cases. The Committee views this with
serious concern. The Committee recommends that the Department should pursue the submission of Utilisation
Certificates with all concerned State Govts.
Action Taken
15.3     The State Governments from whom utilization certificates in respect of funds released for procurement of anti-
TB drugs for sputum negative cases are awaited are constantly reminded. Matter has been taken demi-officially with the
Health Secretaries of the concerned States for expediting the utilization certificates. Attention of Chief Secretaries of
concerned States has also been drawn.
Further Comments Of The Department
            In reply to a question, the department has informed that utilisation certificates in respect of a total sum of Rs.
1175.59 lakhs is pending from the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Kerala,
Manipur, Meghalaya, West Bengal and Jharkhand.  

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
 
Comments Of The Committee
The Committee views it seriously that utilization certificates are  pending from as many as eleven States.   In the
absence of uilisation certification by these states, the Committee is not sure whether the funds have been properly
utilized.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should vigorously pursue  the matter with
the concerned State Governments and find out the reasons  for non-furnishing of utilisation  certificates  by
them.  The Committee further recommends that if these efforts do not yield results, the Department's officials
visiting the States may be asked to pursue the matter personally with them. The possibility of sending concerned
officials for pursuing the matter with the defaulting States could also be examined.
NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
18.2     The Committee in its last Report observed that in spite of  the foolproof procedure for selection of NGOs,
undesirable  activities are still continuing and,  therefore, recommended that regular and  intensive monitoring of NGOs
is very essential and stringent measures need to be taken.  The Department has informed that regular and extensive
monitoring of NGOs has been undertaken as part of NACP-II. Recently, a computerized central monitoring and
information system has been established which includes regular monitoring of NGO activities by both the State AIDS
Societies and  NACO.  In addition, evaluation of NGOs by external agencies is also undertaken.  During 2001-02, it is
proposed to do a sample survey of  NGOs to evaluate their impact.
Recommendation/Observation
18.3     The Committee would like to be apprised of the findings of the sample survey. Given the concentration of NGOs
in metropolitan cities, the Committee had recommended that the Department should conduct a survey so as to assess
which are the districts where NGO activity is simply not there and take up the matter with the State Society for
attracting NGOs towards this social activity. The Department has informed that under NACP-II, the identification and
funding of NGOs has been completely decentralized to the State AIDS Societies. At present 570 NGOs are being
funded under the Programme. State AIDS Societies have been advised to proactively identify NGOs in various districts
based on a mapping of the high risk behaviour groups among which NGOs are asked to implement the Targeted
Interventions Projects. The State AIDS Societies have also been advised to identify credible NGOs working in other
areas of development such as women’s empowerment, education, street children, rural development etc. to expand the
base of NGOs in NACP-II. The States of Gujarat, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal
have identified the NGOs for this purpose and other States are currently undertaking the same.
Action Taken
It was proposed to do a sample survey during the last financial year 2001-02 to evaluate the impact of NGOs. In this
regard, the selection of an evaluating agency is under process  and the job of evaluating the NGOs would be taken up
shortly.
Comments Of The Committee 
The Committee  is surprised to note that the sample survey, which was supposed to have been conducted during
2001-2002, to evaluate the performance of NGOs has not even been initiated so far, and the Department was still
in the process of selecting an 'evaluating agency' for the purpose.  It is baffling to the Committee as to why it
should take such a long time.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that process of  selecting the evaluating
agency be expedited, so that the impact of NGOs may be assessed and the districts where NGO activity is non-
existent be identified
DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICE
Recommendation/Observation
21.2     The Committee feels that in a situation when large number of people of this country, particularly living in
remote and far-flung areas are outside the reach of Health Care Delivery System, continuing with such a process which
makes the opening of new Nursing Schools a long drawn one is not desirable. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that appropriate steps should be taken so that avoidable procedural requirements are done away with. The Committee
would also like to be apprised about the full details regarding Projects of Nursing Schools/colleges sanctioned and lying
pending (State wise).
action taken
21.2     The State-wise schools sanctioned and yet to be operationalised by the State Governments are  given below:
Sl.No.   Name of the State                 No. of Schools sanctioned but not yet
                                                            Operationalised by the State Governments
                                                                Year                                   No.

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
1.  Assam                                                 2001-02                                6
2.  Himachal Pradesh                               1997-98                                1
3.  Jammu & Kashmir                              1999-2000                            2
4.  Kerala                                                  1999-2000                            3
5.  Maharashtra                                         2000-01                                1
 
6.  Tamil Nadu                                          2000-01                                1
                                         TOTAL:                                                           14
 
Further Comments Of The Department
            The Committee has been further informed that Two Schools of Nursing were sanctioned to State
Government of J&K in the year 1999-2000.   Out of which one school has started functioning in the year 2000-
2001 whereas the other School is in the process of establishment by the State Government.   State Government
has been reminded.
            Three Schools of Nursing were sanctioned to State Government of Kerala in the year 1999-2000.   The
Government has given the sanction for opening of these three schools.   The Schools will be functioning after the receipt
of State Government permission for re-deployment of Nursing Teachers.   The whole process will be completed within
3 to 6 months.   The State Government has been reminded to issue necessary orders to ensure functioning of these
Schools immediately.
Comments Of The Committee
The Committee had recommend that the Department should take necessary steps to eliminate avoidable
procedural delays regarding the opening of new nursing schools.   The Department is silent about this.   The
Committee infers that the Department has not taken any remedial steps in this direction so far, and reiterates its
earlier recommendation that appropriate steps may be taken by the Department to do away with the avoidable
procedural requirements.
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
3.3       The Committee notes that it has not been possible to carry out the expansion programme of CGHS
dispensaries to new cities as was planned by the Ministry of Health during the Ninth Plan period, due to the fact
that the Ministry of Finance had not agreed to the creation of new posts of setting up of new dispensaries pending
finalisation of the SIU report on the functioning of CGHS dispensaries. The Committee is deeply disturbed to
note that provision of medical facilities to the government employees which is a basic necessity is trapped into
avoidable legal wrangles. The Ministry should have taken up the matter with the Central Administrative
Tribunal for early resolution of the case(s) so that the expansion programme of dispensaries was  implemented
expeditiously. The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to look into this and submit within a period of
three months of the action taken and the present status of opening new  CGHS dispensaries area-wise.
Action Taken
3.3       Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi vide order dated 21.3.2002 in OA No.1030/2001
filed by All India CGHS Employees Association and others versus UOI and others has inter-alia quashed the
recommendations contained in the SIU report of November, 1999, regarding  staff strength in respect of the categories
of Chowkidar, Safaiwala and Laboratory staff  and  directed to conduct a fresh SIU study regarding workload in relation
to these categories in CGHS dispensaries within a period of three months.
As the SIU Report was prepared by the Department of Expenditure, their comments were sought. The SIU has stated
that it would take up fresh study in respect of the above categories as per directions of the Hon,ble CAT, New Delhi.
However, SIU has requested the Department of Health to seek extension of time by three more months i.e. upto
21.9.2002 to enable them complete the study in respect of the above categories. The Department of Health is
accordingly moving an application in Hon’ble CAT, New Delhi seeking extension of time.
Subject to the Ministry of Finance agreeing to creation of posts for opening new CGHS dispensaries, the CGHS has
proposed to open new dispensaries during the 10
th Five Year Plan as per details given below:-

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
Allopathic Dispensaries
Najafgarh, Sahibabad, Vasant Vihar, Mayur Vihar Phase-II, Vikaspuri (all in Delhi), C.R. Colony (Patna), Ranjhi
(Jabalpur), Ranchi, Bhubaneshwar, Bhopal, Chandigarh, Shillong, Jammu, Dehradun, Jodhpur, Vishakapatnam, Kora
Mangalam (Banglaore), Kendrachal (Allahabad), Varanasi, Vijaywada, Jamshedpur, Aurangabad, Banevouri range
(Pune), Gomti Nagar (Lucknow), Indore, Imphal, Vadodara, Ernakulam, Ichapur and Behala (in Kolkata),
Virugambakkam (Chennai), Borkara, Sonepat and Guntur.
Ayurvedic Dispensaries
Guwahati, Jabalpur, Trivandrum, Kanpur, Chennai, Netaji Nagar (in Delhi), Faridabad, Noida, Kolkata, Mumbai
Homoepathic Dispensaries
Guwahati, Jabalpur, Trivandrum, Chennai, Mumbai, Ghaziabad, Pitam Pura (in Delhi), Noida, Kolkata, Allahabad.
Unani Dispensaries  
Jaipur, Delhi.
Siddha Unit:
Chennai
Further Comments Of The Department
Giving the latest position in the matter, the Department stated that the Hon'ble CAT, New Delhi vide order dated
23.8.2002 has granted extension of time up to 21.9.2002 for implementing its orders dated 21.3.2002 foe conducting a
fresh SIU study regarding workload in relation to categories of Chowkidar, Safaiwala and laboratory  staff in the
CGHS.   Meanwhile, the SIU had requested for moving the Hon'ble court for seeking further extension of time for a
period of three months.  Accordingly, an application has been moved in CAT, New Delhi for granting further extension
of time up to 21.12.2002 for complying with its orders dated 21.3.2002.
Meanwhile the SIU vide letter  dated 25.11.2002 has furnished to the Govt. the review study proposing fresh norms of
Laboratory Staff, Safai Karamchari and Chowkidar of CGHS (Allopathic) dispensaries in accordance with the order of
the Hon’ble CAT, New Delhi referred to above and have requested for comments on the proposed norms within  a
period of 10 days.   The recommendations are being examined.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that this facility is  available to CGHS beneficiaries of Delhi only. Recognition of private
hospitals/diagnostic centres is proposed to be extended to the CGHS covered cities of Allahabad, Ahmedabad,
Bangalore, Bhubaneshwar, Chennai, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jabalpur, Jaipur, Kanpur, Kolkata, Lucknow, Meerut,
Mumbai, Nagpur, Patna, Pune, Ranchi and Thirvananthapuram. The Committee hopes that all efforts will be made to do
the needful in the regard at the earliest.
Action Taken
     Recognition of private hospitals/diagnostic centres under CGHS in cities outside Delhi is under active process in the
CGHS Directorate in consultation with all the concerned Divisions and will be finalised soon.
NATIONAL MALARIA ERADICATION PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
12.5     The Committee notes that to overcome these shortcomings, it has been decided that 100% expenditure for
payment to MLVs from the project funds be met during the Project period. Additional staff has also been provided to
the State Health/Malaria Control Societies for effective implementation of the Project. The Committee hopes that these
measures will increase the utilization of funds by the States. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
utilization of funds by the State Governments in the year 2002-03 which is the last year of the EMCP.
Action Taken
12.5     Information sought for will be provided for submission to the Committee after close of the Financial Year 2002-
03.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee feels perturbed a the seemingly evasive reply given to its observation which was specifically 
about the conduct  of para-medical staff of the Hospital.   The  Committee is amused  at the same time that their
"work culture and approach towards patients" was being improved by subscribing research papers/journals for
them.
            Even if the reply given by the Government is relied, the Committee observes that at least this is not
reflected in the patient care being given in Central Government Hospitals.   The fact remains that a patient

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
cannot receive treatment, more so in emergencies, till he is accompanied by an attendant.   He is made to run
from pillar to post for registration, for obtaining a stretch  ( for which he as to pay whether he has money or not),
face rude or indifferent nurses or doctors, unhygienic beds, toilets and wards.   If what has been stated by
Government, the reality could have been different at least in some respects. (Para 4.6)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee views it seriously that utilization certificates are  pending from as many as eleven States.   In the
absence of uilisation certification by these states, the Committee is not sure whether the funds have been properly
utilized.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should vigorously pursue  the matter with
the concerned State Governments and find out the reasons  for non-furnishing of utilisation  certificates  by
them.  The Committee further recommends that if these efforts do not yield results, the Department's officials
visiting the States may be asked to pursue the matter personally with them. The possibility of sending concerned
officials for pursuing the matter with the defaulting States could also be examined. (Para 15.3)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee  is surprised to note that the sample survey, which was supposed to have been conducted during 2001-
2002, to evaluate the performance of NGOs has not even been initiated so far, and the Department was still in the
process of selecting an 'evaluating agency' for the purpose.  It is baffling to the Committee as to why it should take such
a long time.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that process of  selecting the evaluating agency be expedited, so
that the impact of NGOs may be assessed and the districts where NGO activity is non-existent be identified. (Para 18.3)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee had recommend that the Department should take necessary steps to eliminate avoidable
procedural delays regarding the opening of new nursing schools.   The Department is silent about this.   The
Committee infers that the Department has not taken any remedial steps in this direction so far, and reiterates its
earlier recommendation that appropriate steps may be taken by the Department to do away with the avoidable
procedural requirements. (Para 21.2)
MINUTES      
FIRST  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 8
th  January, 2003 in Committee Room No. 53, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
Shri Eduardo Faleiro                 ¾¾    in the Chair
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Bachani Lekhraj
Shri Lalhmingliana
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
LOK SABHA
Shri Kirti Jha Azad
Shri G. S. Basavaraj
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri Baliram Kashyap
Shri Brij Lal Khabri
Shri Y.G. Mahajan
Dr. Manda Jagannath
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
Dr. N. Venkataswamy
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
            SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
2.       Shri Eduardo Faleiro , M.P. Rajya Sabha  chaired the meeting in the absence of the Chairman. To begin with, the
Committee took up for consideration the Quarterly Report for the first two quarters  on physical and financial
achievements of Department of  Health. The Committee noted underutilization of funds provided under various
schemes/ programmes. However, after some discussion, the Committee decided to defer consideration of Quarterly
Reports in respect of all the Departments/ Ministries within its purview till the same are received for the third quarter
also as they are also due.   
3.         The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 117
th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Department. of Family Welfare and  identified the following points/issues
for clarifications from the Department:
(i) Variations in the cases of No Scalpel Vasectomy (NSV)  during 2001-2002;
(ii) Low Male participation in Family Planning;
(iii) Proposal of the  Government, if any, to introduce the concept of incentives and disincentives with respect to Family
Planning on the lines of practice presently being followed in China; and
(iv)  Remedial steps to be taken in respect of the states which are lagging behind in implementation of Family Planning
programmes.
3.1       The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 118
th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Department of Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy and
identified the following points/issues for clarifications from the Department:
Underutilization  grant-in-aid to state Pharmacies and Laboratories by the states of  Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttranchal, Orissa , West Bengal, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgadh, and Jammu & Kashmir and non-fulfillment of
code formalities by them.
Non-filling of posts in the Department of ISM&H.
Non-increase in bed capacity in National Institute of Homoeopathy.
3.2       The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 119
th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Department of Elementary Education and Literacy  and identified the
following points/issues for clarifications from the Department:
Accuracy of the NSSO survey with regard to increase in literacy rate among SCs/STs and educational minorities in
1999-2000 as compared to 1991.
Efficacy of  the present mechanism to check diversion of funds released by Central Govt. for a particular
scheme/programme and modifications, if any, required in it.
Proposal of the Government, if any, for qualitative and quantitative improvement in the Mid Day Meal Scheme and the
Department’s plan to implement the Judgement of the Supreme Court in this regard.
Assessment/study, if any, made with regard to the drop-out rate of students at a particular place prior to the
implementation of DPEP and after its implementation.
  (v)     Association of local MPs in the construction  of DPEP school buildings.
4.         The Committee, then, adjourned at  12.30 P.M. for lunch  and then again adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet  again
at 11 A.M. on Thursday, the  9
th January, 2003.
 
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 7
th April, 2003 in Committee Room `A`,  First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Dr. Manda Jagannath                ¾¾    in the Chair
            MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Dr. Akhilesh Das
Shri B.P. Apte
Shri Bachani Lekhraj

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
Shri Lalhmingliana
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
Smt. Vanga Geetha
LOK SABHA
Shri Ram Rati Bind
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria
Shri Baliram Kashyap
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
Shri S.B.P.B.K.Satyanarayana Rao
Dr. N. Venkataswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
2.          In the absence of the Chairman, Dr. Manda Jagannath  was voted to the Chair.
3.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up 
consideration of the following Reports:
One Hundred twenty-fifth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred sixteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of
Health;
One Hundred twenty-sixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred seventeenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of
Family Welfare;
 
 
One Hundred twenty-seventh Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in One Hundred eighteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy;
One Hundred twenty-eighth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred-nineteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of
Elementary Education and Literacy;
One Hundred twenty-ninth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred twentieth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of
Secondary and Higher Education;
One Hundred thirtieth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in One
Hundred twenty-first Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of
Women and Child Development
One Hundred thirty-first Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred twenty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports;
One Hundred thirty-second  Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in One Hundred fourteenth Report of the Committee on Implementation of Elementary Education Schemes;
One Hundred thirty-third  Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred twelfth Report of the Committee on Medical Education; and
One Hundred thirty-fourth  Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
One Hundred thirteenth Report of the Committee on Technical Education.
4.         After some discussion,  the Committee adopted the above reports. The Committee also decided that these 
Report may be presented to Rajya Sabha and /laid in Lok Sabha  on the 10
th April, 2003.  The Committee, in this

125thReportofHRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/Report125th.htm[01-07-2016 16:02:49]
connection, authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Prof. R.B.S. Varma and  Smt. Chandra Kala
Pandey  to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and  Dr. M. Jagannath and in his absence Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
to lay the same in the Lok Sabha.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M.
           
 
 
 
 