PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 239
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON HUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST SEXUAL
HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACE BILL, 2010
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8  DECEMBER, 2011)TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8  DECEMBER, 2011)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8  DECEMBER, 2011)TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8  DECEMBER, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST SEXUAL
HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACE BILL, 2010
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8 TH DECEMBER, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8 TH DECEMBER, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)-(iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—52
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 53—74
5. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 75 —112
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 113—131

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2010-11)
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
15. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
16. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
17. Shri Rahul Gandhi
18. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
19. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
20. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
21. Shri P. Kumar
22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
23. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
24. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
25. Shri Tapas Paul
26. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
27. Shri Ashok Tanwar
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
30. Shri P. Viswanathan
31. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
(i)
Constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2010.

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2011-12)
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
12. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
13. Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg
14. Shri Sameer Bhujbal
15. Shri P.K. Biju
16. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
17. Shri Suresh Channabasappa Angadi
18. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
19. Shri Rahul Gandhi
20. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
21. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
22. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
23. Kumari Saroj Pandey
24. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patasani
25. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
26. Shri Ashok Tanwar
27. Shri Joseph Toppo
28. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
29. Shri P. Viswanathan
30. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
*31. Shri Rathod Ramesh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
Constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2011.
*Nominated w.e.f.  25 th November, 2011.

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and
Thirty-ninth Report of the Committee on the Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment at
Workplace Bill, 2010*.
2. The Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010 was
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 7 December, 2010. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation
with Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the Bill to the Committee on 30 December, 2010 for
examination and report.
3. The Committee started its deliberations by issuing a Press Release on 10 January, 2011 for
inviting views and suggestions of the general public as well as the stakeholders on the proposed
Bill. The Committee received a tremendous response to the Press Release. Views of the
Stakeholders were circulated amongst the members of the Committee and were taken note of while
formulating the observations and recommendations of the Committee. The Committee heard the
views of the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development in its meeting held on 20 April,
2011 and 2 November, 2011. The Committee also held extensive deliberations with many
stakeholders apart from consulting the Ministry of Women and Child Development. The Committee
heard the views of the National Commission for Women, NGOs like Saheli, Sewa, PRIA, Lawyers
Collective, Human Rights Law Network, Centre of Indian Trade Unions, National Coalition for Men,
All India Men’s Welfare Association, All India Women Conference, National Domestic Workers
Movement, INSAAF, YWCA and other organizations like Indian Banks Association, NASSCOM, CII,
SCOPE and Office of Chief Labour Commissioner.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in its 8 sittings held on 20 April, 5 May, 18 August,
29 September, 13 October, 2 November, 11 November, and 30 November, 2011.
5. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied on the following:-
(i) Background Note on the Bill and Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the
Ministry of Women and Child Development
(ii) Presentation made and clarifications given by the Secretary, Ministry of Women and
Child Development
(iii) Feedback received from the Ministry on the questionnaires and the memoranda of the
stakeholders along with the issues raised by the Members during the course of the
oral evidence of the Secretary; and
(iv) Replies to the questionnaire and feedback received from the stakeholders heard by the
Committee.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II Section 2 dated 7th December, 2010.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 48026 dated the 30th December, 2010.

6. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 30 November, 2011.
7. For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters at the end of the Report.
OSCAR FERNANDES
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 30, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana 9, 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development
(iv)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Protection of Women Against Sexual Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010 was referred
to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development by
the Chairman, Raja Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 30 December, 2010 for
examination and report.
1.2 The proposed Bill seeks to provide every woman, irrespective of her age or employment
status, a safe and secure environment, free from sexual harassment. It is envisaged as a
comprehensive legislation which covers every workplace, whether in the organized or unorganized
sector and lays down a complaints and redressal mechanism.
1.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as follows:–
“Sexual harassment at a workplace is considered violation of women’ s right to equality, life
and liberty. It creates an insecure and hostile work environment, which discourages women’ s
participation in work, thereby adversely affecting their social and economic empowerment
and the goal of inclusive growth.
The Constitution of India embodies the concept of equality under articles 14  and 15  and
prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth or any of
them. Article 19(1)(g)  gives the fundamental right to all citizens to practice any profession,
or to carry on any occupation, trade or business. This right pre-supposes the availability
of an enabling environment for women, which is equitous, safe and secure in every aspect.
Article 21 , which relates to the right to life and personal liberty, includes the right to live
with dignity, and in the case of women, it means that they must be treated with due respect,
decency and dignity at the workplace.
Article 11  of the Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination (CEDAW), to
which India is a party, requires State parties to take all appropriate measures to eliminate
discrimination against women in the field of employment. In its General Recommendation
No. 19 (1992) , the United Nations Committee on CEDAW further clarified that equality in
employment can be seriously impaired when women are subjected to gender-specific
violence, such as sexual harassment at the workplace. India’ s commitment to protection and
promotion of women’ s constitutional rights as well as respect for its obligations under
various international treaties is unequivocal.
With more and more women joining the workforce, both in organised and unorganised
sectors, ensuring an enabling working environment for women through legislation is felt
imperative by the Government. The proposed legislation contains provisions to protect every
woman from any act of sexual harassment irrespective of whether such woman is employed
or not.
The Supreme Court of India in the case of Vishaka & Ors. v. State of Rajasthan & Ors.
[1997 (7)  SCC 323] , also reaffirmed that sexual harassment at workplace is a form of
discrimination against women and recognised that it violates the constitutional right to
equality and provided guidelines to address this issue pending the enactment of a suitable
legislation.

2
It is, thus, proposed to enact a comprehensive legislation to provide for safe, secure and
enabling environment to every woman, irrespective of her age or employment status (other
than domestic worker working at home), free from all forms of sexual harassment by fixing
the responsibility on the employer as well as the District Magistrate or Additional District
Magistrate or the Collector or Deputy Collector of every District in the State as a District
Officer and laying down a statutory redressal mechanism”.
1.4 The Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development in his deposition before the
Committee on 20 April, 2011 gave an overview of the background highlighting the circumstances
and commitments necessitating the proposed legislation. He made a mention about our country’s
obligations under the Convention on All Forms of Elimination of Discrimination against Women as
well as the provisions of the Constitution for preventing discrimination on the basis of gender and
for providing a safe and secure working environment at the workplace for women. He also drew
the attention of the Committee to the guidelines and norms laid down in the case of Vishaka &
Ors. vs State of Rajasthan & Ors. by the Supreme Court in 1997. Taking into consideration the
hazards which the working women could be exposed and the depravity to which sexual harassment
could degenerate, the Supreme Court was compelled to lay down guidelines and norms for
prevention of sexual harassment at workplace as there was no legislative provision at that time.
Since then, these guidelines, have been the law in the country binding on all organizations, be they
in public or private sector. Elaborating on the significant benefits for working women arising out
of the Supreme Court guidelines, like ‘sexual harassment’ getting defined for the first time, duties
and responsibilities of employer as well as grievance redressal mechanism of Internal Complaints
Committee, the Secretary pointed out that Supreme Court directions were binding and enforceable
in law until suitable legislation was enacted. It was, however, admitted that although both the
Central and State Governments as well as public sector were following these guidelines, no
authentic information about their implementation status in the private sector was available. The
Secretary submitted that it was against such a background that this legislation was being brought
forward with Supreme Court directives being the guiding spirit. It was emphasized that such
guidelines, no matter how detailed they were, could not be a substitute for a legislation approved
and passed by Parliament. A law passed by the supreme law-making body of the country goes
through extensive consultations with all the stakeholders, thereby not only having their endorsement
but also representing the shared vision of all concerned.
1.5 The Secretary then dwelt upon the prolonged exercise undertaken for formulating the
proposed legislation. Pursuant to the Supreme Court directions given in 1997, the National
Commission for Women undertook the exercise of preparing a draft Bill, which went through an
extensive process of consultations with various stakeholders including State Governments, lawyers
and civil society organizations. NCW prepared a series of draft Bills but they could submit the
agreed draft Bill to the Ministry only in January, 2010. It was only after further inter-Ministerial
discussions held at the Ministry level, that the proposed Bill was presented to the Cabinet for its
consideration in October, 2010 which was approved in November, 2010. Finally, the proposed
legislation was introduced in the Parliament in December, 2010.
1.6 The Committee was given to understand that the proposed legislation before it was primarily
based on the draft prepared by the National Commission for Women with suitable modifications as
per the inter-Ministerial consultations. It was clarified that with fairly exhaustive definition of terms
like ‘workplace’, ‘employee’ and ‘employer’, the Bill had gone beyond what was envisaged in the
Supreme Court guidelines. Internal Complaints Committee had been proposed as institutional
mechanism for all organizations employing more than ten persons which was not mandated by the
Apex Court. For other workplaces, Local Complaints Committee would be there at the district level
and even at the sub-district level, if required. Both these committees had been given the powers
of civil courts for enforcing attendances and examination. It was also mentioned that for securing

3
better compliance, power of issuing warrants may also be required to be given to these
Committees. Also, employer would be duty-bound to implement the recommendations of these
committees and liable to be penalized in case of non-compliance. Although not incorporated in the
Bill, the inquiry report would be deemed as inquiry report under the Service Rules of the
organization, thus removing the need for having any further inquiry, and imposing the penalty as
recommended. The Committee was informed that these provisions would be included in the Rules
to be framed under the proposed legislation.
1.7 The Secretary also informed that the draft Bill had the support of almost all concerned
including majority of the State Governments. The Ministry had received comments from twenty
State Governments on the draft Bill. However, there were certain aspects of the Bill which had
been commented upon at different fora like the Bill not being gender neutral, exclusion of domestic
workers in the Bill, penalty for false or malicious complaint, no visible role of National/State
Commissions for Women, and reporting of cases of sexual harassment and its monitoring and
implementation etc.
1.8 The Committee observes that all workplaces including Central and State Government
institutions are required to follow Supreme Court guidelines on sexual harassment laid
down in the Vishaka case in 1997. It was a path-breaking directive given by the Apex Court
of the country meant to create an enabling and safe environment at the workplace for the
rapidly increasing women workforce. A specific query about setting up of an appropriate
complaint redressal mechanism of internal committee as mandated under the guidelines
has, however, revealed a very discouraging scenario. In the absence of any laid down central
mechanism, no centralized database on the number of complaints filed, their disposal and
punishment given is available with the Ministry. The only feedback indicated to the
Committee is that in the Government sector, be it in the Central Ministries/Departments,
Public Sector establishments or States/UTs, Supreme Court guidelines are being complied
with. The Committee notes that out of 68 Central Ministries/Departments from whom
information was sought about the number of cases reported during the period 2007-10, that
too in response to a Parliament Question, response was received from only 49 Ministries/
Departments, out of which 33 Ministries/Departments reporting no case of sexual
harassment. So far as setting up of Complaints Committees in States is concerned, out of
20 States/UTs providing information, only 2 States/UTs were reported to have received
complaints of sexual harassment. What is more disturbing is the admission of complete
helplessness in the context of private sector expressed by the Ministry. Its simple statement
that with no prescribed monitoring and data collection mechanism, implementation of
Supreme Court guidelines in the private sector could not be ascertained and in the absence
of any penal provisions, compliance by the employer in the private sector may have been
lax, clearly establishes the fact that so far Supreme Court guidelines have virtually
remained on paper in majority of workplaces.
1.9 It has taken more than a decade to formulate the legislation and during this period,
Supreme Court guidelines, although envisaged to provide a safe and secure environment to
women at workplace women have failed to reach all the victims and provide relief. The
Committee, therefore, while welcoming the proposed legislation, believes that the proposed
legislation needs to be implemented with immediate effect so that the Vishaka guidelines
can be translated into a strong legislation for protection, prevention and redressal of
grievances of sexual harassment of women at workplace. The Committee also appreciates
the initiative taken by the Ministry for drafting the proposed Bill as it is high time that
such a law sees the light of the day. The Committee believes that women workforce should
have the right to work with dignity in a safe and secure environment and prevention,
protection and redressal of cases of sexual harassment is a must.

4
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
2.1 The Committee was informed that the National Commission for Women undertook the
exercise of preparing a draft Bill on Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment which went
through an extensive process of consultations with various stakeholders including State
Governments, lawyers and civil society organizations. A draft Bill on Sexual Harassment at
Workplace was sent by the Commission to the Ministry on 2 August, 2004. Subsequently, a
discussion with Labour Commissioners of some representative States like Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu and select NGOs working on the issue of sexual
harassment was held on 20 August, 2004. The discussions centered around two broad aspects of
the draft Bill of 2004, namely, its coverage and the scheme of the law with regard to accessibility
to justice. Based on the deliberations, it was highlighted that the coverage of the Bill should be
extended to include students and research scholars; the proposed provision for amicable settlement
of the complaint should be deleted in order to ensure that the complainant is not pressurized to
arrive at a compromise; provision enabling the Government to appoint appropriate officers as
District Special Officer where officers lower than Assistant Labour Commissioners were posted in
smaller districts; no penal action against the complainant/witness/supporter if the complaint is
dismissed etc.
2.2 This was followed by a National Consultation on the draft ‘Prohibition of Sexual
Harassment at Workplace Bill’ organized by the National Commission for Women (NCW) on
6–7 October, 2005. The consultation was attended by representatives of various Ministries/
Departments, women’s groups, lawyers, activists and civil society organizations working on
women’s issues. The deliberations of the Consultation took place in five Working Groups, which
examined the provisions of the proposed law and gave their recommendations. Specific issues
which were extensively deliberated upon by the Working Groups broadly focused on coverage of
the Bill, complaints and redressal mechanism, conciliation and false and malicious complaints.
2.3 The draft ‘Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010’ based
on extensive discussions involving various stakeholders then was placed before women Members
of Parliament in a meeting specially convened for the purpose on 7 August, 2009. Views of the
Members of Parliament were invited specifically on the inclusion of the provision/clause prescribing
penalties for false or malicious complaint. After detailed deliberations on this issue, there was a
consensus that a provision to punish false complaints filed by women should be a part of the
proposed law.
2.4 Final draft legislation titled the Prevention of Sexual Harassment against Women at the
Workplace Bill, 2010 was brought before the Inter-Ministerial Group on 7 January, 2010 which
included representatives from Ministries of Health and Family Welfare and Women and Child
Development, Departments of Legal Affairs, Personnel & Training and Legislative Department and
the National Commission for Women. Detailed discussions took place on various provisions of the
draft Bill resulting in consensus on the definition of “aggrieved woman” and “workplace”,
consequences of failure to constitute Internal Complaints Committee in the context of private
sector, necessity for retention of the provision relating to false or malicious complaints, details
relating to penalties and enforcement of the provisions in the Act itself.
2.5 The Committee observes that very extensive consultation exercise spread over almost
6-7 years held at different fora with a very large number of stakeholders has given final
shape to the draft legislation under its consideration. Both the Ministry of Women and
Child Development and the National Commission for Women have played a major role in
this process, complimenting the initiatives and efforts of each other. The Committee,
however, finds that there are a few areas where suggestions made by the Commission
although very strongly put forth have not been considered to be acceptable by the Ministry

5
due to one reason or the other. The Committee has made an attempt to analyse such
provisions at the relevant place in the Report and incorporated the same, if considered
justifiable.
2.6 The Committee, is however, constrained to observe that these extensive consultations
with NGOs, women groups, various Departments/Ministries etc. and the National
Commission for Women indicate certain very visible gaps. Firstly, views of stakeholders
representing men’s cause were not called for by the Ministry. The Committee has been
given to understand that the Ministry’s Bill is based on the NCW’s drafts of 2006 and 2010.
However, it is rather surprising that at the finalization stage of the present draft, NCW was
not included in the consultation process. Since this legislation has been brought forward
with the objective of protecting women from sexual harassment at workplace and providing
not just a complaints redressal mechanism but also cast a duty on the employer to provide
a safe and secure environment to its women employees, employers, both from private and
Government Sector representing varied women work force right from a Government
establishment to a shop/small worksite also need to be considered a major stakeholder. The
Committee strongly believes that views of all affected parties or stakeholders should be
taken into consideration in order to have wide consultations and a balanced view on the
subject under consideration.
2.7 Against this backdrop, the Committee made a sincere attempt to give opportunity to all
concerned to come forward with their views on this very crucial piece of social legislation. The
Committee issued a Press Release on 10 January, 2011 for inviting views and suggestions of the
general public as well as the stakeholders on the proposed Bill. The Committee received a
tremendous response to the Press Release. In all, 366 memoranda were received. The Committee
started its deliberations with a preliminary discussion on the Bill with the Secretary, Ministry of
Women and Child Development on 20 April, 2010. The Committee, then, heard the views of the
National Commission for Women in its meeting held on 18 August, 2011. The Committee held
meetings with several stakeholders like Saheli, National Domestic Workers Movement, Lawyers
Collective, Human Rights Law Network, Centre of Indian Trade Union, All India Women’s
Conference, SEWA, YWCA, PRIA, National Coalition for Men, Indian Social Awareness and
Activism Forum, All India Men’s Welfare Association, SCOPE, Office of Chief Labour
Commissioner, Indian Banks Association, NASSCOM and CII. The Committee has also been greatly
benefited by the written memoranda received from individuals and organizations like PRS Legislative
Research, Rakshk Foundation, Domestic Workers Forum, Gender Human Rights Society, Mother
and Sister Initiative, Family India Life Line, Industrial Management Academy etc.
2.8 The Committee had a detailed interaction with Member-Secretary of NCW on the proposed
legislation on 18 August, 2011. The Member-Secretary informed the Committee that NCW had been
working on the subject of sexual harassment for some time. The first draft Bill on Sexual
Harassment at Workplace was sent to the Ministry on 2 August, 2004 by the Commission. The
second draft based on consultations with the Government Sector, NGOs and representatives from
the unorganized sector was sent to the Ministry on 6 February, 2006. Finally, the draft Bill, the
Prohibition of Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace Bill, 2010 was forwarded to the Ministry
on 12 February, 2010. The Member-Secretary, however, pointed out that NCW was not involved
or consulted by the Ministry before submitting the final draft Bill for the Cabinet’s approval.
2.9 Member-Secretary, NCW pointed out that there were changes in the final draft introduced
in the Parliament when compared with its draft bills, 2006 and 2010 which needed to be looked
into:-
– The aspect of prohibition and prevention has been diluted as indicated in the title of
2006 Bill, i.e. The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition

6
and Redressal) Bill, 2006 and the Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment at
Workplace bill, 2010.
– A domestic worker was included under the definition of employee. Similarly, the
definition of workplace included the house or dwelling place. In the proposed Bill,
domestic workers have been specifically excluded from the Bill.
– Another issue raised by the Member-Secretary, NCW was the budgetary provision.
Their experience with the Domestic Violence Act had been that budget was not
provided by the State Governments for putting in place the infrastructure for the
implementation of the Act. It was suggested that budgetary provisions should be built
into the Act itself.
– The role envisaged for the NCW and State Women Commission in hearing the
complaints was included in the earlier draft Bills of NCW. The same was missing in
the proposed Bill. Giving the National and State Women Commission a responsibility
of not just monitoring but ensuring compliance of the provisions of the Act under the
Act would make it a firm mandate for these bodies.
– Another aspect highlighted by NCW was the provision for conciliation. As expressed
by many women groups, this provision could lead to pressurizing the women to
reconcile the matter, subjecting her to further harassment and should not be there.
Deletion of the said provision was suggested and the complaint once registered be
simply acted upon.
– The other problem area pointed out was related to compensation and the manner of
its realization. The proposed Bill did not provide for penalty, if the direction of the
Complaints Committee was not complied with or if provisions were not made in the
Service and Conduct Rules for punishment of an employee for sexual harassment. The
aggrieved woman would not have any mechanism for redressal of her grievances in
such a case.
2.10 The Committee appreciates the initiative and efforts of NCW in drafting the
proposed legislation. The Committee has taken note of the observations and suggestions of
the Commission and have incorporated some suggestions at appropriate places in the
proposed Bill.
2.11 Committee’s interaction with bodies/organizations representing employers
representing varied workforce gave an insight to the Committee to understand the proposed
legislation from their viewpoint. Quite a few inputs highlighting the practicality and viability
of provisions incorporated in the Bill were put forth before the Committee. It would not be
wrong to conclude that in the absence of such a thought-provoking interaction with a very
crucial segment of stakeholders, examination of the Bill by the Committee would have
remained incomplete.
2.12 The Committee had a final meeting with the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development for clarifications with respect to some very pertinent issues and concerns
raised by many stakeholders before it. The Committee took note of the views of all
stakeholders with respect to problem areas in the Bill, apprehensions, suggestions etc.
Detailed questionnaires were forwarded to all these stakeholders for their comments, apart
from forwarding two questionnaires to the Ministry of Women and Child Development as
well as written memoranda for their comments. Feedback received from the Ministry and
the stakeholders has proved to be of immense help to the Committee in formulating its
views on the various provisions of the Bill.

7
III. IMPORTANT ISSUES/CONCERNS RAISED
3.1 The Committee has observed that there were a number of issues/concerns raised by many
stakeholders not only in their written memoranda submitted by them but also highlighted during
their interaction with the Committee. The Committee is of the view that these issues are very
pertinent and have adequate relevance so far as efficacy of the proposed legislation is
concerned and accordingly need to be reflected either in the proposed legislation itself or
in the rules/guidelines to be framed thereunder.
Issue of Gender-Neutrality
3.2 In order to have a balanced view on the proposed Bill, the Committee heard the views of
various men’s organizations and groups who presented before the Committee their strong
reservations against the proposed legislation. They alleged that the proposed Bill not being gender-
neutral was biased and only addressed the plight of aggrieved women force, ignoring the sexually
harassed men force which is an increasing number as of now. They expressed dismay for not
being consulted by the Ministry on the proposed Bill. Following were the major concerns expressed
on the gender-specific nature of the Bill:-
– It is incorrect to presume that only women can be victims of sexual harassment.
Percentage of women workforce is gradually increasing and not all are at subordinate
levels.
– Gender should not get any more precedence over human rights.
– Employers are under a duty to provide a safe working environment to all employees.
– The Ministry has no data to claim that sexual harassment is faced only by women and
that harassment of men cannot be put on the same footing character-wise or
incidence-wise.
– Sexual harassment laws in most countries like Denmark, UK, Italy, Ireland, Finland,
France, Germany, Portugal, Spain, Netherlands etc. are gender-neutral.
3.3 On this issue being taken up with the Ministry, it was admitted that data on sexual
harassment at the workplace in India was not available. While there may be incidents of men facing
sexual harassment at workplace, nobody can deny the fact that given the traditional power equation
in our society, it is women who face the disproportionately larger brunt of this scourage. This
could be easily corroborated by using molestation and eve-teasing as proxy indicators with NCRB
data showing an average more than 50,000 incidents of molestation and eve-teasing annually over
the last four years. Attention was also drawn to the reaffirmation made by the Supreme Court in
Vishaka Case that sexual harassment at workplace was a form of discrimination against women
which violated the Constitutional Right to Equality. Not only this, gender-specific legislation on
sexual harassment at workplace needs to be considered as an affirmative action under Article 15
of the Constitution. Committee was also informed that two pre-dominant approaches had been
adopted by countries across the world. One was the formulation of separate legislations prohibiting
sexual harassment at the workplace which may be either gender-specific (Pakistan) or gender-
neutral (Phillippines) while the other was inclusion of provisions as part of existing anti-sex
determination or equal opportunities frameworks (Australia).
3.4 The Committee takes note of strong reservations and angst regarding this gender-
specific Bill allegedly tilted towards women. At the same time, the Committee would like
to point out that it is a sad reality that women have been at a disadvantaged position and
have been discriminated, abused and harassed. With the increase in the number of working

8
women both in the organized and unorganized sector, the situation at ground level continues
to be disturbing. What is more worrisome is that Supreme Court guidelines given way back
in 1997 continue to remain ineffective as borne out by the feedback given by the Ministry.
In such a scenario, it is imperative that a legislation adequately providing for specific
protection of women from sexual harassment at workplace is enacted. The Committee would
also like to point out that a balanced and well-structured mechanism giving equal
opportunity to both the aggrieved woman and respondent with adequate safeguards and
checks is unlikely to give any biased protection to women workforce.
3.5 The Committee also believes that with regard to cases of sexual harassment of men
and women at workplace, survey/studies need to be conducted by the Ministry at regular
interval. This will not only allay the apprehensions of the proposed legislation being biased
against men but would also facilitatate any remedial steps, if so required. The Committee,
keeping in mind the interests of all concerned, feels that the viability of having a provision
of enabling nature where circumstances of sexual harassment cases of men at workplace
can be tackled may be explored. Alternatively, an employer/estabilshment can be mandated
to report cases/instances of male sexual harassment also in their Annual Report. This may
help to understand the real picture of sexual harassment of both men and women.
Issue of inclusion of domestic workers within the ambit of the Bill
3.6 The proposed Bill categorically excludes domestic workers from its purview. It was clarified
by the Ministry that domestic workers had consciously been kept out of the ambit of the proposed
law as there would be practical difficulties in applying the law within the household, especially as
no code of conduct could be laid down within the household. Moreover, there was no policy for
domestic workers yet which laid down their terms and conditions of service and security of work.
Domestic work being a poorly regulated sector, there was a real concern that domestic workers
taking recourse to this law may increase their vulnerability.
3.7 On a specific query about any demand received by the Ministry for the inclusion of
domestic workers in the Bill, the Committee was informed that Domestic Workers Associations and
Trusts from across the country had approached the Ministry through a postcard campaign with
more than 5000 postcards being received so far. The campaign had advocated that as ‘Domestic
work is work and domestic workers are workers’, they should be included in the Bill. A signature
campaign in the form of representations signed by many individuals highlighting the vulnerability
of domestic workers had also been received. A specific representation had also been received from
the Bihar Domestic Workers’ Welfare Trust requesting the inclusion of domestic workers within the
ambit of the Bill. Also, the North-east Regional Domestic Workers’ Movement reiterated the need
for such inclusion in view of the fact that the crux of the Bill was to provide constitutional
safeguards with statutory provisions to all working women.
3.8 Committee was informed that this issue was also raised by the Department of Industrial
Promotion & Policy which had pointed out that practical difficulty in implementation should not be
used as a plea to deprive domestic workers of their legal entitlement. The Department of School
Education & Literacy had pointed out that inclusion of residential domestic workers in the proposed
Bill would help fill the gap in the existing legal framework. It was also suggested that there was
a need for putting in place a friendly and accessible mechanism of recourse with the help of RW As
and civil society organizations. The State Governments of Punjab and Gujarat had communicated
their support for inclusion of domestic workers within the Bill. Opinion of the Punjab Government
was that exclusion of domestic workers from the ambit of the proposed Bill would make it
discriminatory in nature especially when the provisions were being extended to the unorganized
sector and local committees were to be constituted. The State Government of Gujarat had

9
suggested that the definition of “employee” should include domestic workers, especially because the
PWDVA, 2005 did not entitle them to lodge complaints.
3.9 The National Advisory Council (NAC) had also emphasized on the need to include domestic
workers within the purview of the Bill. This issue was also raised in a Consultation organized
jointly by the UNDP and UN Solutions Exchange, on 14 February, 2011. During the discussion, the
need to include “domestic workers” within the ambit of the Bill was articulated. While responding
to the Ministry’s concern of how to gather evidence in view of the nature of an allegation of sexual
harassment within the privacy of the home, it was pointed out that this brought up the much larger
issue about the role of the State in the context of the public-private divide.
3.10 Apart from organizations representing domestic workers, inclusion of domestic workers
under the Bill was strongly advocated by other stakeholders also. Following factors were
highlighted in support of this view-point:-
– According to the Report on Conditions of Work and Promotion of Livelihoods in the
Unorganized Sector by the National Commission for Enterprises in the unorganized
sector (August, 2007), there are 4 million women domestic workers in India. Gross
under estimation of the work done by domestic workers and leaving out a large chunk
of women working in the unorganized sector would amount to gross injustice.
– There are numerous statistics to show that domestic workers are most vulnerable to
sexual harassment. Their exclusion would mean denial of their protection from abuse.
– Expecting such a vulnerable group to have recourse to IPC in a sexual harassment
case cannot be considered viable.
– The Minimum Wages Act 1948 has applicability on domestic workers. Further, clause
2 (n) of the Unorganized Workers’ Social Security Act, 2008 defines one of the
section of unorganized workers like “wage worker” which means “a person employed
for remuneration in the unorganized sector, directly by an employer or through any
contractor, irrespective of place of work, whether exclusively for one employer or for
one or more employers, whether in cash or in kind, whether as a home-based worker,
or as a temporary or casual worker, or as a migrant worker, or workers employed
by households including domestic workers, with a monthly wage of an amount as may
be notified by the Central Government and State Government, as the case may be”.
– The argument that it may be difficult to enforce the provisions of the Bill within the
privacy of homes is unfounded. The enactment of the Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 has broken this myth allowing legal scrutiny and
extending protection to the confines of the home, the private domain.
– Need for recognizing house as a site of labour. Government of India has voted in
favour of the ILO Convention 189 for Decent Work for Domestic Workers and it has
endorsed house as a workplace.
3.11 The Committee observes that support for inclusion of domestic workers came from
almost all the stakeholders appearing before the Committee. Domestic workers comprise
about 30 per cent of female workforce in the unorganized sector. This section is most
vulnerable to sexual harassment. Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the
fact that the Government of India had voted in favour of ILO Convention 189 for Decent
Work for Domestic Workers, thereby endorsing home as a workplace. The Committee is not
convinced by the Ministry’s contention about practical difficulties envisaged in the absence
of any code of conduct laid down within the household.

10
3.12 NCW submitted before the Committee that difficulty in enforcing the provisions of the Bill
within the privacy of home was unfounded as the enactment of the Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (PWDV A) had broken this myth allowing legal scrutiny and extending
protection to the confines of the home i.e. the private domain. Even though domestic workers were
employed in homes, they were not covered by PWDV A as the said legislation was restricted by the
definition of domestic relationship in its application. Presently, home is not recognized as a site of
labour and thus a significant segment of vulnerable women remained unprotected both under the
PWDVA and the proposed legislation. Another argument given by NCW was that the Rashtriya
Swasthya Bima Yojana, a medical insurance scheme approved by Cabinet on 23 June, 2011 which
provided smart card-based cashless health insurance cover available for about 47.50 lakh domestic
workers who were to be registered. Funds were being allocated under the National Social Security
Fund for unorganized workers. The fact that a registration system was already in place went
against the argument that legal provisions would be difficult to make applicable within the privacy
of homes.
3.13 The Committee is in full agreement for inclusion of domestic workers within the
ambit of the proposed Bill. Expecting such a vulnerable group to take recourse to IPC in
a sexual harassment case cannot be considered viable. The Committee believes that privacy
of a household cannot be an excuse to shield uncalled for acts against this category of
women workforce. The Committee is of the view that innovative thinking is required for
making the inclusion of domestic workers possible. Also, the experience gained in the
implementation of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 can be
utilized in the cases of sexual harassment. Redressing cases of sexual harassment of
domestic workers within the confines of a home could be worked out. The Committee would
like to emphasize here on the involvement of and pro-active role to be played by the NGOs,
Police Stations, RWAs and Panchayats in helping the aggrieved domestic worker to get
justice through this legislation.  The Committee would like to impress upon the fact that
even domestic workers who are women have equal rights like the other working women to
have a safe and secure workplace and right to work with dignity. The Committee,
accordingly, is of the view that necessary changes in the Bill especially with respect to the
definitions of employee, employer and workplace are required so as to ensure that the
domestic workers are brought within the ambit of this Bill thereby upholding their right to
work with dignity.
3.14 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the fact that the policy for domestic workers
being formulated by Ministry of Labour and recommendations of the Working Group on Domestic
Workers Issues set up by the National Advisory Council, as and when given, would give useful
inputs which can be incorporated in the Rules and if necessary, in the Act itself. Further, the
Committee has been given to understand that NCW has drafted a Domestic Workers Welfare and
Social Security Bill, 2010 which has been submitted to the Ministry in September, 2010. While
going through the Bill, the Committee finds it to be a comprehensive legislation covering all aspects
of working conditions of domestic workers and measures for their welfare. The Committee feels
that inputs can also be taken from this draft especially in defining a domestic worker,
employee, employer and a workplace. The Committee will be giving its suggestions in the
relevant provisions of the Bill for bringing the women domestic workers within its ambit.
Role of NGOs in the implementation of the legislation
3.15 The Committee observes that quite an important role has been assigned to NGOs and other
civil society members in the implementation of the legislation. They are mandated to be the
members of Internal Complaints Committee as well as Local Complaints Committee. NGOs are also
to play a pivotal role in creating awareness about sexual harassment and rights of women.

11
However, commitment to the cause of women is the only qualification considered necessary for
making a member of NGO eligible. It was pointed out that specific criteria like the registration
status of NGO was required to be specified either in the Bill or in the Rules to be framed
thereunder. Mere commitment to the cause of women was not considered sufficient enough.
Keeping in view the mandate of both the committees, legal knowledge was also considered
necessary. Another pertinent issue raised was viability of having such a large number of members
of NGO whose service would be required as members of both the Committees.
3.16 On a specific query about the justification for having the qualification ‘committed to the
cause of women’, it was informed that these would be people/organizations who had done
outstanding work for women and were sensitive to the concerns of women.
3.17 The Committee finds that all the above issues merit consideration and need to be
looked into. If need be, required modifications be made in the relevant provisions. The
Committee has been given to understand that a better understanding of the expertise
available in the field would emerge as the law is implemented. Based on the experience, a
view would be taken on prescribing more specific qualifications for selection of NGOs as
Chairperson/members of the Complaints Committees in the Rules. The Committee also
strongly feels that this path-breaking legislation would need to be publicized to make the
benefits accessible to the aggrieved women in the real sense. Here the NGOs can play a
very effective role. The Ministry in co-ordination with the National Commission for Women
and State Commissions will have to take the initiative in involving NGOs in creating
awareness about the legislation amongst all concerned.
Training of members of Complaints Committees
3.18 The Committee observes that mere setting up of Complaints Committees will not
serve the purpose. In view of the experience gained so far as the effectiveness of the
institutional mechanism set up under the Supreme Court guidelines given in 1997 is
concerned, the Committee strongly feels that viability of the two Complaints Committees
envisaged to be set up under the proposed legislation needs to be ensured from the very
beginning. During the interactions with women organizations, this fact was emphasized again
and again that members of Complaints Committees wherever established were not sensitized
enough and showed a general lack of awareness about their duties and role. The Committee
would appreciate if awareness camps are conducted with the support of State Legal Aid Forum,
trade unions etc. Besides that, officers of workplaces including the employers will also have
to be made aware about their role as envisaged under the legislation. Here again, the Ministry
in co-ordination with National and State Commissions for Women can playa pro-active role
with the support, guidance and experience gained by members of existing institutional
mechanisms set up under the Supreme Court guidelines. Mere assigning the responsibility of
creating awareness on the issue of sexual harassment and sensitizing those concerned about
the provisions of the law will not be effective. What is required is orientation of the members
of both the Committees about their role and mandate which can be specified through a well
laid-out training programme through the Rules.
Role of National and State Commissions for Women
3.19 The Women Commissions, both at the State and national level can play a pivotal role in
creating awareness and in monitoring the implementation of the proposed legislation. The
Committee observes that the in the draft Bill, 2010 prepared by the National Commission for
Women, both National Commission and the State Commissions had been envisaged to have the
power to examine and review implementation of the Act. Not only this, both the Commissions
could be approached for filing a complaint by the aggrieved woman, especially where the complaint

12
was against the employer or where circumstances warranted so and the inquiry could be conducted
by the Commission directly.
3.20 On a specific query in this regard, the Committee was informed that specific role as
envisaged for the National/State Commission for Women in the NCW draft Bill, was not considered
viable by the Ministry as it would lead to two parallel bodies working for the same purpose.
3.21 The Committee is of the opinion that the National and State Women Commissions
could be assigned a statutory oversight role. This could be easily made possible with
involvement/engagement of NGOs/bodies like Employer Associations, Trade unions etc. on a
continuous basis. The Committee feels that this would gradually lead to every workplace
putting certain monitoring and evaluation mechanisms in place and giving these processes
sufficient publicity to ensure that rights of working women guaranteed under the Act are
upheld. The Committee also takes note of the assurance given by the Secretary for making
a provision in the rules which would enable the National/State Commissions for Women to
receive complaints and forward the same to the concerned Committee and also to ask for
details of the outcome of inquiry/action recommended. The Committee is of the firm view
that both the Commissions need to be given a specific role which should be specified in the
Act itself. Leaving it to the rule-framing stage is simply a manner of diluting the real
objective of a justified suggestion. The Committee will be making its recommendation in
this regard in the relevant clauses.
IV. Issues which have remained uncovered
4.1 During the course of its interactions with various stakeholders and also in the memoranda
received on the Bill, quite a few issues, directly or indirectly connected with the proposed
legislation and implementation thereof were raised. Some of the pertinent issues raised are indicated
below:–
– ‘no retaliation’ clause needs to be included in the Bill to protect people who raise bona
fide Issues.
– Details of the meeting like quorum required, time and venue of such meetings are not
specified. Also no time-limit prescribed for filling in the vacancy in case of removal
of a member of the Committee.
– No provision is there to address anonymous complaints, women employees may
sometimes prefer to do so on no-name basis. Also, aggrieved woman may request for
her identity not being disclosed.
– The Bill does not cover harassment outside workplace like SMS and phone calls to
home.
– Complaint has to be made in writing. Other mediums like e-mails, drop box, personal
approach and secured telephone lines to file a complaint are not included.
– Bill is silent on the steps to be taken by the employer for the protection of
complainant and witnesses.
– There is no clear direction for the action to be taken in the event of management
failing to take any action against the accused, if found guilty. Accused is thus
encouraged to go to the court and get stay orders.
– Specific guidelines relating to the manner for conducting an inquiry and procedure for
recording evidence, manner of examination, nature of questions that are not to be
allowed.

13
The Committee finds all the above issues very crucial and relevant for the proper
implementation of the proposed legislation. The Committee is of the view that all these
aspects need to be incorporated in the legislation itself to the extent possible and in the
Rules to be framed thereunder.
V . The Committee makes the following observations/recommendations on some of the
provisions of the Bill
CLAUSE 1 : SHORT TITLE, EXTENT AND COMMENCEMENT
5.1 Sub Clause (1) dealing with short title of the Act reads as follows:–
“This Act may be called the Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment at Workplace
Act, 2010”,
5.2 It has been pointed out by some NGOs and the National Commission for Women that the
Bill focussed more on protection after the instance of sexual harassment had occurred. The word
‘protection’ in the title emphasized the victim status of women rather than as equal citizens entitled
to a safe workplace. It was also felt that the title of the Bill carried with it connotations of a
patriarchal society where women were in need of protection. With changing dynamics of
employment and the workforce and more women joining the workforce, the underlying principle
of equality being followed mattered. It was, accordingly, suggested that the title of the Bill should
be “The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Bill”
as originally recommended by NCW to emphasize the ‘preventive aspect’ in the proper spirit of the
Vishaka Guidelines.
5.3 Justifying the short title, the Ministry clarified that the intent of the Bill was protection
which included prevention and redressal of complaints of sexual harassment. The Bill has
provisions relating to prevention (19 and 20) which lay down duties on the part of the employer
and the district officers to take steps to create a safe working environment as well as create
awareness on the issue. Clauses 9-13 seek to provide the redressal mechanism available to a
woman at the time of filing a complaint of sexual harassment.
5.4 The Committee has been given to understand that the objective of the Bill is three-fold:-
protection against sexual harassment of women at workplace; prevention of sexual harassment; and
redressal of complaints. The Committee observes that preventive aspect has been reflected
only in clauses 19 and 20 which lay down duties of employer and district officers. As per
Clause 19, employer is duty-bound to provide a safe working environment and undertake
workshops/training programmes for sensitizing the employees about the Act. Similarly,
under clause 20, district officer has to engage NGOs for creation of awareness in women
employees. The Committee feels that preventive aspect as reflected in the above two provisions
fails to cover all the areas. This is borne out by the preventive steps as enumerated in the Supreme
Court guidelines which made not only the employer but also other responsible persons in workplace
duty- bound to prevent or deter the commission of acts of sexual harassment. Not only this,
appropriate steps were to be taken by employers to prevent sexual harassment like express
prohibition of sexual harassment at the workplace by notifying, publishing and circulating the same
in appropriate ways. Also, rules/regulations of Government and public sector bodies relating to
conduct and discipline should include rules/regulations prohibiting sexual harassment and provide
for penalties in such rules against the offender. As regards private employers, steps had to be taken
to include the aforesaid prohibitions in the standing orders under the Industrial Employment
(Standing Orders) Act, 1946. Lastly, appropriate work conditions were to be provided in respect
of work, leisure, health and hygiene to further ensure that there is no hostile environment towards

14
women at workplaces and no woman employee should have reasonable grounds to believe that she
is disadvantaged in connection with her employment.
5.5 The Committee is of the firm view that the preventive aspect reflected in the
proposed Bill has to be strictly in line with the Vishaka guidelines. The Committee would
also like to point out that no specific penalty has been provided for violation of duties
relating to preventive aspect assigned to the employer. Not only this, rule-making provision
is also silent on this aspect. The Committee, therefore, suggests that the preventive aspect
in the Bill, as mandated in the Supreme Court guidelines has to be reflected in the Bill by
incorporating the same in the relevant provisions. Accordingly, the title of the Bill should
also be modified to read as ‘the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention,
Prohibition and Redressal) Bill’ .
VI. CLAUSE 2 : DEFINITIONS
Clause 2 of the Bill deals with definitions.
6.1 The term ‘aggrieved woman’ has been defined as follows:–
“aggrieved woman” in relation to a workplace means a woman, of any age, who alleges
to have been subjected to any act of sexual harassment by the respondent and includes a
woman whether employed or not”
6.2 It was clarified by the Ministry that sexual harassment is a concern not only for women
who were employed but also of those who entered the workplace as clients, customers,
apprentices, daily wage workers or in ad-hoc capacity. Sexual harassment could also occur in the
case of students and research scholars in colleges/universities and patients in hospitals. It was in
recognition of these concerns that clause 2(a) provides for an inclusive definition of ‘aggrieved
woman’.
6.3 Definition of ‘aggrieved woman’ broadly speaking, was found acceptable with the exception
of some apprehensions and one or two suggestions. Attention of the Committee was drawn by
many organizations to the fact that it was not clear whether the definition of ‘aggrieved woman’
included student, research scholar, patient, physically and mentally challenged women etc. The
Ministry submitted that the proposed Bill covered cases of sexual harassment at the workplace,
including third party harassment. All the cases referred to were covered on the basis of a combined
reading of the definitions of ‘aggrieved woman’ and workplace’ depending on the relationship
between the perpetrator and the aggrieved woman. Further, a reading of the definition of ‘aggrieved
woman’ read with inclusion of educational institutions within the ambit of ‘workplace’ made it clear
that research scholars were covered under the Bill. Also, a combined reading of the definitions of
“aggrieved person” “employee” and “workplace” covered students, trainers and apprentices.
Similarly, a combined reading of definitions of ‘aggrieved woman’ and ‘workplace’ clearly showed
that even patients at clinics or hospitals were also covered within the ambit of the Bill. The
Committee is of the view that the clarification given by the Ministry would allay the
apprehensions of the stakeholders in the light of the inclusive definition of ‘aggrieved
woman’.
6.4 Another suggestion which came up before the Committee was for expanding of the
definition of ‘aggrieved woman’ as in the following manner:- “aggrieved woman’ in relation to a
workplace means a woman of any age or a group of persons acting on behalf of such a woman
or a trade union, who alleges that she has been subjected to sexual harassment and/or victimization
in relation to acts of sexual harassment by any person and includes a woman whether employed
or not”. Response of the Ministry was that it was a well-accepted legal principle that the complaint
should only be filed by the person who had been aggrieved by any act/omission. Further, in

15
situations where the person due to physical/mental infirmity was unable to do so, the law provided
for the legal heir of the person to carry out the same action.
6.5 Agreeing with the contention of the Ministry, the Committee observes that
contingencies like physical or mental incapacity or death are already covered under clause
9 which authorizes the legal heir or any other person so authorized to file a complaint. The
Committee would also like to point out that instances may occur when legal heir or person
so authorized may not come forward or the aggrieved woman herself is not willing to file
a complaint. The Committee feels that in such circumstances, where sexual harassment of
a very serious nature has occurred, the Complaints Committee may be authorized to take
suo moto  cognizance of such happening and initiate inquiry.
6.6 Committee’s attention was drawn to the concept of victimization which was very well-
known in labour law and many of the labour statutes included this concept. In the event of an
employee raising a dispute about any issue, there may be a tendency of employers to either dismiss
that person on some ground or another. Accordingly, a guarantee against victimization was essential
in the legislation itself. The definition of ‘aggrieved woman’ should, therefore, include not only a
sexually harassed woman but also a woman who has been victimized. The Committee
understands the precarious situation in which an aggrieved woman may find herself. In no
case, victim or even a witness should be victimized or discriminated against. To prevent
such situations which may arise even before filing of a formal complaint, the concept of
victimization needs to be included in the definition of ‘aggrieved woman’. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends the modification of the definition of the term ‘aggrieved woman’
as indicated above.
6.7 Inclusion of domestic worker within this Bill has been widely supported by many
stakeholders. The Committee would like to point out that since it supported the inclusion
of domestic worker within the proposed legislation, the definition of aggrieved woman will
have to be somewhat modified in the context of domestic worker and home as the
workplace. Whereas definition of ‘aggrieved woman’ would include employed as well as not
employed women in normal establishments, the same may not hold good so far as a home
as the workplace is concerned. In the event of any untoward incident happening with a
friend/acquaintance of a domestic worker, that person may seek judicial intervention.
Accordingly, the following proviso may be added to the definition of ‘aggrieved woman’.
“Provided that in case of domestic workers, the aggrieved woman would only mean the
person who is employed in a dwelling place”
The Committee recommends to the Ministry to make necessary changes in the
definition of the term ‘aggrieved woman’.
6.8 Clause 2(e) of the Bill defining the term ‘employee’ reads as follows:-
“employee” means a person employed at a workplace for any work on regular, temporary,
ad hoc or daily wage basis, either directly or through an agent, including a contractor, with
or without the knowledge of the principal employer, for remuneration or not, or working
on a voluntary basis or otherwise, whether the terms of employment are express or implied
and includes a co-worker, a contract worker, probationer, trainee, apprentice or called by
any other such name, but does not include domestic worker working at home”.
6.9 It was pointed out to the Committee by the stakeholders during its deliberations that the
definition of employee was restrictive and needed to be broad-based. The definition should include
domestic workers, agricultural workers, defense personnel, and paramedical, small factory and mill
workers etc. It should cover every woman who steps out of her house to earn her living/or to

16
gain professional qualifications either as full time employee/trainee/student/apprentice/casual/
temporary/ part time worker. The Ministry reasoned domestic workers have been consciously kept
out of the ambit of the proposed Bill as there would be practical difficulties in applying the law
within a household in the absence of any code of conduct for these workers. They would continue
to take recourse to any of the provisions of the IPC. As stated earlier, wide support from all
quarters came for the inclusion of domestic workers within the purview of the Bill.
6.10 The Committee fully supports the inclusion of domestic workers within this Bill and
recommends to the Ministry to delete the words “but does not include domestic workers
working at the home” from the definition of the term ‘employee’. To facilitate such
inclusion, necessary changes need to be made in the definition of ‘employee’. Since the
nature of work of domestic workers is different as it is within the confines of a dwelling
place, a separate definition of ‘domestic worker’ can be added under clause 2. The
Committee, while going through the draft prepared by NCW for domestic workers i.e.
Domestic Workers Welfare and Social Security Bill, 2010 found the definition of ‘domestic
worker’ quite appropriate. ‘Domestic worker’ has been defined therein as given below:–
“Domestic worker means a person who is employed for remuneration whether in cash or
kind, in any household ‘or similar Establishments’ through any agency or directly, either
on a temporary or contract basis or permanent, part-time or full time to do the
household or allied work and includes a “Replacement worker” who is working as a
replacement for the main worker for a short and specific period of time as agreed with
the main worker”
Explanation: household and allied work includes but is not limited to activities such as cooking
or a part of it, washing clothes or utensils, cleaning or dusting of the house, driving, caring/
nursing of the children/sick/old/mentally challenged or disabled persons.
The Committee is of the view that the above definition of ‘domestic worker’ may be
included under the definition clause with a slight modification by replacing the work
‘person’ with the word ‘woman’.
6.11 Committee’s attention has been drawn to the fact that in the event of third party encounter
in course of work, employees have to deal with contractors, suppliers, out sourcing women
officers. Therefore, it has been suggested that the words ‘or any third party encountered in the
course of work’ need to be added at the end of the definition of ‘employee’, because in the
informal sector, there is no specific employer-employee relationship.
6.12 The Ministry submitted that the Bill regulated sexual harassment at workplace in two
principal situations: one, where the parties were employed in the same workplace or have an
employer-employee relationship; and second, in case of third party harassment. Hence, in cases
where the parties were employed in two different workplaces, depending on the workplace where
the incident of sexual harassment took place, the ICC of that workplace would have jurisdiction
over the matter. Since this would constitute third party harassment, as per Clause 19(h) of the Bill,
the employer of the aggrieved woman could initiate action under the IPC and seek assistance of
the police. Alternatively, for enforcement of findings, possibility of making a provision enabling the
employer/ICC of the workplace where the incident took place to transfer its recommendations to
the employer of the place where perpetrator was employed may be considered at the time of
framing the Rules. Since the employees engaged on a contractual basis would be part of the
workplace of the principal employer, the ICC of that workplace would have jurisdiction over such
employees. However, as the terms of contract of such employees were ordinarily regulated by the
contractor, with the principal employer not engaged in any direct control over the contractual
employee, any action recommended by the Committee would be enforced by the contractor and
not by the principal employer.

17
6.13 The Committee is not fully convinced by the justification given by the Ministry for
coverage of contract employees working at different workplaces who normally would be
under the control of another employer. It is a well-established fact that daily wage workers,
that too women workers are the most vulnerable segment of unorganized workforce. To
expect that employer of such a casual worker who may be a contractor and not directly
responsible would take a suo-moto action of filing a case under IPC is far away from the
ground realities. The Committee is of the view that the definition of ‘employee’ can be
made more explicit by adding the words ‘for any third party encountered in the course of
work’ at the end of the definition of the term ‘employee’ so as to ensure coverage of all
categories of women employees.
6.14 Clause 2(f) defines the term ‘employer’ as follows:-
(i) ‘employer’ means’ in relation to any department, organisation, undertaking,
establishment; enterprise, institution, office, branch or unit of the appropriate Government
or a local authority, the head of that department, organisation, undertaking, establishment,
enterprise, institution, office, branch or unit or such other officer as the appropriate
Government or the local authority, as the case may be, may by an order specify in this
behalf;
(ii) in any workplace not covered under sub-clause (i), any person responsible for the
management, supervision and control of the workplace.”
The Ministry has justified this definition by saying that the Bill sought to identify a particular
person at each workplace, who would be responsible for its implementation so that the protection
afforded under the Bill is enforced in an effective manner.
6.15 It was pointed out that more clarity was required so far as the definition of ‘employer’ was
concerned in the context of employer of contract labour employed at the workplace belonging to
the principal employer. Contractors have their own Standing Orders under the Industrial
Employment (Standing Orders) Act. Disciplinary action can be  taken by the contractor if the
accused employee is also a contract labour otherwise, action will have to be taken by the employer
of the accused employee who may be in the employment of another contractor or in the
employment of the principal employer. Not only this, contract employees work for a short duration
and may be out of the reach of the principal employer by the time action is taken.
6.16 Ministry’s response to the above concerns was that since the employees engaged on a
contractural basis would be part of the workplace of the principal employer, ICC of that workplace
would have jurisdiction over such employees. However, as the terms of contract of such employees
are ordinarily regulated by the contractor, with the principal employer not engaged in any direct
control over the contractual employee, any action recommended by the Committee would be
enforced by the contractor and not the principal employer. It has, accordingly, been proposed that
any person responsible for the management, supervision and control of workplaces would fall
under the definition of ‘employer’. In cases where the parties are employed in two different
workplaces depending on the workplace where the incident of sexual harassment took place, ICC
of that workplace would have jurisdiction over the matter. Since this would constitute third party
harassment as per clause 19(h), employer of the aggrieved woman can initiate action under IPC
and seek assistance of the police. Alternatively, for enforcement of findings, possibility of making
a provision enabling the employer/ICC of the workplace where the incident took place to transfer
its recommendations to the employer of the place where perpetrator is employed may be considered
at the time of framing the Rules.
6.17 The Committee understands the justification of the Ministry but in order to make
things more clear, an explanatory clause about contractors should be included especially in

18
view of the fact that action has to be taken by the contractor against the perpetrator. The
Committee finds that ambiguity is also there about the action to be taken against
contractor in the event of his being the perpetrator or contract labour woman being the
victim of the principal employer. It is not clear whether they can approach the ICC set up
by the principal employer or action has to be taken by contractor.
6.18 The Committee notes that the definition of ‘employer’ as envisaged would cover all
categories of workplaces falling under Government and private sector. The Committee would
like to point out that one distinct issue which needs consideration is whereas heads of all
Government (Central/State/Local) workplaces or any other officer so authorized by the
appropriate Government have been specified, there is no mention of the head of the
organization in the private sector. This clearly indicates that in the private establishments e.g.
companies/hospitals/universities etc, no liability would fall on the Head. The Committee is of
the view that similar provision needs to be there for both Government and private sector. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to modify the provision accordingly.
6.19 A suggestion has been put before the Committee that this clause should include
house owners and landlords also. The Ministry has specifically stated that house owners and
landlords are not covered in the Bill since there was no associated workplace. The
Committee would like to point out that with the inclusion of domestic worker under the
Bill, definition of ‘employer’ will need to be expanded by adding house owners under it. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the definition of ‘employer’ may, accordingly, be
modified.
6.20 Clause 2(m) defines the term ‘sexual harassment’ as follows:–
“sexual harassment” includes such unwelcome sexually determined behaviour (whether directly or
by implication) as—
(i) physical contact and advances; or
(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or
(iii) sexually coloured remarks; or
(iv) showing pornography; or
(v) any other unwelcome phy sical, verbal or non-verbal conduct of sexual nature”
6.21 The Ministry has explained that the present Bill has a very specific purpose, to prevent
sexual harassment at the workplace. As such, it is essential that “harassment” is qualified to be of
a sexual nature. Unless “sexual harassment” is so defined, it would fall within the realm of
“harassment” per se , which is already addressed under the IPC.
6.22 It was suggested to replace the words “sexual nature” in Sub-clause (v) with “sexual
indignity” because the words ‘sexual nature’ seemed ambiguous and the word ‘dignity’ had a well-
defined meaning in law. The Committee observes that the present definition of ‘sexual
harassment’ is based on the definition given by the Supreme Court in Vishaka case. The
Committee feels that this definition would serve the desired purpose.
6.23 Another view which was put forth before the Committee was that the definition of ‘sexual
harassment’ should commence with the words, ‘sexual harassment shall mean and include but not
confined to--------’. The Ministry was of the view that the definition provided detailed illustrations,
which were intended to provide guidance to the Committee, courts as well as aggrieved women
in understanding the scope of the law. As such, there was no need to add further explanations to
elaborate on the definition.

19
6.24 The Committee believes that the present definition of ‘sexual harassment’ would
suffice and serve its purpose as it is based on the definition given by the Supreme Court.
However, keeping in view various developments in technology and harassment through these
mediums, the following words as given in the definition of ‘sexual harassment’ in the NCW
draft Bill, 2010 can be added at the end of Sub-clause (v):–
“whether verbal, textual, physical, graphic or electronic or by any other actions”.
Sexual harassment will thus include any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-verbal conduct
of sexual nature whether verbal, textual, physical, graphic or electronic or by any other actions.
6.25 The term ‘ workplace’ has been defined as follows:-
“workplace” includes—
(i) any department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, enterprise, institution,
office, branch or unit which is established, owned, controlled or wholly or
substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly by the appropriate
Government or the local authority or a Government company or a corporation or a
co-operative society;
(ii) any private sector organisation or a private venture, undertaking, enterprise,
institution, establishment, society, trust, non-governmental organisation, unit or service
provider carrying on commercial, professional, vocational, educational,
entertainmental, industrial, health services or financial activities including production,
supply, sale, distribution or service;
(iii) hospitals or nursing homes;
(iv) any place visited either by air, land, rail or sea by the employee arising out of, or
during and in the course of employment.
6.26 It was informed that keeping in view the fact that more than 90 per cent of the workforce
is engaged in the unorganized sector, the proposed Bill covers both organized as well as
unorganized sector under the definition of ‘workplace.’ Further, recognizing that a woman
employee may face harassment even outside the physical boundaries of workplace, in course of her
employment, the definition of “workplace” also includes “any place visited either by air, land, rail
or sea by the employee arising out of, or during and in the course of, employment.
6.27 Many suggestions have been made by stakeholders for broadening the definition of
‘workplace’ as indicated below:-
– Bill restricts itself to the employer-employee relationship and does not include a
student-teacher relationship as being addressed in Medha Kotwal case.
– Teacher-Student relationship needs to be brought within the ambit of the Bill
– Definition of workplace to include travel to and from the workplace as well as travel
in connection with work as specified under Vishaka guidelines
– Educational institutions and charitable institutions to be included
– Establishments such as courts, legislative assemblies, panchayats, municipal council,
Houses of Parliament to be included
– Workplaces to include natural markets of the vendors, vending spaces, markets, public
places where any activity for a livelihood is undertaken.

20
– workplaces to include farms, factories, small industries etc.
– house or dwelling place may also be included
The Committee finds that the Ministry has specifically excluded religious and charitable
institutions and a house dwelling from the purview of the Bill. However, educational institutions are
included in the present definition.
6.28 The Committee observes that definition of the term ‘workplace’ covers all categories
of workplaces falling under Government and private sector and also includes any place
visited by air/land/sea/rail. On being asked about the viability of including an incident of
sexual harassment occurring at a place visited by an employee, the Committee has been
informed that women employees may face harassment not only within the physical
boundaries of the workplace but even outside it, which may be during or in course of her
employment. This may include harassment from a co-worker or from an employee of the
workplace visited by her in course of her employment or by a third party at such place.
While agreeing with the clarification given by the Ministry, the Committee would like to
point out that a very crucial area which strictly speaking cannot be considered a workplace
has remained out of the ambit of the Bill thereby leaving the aggrieved woman in situations
which may cause harm to her. Very frequent incidents of women employees being sexually
harassed during their journey from home to workplace and vice-versa are being reported.
The Committee, therefore, feels that vehicles being provided by the employer should also
be covered under the definition of ‘workplace’. Accordingly, the words ‘any vehicle provided
by the employer’ may be added at the end in sub-clause (iv).
6.29 The Committee would also like to point out since it has recommended for inclusion
of domestic workers within the ambit of the Bill, a house or dwelling place should be added
in the definition of workplace. This may be included in the definition of a workplace as
given in the NCW draft of 2006 which reads as follows:–
“includes any place where an aggrieved woman or defendant or both is/are employed or
works, or visit in connection with work during the course of or arising out of
employment.”
6.30 Clause 2(o) defines ‘unorganized sector’ as follows:–
“unorganised sector” in relation to a workplace means an enterprise owned by individuals
or self employed workers and engaged in the production or sale of goods or providing
service of any kind whatsoever, and where the enterprise employs workers, the number of
such workers is less than ten”,
6.31 Some stakeholders deposing before the Committee pointed out that about 95 per cent of the
female work force was engaged in the unorganized sector and their working conditions were
different from those in the organized sector. The present Bill focused more on the formal sector
and employer-employee relationship. In the informal sector, specific employer-employee relationship
did not exist. It was suggested that a separate chapter that takes into account the specific work
conditions of this large labour force in the unorganized sector should be included in the Bill.
6.32 When this issue was taken up with the Ministry, it was clarified that the present definition
of ‘unorganized sector’ was broad enough to include all categories of establishments that form part
of this sector and there was a specific complaints redressal mechanism for this sector in the form
of Local Complaints Committee. It was also emphasized that a separate chapter on the unorganized
sector would have the effect of limiting its scope and applicability. Although NCW Bill, 2006 had
a schedule with a list of establishments in 19 categories that might fall within this sector, it was
pointed out that no such listing of unorganized sector establishments could be made as this could

21
be quite exhaustive. Committee’s attention was also drawn to the fact that the Legislative
Department whose opinion was sought in the matter in 2008 was of the view was that as there
was no ambiguity about the unorganized sector falling within the ambit of the legislation, there was
no need to have a separate chapter for this sector.
6.33 The Committee is of the view that the justification given by the Ministry for not
having a separate chapter on unorganized sector is quite convincing. The Legislative
Department has also approved the stand of the Ministry in this regard. However, it is
equally true that in the unorganized sector, employer-employee relationship as prevailing in
the formal sector does not exist. The Committee would like to mention that provision of
a Local Complaints Committee alone for the unorganized sector will not serve the purpose.
Secondly, in the formal sector, employer will be directly supervising the working of Internal
Complaints Committee. For the Local Complaints Committee, District Officer has simply
the role of setting up of these Committees at the district level or at the Sub-district level,
wherever required. Although the employer is supposed to assist the LCC also, it may not
happen when the inquiry is to be conducted against him. No liability is fixed on the District
Officer for not setting up of Local Complaints Committee as in the case of employer for
Internal Complaints Committee. The Committee is of the firm opinion that more pro-active
role needs to be assigned to the District Officer so far as the functioning of LCC is
concerned. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that specific duties as indicated in
NCW Draft Bill, 2010 should be included in the present Bill also. Only then, the LCCs will
be in a position to protect the most vulnerable segment of women workforce in the
unorganized sector. The Committee will be making recommendations in the relevant
provisions.
VII. Clause 3 : Prevention of Sexual Harassment
7.1 Clause 3 relating to prevention of sexual harassment reads as follows:–
“No woman shall be subjected to sexual harassment at any workplace which may include,
but is not limited to —
(i) implied or overt promise of preferential treatment in her employment; or
(ii) implied or overt threat of detrimental treatment in her employment; or
(iii) implied or overt threat about her present or future employment status; or
(iv) conduct of any person which interferes with her work or creates an intimidating or
offensive or hostile work environment for her; or
(v) humiliating conduct constituting health and safety problems for her
7.2 This clause makes provision for prevention of sexual harassment. It provides that no
woman shall be subjected to sexual harassment at any workplace. While the Bill has a general
definition of ‘sexual harassment at the workplace’, clause 3 is more specific and addresses indirect
harassment including intimidation and creation of a hostile work environment. The Committee was
also informed that the Supreme Court in the Vishaka case, while defining sexual harassment had
also gone beyond the specific acts of sexual harassment to include such acts as covered under
clause 3.
7.3 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that there was no link between the definition
of sexual harassment under Clause 2(m) and circumstances listed under clause 3. Provision under
this clause needed to be linked to having made a complaint about sexual harassment. It was also
suggested that express prohibition of sexual harassment at the workplace must be laid down. This

22
provision should also provide that sexual harassment constituted misconduct. Reason being that
unless it was a misconduct under the existing labour statutes, disciplinary action could not be
taken. The Committee takes note of the modified clause 3 to read as follows:-
“3. Prohibition of sexual harassment: (1)  No woman shall be subjected to sexual harassment
at the workplace.
(2) Sexual harassment and victimization in relation to any act of sexual harassment shall
constitute a misconduct.
The Committee also takes note of a specific clause 3A on victimization as reproduced
below:
“Prohibition of victimization-  (1)  (a) No woman shall be victimized for doing a protected
act or for having made a complaint of sexual harassment as defined under this Act.
(b) Victimization in relation to an act of sexual harassment shall be considered to include
the following circumstances:
(i) implied or overt promise of preferential treatment in her employment; or
(ii) implied or overt threat of detrimental treatment in her employment; or
(iii) implied or overt threat about her present or future employment status; or
(iv) conduct of any person which interferes with her work or creates an intimidating or
offensive or hostile work environment for her; or
(v) humiliating conduct constituting health and safety problems for her.
(2) (a) No aggrieved woman or any other person shall be victimized for doing any protected
act under this Act.
(b) Each of the following shall be considered to be a protected act under this Act-
(i) conducting inquiry under this Act;
(ii) giving evidence or information in connection with inquiry under this Act;
(iii) doing any other thing for the purposes of or in connection with this Act;
(iv) making an allegation (whether express or not) that A or another person has
contravened this Act.
Explanation 1-A person (A) victimizes another person (B) if A subjects B to a detriment because-
(i) B does a protected act; or
A believes that B has done, or may do, a protected act”.
7.4 The Committee is of the view that clauses 3 and 3A as reproduced above would take
care of all eventualities which a victim of sexual harassment may face and provide
necessary safeguard to her. Not only this, express provision of sexual harassment being
considered a misconduct would enable the employer to take action as recommended under
the service rules. Another positive outcome of such an elaborate provision would be that it
would act as an effective safeguard to the witnesses and all those involved in the inquiry
proceedings from any victimization.
7.5 The Committee would also like to emphasize that what constitutes misconduct in the
context of sexual harassment and what penalties it would attract should be provided in

23
service rules so far as Government and Public Sector bodies are concerned. With regard to
private employers, steps should be taken to include the aforesaid prohibitions in the
standing orders under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946. The
Committee would appreciate if the Ministry takes a pro-active role in the matter and make
an assessment about the service rules applicable to all categories of employees and ensure
that misconduct relating to sexual harassment is incorporated therein.
7.6 Another view point which was placed before the Committee was that the different forms
of sexual harassment should be graded and the nature and range of punishment for each kind of
harassment be specified; from minimum to maximum and defined for the different kinds of
harassment, commensurate with the degree of gravity of the offence. The Ministry submitted in
this regard that keeping in mind the nature of harassment, the subjectivity in the issue and the
extent it may affect a woman, it may not be possible to lay down forms of sexual harassment in
a graded manner and list the nature of punishments.
7.7 The Committee also opines that grading of different forms of sexual harassment and
punishment level specified accordingly would not be feasible as it would limit the scope of
the definition of sexual harassment. Moreover, the Committee believes that ICC/LCC will
be making inquiry and based on their findings, they would recommend action to the
Employer or the District Officer.
7.8 Another point highlighted by the stakeholders was the questioning or challenging the moral
character of the complainant after a complaint of sexual harassment has been filed. In such a case,
the respondent needed to be punished. The Committee would like to point out that this was
a well accepted legal principle that in cases of sexual abuse, character of the woman would
not be taken into account and if discussed would not have any impact on the decisions
taken. In view of this, the issue of challenging a complainant’s moral character would not
arise.
7.9 Clause 3(iv) makes a mention of a ‘hostile work environment.’ Attention was also drawn
to the definition of hostile work environment in the Protection against Sexual Harassment of
Women Bill, 2006. It was, accordingly, suggested that the following definition of ‘Hostile work
environment’ may be added:-
“Hostile work environment’ is said to be created when any act of sexual harassment has the
purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual’ s work performance or
creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment”.
The Ministry was of the view that all the elements suggested so as to constitute a ‘hostile work
environment were already included in Clause 3(iv) and a separate definition was not required. The
Committee believes that a specific definition of a ‘hostile work environment’ as suggested
above need to be included because the intention is only to protect the woman or victim from
any additional suffering apart from being sexually harassed. Sensitivity to the plight of a
victim is essential as it would be very difficult for her to continue working if her work
environment becomes hostile, offensive or intimidating in any way.
VIII. Clause 4 : Constitution of Internal Complaints Committee
8.1 Clause 4(1) relating to ‘Constitution of Internal Complaints Committee’ reads as follows:–
“(i) Every employer of a workplace shall, by an order in writing, constitute a Committee
to be known as the “Internal Complaints Committee”:

24
Provided that where the offices or administrative units of the workplace are located at
different places or divisional or sub-divisional level, the Internal Committee shall be
constituted at all administrative units or offices”.
8.2 Objections were raised by some of the stakeholders for having a permanent set up of ICC.
It was suggested that such committees should be set up only upon receiving a complaint and
should be disbanded after the inquiry proceedings were over and inquiry report submitted. On this
issue being raised with the Ministry, it was clarified that this provision had been specifically
included as confidence-building measure as well as to ensure impartiality in the inquiry proceedings.
Such Standing Committees would also provide easy and timely access to victims and there would
be no delay due to procedural requirements.
8.3 The Committee would like to emphasize on the fact that a victim of sexual
harassment needs support and assistance in filing a complaint and going through the inquiry
process for the redressal of her complaint. A mechanism already in place would definitely
help her to seek justice at the earliest. The Committee agrees with the Ministry that for
timely and easy access to victims, these Complaints Committees should be permanent so as
to avoid any delay due to procedural requirements of formally constituting such Committees
every time a complaint is received.
8.4 Committee’s attention was drawn to another practical problem relating to constitution of
ICC in every office/unit/branch of a company which may be a challenge to the employers. It may
pose administrative issues and inconsistent decision-making. It might also happen that administrative
units/offices may not have a female employee or only one female employee. It was suggested that
ICC should be constituted company-wise and vested with the power of planning and decision-
making at a particular given location of the employer and further commissioning of junior level
authorities at each branch/unit to carry on the proceedings under the supervision of ICC. Such
junior level authorities would be employees of the employer and formed at the good judgement of
the employer. This would help in arriving at a timely decision, through all the locations of the
employer, making the process firm and ensuring the implementation of the objective of the Bill.
8.5 On a specific query in this regard, it was clarified by the Ministry that in case of
organization having more than one office at one or more locations and facing difficulty in
constituting ICC at its branch offices/units, ICCs may be constituted at the headquarters which
may cover the other units also by co-opting local members from that branch/unit from where the
complaint may arise. It was also indicated that this being a matter of modality could be elaborated
upon in the Rules.
8.6 The Committee believes that this provision should be in the Act itself specifying the
circumstances where companies can be exempted from such a provision. The Committee
would like draw attention to the following proviso to the clause relating to constitution of
ICC in the NCW Bill, 2010:–
“provided that where the offices or administrative units of the workplace are located at
different places, the Committee shall as far as practicable be constituted at all
administrative units of offices.”
However, this provision needs to be made more specific in the context of practicality
and viability of constituting a ICC in every workplace. The Committee is in agreement with
the suggestion for having viable and workable institutional mechanism for handling sexual
harassment cases occurring in small administrative units of company scattered over
different areas. The Committee is happy to note the alternative mechanism suggested by
the Ministry. The Committee would, however, like to point out that the such a provision
should be incorporated in the Bill itself so as to ensure removal of any ambiguity.

25
8.7 Clause 4(2) deals with the composition of the ICC which provides for four members. This
has been pointed out by some stakeholders to be problematic in the event that the bench is evenly
divided over a case. The Committee is in agreement with this and recommends to the
Ministry for increasing the number of members to at least five or an odd number so that
there is no deadlock over a case and taking of decisions is facilitated.
8.8 Clause 4(2)(a) emphasizes that the Presiding Officer of the ICC should be a woman
employed at a senior level. The Ministry submitted that this sub-section was specifically included
as a confidence-building measure for women who approach the Internal Committee with a
complaint under the Bill. The basic premise of the provision was that given the nature of such
complaints, women may be more comfortable approaching a woman at the senior level. It was
neither the premise nor the understanding that only women were capable of arbitrating complaints
of sexual harassment.
8.9 It was pointed out that the Presiding Officer of the ICC must also have a commitment to
women’s issues. Further, in case the other offices or administrative units of the workplace which
do not have a senior level woman employee, the District Officer notified under Sections 5 should
nominate a ‘woman member’ of the LCC instead of any member of the LCC. Clause 4(2)(a) and
its second proviso should accordingly be amended as follows:–
“a Presiding Officer who shall be a woman employed at a senior level at workplace from
amongst the employees and has shown commitment to the cause of women.” Provided
further that in case the other offices or administrative units of the workplace do not have
a senior level woman employee, the district officer notified under section 5 may nominate
a woman member of the Local Complaints Committee in that area to act as Presiding
Officer” .
Another suggestion regarding the Presiding Officer was that in case a senior level woman
was not present to be a part of the ICC, the Presiding Officer should be an employee of the
employer or part of the ombudsman network appointed by the company.
8.10 The Committee is of the considered view that in case senior level woman employee
is not available, it would not be a viable option to always approach the District Officer of
the LCC for nominating such a member as the Presiding Officer. The Committee, instead,
believes that it would be better or more workable to have a senior woman officer from
sister organization or other Departments or other Banks or other organisations. In this way,
the employer would have more flexibility rather than simply approaching the LCC and
waiting for the District Officer to nominate the Presiding Officer.
8.11 Sub-clause (2)(b) provides for not less than two members from amongst employees
preferably ‘committed to the cause of women’ or who have had experience in social work or have
legal knowledge to be nominated by the employer. It was pointed out by some stakeholders that
the eligibility criteria for members of the Internal Committee required the two members from
amongst employees preferably committed to the cause of women or who have had experience in
social work or have legal knowledge. Background in law or legal knowledge was not considered
a mandatory provision inspite of giving this Committee the powers of a civil court under the Code
of Civil Procedure for summoning, requiring the discovery and production of documents etc. This
seemed to be in contrast to the composition of LCC where at least one member was supposed to
have a background in law or have legal knowledge.
8.12 The Ministry had submitted that it was not advisable to keep a rigid provision regarding a
member having legal knowledge as all organizations may not have employees with legal background.
This, according to the Ministry, was meant to be a guideline provided to the employer while
constituting the ICC.

26
8.13 The Committee is convinced by the explanation of the Ministry as rigid provisions
cannot be made for constituting ICCs at all workplaces which may be of different nature
altogether. A certain amount of flexibility is required for the constitution of ICC. The
Committee, however, would like to emphasize that training of the members of the ICC
should be made an essential component so as to ensure that the members are well-aware
of legal provisions required for handling the sexual harassment cases. Only then, ICC can
be termed as a viable institutional mechanism for carrying out the mandate assigned to it.
8.14 Sub-clause (2)(c) entails that one member from amongst the non-governmental organizations
or associations committed to the cause of women should be nominated as a member in ICC.
Reservations have been expressed by some stakeholders regarding the inclusion of external
members specially from NGOs related to women rights. According to them, such a specification
clearly indicates the inherent bias and prejudice intended to be introduced in the system. It was
suggested that ICC of any organization should be formed with only employees from within the
organization. NCW, on the other hand, suggested the inclusion of representative of trade unions/
employees association as a member of the Committee which would be in the interest of the
employees.
8.15 Ministry’s stand on the reservations expressed above is that the external member of NGO
representative was specifically included to bring an outside perspective to the proceedings, thereby
ensuring objectivity in the deliberations and findings of the Committee. Further, the Ministry found
no reasonable or justified basis for believing that women’s organizations have an inherent bias
against men.
8.16 The Committee would like to reiterate the pro-active role to be played by NGOs in
the implementation of the legislation. The Committee finds no flaw in having a member
from the NGOs in the ICC. It is, in fact, in consonance with the direction of the Supreme
Court in Vishaka Case. The Supreme Court suggested the inclusion of a third party-either
NGO or other body familiar with the issue of sexual harassment for preventing any
pressure from senior level. Accordingly, a member of NGO would be a welcome inclusion in
the ICC for it to function in an objective manner.
8.17 Sub-clause (3) specifies the terms of the Presiding Officer and every Member of the
Council to be three years from  the date of nomination. The Committee observes that no
provision for reconstitution of the ICC has been made. The Committee takes note of the
specific provision in this regard proposed in the NCW draft Bill, 2006. The Committee is of
the view that a similar provision clearly laying down reconstitution of an ICC on completion
of three year term with the condition that the previous Committee or individual members
of the previous Committee may be re-appointed but not for more than two terms needs to
be included in the present Bill.
8.18 Sub-clause (4) provides that the Presiding Officer and Members of ICC shall be paid
such fees or allowances for holding the proceedings as prescribed by the employer.
Objections were raised to this provision as it was felt that as the Presiding Officer and
members would be employees of the organization, this matter may be left to the discretion
of the employer. The Committee finds some merit in the argument. The Committee would,
however, like to point out that the one member from amongst the NGOs or associations
committed to the cause of women not being employee of the organization, needs to be
compensated for rendering his services as a member of ICC. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that this issue needs to be reviewed in the right perspective and the provision
modified accordingly.
8.19 Sub-clause (5) lays down the conditions which would render the Presiding Officer or a
member of ICC disqualified. It was pointed out that some of the conditions could not be

27
considered relevant in the present day situation. For example, disqualification like insolvency was
taken from pre-existing laws which could not be considered relevant in today’s context. Normally,
companies go in for insolvency and not individuals. Similarly, disqualification regarding ‘being of
unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court’ needs to be modified as such terms
are no longer referred to in statutes. Lastly, the condition of ‘engaging during his term of office
in any paid employment outside the duties of his office’ goes against NGOs who may be gainfully
employed elsewhere.
8.20 In the light of the above, the Committee recommends the following sub-clause be included
in place of sub-clause (5):
Where the Presiding Officer or any Member of the Internal Committee,–
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16; or
(b) an inquiry into an offence under any law for the time being in force is pending
against him or her or he or she has been convicted for such offence; or
(c) he or she has, in any manner, exhibited bias against any employee, by acts or in
writing or otherwise; or
(d) if subject to any disciplinary control, whether a public servant or otherwise, a
disciplinary proceeding is pending against him or her, or he or she has been found
guilty in any such proceeding; or,
(e) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which involves moral
turpitude; or
(f) has so abused his or her position as to render his or her continuance in office
prejudicial to the interest of the complainant;
Such Presiding Officer or Member, as the case may be, shall be removed from the Committee and
the vacancy so created or any causal vacancy shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
8.21 Another very pertinent issue to which Committee’s attention was drawn was that there was
no public data on either the number of work places where lee would have to be set up or the
number of NGO personnel committed to the cause of women available in the country. There could
be difficulties in bringing into effect the basic structure envisaged under the proposed legislation
if sufficient number of such NGO personnel would not be available. The Committee foresees
operational difficulties in the functioning of ICC in case of non-availability of NGO member.
The Committee is of the view that viability of this mandatory condition of member of NGO
to be nominated as a member of ICC may be looked into. Supreme Court guidelines of
having a member of either an NGO or other body familiar with the issue of sexual
harassment can be a viable option.
8.22 The Committee observes that every organization whether in the private or
Government Sector has an association representing its employees. Similarly, educational
institutions have teacher and student bodies. Not only this, every organization has a
designated officer for taking care of welfare related activities of its employees. The
Committee recommends to the Ministry for exploring the possibility of including
representatives from trade union/employee association/student union/welfare officers.
Besides that, the eligibility criteria for selection of member from NGOs or association
should also be specified along with work experience in conducting inquiry and dispensing
justice in the Rules to be framed under the proposed legislation.

28
8.23 Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the fact that institutional mechanism
of Complaints Committee already exists in some organizations. For example, universities
have already passed statutes whereunder local committees are appointed by inviting
participation from teachers and students through election mode. The Committee is of the
view that an enabling provision needs to be included which would provide that if there is
already an existing Complaints Committee under any law for the time being in force then
that Committee will continue as ICC. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that this
aspect may be examined and relevant provision added so as to avoid any conflict with the
existing institutional mechanism carrying out its mandate as envisaged under the relevant
law.
IX. Clause 6 : Constitution and jurisdiction of Local Complaints Committee
9.1 Clause 6 deals with the constitution and jurisdiction of Local Complaints Committee and
reads as follows:–
(1) Every District Officer shall constitute in the district concerned, a Committee to be
known as the “Local Complaints Committee”.
(2) Where constitution of the Internal Committee at a work place is not feasible on
account of less than ten persons being employed at such work place or where the
complaint is against the employer himself, the District Officer shall, constitute at every
concerned block, taluka or tehsil in rural or tribal area and ward or municipality in
urban area, additional Local Committee which shall also be known as the “Local
Complaints Committee” for that area concerned.
(3) The jurisdiction of the Local Committee shall extend to the area within the district, or
block, taluka or tehsil or ward or municipality level where it is constituted.
9.2 Apart from providing the constitution of LCC at district level, it has also been stipulated that
where constitution of the Internal Committee at a workplace is not feasible on account of less than
ten persons being employed at such work place or where the complaint is against the employer
himself, the District Officer shall, constitute at every concerned block, taluka or tehsil in rural or
tribal area and ward or municipality in urban area, additional Local Committee which shall also be
known as the “Local Complaints Committee” for that area concerned. It also provides that the
jurisdiction of the Local Committee shall extend to the area within the district, or block, taluka or
tehsil or ward or municipality level where it is constituted.
9.3 During the course of interactions with stakeholders, a number of issues/doubts were raised
about the viability of the proposed LCCs as indicated below:-
– the composition of the LCC was problematic as the District Officer is an officer with
a number of responsibilities and therefore, Local Complaints Committee would not be
a priority for him.
– The functions of the district level and the block/taluka level Committee are not
delineated clearly leading to ambiguity. It was not clear whether the block level
Committee would be a temporary ad-hoc Committee or permanent Committee.
9.4 Committee finds the problem areas highlighted in the setting up of LCCs to be quite
genuine. The feasibility of having such a LCC in every block/taluka/tehsil in rural and
tribal area and ward/municipality in urban area needs to be looked into, especially in the
case of big districts. The Committee believes that practical aspects like setting up an office
for such LCC also require careful examination. The Committee is of the view that a
beginning can perhaps be made by having district level committees on a permanent basis.

29
So far as setting up of such Committees at block, taluka or tehsil in rural or tribal area
and ward or municipality in urban area is concerned, in case of non-feasibility of an ICC
at a work place having less than ten employees, the Committee is of the view that District
level LCCs can handle such cases. To make their task easier, a local member from the
taluka/ward etc. may be co-opted as a member wherever any incident of sexual harassment
case had occurred.
9.5 Committee takes note of a very pertinent issue highlighted by NCW that where the
perpetrator might be the concerned Head of the establishment or Head of a large private company/
Government establishment. Block, taluka or tehsil level Local Committee or even district level Local
Committee would not be in a position to provide adequate redressal in such cases. It was suggested
that a provision for a High Power Committee constituted under the Ministry may be considered to
address such situations and the punishment in case of employers may be made more stringent. On
this matter being taken up with the Ministry, it was pointed out that setting up of a high-power
Committee may not be feasible.
9.6 The Committee understands the predicament of local level Committee in providing
redressal to victims against highly placed officials of a Government or private company. The
Committee would like to point out that categorical non-acceptance by the Ministry would
not solve the problem. An alternate mechanism has to be identified. The Committee is of
the view that State Commissions for Women need to be involved in handling of cases
against employers. A workable mechanism which can be the district level LCC with
representative from the State Commission for Women can be the best option.
X. Clause 7 : Composition, tenure and other terms and Conditions of Local Complaints
Committee
10.1 Clause 7 deals with the composition, tenure and other terms and conditions of LCC. It
provides that the members of Local Complaints Committee shall be nominated by the District
Officer which shall consist of:–
– (a) a Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the eminent women in the field of
social work and committed to the cause of women;
– (b) one Member to be nominated from amongst the women working in block, taluka
or tehsil or ward or municipality in the district;
– (c) two Members, of whom at least one shall be a woman, to be nominated from
amongst such non-governmental organisations or associations committed to the cause
of women, which may be prescribed provided that one of the nominees should,
preferably, have background in law or legal knowledge; and
– (d) the Protection Officer appointed under sub-section (1) of section 8 of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 in the District, in which
block, taluka or tehsil in rural or tribal area or ward or municipality in urban area, the
Local Committee is constituted. At least one-half of the total Members so nominated
shall be women.
10.2 It further provides that the Chairperson and every Member of the Local Committee shall
hold office for such period as may be specified by rules which shall not exceed three years from
the date of their appointment. It also provides that the Chairperson or any Member of the Local
Committee shall be removed from the Local Committee if he contravenes the provisions of clause
16 relating to prohibition of publication or making known contents of complaint and enquiry
proceedings and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall be filled by fresh nomination

30
in accordance with the provisions of this clause. The Chairperson and Members of the Local
Committee shall be entitled to such fees or allowances for holding the proceeding of the Local
Committee as may be prescribed by rules.
10.3 Reservations have been expressed by many stakeholders regarding the criteria “committed
to the cause of women” for Chairperson and Member of LCC. It was stated that the Vishaka
guidelines nowhere mentioned such a pre-qualification for being member of the Complaints
Committee. It was also emphasized that appointment/nomination of most of the members including
Chairperson of the LCC purely based on one gender would be devoid of judicial mindset. Under
such circumstances, possibility of biased and injudicious decision cannot be ruled out where many
cases would be heard on the basis of circumstantial evidence which required proper mindset of
judicial knowledge. In Indian judicial practice, no evidence of precedence was found where only
women judges were eligible for trial of cases, involving heinous crimes including rape, murder etc
against women. Therefore, it was suggested that the appointment of the Committee Chairperson
and members should be on the basis of their integrity and judicious approach.
10.4 The Ministry has justified the inclusion of criteria of ‘committed to the cause of women’
by stating that this qualification was included keeping in mind that the Chair/Members should be
sensitive to the concerns of women and to permit broad based selection. These members would
be persons who have done outstanding work for women. Qualifications of members can
subsequently be elaborated through the Rules.
10.5 The Committee is convinced by the justification of the Ministry because utmost
sensitivity and care should be shown towards a victim of sexual harassment by the members
of Local Complaints Committee. The Committee would also like to draw attention to the
criteria laid down by the Supreme Court for members of the Complaints Committees which
stipulate that such Committees should be headed by a woman and not less than half of its
members should be women. To prevent the possibility of any undue pressure or influence
from senior levels, a third party which could be either an NGO or other body familiar with
the issue of sexual harassment. The Committee observes that broadly speaking, the
composition of LCC is envisaged as per the Supreme Court guidelines. The Committee also
takes note of the assurance given by the Ministry that qualifications of members of LCC
would be elaborated in the Rules.
10.6 The Committee observes that majority of women working in the unorganized sectors
especially working as domestic workers were women from the oppressed sections like the
Scheduled Castes and Schedule Tribes, OBCs and minorities. It was impressed upon the Committee
that adequate representation needed to be given to such women in the composition of the Local
Complaints Committee so as to safeguard their interests. The Committee, therefore, would like
the Ministry to include a provision for giving representation to women from Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes, OBCs and Minorities in the Local Complaints Committee,
depending upon local conditions for fair dispensation of justice from a body which
represented all sections of the society.
10.7 The Committee would, however, like to draw attention to a very important suggestion
given by some stakeholders regarding the inclusion of a representative of trade union/
employees association as a member of the Committee which would be in the interest of the
employees. It was asserted that composition of LCC should embrace both a women rights
perspective as well as a workers’ rights perspective. The Committee supports the inclusion
of representative of trade union or employee association and recommends to the Ministry
to incorporate this category of members in the LCC in order to have a broad-based
membership protecting the interests of the victim as a woman as well as an employee. The
Committee recommends that the following addition may be made in clause 7:-

31
“one member to be nominated from amongst the registered trade unions or workers
associations functioning in that block or district”
10.8 It was also pointed out before the Committee that any stipulation with respect to number of
women in the composition of the Committee was unnecessary and made a prejudiced assumptions
that only women members are capable of arbitrating complaints. The Committee would like to
point out that more number of women in the Committee would be more comforting for a
victim of sexual harassment as she would feel free to speak out. This has to be perceived
from the viewpoint of a victim. The Committee takes the opportunity to point out here that
out of the five members of the LCC, three members are mandated to be women. The proviso
that at least half of the total members shall be women, therefore, becomes redundant. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Ministry to delete the said proviso.
10.9 Role and functioning of Protection Officers to be nominated to LCC was highlighted by
many stakeholders. Clause 7(i)(d) specifies nomination of Protection Officers appointed under the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 in the District, in which block, taluka or
tehsil in rural or tribal area or ward or municipality in urban area the Local Committee is
constituted. The constitution of sub-district level LCCs is envisaged only where it is deemed
feasible, keeping in view the size and population of enterprises covered under the Bill. In case,
there were no Protection Officers appointed at the sub-district level, it may not be feasible for a
single officer to serve on both the Committees. It was clarified by the Ministry that in such cases,
District Officer would be required to nominate any other person at sub-district level to attend the
meetings. This was to be specifically provided through the Rules.
10.10 The Committee has been given to understand that LCCs would be benefitted by nomination
of Protection Officers on account of their having requisite knowledge and orientation as well as
sensitivity gained from working with victims of domestic violence and procedural knowledge gained
in assisting court cases.
10.11 It was pointed out that engagement of Protection Officer under this legislation seemed to
be problematic and unpractical also. It was problematic because these officers were understaffed
and had no resources to implement the DV Act. Burdening them with additional responsibility would
not be correct. Secondly, the role of these officers under this legislation was not clear. It was also
not clear whether they would be required to serve only on the District level Complaints Committee
or each block/taluk level Committee in the district. If the officer was required to serve at the latter
level, it would be highly improbable for a single officer in each district to fulfill his/her roles
mandated under this legislation as well as the DV Act, 2005.
10.12 Taking into consideration the problem areas cited above, the Committee would like
the Ministry to review the viability of having Protection Officer as a member of LCC.
Protection Officers already have a well-defined mandate under the DV Act, 2005. The
Committee also has been given to understand that there is also a proposal to appoint them
as Dowry Prohibition Officer. Additional responsibility for these officers under the proposed
legislation would not be advisable for its effective implementation. The Committee,
therefore, is of the view that in addition to the specific nomination of Protection Officer,
an alternative proposition will also have to be categorically mentioned in the composition
clause. Suggestion of the Ministry to provide for alternative provision in the Rules cannot
be considered viable from any point of view and is therefore, not acceptable. The Committee
takes note of the alternative to Protection Officers, as given in the NCW Draft Bill, 2010,
i.e. ‘any other officer such as inspectors or additional inspectors under the Shops and
Establishments Acts of the respective States, additional Inspectors under the Factories Act,
1948 or any other public servant at the district level appointed under any law for the time
being in force’. The Committee considers the option given in the draft NCW Bill, 2010
viable and more conducive for the functioning of LCC. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends incorporation of the same in clause 7(1)(d).

32
10.13 Clause 7(2) entails that the Chairperson and every Member of the Local Committee shall
hold office for such period, not exceeding three years, from the date of their appointment as may
be prescribed. It has been pointed out by stakeholders that stipulating tenure without any stipulation
of terms of service amounts to allowing the members to work without any conditions attached to
the job. The Ministry assured that provisions may be added which would specify the conditions
under which the appointment of a person as Chairperson/Member would be prohibited as in the
case of ICC. The Committee feels that the three year tenure of LCC should be specified
in the similar manner as suggested in the case of ICC.
10.14 Reservations were expressed by stakeholders regarding the payment of fees or allowances
to Chairperson and members of LCC for holding its proceedings as indicated in clause 7(4). The
Committee observes that similar reservations have also been expressed in respect of ICC also. It
was strongly recommended that no remuneration or allowances should be made payable to any of
the Committee members or Chairperson as it would encourage frivolous and malicious cases to
justify such payments.
10.15 The Committee would like to point out that composition of Internal Complaints
Committee and Local Complaints Committee is significantly different. Whereas out of the
four member ICC, Presiding Officer and two members will be employees of the
Establishment, the five member LCC will be primarily composed of NGO representatives,
social activists, only exception being Protection Officer and woman working in block/taluka/
tehsil/ward/municipality. The Committee is of the view that proposed entitlement of fees or
allowances for LCC Chairperson and members is justified and needs to be retained.
10.16 The Committee fails to understand the rationale of prescribing only one condition for
disqualification i.e.  contravening the provisions of section 16 for the Chairperson and
members of LCC as compared to seven conditions of disqualification enumerated in clause
4(5) for the Presiding Officer and members of ICC. The Committee finds no justification
for different approach in respect of the two Committees having the same mandate. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends, similar modification in clause 7(3) as suggested in
clause 4(5).
XI. Grants and audit
11.1 Clause 8 relates to Grants and Audit. It provides that the Central Government may, after
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the State Government grants
of such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit, for being utilised for the payment
of fees or allowances of the Chairperson and Members of the Local Committee. It also empowers
the State Government to set up an agency and transfer the grants made under sub-clause (1) to
that agency and the agency shall pay to the District Officer, such sums as may be required for
the payment of fees or allowances of the Chairperson and Members of the Local Committee.
11.2 The Committee observes that as per the Financial Memorandum, Central Government will
meet the entire expenditure on fees/allowances payable to Chairperson/Members of LCC till 2012,
i.e. the end of the 11th Plan period. Thereafter, it would be shared between Centre and State
Government on a ratio to be specified by the Central Government. The Committee has been given
to understand that this provision of sharing of expenditure between Centre and States after 2012
is acceptable to the State Governments. It was suggested by NCW that the provision for budgetary
allocation may be mandated to all State Governments and Central Government by substituting the
word ‘may’ by ‘shall’. The Committee is of the view that budgetary provision is a crucial
component for effective implementation of any law and the Central Government has to take
a pro-active role in this matter. Ratio for division of expenditure between Centre and State
needs to be fixed in consultation with the State Governments keeping in view their financial

33
position. Only then, it can be ensured to achieve the objective of providing relief to the
most vulnerable section of our women workforce.
XII. Clause 9 : Complaint of sexual harassment
12.1 Clause 9 relating to complaint of sexual harassment reads as follows:–
(1) “Any aggrieved woman may make, in writing, a complaint of sexual harassment at
workplace to the Internal Committee if so constituted, or the Local Committee, in case it
is not so constituted:
Provided that where such complaint cannot be made in writing the Presiding Officer or any
Member of the Internal Committee or the Chairperson or any Member of the Local
Committee, as the case may be, shall render all reasonable assistance to the woman for
making the complaint in writing.
(2) Where the aggrieved woman is unable to make a complaint on account of her physical
or mental incapacity or death or otherwise, her legal heir or such other person as may be
prescribed may make a complaint under this section”.
12.2 This clause provides for making of complaint of sexual harassment and lays down the
procedure for making a complaint to the concerned Complaints Committee. The complaint has to
be made by the aggrieved woman in writing. However, in case of physical or mental incapacity
or death of aggrieved woman, her legal heir or any other person as prescribed has the right to file
the complaint on her behalf. Presiding Officer/Chairperson/Members are mandated to render all
assistance to her in filing a complaint, if required.
12.3 Reservations were expressed by many stakeholders before the Committee that the clause
was completely silent on the time frame within which the complainant should file the complaint
related to sexual harassment. They emphasized that a time limit within which the complaint needed
to be filed from the time of alleged incident is of crucial significance in settling sexual harassment
disputes. Complainant should lodge the complaint instantaneously without any loss of time. In the
interest of justice and to ensure that no evidence got damaged, destroyed or rendered useless or
escaped memory, it was important that time within which complaint should be filed should be
stipulated clearly and in unambiguous terms in the proposed Act. Further, any delay in filing the
complaint should be explained in writing to the satisfaction of the Inquiry Committee. The
stakeholders suggested that a time limit of thirty days or four weeks should be specified within
which a complaint of sexual harassment should be filed.
12.4 On the attention of the Ministry being drawn to this visibly reasonable reservation and
suggestion given, Committee was given to understand that non-specification of any time-limit was
a well-thought action on the part of the Ministry. Nobody can deny that a woman would require
a lot of courage and determination to make up her mind and file a complaint of sexual harassment.
Fear of reprisal at the workplace, social stigma attached as well as the lack of evidence,
particularly where the perpetrator was a superior were often the reasons for women hesitating to
file complaint. To ensure that she was not denied access to justice due to her vulnerability, no time
line for filing complaints had been provided as it was advisable to do so.
12.5 The Committee agrees with the contention of the stakeholders regarding having a
time limit for filing a complaint of sexual harassment. At the same time, the Committee
also understands the intention of the Ministry for recognizing the fact that the aggrieved
woman may take considerable time to muster enough courage to come forward and file a
complaint. However, clarification of the Ministry for not having any time-limit for filing of
complaint is not very convincing. The Committee believes that without any time limit, this

34
would become an endless process and may not lead to a logical conclusion. In the final
interaction with the Committee, the Secretary, agreed that having an open-ended provision
without specifying any time limit for filing a complaint of sexual harassment would not be
desirable as it would not be possible for a Complaints Committee to conduct an inquiry in
a justifiable manner. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Ministry to work out
a reasonable time limit which is neither too short so as to deny justice to the aggrieved
woman who would be needing considerable courage and will-power to file a complaint nor
too long so as to dilute the real objective.
12.6 The Committee takes note of the fact that in the draft NCW Bill, 2010, aggrieved
woman has the option to approach the State Women Commission when the complaint is
against the employer. The Committee feels that such an option seems to be justified and
needs to be included as it would make the aggrieved woman more comfortable and secure.
With the kind of experience and expertise available with any State Women Commission,
it can be considered the most appropriate alternate forum for filing of a complaint by the
aggrieved woman, especially in case when the complaint is against the employer himself.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the following proviso may be added to
clause 9(1).
“Provided further that an aggrieved woman may file a complaint to the Commission
where the complaint is against the employer”.
XIII. Clause 10 : Conciliation
13.1 Clause 10 relates to conciliation which reads as follows:–
(1) “The Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee, may, before
initiating inquiry under section 11  and at the request of the aggrieved woman take steps
to settle the matter between her and the respondent through conciliation.
(2) Where a settlement has been arrived at under sub-section (i), the Internal Committee or
the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall record the settlement so arrived and forward
the same to the employer or the District Officer to take action as specified in the
recommendation.
(3) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall provide the
copies of the settlement as recorded under sub-section (2)  to the aggrieved woman and the
respondent.
(4) Where a settlement is arrived at under sub-section (i), no further inquiry shall be
conducted by the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be” .
13.2 This provision has been specifically incorporated as a woman’s sense of justice may be met
through various ways and settlement through conciliation which would include instances such as
tendering of an apology or admission of guilt by the perpetrator. Before initiating enquiry and at
the request of the aggrieved woman, the Internal Committee/ Local Committee may take steps to
settle the matter between her and the respondent through conciliation and where a settlement has
been arrived, the Committee shall record the settlement so arrived and forward the same to the
employer or the District Officer to take action as recommended. Copies of the recorded settlement
to the aggrieved woman and the respondent shall be provided by the Committee. No further enquiry
shall be conducted by the Committee thereafter.
13.3 Apprehensions were expressed by many stakeholders about undue pressure on the aggrieved
woman for going for conciliation. It was pointed out that in case a complainant wanted the case

35
to be mediated and conciliated instead of there being an inquiry conducted, she was free to do so.
But by including this mode of resolving the issue in the law itself, it was most likely that employees
would insist on case being ‘settled and conciliated’ instead of an inquiry being held, no matter how
heinous the act of sexual harassment was. Serious concern was, therefore expressed as it was
likely to be misinterpreted or misused by employers to coerce complainants into some kind of
settlement and withdrawal of complaint without offering any justice. It was suggested that adequate
steps must be taken to ensure that the complainant was not under any threat or pressure to pursue
this route. It was emphasized that if process of conciliation was undertaken by the aggrieved
woman, it should also result in some corrective action and the Complaints Committee should be
vested with powers to decide the corrective action to be taken. A serious attempt should be made
by the employers to ensure correction in deviant behavior of the respondent.
13.4 The Ministry justified this clause by submitting that recognizing that an aggrieved woman
may be in an unequal power relationship vis-à-vis the perpetrator and may thus be subjected to
undue pressure during conciliation, the Bill specifically puts in place a safeguard that any
conciliation proceeding can be initiated only at her instance. Not only this, an inquiry can be
initiated even after a settlement was arrived if conciliation has not been complied with. There are
thus sufficient safeguards to protect an aggrieved woman from undue pressure or harassment.
13.5 Reservations have been expressed by many stakeholders that by legally providing a
mechanism to bargain punishment with settlement, the Act might become a tool for ‘legal
extortion’. Monetary payments would only render the proposed statute open for abuse. It was
emphasized that a complaint of sexual harassment was a serious complaint and under no
circumstances should the conciliation include any monetary settlements. It was an outrage to the
sensibilities of all self-respecting men and women that money could be considered as adequate
redressal for their loss of dignity. Another issue raised was that as a complaint of sexual
harassment was a serious complaint, re-conciliation should not be limited to monetary settlements
as no amount of money could wipe out the ignominies suffered by a victim of sexual harassment.
13.6 The Committee finds that there are two issues in this clause i.e.  apprehensions
regarding undue pressure on aggrieved woman for conciliation and monetary settlement
likely to be subject to misuse and also outraging the sensibilities of the aggrieved woman.
The Committee would like to point out that safeguards against imposing undue pressure on
the victim can be seen in this very clause itself as the conciliation would only be initiated
at the instance of the victim herself. Also, proviso to clause 11(1) entitles the victim to
approach ICC/LCC in the event of any term or condition of the settlement not being
complied with. Secondly, the Committee does not find the mention of any ‘monetary
settlement in the Bill. Even the clarification given by the Ministry makes a mention of
tendering of apology or admission of guilt by the perpetrator. The Committee strongly
recommends that there should not be any ‘monetary settlement’ for it would trivialize a
grave act of sexual harassment.
13.7 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the fact that if an aggrieved
women opts for conciliation, the accused would be let off simply by tendering his apology
or admission of guilt. The Committee suggests that a distinction should be made between
a minor offence and a major one. Tendering apology or admission of guilt would be fine in
the case of a minor offence but the same should not be applicable to major offences. This
can encourage the accused indirectly and he can indulge in similar undesirable activities in
future. Punishment should be the only way of rendering justice to the aggrieved woman in
such cases. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Ministry for making provision
of conditional conciliation for minor offences relating to sexual harassment. For other major
offences, stern punishment should be the only way out without any scope for the
conciliation.

36
XIV . Clause 11 : Inquiry into Complaint
14.1 Clause 11 which deals with inquiry into complaint reads as follows:–
“Subject to the provisions of section 10 and section 16, the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be, shall proceed to make inquiry into the complaint in such
manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that where the aggrieved woman informs the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case, may be, that any term or condition of the settlement arrived at
under sub-section (2)  of section 10 has not been compiled with by the respondent, the
Internal Committee or the Local Committee shall proceed to make an inquiry into the
complaint.
(2) For the purpose of making inquiry under sub-section (1) , the Internal Committee or the
Local Committee, as the case may be, shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 when trying a suit in respect of the following
matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; and
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed
(3) The inquiry under sub-section (1) shall be completed within a period of ninety days”.
14.2 This clause enumerates the circumstances whereunder Complaints Committee can initiate
inquiry. It also specifies the special powers vested in Complaints Committees.
14.3 Strong objections were raised by many stakeholders regarding ICC or LCC being vested
with the quasi-judicial powers of a Civil Court for the purpose of making inquiry. Apprehension
were voiced on the words in sub-clause (2) (c) of clause 11:- “any other matter which may be
prescribed”. This kind of discretionary power, it was alleged, would lend itself to very wide
interpretations and wide-spread misuse. It was suggested that this sub-clause needed to be deleted
as it was ambiguous and open to various interpretations. Other reservations/suggestions of the
stakeholders are as follows:
– only one member is to have a legal background, that too preferably
– very vague powers regarding any other matter have been given
– duties of ICC/LCC need to be spelt out
– model policies and guidelines need to be laid down to facilitate their functioning
– feasibility of having a legal counsel as and when required into be included in the Rules
manner of holding an inquiry to be prescribed in the Rules.
– time-period for producing of documents, oral evidence and for judgement should be
specified in the Act itself.
14.4 The Committee has been given to understand by the Ministry that the inquiry process under
the Bill was proposed as a quasi-judicial proceeding, which was informal in nature. As such,
representation of legal counsel, for both parties, was ordinarily not envisaged. However, at the time
of formulating the Rules, the feasibility of including a provision allowing legal counsel depending
upon the circumstances might be considered. Further, clauses 11 to 13 of the proposed Bill
adequately provided for the powers and process of enquiry to be undertaken by the Internal or

37
Local Committee. There were certain specific aspects such as other powers of the Committees
under Clause 11(2)(c), which were to be prescribed through the Rules to allow for some flexibility.
14.5 The Committee is of the view that very pertinent aspects relating to conduct of
inquiry have been left out to be included in the Rules which leaves a lot of scope for
ambiguity and mis-interpretation. The Committee would like to draw attention to the
following provision included in NCW Draft Bill, 2010:–
“where conciliation under sub-section (1) of section 10 is not arrived at, the Committee
or the Local Committee as the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions of section
15, proceed to make enquiry into the complaint in accordance with its service and
conduct rules/standing orders/policies and where no such rules exist then in such a
manner as may be prescribed”.
This provision in a way makes it clear that the inquiry has to be made in accordance
with service and conduct rules, standing orders or policies. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that clause 11(1) may be modified accordingly.
14.6 Cl ause 11 (3) provides that the inquiry under sub-section (1) should be completed within
a period of ninety days. The Committee would like to point out that in the event of inquiry not
being completed within the stipulated period i.e. ninety days, no liability has been fixed on the
employer. NCW also suggested that culpability of employers be specified for delay of inquiry
beyond ninety days. Committee’s attention has been drawn to a similar provision of NCW Draft
Bill, 2010 which reads as following:
“where the Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, fails to complete the
enquiry within the period specified under sub-section (3) , the employer or the District
Officer, as the case may be, may take such action as may be prescribed.
The Committee suggests that either a similar clause as in the NCW Draft Bill, 2010 be
included in the present Bill or a liability be fixed on the employer which can be included
under clause 25 dealing with penalty.
XV. Clause 12 : Action during pendency of inquiry
15.1 Clause 12 deals with action during pendency of inquiry and reads as follows:–
“During the pendency of inquiry, on a written request made by the aggrieved woman, the
Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, may recommend to the
employer to-
(a) transfer the aggrieved woman or the respondent to any other workplace; or
(b) grant leave to the aggrieved woman; or
(c) grant such other relief to the aggrieved woman as may be prescribed”.
15.2 Ministry’s objective was to provide discretion to the Committee to recommend any interim
relief to the aggrieved woman during pendency of the inquiry. The reliefs envisaged under this
provision were transfer, leave or such other relief, in case the aggrieved woman apprehended or
was facing reprisals or hostile work environment or apprehending intimidation of witnesses as a
result of filing of a complaint. The Bill envisaged such action as temporary measures only.
15.3 Some stakeholders voiced their objection about the transfer of respondent at the request of
aggrieved woman. Transfer of respondent would spell trouble for his family and could also lead
to financial hardship thereby affecting the welfare of the children of the respondent. It was also

38
pointed out that any action which caused detriment to the accused was prohibited in Indian Judicial
System. Therefore, it was suggested that transfer of the respondent should only be done with his
consent and he should be equally entitled to request for grant of leave until the pendency of inquiry.
15.4 The Committee has been given to understand that adequate safeguards were available to
ensure that the perpetrator was not put to a disadvantage as a result of any recommendation of
temporary relief to the aggrieved woman. Complaints Committee would make a recommendation in
this regard only after having considered the facts and circumstances of the case. This provision
was meant to provide interim relief where the complainant so requested on apprehension of
imminent danger or harm or need.
15.5 The Committee is convinced by the justification given by the Ministry. The
Committee feels that the focus should be more on the victim who goes through a lot of
mental trauma and these interim reliefs were meant to make her comfortable during the
inquiry process. The Committee would also like to emphasize that provision should also be
made for safety and security of not only the victim but also the witnesses including
prevention of their victimization during and after the inquiry proceedings. The victim/
witnesses should not be suspended, given memos, inquiry conducted against them for acts
which would be considered as harassment as a fallout of the complaint. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends the Ministry to make necessary provisions in this regard so that
the victim and the witnesses are protected from all sorts of pressure and hostility.
15.6 Sub-clause 2 of Clause 12 provides for leave to be given to the aggrieved woman if the
case is proved. It was pointed out that in reality, the complainant would also have to bear a
financial burden of taking unpaid leave due to the stress caused as a result of making the
complaint. Also, the provision does not stipulate the number of days of leave. Therefore, it was
suggested that the words, ‘if the case is proved’ be deleted.
15.7 The Ministry explained that the number of days of leave to be granted may vary from case
to case and could be decided by the members of the Committee. The Committee, however, is
of the view that a specification of leave period needs to be included in the interest of the
aggrieved woman. Further, the Committee finds some merit in the argument for the
deletion of the words ‘if the cases is proved’ as it would not always be easy for an aggrieved
woman to prove a case of sexual harassment which would not have any witnesses. The
Committee recommends to the Ministry to delete the words as suggested above. The
aggrieved woman should not be hassled for leave issues etc. as the trauma of being sexually
harassed would be too much for her. This would just facilitate an aggrieved woman to file
a complaint of sexual harassment and not to deter her from doing so making her think
about the consequences if her case is not proved.
XVI. Clause 13 : Inquiry Report
16.1 Clause 13 which deals with Inquiry Report reads as follows:—
“ On the completion of an inquiry under this Act, the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be, shall provide a report of its findings to the employer, or
as the case may be, the District Officer and such report be made available to the concerned
parties.
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives at
the conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has not been proved, it shall
recommend to the employer and the District Officer that no action is required to be taken
in the matter.

39
(3) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives at
the conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has been proved, it shall
recommend to the employer or the District Officer, as the case may be–
(i) to take action for sexual harassment as a misconduct in accordance with the provisions
of the service rules applicable to the respondent or where no such service rules have been
made, in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) to deduct, notwithstanding anything in the service rules applicable to the respondent,
from the salary or wages of the respondent such sum of compensation to be paid to the
aggrieved women or to legal heirs, as it may determine, in accordance with the provisions
of section 15:
Provided that in case the employer is unable to make such deduction from the salary of
the respondent due to his being absent from duty or cessation of employment it may direct to the
respondent to pay such compensation to the aggrieved women” .
4. The employer or the District Officer shall act upon the recommendation within sixty days
of its receipt by him.
This clause specifies the recommendations to be made by the Complaints Committee based
on the findings of inquiry conducted by it both where allegation against the respondent has been
proved or not. It also enumerates the kind of recommendations to be made where the allegation
stands proved. It also makes it mandatory for the employer or the District Officer to act upon the
findings of the Inquiry Report within sixty days.
16.2 Committee’s attention was drawn to the existing process of conducting such inquiry being
not very conducive due to its taking unduly long time which resulted in many women complainants,
unable to bear the hostile atmosphere at the workplace. Since no interim relief was forthcoming,
they were often forced to drop the complaint or compromise, or even quit their job. Even after
establishment of guilt of the perpetrator, the management often failed to take action in any time-
bound manner/implement the recommendation of ‘the Complaints Committee, causing further
trauma to the complainant. Apprehensions were voiced that the position might remain unchanged
even after the proposed law coming into face.
16.3 The Committee finds the concern expressed above to be quite genuine. It would like
to point out that under clause 11 (3), process of inquiry has to be completed with ninety
days and the employer or the District Officer has to act upon the recommendation within
sixty days of Inquiry Report being received. Not only this, failure to do so will invite penal
action under clause 25. The Committee would like to point out that chances of such an
instance happening would be very little, keeping in view the composition of these
Committees and their mandate. The Committee observes that as indicated in clause 20, the
District Officer shall be duly-bound to monitor the timely submission of reports furnished
by the Internal Committee or the Local Committee. The Committee is of the view that this
duty should be cast on the employer also so far as Internal Committee is concerned. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that this duty should also be included in clause 19
relating to the duties of employer.
16.4 The Committee feels that these provisions are stringent enough and the Inquiry
process and follow-up action on the findings thereof have to be completed within a specified
time-limit. Only limited area of concern could be a situation when the Complaints
Committee itself unduly delays the submission of the Report.

40
16.5 It was also impressed upon the Committee that specific guidelines relating to the manner
in which an inquiry should be conducted and the procedure for recording of evidence needed to
be laid out which may include but not limited to:
➢ Participation of the complainant
➢ Manner of examination of the witnesses
➢ Nature of questions that are not to be allowed
➢ Non-permissibility of evidence/examination based on aggrieved woman’ s character,
personal/sexual life and history, etc.
The Committee is of the view that the procedural details for conducting the inquiry
need to be enumerated and, accordingly, recommends that the same may be specified in the
Rules to be framed under clause 28.
16.6 Doubts were raised that it was not clear if the employer was bound by the recommendation
of the Committee. The Committee would like to point out that the employer is bound by the
recommendation of the Committee as specified in clause 25 (1) (b) whereunder on the
employer failing to comply with any recommendation made under clause 13, he is liable to
be penalized. Further, the terms of settlement arrived at during conciliation under clause
10 are required to be recorded and forwarded by the ICC/LCC as its recommendation. By
virtue of this, the settlement terms would take the character of a recommendation under
clause 13. The Committee is of the view that with these provisions, the employer is duly-
bound to ensure every single complaint of sexual harassment reaching the Complaints
Committee being handled and disposed of and recommendation of Inquiry Report acted
upon. Chances of his acting otherwise would be very rare.
16.7 Another aspect highlighted was that the Complaints Committee should not be empowered to
give monetary compensation. They should only conduct the inquiry and submit their report. It was
suggested that monetary compensation must be decided by the legal authority. On this issue being
taken up with the Ministry, it was clarified that ICC/LCC was a quasi-judicial, statutory authority
and as such its recommendation would have the force of law. Since compensation for the physical
and mental injury is an integral part of the relief, empowering only a court of law to grant such
a relief may defeat the very purpose of the proposed law.
16.8 The Committee is convinced with the justification given by the Ministry as the
Complaints Committee would be fully empowered to grant relief to the aggrieved
woman. Decision of the compensation etc. by a court of law would mean an agonizing
wait for justice for the aggrieved woman as it may take considerable time to come to
a decision and unnecessarily extend her mental trauma. This would in a way defeat the
very purpose of doing justice to her without any uncalled for publicity. The Committee
would like to mention that complaint mechanism as mandated in the Supreme Court
guidelines is to be created in the employer’s organization for redressal of the complaint
made by the victim.
16.9 Clause 13 (3) of the Bill deals with action to be taken by the employer or the District
Officer once it has been concluded that the allegation against the respondent is proved. This may
include taking action in accordance with the provisions of the service rules/conduct rules or
policies governing disciplinary matters applicable to the respondent and deducting from the salary
or wages of the respondent such sum of compensation to be paid to the aggrieved woman. This
may also include dismissal of the perpetrator from service, where the Service Rules so provide or
as may be prescribed by Rules to the Act.

41
16.10 V arious reservations were expressed by stakeholders on different aspects of sub-clause 3 of
clause 13. They are as follows:–
– norms/criteria for deciding the quantum of compensation need to be specified;
– monetary compensation was not considered viable. If at all there was such
compensation, it should be the responsibility of the employer to make the required
compensation to the complaint;
– action to be taken in accordance with service rules or in absence of service rules, ‘in
such manner as prescribed’, needed to be re-drafted so as to bring clarity on punitive
action. Specific penalties should be mentioned in case no such mention is there in
service rules;
– in case where the respondent was not necessarily an employee, manner of recovery
of compensation from him was not clear;
– instances where sexual harassment occured as a result of an act of omission by any
third party/outsider was not covered;
– chances of conflict with existing laws; and
– no clarity in the Inquiry procedure.
It was also pointed out that the Bill was silent on the rights of the accused. There was no
mention of appeal in the process. No accused should be denied free and fair trial of charges against
him. Right to appeal and revision of judgments would make it possible to have a chance of fair
trial.
16.11 Taking into cognizance the above mentioned concerns, the Committee finds that a lot needs
to be specified so as to make the present clause clear in terms of various aspects relating to
follow-up action on the findings of the Inquiry. Any element of ambiguity or lack of clarity may
create uncalled for or unjustified action from the aggrieved woman’s point of view as well as that
of the respondent. The Committee would also like to point out that the NCW Bill, 2006 and 2010
had provided a procedure for penalizing the accused by the District Officer in cases where no
service and disciplinary rules existed. The present Bill leaves it open ended with the phrase ‘as may
be prescribed’.
16.12 The Committee is of the view that first of all, sexual harassment should be clearly
laid down as an offence in the service rules of all Government employees and in the
contracts of all employees in the private sector. This is in consonance with the directive of
the Supreme Court that Rules/Regulations of Government/Public Sector Bodies relating to
conduct and discipline should include rules/regulations prohibiting sexual harassment and
provide for appropriate penalties in such rules against the offender. For the private
employers, steps should be taken to include the aforesaid prohibition in the Standing Orders
under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946. Secondly, to bring clarity in
the phase ‘as may be prescribed’, the Rules should clearly state the kind of penal action
such an offence would attract. Laying down specific penalties for sexual harassment would
certainly clear the air. As for the prescribed procedure to be followed by the employer after
the Complaints Committee gives its report, the Committee notes that same is to be
provided in the Rules to be framed under clause 28.
16.13 W ith regard to the use of the term ‘sum of compensation’ in sub-clause 3 (ii), it was
suggested that the same may be reframed as ‘damages’ which would be against mental, physical,
personal and professional trauma borne by the complaint. In articulating the granting of remedial

42
damages to the complaint as ‘compensation’, the Bill failed to recognize that it took much
more than money to compensate for the trauma caused by various forms of sexual harassment
at the workplace. The Committee agrees with the suggestion for use of the term ‘damages’
in place of ‘compensation’ as ‘damages’ for any amount of compensation cannot
ever compensate for mental and physical trauma a victim of sexual harassment goes
through. Further, the word ‘damages’ is much more dignified and appropriate compared to
the word ‘compensation’. The Committee, accordingly, recommends modification in sub-
clause (3) (ii).
16.14 Some stakeholders had argued in favour of compensation being paid by the employer/
organization because it was the responsibility of the employer to discipline his own employees and
ensure that they followed service rules. It was suggested that this practice prevalent in the western
countries should be applied in this Bill too. The Ministry submitted that given the diverse nature
of workplaces across the country, including small and unorganized sector enterprises, it would not
be practical to make the employer liable for payment of compensation. At the same time,
recognizing the primary responsibility of the employer to ensure a safe and secure environment at
the workplace, detailed duties of employer had been provided in clause 19. Also, clause 25 lays
down penalties on the employer for non-compliance with provisions of the law.
16.15 The Committee finds merit in the justification given by the Ministry and believes
that apart from the responsibility of the employer, it is also a personal responsibility of
every individual under the service rules or terms of contract that he would not engage in
any act of sexual harassment. Sexual harassment should be specified as a grave misconduct
in the service rules or terms of contract to emphasize upon personal responsibility of an
individual also. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that compensation should be paid
by the accused only and not by the employer.
16.16 The Committee was given to understand that several local laws and special laws had already
been amended to set up Complaints Committees to deal with cases of sexual harassment. The
Committee would appreciate if the assessment of existing institutional mechanism for
handling of sexual harassment cases which might be in place in different categories of
workplaces in the light of Supreme Court guidelines is undertaken by the Ministry and
viable components were made a part of the inquiry procedure to be prescribed through rules
under the proposed law.
16.17 A very important and pertinent issue which had been raised by many stakeholders relates
to the rights of the accused. As mentioned earlier, the Bill is silent on this aspect. It was suggested
that the accused should not be denied free and fair trial. The Committee is of the firm view that
every accused person needs to have a free and fair trial as this is the very basis of the
principle of natural justice. The Committee observes that clause 3 (i) simply mentions that
copy of the inquiry report is to be made available to the concerned parties. The Committee
believes that there should be a proper procedure for giving a chance to the accused and also
to the aggrieved woman, if not satisfied to place their side of the story before the
Complaints Committee. Not just this, before forwarding its recommendations, the
Complaints Committee should give a final chance to the accused to convey his position. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to include an appropriate provision in
the Bill or specify in the Rules to ensure a fair and free inquiry proceedings from the point
of view of the accused.
XVII. Clause 14 : Punishment for false or malicious complaint and false evidence
17.1 Clause 14 which deals with punishment for false or malicious complaints and false evidence
reads as follows:–

43
“(i) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be arrives at
a conclusion that the allegation against the respondent is false or malicious or the
aggrieved woman or any other person making the complaint has produced any forged or
misleading document, it may recommend to the employer or the District Officer, as the case
may be, to take action against the woman or the person who has made the complaint under
sub-section (1)  or sub-section (2)  of section 9, as the case may be, in accordance with the
provisions of the service rules applicable to her or him or where no such service rules exist,
in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that a mere inability to substantiate a complaint or provide adequate proof need
not attract action against the complaint under this section:
Provided further that the malicious intent or falsehood on part of the complaint shall be
established after an inquiry in accordance with the procedure prescribed, before any action
is recommended.
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives at
a conclusion that during the inquiry any witness has given false evidence or produced any
forged or misleading document, it may recommend to the employer of the witness or the
District Officer, as the case may be to take action in accordance with the provisions of the
service rules applicable to the said witness or where no such service rules exist, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
17.2 The Committee was given to understand that the objective of having such a provision in
the proposed legislation was that there was a section of society which held the view that woman-
friendly legislation was prone to misuse. Their concern had been addressed by empowering the
Complaints Committee to recommend action against those making false or malicious complaint.
Further, mere inability to substantiate the complaint or provide adequate proof, however, would not
make a person liable for punishment. The malicious intent was required to be proved before
initiating action under this provision.
17.3 Strong reservations have been expressed against this provision from majority of stakeholders
which are as follows:–
– this provision would discourage those women who required protection from sexual
harassment at the workplace and needed to use the law;
– it added to the obstacle faced by women in their unequal labour relationship and their
gendered relationship with their employer;
– intent of complaint may not be false but the lack of evidence or objectivity stating the
issue could be regarded as false;
– distinction to be made between false and malicious;
– instead of punishing the women who has made a false allegation, she should be given
a chance to explain and withdraw her complaint; and
– present provision under the IPC could be invoked to deal with forged evidence and
false or malicious complaints.
17.4 The Committee has been given be to understand that a provision for punishment for false
or malicious complaint and false evidence in the proposed legislation would significantly deter
women from filing a case of sexual harassment. Most instances of sexual harassment took place
in private or behind closed doors which in most cases might not have any documentary evidence
or any witnesses. In such a situation, a subordinate had to muster up courage to make a complaint

44
who might also face social approbation from others in her workplace. Hence, wide opposition to
inclusion of penal provision for false and malicious complaint was expressed as it was likely to
defeat the real purpose of the proposed law.
17.5 Also, a distinction had to be made between false and malicious complaints. The provision
penalized even false complaints which may not be malicious. The clarification given by the Ministry
was that a specific safeguard under the proviso to clause 14 (1) to ensure that any complaint
merely by virtue of it not being proved was not penalized as false complaint was already there.
Another viewpoint which was placed before the Committee was that there was a need to provide
safeguards against malicious complaints.
17.6 The Committee understands the complex position of an aggrieved woman who has to
muster great courage to come forward to file a complaint of sexual harassment. Also, given
the unequal nature of relations with the employer, it would not be easy for the aggrieved
woman to prove her case. The Committee realizes that acts of sexual harassment take place
behind closed doors and it is a tough task to prove the authencity of a complaint. Also, such
instances occur where witnesses are not readily available. If at all a witness gathers courage
to come forward, such a provision may act as a deterrent. The Supreme Court in Vishaka
Guidelines had stated clearly that it had to be ensured that victims or witnesses are not
victimized or discriminated against while dealing with complaints of sexual harassment The
Committee believes that a distinction needs to be made between false and malicious
complaints. For any false complaint, no punishment may be prescribed. However, if it is
proved that a complaint has been filed with malicious intent, only then action against the
aggrieved woman may be considered as it affects the character and credibility of the
accused. The punishment for filing complaints with malicious intent should be provided in
the Rules.
17.7 The Committee understands the apprehensions of some stakeholders regarding the
misuse of the proposed legislation and takes note of their suggestion to change the word
‘may recommend’ to ‘shall recommend’ so as to make it mandatory for the Complaint
Committee to take action against complainants filing false and malicious complaints. The
Committee would like to point out that the focus of the proposed legislation is to provide
redressal to aggrieved woman who may have faced sexual harassment and not on the misuse
of the law by some. The Committee takes note of the fact that any provision should not
be there which may deter an already aggrieved woman to file a genuine case of sexual
harassment. The Committee observes that malicious intent or falsehood on the part of the
complainant will have to be established after an inquiry to be conducted in accordance with
the prescribed procedure. Such a provision will ensure that this provision will be resorted
to only in genuine cases and disposed of after a proper inquiry.
XVIII. Clause 15 : Determination of Compensation
18.1 Clause 15 which deals with determination of compensation reads as follows:–
“For the purpose of determining the compensation to be paid to the aggrieved woman under clause
(ii) of sub-section 13 , the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall
have regard to –
(a) the mental trauma, pain, suffering and emotional distress caused to the aggrieved
woman;
(b) the loss in the career opportunity due to the incident of sexual harassment;
(c) medical expenses incurred by the victim for physical or psychiatric treatment;

45
(d) the income and financial status of the respondent;
(e) feasibility of such payment in lump sum or in installments”.
18.2 This clause providing for determination of compensation by ICC or LCC should take into
consideration the following aspects like mental trauma, pain, suffering, emotional distress caused
to the aggrieved woman; loss in the career opportunity; medical expenses for physical or
psychiatric treatment; income and financial status of the respondent and the feasibility of such
payment in lump sum or in installments.
18.3 Majority of the stakeholders have supported this provision and have given their own
suggestions for its improvement like:–
– loss of earnings to be taken into consideration while determining compensation;
– apart from compensation, a heavy fine should be there to act as a deterrent;
– procedure for realization of compensation and recovery needed to be spelt out;
– determination of compensation to be seen and computed as damages; and
– money compensation should be limited to the actual money loss suffered like paid
leave, salary loss or medical loss.
18.4 The Committee was given to understand that Ministry’s purpose of specifically including
monetary compensation under any law was to compensate the victim for the physical as well as
the mental injury/harm suffered. Keeping this in view, the provision for monetary compensation
under clause 13 (3) read with clause 15 included the mental trauma suffered by the aggrieved
woman, in addition to the actual money loss incurred. The Bill aimed to create a safe environment
for women at the workplace through preventive means as well as deterrent action. It was expected
that a liability to pay compensation would add to the deterrent effect of punitive clauses.
18.5 The Committee agrees with the intent of the Ministry for determining compensation
based on several factors relating to various forms of suffering and loss of the aggrieved
women. It also takes into consideration the suggestions of the stakeholders and is of the
view that the elaborate procedure for realization of compensation and recovery needs to be
spelt out so that the aggrieved woman is given compensation as determined by ICC or LCC.
The Committee would like to reiterate the stance of the Ministry that compensation does
not go against the spirit of the Bill and is not intended to be an alternative to punishment
for an act of sexual harassment.
XIX. Clause 16 Prohibition of publication or making known contents of complaint and
inquiry proceedings and Clause 17 : Penalty for publication or making known
contents and inquiry proceedings.
19.1 Clause 16 entails prohibition of publication or making known contents of complaint and
inquiry proceedings. Clause 17 provides penalty for publication or making known contents of
complaint and inquiry proceedings.
19.2 Clause 16 specifically excludes any publication or communication regarding the complaint,
the parties and proceeding from the purview of the RTI. The Committee was informed that this
was done with the specific objective of ensuring that the identity of the complaint was protected
so that she was not further victimized or reprimanded. It further clarified that information regarding
justice secured by any victim may be disseminated as it was a matter of public interest without
disclosing the identity of the victim.

46
19.3 Clause 17 provides for penalty for publication or making known contents of complaints and
inquiry proceedings. It provides that where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal
with the complaint, enquiry or any recommendations or action to be taken under the provisions of
the proposed legislation contravenes the provision of clause 16 relating to prohibition of publication
or making known contents of complaint and enquiry proceedings, he shall be liable for penalty in
accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said person or where no such
service rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed by rules.
19.4 Reservations have been expressed by many stakeholders with respect to these two clauses
on the following grounds:–
– there was no need for a special provision in the Bill whereunder the RTI Act could
not be used to unearth cases of false allegation and misuse of the legislation;
– blockage on the use of RTI Act was undemocratic and unconstitutional and obstructed
transparency;
– when either the complaint on the respondent wishes to approach any court of law for
justice, they should have a right to the details and proceedings of the inquiry given
in the report to provide details of the case to the court;
– clause 17 included to systemically oppress the whistle-blowers if they choose to bring
out the truth to the public.
19.5 Ministry’s justification for having these two clauses was to protect the confidentiality of
complaint regardless of what was contained in the RTI Act. The idea was to give the complainant
confidence to take recourse to the mechanism provided without fear and stigma.
19.6 The Committee would like to emphasize upon the sensitivity of a case of sexual
harassment and the essentiality of maintaining confidentiality of the complainant so that
she does not regret filing a complaint of sexual harassment. The justification given by the
Ministry seems to be very convincing. The Committee would like to point out that justice
secured by any victim can be accessed as it is a matter of public interest. Only the identity
of the victim is not to be disclosed. There is no question of highlighting only genuine cases
and hiding the false ones as under clause 22 the employer is required to include the
information regarding cases filed and their disposal in the Annual Report of the
organization. The Committee agrees with the stand of Ministry that in no way the RTI Act
is being subverted. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 22 of the RTI Act, a legislation
enacted subsequently can be outside its purview in case specific exception to this effect has
been made in that subsequent law. In fact, clause 16 is in conformity with section 8 (j) of
the RTI Act and there is no inconsistency between the two.
19.7 As for clause 17, the Committee is of the view that it should be read with clause 16.
It is meant to safeguard the aggrieved woman against any mischievous intention/deliberate
act so as to put her in awkward position by disclosing the details of case filed by her. Hence,
the Committee finds no problem in clauses 16 and 17 as the intention of provisions is to
protect the aggrieved woman from further harassment of any kind or public ridicule.
XX. Clause 18 : Appeal
20.1 Clause 18 provides that any person aggrieved by the recommendations made by the
Complaints Committee or non-implementation of such recommendations or by imposition of penalty
under clause 17 may prefer an appeal to the court or tribunal in accordance with the service rules
applicable to the said person or where no such service rules exist then, without prejudice to

47
provisions contained in any other law for the time being in force, the person aggrieved may prefer
an appeal in such manner as may be prescribed by rules.
20.2 Strong reservations were voiced by some of the stakeholders on court or tribunal being
designated as the appellate forum on the following grounds:–
– the case shall no more remain confidential;
– the victim shall not be in a position to bear the expenses;
– the process for getting justice would be too long; and
– the victim shall be hesitant to appear connected in the court.
20.3 Another issue which was raised was that the Inquiry Report of Complaints Committee
should be considered final, with no further disciplinary inquiry being undertaken. Any further
inquiry shall only be repetitive and delay the process and also put both the victim and witnesses
in an awkward position who may not have the courage to come forward again. In this regard,
attention of the Committee was drawn to the following directions given by the Supreme Court in
the case of Dr. Medha Kotwal Lele & others V . Union of India:
“The investigation and the report of the Complaints Committee are to be treated as final
work in sexual harassment case and the process is not to be repeated by any other in-house
Inquiry Committee”.
On the issue of appellate forum of court or tribunal, it was clarified by the Ministry that
wherever Service Rules prescribed the Court of Law as an appellate forum, an appeal would be
preferred before that court. Even in cases where Service Rules do not exist, a Court of Law may
be prescribed as the appellate forum through the Rules.
20.4 The Committee while appreciating the concerns about likelihood of aggrieved woman
as well as witnesses being made to face further harassment and uncalled for exposure in
case of appeal being made in the Court or Tribunal would like to point out that principle
of natural justice has to be adhered to in every case. Sexual harassment cases cannot be
made an exception. The Committee would like to point out that with required steps and
extra precaution taken by making the conduct of appeal proceedings in camera, chances of
victims/witnesses facing undue harassment will not be there. It would also be better if onus
of proving the case should be on the employer.
20.5 So far as Supreme Court directives in Dr. Medha Kotwal case is concerned, the
Committee observes that the proposed legislation envisages no further inquiry after the
Report of the Complaints Committee has been given which would be mandatorily
implemented by the employer. However, the right to appeal both to the aggrieved woman
and the respondent stays in consonance with principles of natural justice.
XXI. Clause 19 : Duties of Employer
21.1 Clause 19 entails the duties of an employer. It provides that every employer shall –
(a) provide a safe working environment at the workplace which shall include safety from the persons
coming into contact at the workplace; (b) display the order constituting the Internal Committee at
any conspicuous place in the workplace; (c) undertake workshops and training programmes at
regular intervals for sensitizing the employees regarding the provisions of the proposed legislation;
(d) provide necessary facilities to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may
be, for dealing with the complaint and conducting enquiry; (e) assist in securing the attendance of
respondent and witnesses before the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may

48
be; (f) make available such information to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee as it may
require having regard to the complaint; (g) provide assistance to the woman if she so chooses to
file a complaint in relation to the offence under the Indian Penal Code or any other law for the
time being in force; and (h) initiate action, under the Indian Penal Code or any other law for the
time being in force, against the perpetrator after the conclusion of the enquiry, or without waiting
for the enquiry, where the perpetrator is not an employee in the workplace at which the incident
of sexual harassment took place.
21.2 All the stakeholders supported the provision relating to duties of the employer with some
additions in the duties already mentioned. They are as follows:–
– punishment should be prescribed for employers/administrative heads who do not form
the redressal mechanism at the workplace;
– responsibility to take necessary action to maintain an atmosphere free from prejudice
in the workplace during the pendency of inquiry;
– it should be stated that the employer would not alter to the prejudice of the
complainant/supporter/service of their conditions of service prevailing immediately
prior to the complaint being lodged as a consequence to the filing and prosecuting of
a complaint under this Act;
– preventive measures to be adopted by the employer like a Sexual Harassment Policy,
undertaking training for attitudinal change, gender sensitization and awareness
regarding women’s rights as citizens etc;
– strict action against use of unparliamentary, derogatory and foul language within the
premises which would affect the discipline and decorum of the work place; and
– the quality of assistance to be provided by the employer must be spelt out clearly.
21.3 The Committee observes that recognizing the primary responsibility of the employer to
ensure a safe and secure environment at the workplace, the Ministry has emphasized upon this
provision which provides for detailed duties of the employer.
21.4 The Committee finds that a similar set of duties of the employers are included in
the the Committee, however, observes that duties covering preventive Vishaka Guidelines
action on the part of employer as substantiated in these guidelines have not found a place
in clause 19. The Committee would like to draw attention of the Ministry of the following
duties mentioned in Supreme Court guidelines.
(a) Express prohibition of sexual harassment at the workplace should be notified,
published and circulated in appropriate ways.
(b) The Rules/Regulations of Government and Public Sector bodies relating to
conduct and discipline should include rules/regulations prohibiting sexual
harassment and provide for appropriate penalties in such rules against the
offender.
(c) As regards private employers, steps should be taken to include the aforesaid
prohibitions in the standing orders under the Industrial Employment (Standing
Orders) Act, 1946.
(d) Appropriate work conditions should be provided in respect of work, leisure,
health and hygiene to further ensure that there is no hostile environment

49
towards women at workplace and no employee woman should have reasonable
grounds to believe that she is disadvantaged in connection with her
employment.
The Committee is of the view that the duties of employers as mentioned above
should be incorporated in this provision along with the existing ones.
21.5 Committee’s attention was drawn to few valid objections to duty indicated in sub-clauses
(h) as mentioned below:-
– employer holds no right to take criminal action against a perpetrator who is not his
employee. This would be a crime against that person;
– locating such a person will be beyond the control of the employer and impose uncalled
hardship for him;
– matter of taking action against a non-employee before the conclusion of inquiry also
needs consideration.
21.6 The Committee is of the opinion that sub-clause (h) seems to be problematic as the
employer cannot in any way take action against non-employee or even make an effort to
locate him. Certain practical difficulties would not make it possible for the employer to rope
in non-employee within the ambit of the Bill. The only way out for the employer, the
Committee feels, would be to assist and give full co-operation to its female employee who
has been sexually harassed in filing a case under the IPC.
XXII. Clause 20 : Duties and power of District Officer
22.1 This clause lays down duties and power of District Officer. It provides that the District
Officer shall monitor the timely submission of reports furnished by the Internal Committee or the
Local Committee and take such measures as may be necessary for engaging NGOs for creation
of awareness on sexual harassment and the rights of women.
22.2 The Committee observes that on a comparative analysis of this provision with clause
22 relating to Duties of District Officer as given in the NCW Draft Bill, 2010, role of
District Officer as envisaged under the proposed law seems to be somewhat diluted. This is
further borne out by the fact that a number of duties of employer as indicated in clause
19 are not considered appropriate enough to be assigned to the Distinct Officer. The
Committee strongly feels that this would be a serious anomaly, resulting in non-delivery of
justice to aggrieved woman. The Committee would like to point out that the District Officer
is mandated to set up a Local Complaints Committee in every district and sub-district
wherever required which will be assigned the role of conducting an inquiry against the
employer himself. In such a scenario, absence of such duties like providing necessary
facilities to LCC for dealing with the complaint and conducting inquiry, assisting in securing
these attendances of respondents and witnesses before the Complaints Committee and
making available the required information to it cannot be considered acceptable. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that duties assigned to the District Officer should be
on the same pattern as envisaged for the employer to the extent possible.
XXIII. Clause 23 : Appropriate Government to monitor implementation and maintain data
23.1 This clause provides that the appropriate Government, i.e. Central or State Government shall
monitor the implementation of the proposed legislation and maintain data on the number of cases
filed and disposed of in respect of all cases of sexual harassment at workplace.

50
23.2 The Committee was informed that the Supreme Court guidelines did not lay down any
Central monitoring mechanism but placed the onus on the Complaints Committees to make an
annual report to the Government Department concerned. However, in the absence of any centralised
data collection mechanism, the implementation of the Supreme Court guidelines in the private sector
could not be ascertained. In the light of the experience gained since the Supreme Court guidelines
were given in 1997, the Committee feels that an effective monitoring mechanism has to be put in
place if the objective of the proposed law is to be achieved. The Committee, however, has one
suggestion in this regard. The responsibility of monitoring the implementation of various
provisions needs to be given to the National or State Commissions for Women who would
be better equipped for handling such a task in view of their experience and expertise of
working for the cause of women. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
provision relating to Monitoring of the Act stipulated in the draft NCW Bill, 2010
reproduced below may be included in the proposed law in place of clause 23:
“The National Commission for Women or, as the case may be, the State Commission for
Women shall, in addition to the functions assigned to them under their respective Acts
examine and review the implementation of this Act and advise the appropriate Government
on its implementation”.
XXIV. Clause 24 : Power  to call for information and inspection of records
24.1. This clause empowers appropriate Government to call for information and inspection of
records. It provides that the appropriate Government, i.e. Central or State Government, on being
satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest or in the interest of women employees at a
workplace to do so, by order in writing call upon any employer or District Officer to furnish in
writing such information relating to sexual harassment as it may require, and authorize any officer
to make inspection of the records and workplace in relation to sexual harassment who shall submit
a report of such inspection to it within a specified period.
24.2 The Committee, while appreciating the spirit behind this provision as a part of an
effective monitoring mechanism envisaged to be put in place in the proposed law has a word
of caution. The Committee finds that Report on the cases of sexual harassment handled by
an establishment will be submitted to the State Government annually and the appropriate
Government is also mandated to monitor the implementation of the Act and maintain data
on the number of cases filed and properly disposed of. Provision in clause 24 authorizing
any by officer to inspect an establishment in public interest or in the interest of women
employees on the part of the appropriate Government seems to be somewhat unjustified.
The Committee is of the view that such a power may be given only in case of an extreme
case of sexual harassment taking place and not being handled properly by the concerned
authorities and a specific Complaint/Report being made by the complainant/Complaints
Committee/State Commission for Women.
XXV. Clause 25 : Penalty for non-compliance with provisions of Act
25.1 Clause 25 provides for penalty for non-compliance with provisions of the proposed
legislation. It provides that where the employer failed to constitute an Internal Committee, failed to
take action under clauses 13, 14 and 22 and contravened or attempted to contravene or abets
contravention of other provisions of the proposed legislation or any rules made thereunder, then,
he should be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. It further provides
that if any employer, after having been previously convicted of an offence punishable under the
proposed legislation subsequently committed and is convicted of the same offence, then, he would
be liable to twice the punishment imposed on his licence or withdrawal or non-renewal or approval

51
or cancellation of the registration by the Government or local authority, required for carrying on
his business or activity.
25.2 Many of the stakeholders have expressed reservation about the cancellation or
withdrawal of registration which would result in the closure of the business operations of the
workplace and would result in loss to ex-chequer in the form of loss of revenue from octroi
value added tax, income tax etc. It would also affect the employees and vendors, dependent
on the operations of the workplace, inspite of their not committing any uncalled for action. It
was pointed out that industry was a human centric industry. Employers licence withdrawal/
non-renewal/approval cancellation of registration due to non-compliance with the law would
lead to shutting down of units making thousand of employees jobless. It was suggested that
this should be modified or removed so that the guilty were punished but it should not adversely
impact harmless people.
25.3 The Committee has been given to understand by the Ministry that this clause had been
included to provide a strong deterrent for the employer who commits an offence under the Act for
the second time. An alternative provision in NCW Draft Bill, 2010 indicates that revocation,
suspension of any licence/registration for such period as may be specified, issued under any law
for the time being in force, provided that an opportunity to the employer/respondent to be heard
is afforded before initiating any action. The Committee agrees that strong deterrent should be
provided in the Bill itself so that a safe and secure workplace is ensured by an employer
and the accused should be brought to book at any cost. However, in doing so, the impact
of punishing the employer for not complying with the provisions of the Act should not
adversely affect the other employees or dependents of an organization. Cancellation of
license or withdrawal of non-renewal or cancellation of registration by the Government or
local authority would harm the interests of many persons associated with a particular
organization because it is a matter of means of livelihood for many. Also adequate
opportunity should be given to the employer to present his case before any such action is
taken against him if the clause is proposed to be retained.
25.4 The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Ministry to modify the provision in
such a way so as to safeguard the interests of other employees, dependents parties and at
the same time penalize the employer in a certain manner which does not affect innocent
lives.
XXVI. Conclusion
26.1 The Committee believes that a legislation for the protection of women against sexual
harassment at workplace is a much needed one for ensuring a secure and safe workplace
so that women can work with dignity. It took thirteen years to implement the Vishaka
Guidelines into a full fledged legislation. Sexual harassment is a sad reality of our society.
It is an index of moral degradation of society in recent years. Although it is high time for
such a law to come into effect, a legislation has its own limitation also. It entails the action
of a mechanism for redressal of complaints of cases of sexual harassment but cannot
change the moral fabric of the society. It is where the need for cultural education and
respect for womanhood which has been the cherished value of our culture is felt. The
Committee would like to emphasize on the importance of inculcating such values in a child
at tender age itself so that it is made known since childhood itself that sexual harassment
of women or violence against women is most heinous. This would certainly indirectly result
in diminishing acts of sexual harassment. Not just this, proper training programmes and
awareness generation programme should be given due importance so as to educate
employees about respect for womanhood by all possible methods.

52
26.2 Further, proper implementation of the law and its monitoring is essential for the
success of this legislation which should achieve its objective of protecting women from acts
of sexual harassment at workplace by providing a safe and secure environment/workplace
and also a mechanism for redressal of complaints of sexual harassment.
26.3 The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
26.4 The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
26.5 The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the
amendments/additions suggested by it.
26.6 The Committee would like the Ministry to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill.

53
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
I. INTRODUCTION
The Committee observes that all workplaces including Central and State Government
institutions are required to follow Supreme Court guidelines on sexual harassment laid
down in the Vishaka case in 1997. It was a path-breaking directive given by the Apex Court
of the country meant to create an enabling and safe environment at the workplace for the
rapidly increasing women workforce. A specific query about setting up of an appropriate
complaint redressal mechanism of internal committee as mandated under the guidelines
has, however, revealed a very discouraging scenario. In the absence of any laid down central
mechanism, no centralized database on the number of complaints filed, their disposal and
punishment given is available with the Ministry. The only feedback indicated to the
Committee is that in the Government sector, be it in the Central Ministries/Departments,
Public Sector establishments or States/UTs, Supreme Court guidelines are being complied
with. The Committee notes that out of 68 Central Ministries/Departments from whom
information was sought about the number of cases reported during the period 2007-10, that
too in response to a Parliament Question, response was received from only 49 Ministries/
Departments, out of which 33 Ministries/Departments reporting no case of sexual
harassment. So far as setting up of Complaints Committees in States is concerned, out of
20 States/UTs providing information, only 2 States/UTs were reported to have received
complaints of sexual harassment. What is more disturbing is the admission of complete
helplessness in the context of private sector expressed by the Ministry. Its simple statement
that with no prescribed monitoring and data collection mechanism, implementation of
Supreme Court guidelines in the private sector could not be ascertained and in the absence
of any penal provisions, compliance by the employer in the private sector may have been
lax, clearly establishes the fact that so far Supreme Court guidelines have virtually
remained on paper in majority of workplaces. (Para 1.8)
It has taken more than a decade to formulate the legislation and during this period,
Supreme Court guidelines, although envisaged to provide a safe and secure environment to
women at workplace women have failed to reach all the victims and provide relief. The
Committee, therefore, while welcoming the proposed legislation, believes that the proposed
legislation needs to be implemented with immediate effect so that the Vishaka guidelines
can be translated into a strong legislation for protection, prevention and redressal of
grievances of sexual harassment of women at workplace. The Committee also appreciates
the initiative taken by the Ministry for drafting the proposed Bill as it is high time that
such a law sees the light of the day. The Committee believes that women workforce should
have the right to work with dignity in a safe and secure environment and prevention,
protection and redressal of cases of sexual harassment is a must. (Para 1.9)
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
The Committee observes that very extensive consultation exercise spread over almost
6-7 years held at different fora with a very large number of stakeholders has given final
shape to the draft legislation under its consideration. Both the Ministry of Women and
Child Development and the National Commission for Women have played a major role in
this process, complimenting the initiatives and efforts of each other. The Committee,
53

54
however, finds that there are a few areas where suggestions made by the Commission
although very strongly put forth have not been considered to be acceptable by the Ministry
due to one reason or the other. The Committee has made an attempt to analyse such
provisions at the relevant place in the Report and incorporated the same, if considered
justifiable. (Para 2.5)
The Committee, is however, constrained to observe that these extensive consultations
with NGOs, women groups, various Departments/Ministries etc. and the National
Commission for Women indicate certain very visible gaps. Firstly, views of stakeholders
representing men’s cause were not called for by the Ministry. The Committee has been
given to understand that the Ministry’s Bill is based on the NCW’s drafts of 2006 and 2010.
However, it is rather surprising that at the finalization stage of the present draft, NCW was
not included in the consultation process. Since this legislation has been brought forward
with the objective of protecting women from sexual harassment at workplace and providing
not just a complaints redressal mechanism but also cast a duty on the employer to provide
a safe and secure environment to its women employees, employers, both from private and
Government Sector representing varied women work force right from a Government
establishment to a shop/small worksite also need to be considered a major stakeholder. The
Committee strongly believes that views of all affected parties or stakeholders should be
taken into consideration in order to have wide consultations and a balanced view on the
subject under consideration. (Para 2.6)
The Committee appreciates the initiative and efforts of NCW in drafting the
proposed legislation. The Committee has taken note of the observations and suggestions of
the Commission and have incorporated some suggestions at appropriate places in the
proposed Bill. (Para 2.10)
The Committee’s interaction with bodies/organizations representing employers
representing varied workforce gave an insight to the Committee to understand the proposed
legislation from their viewpoint. Quite a few inputs highlighting the practicality and viability
of provisions incorporated in the Bill were put forth before the Committee. It would not be
wrong to conclude that in the absence of such a thought-provoking interaction with a very
crucial segment of stakeholders, examination of the Bill by the Committee would have
remained incomplete. (Para 2.11)
The Committee had a final meeting with the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development for clarifications with respect to some very pertinent issues and concerns
raised by many stakeholders before it. The Committee took note of the views of all
stakeholders with respect to problem areas in the Bill, apprehensions, suggestions etc.
Detailed questionnaires were forwarded to all these stakeholders for their comments, apart
from forwarding two questionnaires to the Ministry of Women and Child Development as
well as written memoranda for their comments. Feedback received from the Ministry and
the stakeholders has proved to be of immense help to the Committee in formulating its
views on the various provisions of the Bill. (Para 2.12)
III. IMPORTANT ISSUES/CONCERNS RAISED
The Committee has observed that there were a number of issues/concerns raised by
many stakeholders not only in their written memoranda submitted by them but also
highlighted during their interaction with the Committee. The Committee is of the view that
these issues are very pertinent and have adequate relevance so far as efficacy of the
proposed legislation is concerned and accordingly need to be reflected either in the proposed
legislation itself or in the rules/guidelines to be framed thereunder. (Para 3.1)

55
Issue of Gender-Neutrality
The Committee takes note of strong reservations and angst regarding this gender-
specific Bill allegedly tilted towards women. At the same time, the Committee would like
to point out that it is a sad reality that women have been at a disadvantaged position and
have been discriminated, abused and harassed. With the increase in the number of working
women both in the organized and unorganized sector, the situation at ground level continues
to be disturbing. What is more worrisome is that Supreme Court guidelines given way back
in 1997 continue to remain ineffective as borne out by the feedback given by the Ministry.
In such a scenario, it is imperative that a legislation adequately providing for specific
protection of women from sexual harassment at workplace is enacted. The Committee would
also like to point out that a balanced and well-structured mechanism giving equal
opportunity to both the aggrieved woman and respondent with adequate safeguards and
checks is unlikely to give any biased protection to women workforce. (Para 3.4)
The Committee also believes that with regard to cases of sexual harassment of men
and women at workplace, survey/studies need to be conducted by the Ministry at regular
interval. This will not only allay the apprehensions of the proposed legislation being biased
against men but would also facilitate any remedial steps, if so required. The Committee,
keeping in mind the interests of all concerned, feels that the viability of having a
provision of enabling nature where circumstances of sexual harassment cases of men at
workplace can be tackled may be explored. Alternatively, an employer/estabilshment can
be mandated to report cases/instances of male sexual harassment also in their Annual
Report. This may help to understand the real picture of sexual harassment of both men
and women. (Para 3.5)
Issue of inclusion of domestic workers within the ambit of the Bill
The Committee observes that support for inclusion of domestic workers came from
almost all the stakeholders appearing before the Committee. Domestic workers comprise
about 30 per cent of female workforce in the unorganized sector. This section is most
vulnerable to sexual harassment. Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the
fact that the Government of India had voted in favour of ILO Convention 189 for Decent
Work for Domestic Workers, thereby endorsing home as a workplace. The Committee is not
convinced by the Ministry’s contention about practical difficulties envisaged in the absence
of any code of conduct laid down within the household. (Para 3.11)
The Committee is in full agreement for inclusion of domestic workers within the
ambit of the proposed Bill. Expecting such a vulnerable group to take recourse to IPC in
a sexual harassment case cannot be considered viable. The Committee believes that privacy
of a household cannot be an excuse to shield uncalled for acts against this category of
women workforce. The Committee is of the view that innovative thinking is required for
making the inclusion of domestic workers possible. Also, the experience gained in the
implementation of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 can be
utilized in the cases of sexual harassment. Redressing cases of sexual harassment of
domestic workers within the confines of a home could be worked out. The Committee would
like to emphasize here on the involvement of and pro-active role to be played by the NGOs,
Police Stations, RWAs and Panchayats in helping the aggrieved domestic worker to get
justice through this legislation. The Committee would like to impress upon the fact that
even domestic workers who are women have equal rights like the other working women to
have a safe and secure workplace and right to work with dignity. The Committee,
accordingly, is of the view that necessary changes in the Bill especially with respect to the

56
definitions of employee, employer and workplace are required so as to ensure that the
domestic workers are brought within the ambit of this Bill thereby upholding their right to
work with dignity. (Para 3.13)
Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the fact that the policy for domestic
workers being formulated by Ministry of Labour and recommendations of the Working
Group on Domestic Workers Issues set up by the National Advisory Council, as and when
given, would give useful inputs which can be incorporated in the Rules and if necessary, in
the Act itself. Further, the Committee has been given to understand that NCW has drafted
a Domestic Workers Welfare and Social Security Bill, 2010 which has been submitted to the
Ministry in September, 2010. While going through the Bill, the Committee finds it to be a
comprehensive legislation covering all aspects of working conditions of domestic workers
and measures for their welfare. The Committee feels that inputs can also be taken from
this draft especially in defining a domestic worker, employee, employer and a workplace.
The Committee will be giving its suggestions in the relevant provisions of the Bill for
bringing the women domestic workers within its ambit. (Para 3.14)
Role of NGOs in the implementation of the legislation
The Committee finds that all the above issues merit consideration and need to be
looked into. If need be, required modifications be made in the relevant provisions. The
Committee has been given to understand that a better understanding of the expertise
available in the field would emerge as the law is implemented. Based on the experience, a
view would be taken on prescribing more specific qualifications for selection of NGOs as
Chairperson/members of the Complaints Committees in the Rules. The Committee also
strongly feels that this path-breaking legislation would need to be publicized to make the
benefits accessible to the aggrieved women in the real sense. Here the NGOs can play a
very effective role. The Ministry in co-ordination with the National Commission for Women
and State Commissions will have to take the initiative in involving NGOs in creating
awareness about the legislation amongst all concerned. (Para 3.17)
Training of members of Complaints Committees
The Committee observes that mere setting up of Complaints Committees will not
serve the purpose. In view of the experience gained so far as the effectiveness of the
institutional mechanism set up under the Supreme Court guidelines given in 1997 is
concerned, the Committee strongly feels that viability of the two Complaints Committees
envisaged to be set up under the proposed legislation needs to be ensured from the very
beginning. During the interactions with women organizations, this fact was emphasized
again and again that members of Complaints Committees wherever established were not
sensitized enough and showed a general lack of awareness about their duties and role. The
Committee would appreciate if awareness camps are conducted with the support of State
Legal Aid Forum, trade unions etc. Besides that, officers of workplaces including the
employers will also have to be made aware about their role as envisaged under the
legislation. Here again, the Ministry in co-ordination with National and State Commissions
for Women can play a pro-active role with the support, guidance and experience gained by
members of existing institutional mechanisms set up under the Supreme Court guidelines.
Mere assigning the responsibility of creating awareness on the issue of sexual harassment
and sensitizing those concerned about the provisions of the law will not be effective. What
is required is orientation of the members of both the Committees about their role and
mandate which can be specified through a well laid-out training programme through the
Rules. (Para 3.18)

57
Role of National and State Commissions for Women
The Committee is of the opinion that the National and State Women Commissions
could be assigned a statutory oversight role. This could be easily made possible with
involvement/engagement of NGOs/bodies like Employer Associations, Trade unions etc. on a
continuous basis. The Committee feels that this would gradually lead to every workplace
putting certain monitoring and evaluation mechanisms in place and giving these processes
sufficient publicity to ensure that rights of working women guaranteed under the Act are
upheld. The Committee also takes note of the assurance given by the Secretary for making
a provision in the rules which would enable the National/State Commissions for Women to
receive complaints and forward the same to the concerned Committee and also to ask for
details of the outcome of inquiry/action recommended. The Committee is of the firm view
that both the Commissions need to be given a specific role which should be specified in the
Act itself. Leaving it to the rule-framing stage is simply a manner of diluting the real
objective of a justified suggestion. The Committee will be making its recommendation in
this regard in the relevant clauses. (Para 3.21)
V . The Committee makes the following observations/recommendations on some of the
provisions of the Bill
CLAUSE 1 : SHORT TITLE, EXTENT AND COMMENCEMENT
The Committee has been given to understand that the objective of the Bill is three-
fold:- protection against sexual harassment of women at workplace; prevention of sexual
harassment; and redressal of complaints. The Committee observes that preventive aspect
has been reflected only in clauses 19 and 20 which lay down duties of employer and district
officers. As per Clause 19, employer is duty-bound to provide a safe working environment
and undertake workshops/training programmes for sensitizing the employees about the Act.
Similarly, under clause 20, district officer has to engage NGOs for creation of awareness in
women employees. The Committee feels that preventive aspect as reflected in the above two
provisions fails to cover all the areas. This is borne out by the preventive steps as
enumerated in the Supreme Court guidelines which made not only the employer but also
other responsible persons in workplace duty-bound to prevent or deter the commission of
acts of sexual harassment. Not only this, appropriate steps were to be taken by employers
to prevent sexual harassment like express prohibition of sexual harassment at the
workplace by notifying, publishing and circulating the same in appropriate ways. Also, rules/
regulations of Government and public sector bodies relating to conduct and discipline should
include rules/regulations prohibiting sexual harassment and provide for penalties in such
rules against the offender. As regards private employers, steps had to be taken to include
the aforesaid prohibitions in the standing orders under the Industrial Employment (Standing
Orders) Act, 1946. Lastly, appropriate work conditions were to be provided in respect of
work, leisure, health and hygiene to further ensure that there is no hostile environment
towards women at workplaces and no woman employee should have reasonable grounds to
believe that she is disadvantaged in connection with her employment. (Para 5.4)
The Committee is of the firm view that the preventive aspect reflected in the
proposed Bill has to be strictly in line with the Vishaka guidelines. The Committee would
also like to point out that no specific penalty has been provided for violation of duties
relating to preventive aspect assigned to the employer. Not only this, rule-making provision
is also silent on this aspect. The Committee, therefore, suggests that the preventive aspect
in the Bill, as mandated in the Supreme Court guidelines has to be reflected in the Bill by
incorporating the same in the relevant provisions. Accordingly, the title of the Bill should

58
also be modified to read as ‘the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention,
Prohibition and Redressal) Bill’. (Para 5.5)
VI. CLAUSE 2 : DEFINITIONS
Clause 2 of the Bill deals with definitions.
Another suggestion which came up before the Committee was for expanding of the
definition of ‘aggrieved woman’ as in the following manner:- “aggrieved woman in relation
to a workplace means a woman of any age or a group of persons acting on behalf of such a
woman or a trade union, who alleges that she has been subjected to sexual harassment and/or
victimization in relation to acts of sexual harassment by any person and includes a woman
whether employed or not”. Response of the Ministry was that it was a well-accepted legal
principle that the complaint should only be filed by the person who had been aggrieved by
any act/omission. Further, in situations where the person due to physical/mental infirmity
was unable to do so, the law provided for the legal heir of the person to carry out the same
action. (Para 6.4)
Agreeing with the contention of the Ministry, the Committee observes that
contingencies like physical or mental incapacity or death are already covered under clause
9 which authorizes the legal heir or any other person so authorized to file a complaint. The
Committee would also like to point out that instances may occur when legal heir or person
so authorized may not come forward or the aggrieved woman herself is not willing to file
a complaint. The Committee feels that in such circumstances, where sexual harassment of
a very serious nature has occurred, the Complaints Committee may be authorized to take
suo moto  cognizance of such happening and initiate inquiry. (Para 6.5)
The Committee’s attention was drawn to the concept of victimization which was very
well-known in labour law and many of the labour statutes included this concept. In the
event of an employee raising a dispute about any issue, there may be a tendency of
employers to either dismiss that person on some ground or another. Accordingly, a
guarantee against victimization was essential in the legislation itself. The definition of
‘aggrieved woman’ should, therefore, include not only a sexually harassed woman but also
a woman who has been victimized. The Committee understands the precarious situation in
which an aggrieved woman may find herself. In no case, victim or even a witness should
be victimized or discriminated against. To prevent such situations which may arise even
before filing of a formal complaint, the concept of victimization needs to be included in the
definition of ‘aggrieved woman’. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the modification
of the definition of the term ‘aggrieved woman’ as indicated above. (Para 6.6)
Inclusion of domestic worker within this Bill has been widely supported by many
stakeholders. The Committee would like to point out that since it supported the
inclusion of domestic worker within the proposed legislation, the definition of aggrieved
woman will have to be somewhat modified in the context of domestic worker and home
as the workplace. Whereas definition of ‘aggrieved woman’ would include employed as
well as not employed women in normal establishments, the same may not hold good so
far as a home as the workplace is concerned. In the event of any untoward incident
happening with a friend/acquaintance of a domestic worker, that person may seek
judicial intervention. Accordingly, the following proviso may be added to the definition
of ‘aggrieved woman’.
“Provided that in case of domestic workers, the aggrieved woman would only mean the
person who is employed in a dwelling place”

59
The Committee recommends to the Ministry to make necessary changes in the
definition of the term ‘aggrieved woman’. (Para 6.7)
The Committee fully supports the inclusion of domestic workers within this Bill and
recommends to the Ministry to delete the words “but does not include domestic workers
working at the home” from the definition of the term ‘employee’. To facilitate such
inclusion, necessary changes need to be made in the definition of ‘employee’. Since the
nature of work of domestic workers is different as it is within the confines of a dwelling
place, a separate definition of ‘domestic worker’ can be added under clause 2. The
Committee, while going through the draft prepared by NCW for domestic workers i.e.
Domestic Workers Welfare and Social Security Bill, 2010 found the definition of ‘domestic
worker’ quite appropriate.  ‘Domestic worker’ has been defined therein as given below:–
“Domestic worker means a person who is employed for remuneration whether in cash or
kind, in any household ‘or similar Establishments’ through any agency or directly, either
on a temporary or contract basis or permanent, part time or full time to do the
household or allied work and includes a “Replacement worker” who is working as a
replacement for the main worker for a short and specific period of time as agreed with
the main worker”
Explanation: household and allied work includes but is not limited to activities such as cooking
or a part of it, washing clothes or utensils, cleaning or dusting of the house, driving, caring/
nursing of the children/sick/old/mentally challenged or disabled persons.
The Committee is of the view that the above definition of ‘domestic worker’ may be
included under the definition clause with a slight modification by replacing the work
‘person’ with the word ‘woman’. (Para 6.10)
The Committee is not fully convinced by the justification given by the Ministry for
coverage of contract employees working at different workplaces who normally would be
under the control of another employer. It is a well-established fact that daily wage workers,
that too women workers are the most vulnerable segment of unorganized workforce. To
expect that employer of such a casual worker who may be a contractor and not directly
responsible would take a suo-moto action of filing a case under IPC is far away from the
ground realities. The Committee is of the view that the definition of ‘employee’ can be
made more explicit by adding the words ‘for any third party encountered in the course of
work’ at the end of the definition of the term ‘employee’ so as to ensure coverage of all
categories of women employees. (Para (6.13)
The Committee understands the justification of the Ministry but in order to make
things more clear, an explanatory clause about contractors should be included especially in
view of the fact that action has to be taken by the contractor against the perpetrator. The
Committee finds that ambiguity is also there about the action to be taken against
contractor in the event of his being the perpetrator or contract labour woman being the
victim of the principal employer. It is not clear whether they can approach the ICC set up
by the principal employer or action has to be taken by contractor. (Para 6.17)
The Committee notes that the definition of ‘employer’ as envisaged would cover all
categories of workplaces falling under Government and private sector. The Committee would
like to point out that one distinct issue which needs consideration is whereas heads of all
Government (Central/State/Local) workplaces or any other officer so authorized by the
appropriate Government have been specified, there is no mention of the head of the
organization in the private sector. This clearly indicates that in the private establishments
e.g. companies/hospitals/universities etc, no liability would fall on the Head. The Committee

60
is of the view that similar provision needs to be there for both Government and private
sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to modify the provision
accordingly. (Para 6.18)
A suggestion has been put before the Committee that this clause should include
house owners and landlords also. The Ministry has specifically stated that house owners and
landlords are not covered in the Bill since there was no associated workplace. The
Committee would like to point out that with the inclusion of domestic worker under the
Bill, definition of ‘employer’ will need to be expanded by adding house owners under it. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the definition of ‘employer’ may, accordingly, be
modified. (Para 6.19)
It was suggested to replace the words “sexual nature” in Sub-clause (v) with “sexual
indignity” because the words ‘sexual nature’ seemed ambiguous and the word ‘dignity’ had
a well-defined meaning in law. The Committee observes that the present definition of
‘sexual harassment’ is based on the definition given by the Supreme Court in Vishaka case.
The Committee feels that this definition would serve the desired purpose. (Para 6.22)
The Committee believes that the present definition of ‘sexual harassment’ would
suffice and serve its purpose as it is based on the definition given by the Supreme Court.
However, keeping in view various developments in technology and harassment through these
mediums, the following words as given in the definition of ‘sexual harassment’ in the NCW
draft Bill, 2010 can be added at the end of Sub-clause (v):–
“whether verbal, textual, physical, graphic or electronic or by any other actions”.
Sexual harassment will thus include any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-
verbal conduct of sexual nature whether verbal, textual, physical, graphic or electronic or
by any other actions. (Para 6.24)
The Committee observes that definition of the term ‘workplace’ covers all categories
of workplaces falling under Government and private sector and also includes any place
visited by air/land/sea/rail. On being asked about the viability of including an incident of
sexual harassment occurring at a place visited by an employee, the Committee has been
informed that women employees may face harassment not only within the physical
boundaries of the workplace but even outside it, which may be during or in course of her
employment. This may include harassment from a co-worker or from an employee of the
workplace visited by her in course of her employment or by a third party at such place.
While agreeing with the clarification given by the Ministry, the Committee would like to
point out that a very crucial area which strictly speaking cannot be considered a workplace
has remained out of the ambit of the Bill thereby leaving the aggrieved woman in situations
which may cause harm to her. Very frequent incidents of women employees being sexually
harassed during their journey from home to workplace and vice-versa are being reported.
The Committee, therefore, feels that vehicles being provided by the employer should also
be covered under the definition of ‘workplace’. Accordingly, the words ‘any vehicle provided
by the employer’ may be added at the end in sub-clause (iv). (Para 6.28)
The Committee would also like to point out since it has recommended for inclusion
of domestic workers within the ambit of the Bill, a house or dwelling place should be added
in the definition of workplace. This may be included in the definition of a workplace as
given in the NCW draft of 2006 which reads as follows:–

61
“includes any place where an aggrieved woman or defendant or both is/are employed or
works, or visit in connection with work during the course of or arising out of
employment” (Para 6.29)
The Committee is of the view that the justification given by the Ministry for not
having a separate chapter on unorganized sector is quite convincing. The Legislative
Department has also approved the stand of the Ministry in this regard. However, it is
equally true that in the unorganized sector, employer-employee relationship as prevailing in
the formal sector does not exist. The Committee would like to mention that provision of
a Local Complaints Committee alone for the unorganized sector will not serve the purpose.
Secondly, in the formal sector, employer will be directly supervising the working of Internal
Complaints Committee. For the Local Complaints Committee, District Officer has simply
the role of setting up of these Committees at the district level or at the Sub-district level,
wherever required. Although the employer is supposed to assist the LCC also, it may not
happen when the inquiry is to be conducted against him. No liability is fixed on the District
Officer for not setting up of Local Complaints Committee as in the case of employer for
Internal Complaints Committee. The Committee is of the firm opinion that more pro-active
role needs to be assigned to the District Officer so far as the functioning of LCC is
concerned. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that specific duties as indicated in
NCW Draft Bill, 2010 should be included in the present Bill also. Only then, the LCCs will
be in a position to protect the most vulnerable segment of women workforce in the
unorganized sector. The Committee will be making recommendations in the relevant
provisions. (Para 6.33)
VII. Clause 3 : Prevention of Sexual Harassment
The Committee is of the view that clauses 3 and 3A (relating to victimization) as
reproduced above would take care of all eventualities which a victim of sexual harassment
may face and provide necessary safeguard to her. Not only this, express provision of sexual
harassment being considered a misconduct would enable the employer to take action as
recommended under the service rules. Another positive outcome of such an elaborate
provision would be that it would act as an effective safeguard to the witnesses and all those
involved in the inquiry proceedings from any victimization. (Para 7.4)
The Committee would also like to emphasize that what constitutes misconduct in the
context of sexual harassment and what penalties it would attract should be provided in
service rules so far as Government and Public Sector bodies are concerned. With regard to
private employers, steps should be taken to include the aforesaid prohibitions in the
standing orders under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946. The
Committee would appreciate if the Ministry takes a pro-active role in the matter and make
an assessment about the service rules applicable to all categories of employees and ensure
that misconduct relating to sexual harassment is incorporated therein. (Para 7.5)
The Committee also opines that grading of different forms of sexual harassment and
punishment level specified accordingly would not be feasible as it would limit the scope of
the definition of sexual harassment. Moreover, the Committee believes that ICC/LCC will
be making inquiry and based on their findings, they would recommend action to the
Employer or the District Officer. (Para 7.7)
Another point highlighted by the stakeholders was the questioning or challenging the
moral character of the complainant after a complaint of sexual harassment has been filed.
In such a case, the respondent needed to be punished. The Committee would like to point
out that this was a well accepted legal principle that in cases of sexual abuse, character of

62
the woman would not be taken into account and if discussed would not have any impact on
the decisions taken. In view of this, the issue of challenging a complainant’s moral
character would not arise. (Para 7.8)
The Committee believes that a specific definition of a ‘hostile work environment’
as suggested above need to be included because the intention is only to protect the woman
or victim from any additional suffering apart from being sexually harassed. Sensitivity to
the plight of a victim is essential as it would be very difficult for her to continue working
if her work environment becomes hostile, offensive or intimidating in any way.
(Para 7.9)
VIII. Clause 4 : Constitution of Internal Complaints Committee
The Committee would like to emphasize on the fact that a victim of sexual
harassment needs support and assistance in filing a complaint and going through the inquiry
process for the redressal of her complaint. A mechanism already in place would definitely
help her to seek justice at the earliest. The Committee agrees with the Ministry that for
timely and easy access to victims, these Complaints Committees should be permanent so as
to avoid any delay due to procedural requirements of formally constituting such Committees
every time a complaint is received. (Para 8.3)
The Committee believes that this provision should be in the Act itself specifying the
circumstances where companies can be exempted from such a provision. The Committee
would like draw attention to the following proviso to the clause relating to constitution of
ICC in the NCW Bill, 2010:-
“provided that where the offices or administrative units of the workplace are located at
different places, the Committee shall as far as practicable be constituted at all
administrative units of offices”
However, this provision needs to be made more specific in the context of
practicality and viability of constituting a ICC in every workplace. The Committee is in
agreement with the suggestion for having viable and workable institutional mechanism for
handling sexual harassment cases occurring in small administrative units of company
scattered over different areas. The Committee is happy to note the alternative mechanism
suggested by the Ministry. The Committee would, however, like to point out that the such
a provision should be incorporated in the Bill itself so as to ensure removal of any
ambiguity. (Para 8.6)
Clause 4(2) deals with the composition of the ICC which provides for four members.
This has been pointed out by some stakeholders to be problematic in the event that the
bench is evenly divided over a case. The Committee is in agreement with this and
recommends to the Ministry for increasing the number of members to at least five or an
odd number so that there is no deadlock over a case and taking of decisions is facilitated.
(Para 8.7)
The Committee is of the considered view that in case senior level woman employee
is not available, it would not be a viable option to always approach the District Officer of
the LCC for nominating such a member as the Presiding Officer. The Committee, instead,
believes that it would be better or more workable to have a senior woman officer from
sister organization or other Departments or other Banks or other organisations. In this way,
the employer would have more flexibility rather than simply approaching the LCC and
waiting for the District Officer to nominate the Presiding Officer. (Para 8.10)

63
The Committee is convinced by the explanation of the Ministry as rigid provisions
cannot be made for constituting ICCs at all workplaces which may be of different nature
altogether. A certain amount of flexibility is required for the constitution of ICC. The
Committee, however, would like to emphasize that training of the members of the ICC
should be made an essential component so as to ensure that the members are well-aware
of legal provisions required for handling the sexual harassment cases. Only then, ICC can
be termed as a viable institutional mechanism for carrying out the mandate assigned to it.
(Para 8.13)
The Committee would like to reiterate the pro-active role to be played by NGOs in
the implementation of the legislation. The Committee finds no flaw in having a member
from the NGOs in the ICC. It is, in fact, in consonance with the direction of the Supreme
Court in Vishaka Case. The Supreme Court suggested the inclusion of a third party-either
NGO or other body familiar with the issue of sexual harassment for preventing any
pressure from senior level. Accordingly, a member of NGO would be a welcome inclusion in
the ICC for it to function in an objective manner. (Para 8.16)
Sub-clause (3) specifies the terms of the Presiding Officer and every Member of the
Council to be three years from the date of nomination. The Committee observes that no
provision for reconstitution of the ICC has been made. The Committee takes note of the
specific provision in this regard proposed in the NCW draft Bill, 2006. The Committee is of
the view that a similar provision clearly laying down reconstitution of an ICC on completion
of three year term with the condition that the previous Committee or individual members
of the previous Committee may be re-appointed but not for more than two terms needs to
be included in the present Bill. (Para 8.17)
Sub-clause (4) provides that the Presiding Officer and Members of ICC shall be paid
such fees or allowances for holding the proceedings as prescribed by the employer.
Objections were raised to this provision as it was felt that as the Presiding Officer and
members would be employees of the organization, this matter may be left to the discretion
of the employer. The Committee finds some merit in the argument. The Committee would,
however, like to point out that the one member from amongst the NGOs or associations
committed to the cause of women not being employee of the organization, needs to be
compensated for rendering his services as a member of ICC. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that this issue needs to be reviewed in the right perspective and the provision
modified accordingly. (Para 8.18)
The Committee foresees operational difficulties in the functioning of ICC in case of
non-availability of NGO member. The Committee is of the view that viability of this
mandatory condition of member of NGO to be nominated as a member of ICC may be
looked into. Supreme Court guidelines of having a member of either an NGO or other body
familiar with the issue of sexual harassment can be a viable option. (Para 8.21)
The Committee observes that every organization whether in the private or
Government Sector has an association representing its employees. Similarly, educational
institutions have teacher and student bodies. Not only this, every organization has a
designated officer for taking care of welfare related activities of its employees. The
Committee recommends to the Ministry for exploring the possibility of including
representatives from trade union/employee association/student union/welfare officers.
Besides that, the eligibility criteria for selection of member from NGOs or association
should also be specified along with work experience in conducting inquiry and dispensing
justice in the Rules to be framed under the proposed legislation. (Para 8.22)

64
The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the fact that institutional
mechanism of Complaints Committee already exists in some organizations. For example,
universities have already passed statutes whereunder local committees are appointed by
inviting participation from teachers and students through election mode. The Committee is
of the view that an enabling provision needs to be included which would provide that if
there is already an existing Complaints Committee under any law for the time being in
force then that Committee will continue as ICC. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that this aspect may be examined and relevant provision added so as to avoid any conflict
with the existing institutional mechanism carrying out its mandate as envisaged under the
relevant law. (Para 8.23)
IX. Clause 6 : Constitution and jurisdiction of Local Complaints Committee
The Committee finds the problem areas highlighted in the setting up of LCCs to be
quite genuine. The feasibility of having such a LCC in every block/taluka/tehsil in rural and
tribal area and ward/municipality in urban area needs to be looked into, especially in the
case of big districts. The Committee believes that practical aspects like setting up an office
for such LCC also require careful examination. The Committee is of the view that a
beginning can perhaps be made by having district level committees on a permanent basis.
So far as setting up of such Committees at block, taluka or tehsil in rural or tribal area
and ward or municipality in urban area is concerned, in case of non-feasibility of an ICC
at a workplace having less than ten employees, the Committee is of the view that District
level LCCs can handle such cases. To make their task easier, a local member from the
taluka/ward etc. may be co-opted as a member wherever any incident of sexual harassment
case had occurred. (Para 9.4)
The Committee understands the predicament of local level Committee in providing
redressal to victims against highly placed officials of a Government or private company. The
Committee would like to point out that categorical non-acceptance by the Ministry would
not solve the problem. An alternate mechanism has to be identified. The Committee is of
the view that State Commissions for Women need to be involved in handling of cases
against employers. A workable mechanism which can be the district level LCC with
representative from the State Commission for Women can be the best option. (Para 9.6)
X. Clause 7 : Composition, tenure and other terms and Conditions of Local Complaints
Committee
The Committee is convinced by the justification of the Ministry because utmost
sensitivity and care should be shown towards a victim of sexual harassment by the members
of Local Complaints Committee. The Committee would also like to draw attention to the
criteria laid down by the Supreme Court for members of the Complaints Committees which
stipulate that such Committees should be headed by a woman and not less than half of its
members should be women. To prevent the possibility of any undue pressure or influence
from senior levels, a third party which could be either an NGO or other body familiar with
the issue of sexual harassment. The Committee observes that broadly speaking, the
composition of LCC is envisaged as per the Supreme Court guidelines. The Committee also
takes note of the assurance given by the Ministry that qualifications of members of LCC
would be elaborated in the Rules. (Para 10.5)
The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to include a provision for giving
representation to women from Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, OBCs and Minorities in
the Local Complaints Committee, depending upon local conditions for fair dispensation of
justice from a body which represented all sections of the society. (Para 10.6)

65
The Committee would, however, like to draw attention to a very important suggestion
given by some stakeholders regarding the inclusion of a representative of trade union/
employees association as a member of the Committee which would be in the interest of the
employees. It was asserted that composition of LCC should embrace both a women rights
perspective as well as a workers’ rights perspective. The Committee supports the inclusion
of representative of trade union or employee association and recommends to the Ministry
to incorporate this category of members in the LCC in order to have a broad-based
membership protecting the interests of the victim as a woman as well as an employee. The
Committee recommends that the following addition may be made in clause 7:-
“one member to be nominated from amongst the registered trade unions or workers
associations functioning in that block or district” (Para 10.7)
The Committee would like to point out that more number of women in the
Committee would be more comforting for a victim of sexual harassment as she would feel
free to speak out. This has to be perceived from the viewpoint of a victim. The Committee
takes the opportunity to point out here that out of the five members of the LCC, three
members are mandated to be women. The proviso that at least half of the total members
shall be women, therefore, becomes redundant. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to
the Ministry to delete the said proviso. (Para 10.8)
Taking into consideration the problem areas cited above, the Committee would like
the Ministry to review the viability of having Protection Officer as a member of LCC.
Protection Officers already have a well-defined mandate under the DV Act, 2005. The
Committee also has been given to understand that there is also a proposal to appoint them
as Dowry Prohibition Officer. Additional responsibility for these officers under the proposed
legislation would not be advisable for its effective implementation. The Committee,
therefore, is of the view that in addition to the specific nomination of Protection Officer,
an alternative proposition will also have to be categorically mentioned in the composition
clause. Suggestion of the Ministry to provide for alternative provision in the Rules cannot
be considered viable from any point of view and is therefore, not acceptable. The Committee
takes note of the alternative to Protection Officers, as given in the NCW Draft Bill, 2010,
i.e. ‘any other officer such as inspectors or additional inspectors under the Shops and
Establishments Acts of the respective States, additional Inspectors under the Factories Act,
1948 or any other public servant at the district level appointed under any law for the time
being in force’. The Committee considers the option given in the draft NCW Bill, 2010
viable and more conducive for the functioning of LCC. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends incorporation of the same in clause 7(1)(d). (Para 10.12)
Clause 7(2) entails that the Chairperson and every Member of the Local Committee
shall hold office for such period, not exceeding three years, from the date of their
appointment as may be prescribed. The Committee feels that the three year tenure of LCC
should be specified in the similar manner as suggested in the case of ICC. (Para 10.13)
The Committee would like to point out that composition of Internal Complaints
Committee and Local Complaints Committee is significantly different. Whereas out of the
four member ICC, Presiding Officer and two members will be employees of the
Establishment, the five member LCC will be primarily composed of NGO representatives,
social activists, only exception being Protection Officer and woman working in block/taluka/
tehsil/ward/municipality. The Committee is of the view that proposed entitlement of fees
or allowances for LCC Chairperson and members is justified and needs to be retained.
(Para 10.15)

66
The Committee fails to understand the rationale of prescribing only one condition for
disqualification i.e.  contravening the provisions of section 16 for the Chairperson and
members of LCC as compared to seven conditions of disqualification enumerated in clause
4(5) for the Presiding Officer and members of ICC. The Committee finds no justification
for different approach in respect of the two Committees having the same mandate. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends, similar modification in clause 7(3) as suggested in
clause 4(5). (Para 10.16)
XI. Grants and audit
The Committee is of the view that budgetary provision is a crucial component for
effective implementation of any law and the Central Government has to take a pro-active
role in this matter. Ratio for division of expenditure between Centre and State needs to be
fixed in consultation with the State Governments keeping in view their financial position.
Only then, it can be ensured to achieve the objective of providing relief to the most
vulnerable section of our women workforce. (Para 11.2)
XII Clause 9 : Complaint of sexual harassment
The Committee agrees with the contention of the stakeholders regarding having a
time limit for filing a complaint of sexual harassment. At the same time, the Committee
also understands the intention of the Ministry for recognizing the fact that the aggrieved
woman may take considerable time to muster enough courage to come forward and file a
complaint. However, clarification of the Ministry for not having any time-limit for filing of
complaint is not very convincing. The Committee believes that without any time limit, this
would become an endless process and may not lead to a logical conclusion. In the final
interaction with the Committee, the Secretary, agreed that having an open-ended provision
without specifying any time limit for filing a complaint of sexual harassment would not be
desirable as it would not be possible for a Complaints Committee to conduct an inquiry in
a justifiable manner. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Ministry to work out
a reasonable time limit which is neither too short so as to deny justice to the aggrieved
woman who would be needing considerable courage and will-power to file a complaint nor
too long so as to dilute the real objective. (Para 12.5)
The Committee takes note of the fact that in the draft NCW Bill, 2010, aggrieved
woman has the option to approach the State Women Commission when the complaint is
against the employer. The Committee feels that such an option seems to be justified and
needs to be included as it would make the aggrieved woman more comfortable and secure.
With the kind of experience and expertise available with any State Women Commission, it
can be considered the most appropriate alternate forum for filing of a complaint by the
aggrieved woman, especially in case when the complaint is against the employer himself.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the following proviso may be added to clause
9(1).
“Provided further that an aggrieved woman may file a complaint to the Commission
where the complaint is against the employer”. (Para 12.6)
XIII. Clause 10 : Conciliation
The Committee finds that there are two issues in this clause  i.e.  apprehensions
regarding undue pressure on aggrieved woman for conciliation and monetary settlement
likely to be subject to misuse and also outraging the sensibilities of the aggrieved woman.

67
The Committee would like to point out that safeguards against imposing undue pressure on
the victim can be seen in this very clause itself as the conciliation would only be initiated
at the instance of the victim herself. Also, proviso to clause 11(1) entitles the victim to
approach ICC/LCC in the event of any term or condition of the settlement not being
complied with. Secondly, the Committee does not find the mention of any ‘monetary
settlement’ in the Bill. Even the clarification given by the Ministry makes a mention of
tendering of apology or admission of guilt by the perpetrator. The Committee strongly
recommends that there should not be any ‘monetary settlement’ for it would trivialize a
grave act of sexual harassment. (Para 13.6)
Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the fact that if an aggrieved
women opts for conciliation, the accused would be let off simply by tendering his apology
or admission of guilt. The Committee suggests that a distinction should be made between
a minor offence and a major one. Tendering apology or admission of guilt would be fine in
the case of a minor offence but the same should not be applicable to major offences. This
can encourage the accused indirectly and he can indulge in similar undesirable activities in
future. Punishment should be the only way of rendering justice to the aggrieved woman in
such cases. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Ministry for making provision
of conditional conciliation for minor offences relating to sexual harassment. For other major
offences, stern punishment should be the only way out without any scope for the
conciliation. (Para 13.7)
XIV. Clause 11 : Inquiry into Complaint
The Committee is of the view that very pertinent aspects relating to conduct of
inquiry have been left out to be included in the Rules which leaves a lot of scope for
ambiguity and mis-interpretation. The Committee would like to draw attention to the
following provision included in NCW Draft Bill, 2010:–
“where conciliation under sub-section (1) of section 10 is not arrived at, the Committee
or the Local Committee as the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions of section
15, proceed to make enquiry into the complaint in accordance with its service and
conduct rules/standing orders/policies and where no such rules exist then in such a
manner as may be prescribed”.
This provision in a way makes it clear that the inquiry has to be made in accordance
with service and conduct rules, standing orders or policies. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that clause 11(1) may be modified accordingly. (Para 14.5)
Clause 11 (3) provides that the inquiry under sub-section (1) should be completed
within a period of ninety days. The Committee would like to point out that in the event of
inquiry not being completed within the stipulated period i.e. ninety days, no liability has
been fixed on the employer. The Committee suggests that either a similar clause as in the
NCW Draft Bill, 2010 be included in the present Bill or a liability be fixed on the employer
which can be included under clause 25 dealing with penalty. (Para 14.6)
XV. Clause 12 : Action during pendency of inquiry
The Committee is convinced by the justification given by the Ministry. The
Committee feels that the focus should be more on the victim who goes through a lot
of mental trauma and these interim reliefs were meant to make her comfortable during
the inquiry process. The Committee would also like to emphasize that provision should
also be made for safety and security of not only the victim but also the witnesses

68
including prevention of their victimization during and after the inquiry proceedings. The
victim/witnesses should not be suspended, given memos, inquiry conducted against them
for acts which would be considered as harassment as a fallout of the complaint. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to make necessary provisions in this
regard so that the victim and the witnesses are protected from all sorts of pressure and
hostility. (Para 15.5)
The Ministry explained that the number of days of leave to be granted may vary
from case to case and could be decided by the members of the Committee. The Committee,
however, is of the view that a specification of leave period needs to be included in the
interest of the aggrieved woman. Further, the Committee finds some merit in the argument
for the deletion of the words ‘if the cases is proved’ as it would not always be easy for an
aggrieved woman to prove a case of sexual harassment which would not have any witnesses.
The Committee recommends to the Ministry to delete the words as suggested above. The
aggrieved woman should not be hassled for leave issues etc. as the trauma of being sexually
harassed would be too much for her. This would just facilitate an aggrieved woman to file
a complaint of sexual harassment and not to deter her from doing so making her think
about the consequences if her case is not proved. (Para 15.7)
XVI. Clause 13 : Inquiry Report
The Committee finds the concern expressed above to be quite genuine. It would like
to point out that under clause 11 (3), process of inquiry has to be completed with ninety
days and the employer or the District Officer has to act upon the recommendation within
sixty days of Inquiry Report being received. Not only this, failure to do so will invite penal
action under clause 25. The Committee would like to point out that chances of such an
instance happening would be very little, keeping in view the composition of these
Committees and their mandate. The Committee observes that as indicated in clause 20, the
District Officer shall be duly-bound to monitor the timely submission of reports furnished
by the Internal Committee or the Local Committee. The Committee is of the view that this
duty should be cast on the employer also so far as Internal Committee is concerned. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that this duty should also be included in clause 19
relating to the duties of employer. (Para 16.3)
The Committee feels that these provisions are stringent enough and the Inquiry
process and follow-up action on the findings thereof have to be completed within a specified
time-limit. Only limited area of concern could be a situation when the Complaints
Committee itself unduly delays the submission of the Report. (Para 16.4)
It was also impressed upon the Committee that specific guidelines relating to the
manner in which an inquiry should be conducted and the procedure for recording of
evidence needed to be laid out which may include but not limited to:
➢➢➢➢➢ Participation of the complainant
➢➢➢➢➢ Manner of examination of the witnesses
➢➢➢➢➢ Nature of questions that are not to be allowed
➢➢➢➢➢ Non-permissibility of evidence/examination based on aggrieved woman’s character,
Personal/sexual life and history, etc.
The Committee is of the view that the procedural details for conducting the inquiry
need to be enumerated and, accordingly, recommends that the same may be specified in the
Rules to be framed under clause 28. (Para 16.5)

69
Doubts were raised that it was not clear if the employer was bound by the
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee would like to point out that the
employer is bound by the recommendation of the Committee as specified in clause 25 (1)
(b) whereunder on the employer failing to comply with any recommendation made under
clause 13, he is liable to be penalized. Further, the terms of settlement arrived at during
conciliation under clause 10 are required to be recorded and forwarded by the ICC/LCC as
its recommendation. By virtue of this, the settlement terms would take the character of a
recommendation under clause 13. The Committee is of the view that with these provisions,
the employer is duly-bound to ensure every single complaint of sexual harassment reaching
the Complaints Committee being handled and disposed of and recommendation of Inquiry
Report acted upon. Chances of his acting otherwise would be very rare. (Para 16.6)
The Committee is convinced with the justification given by the Ministry as the
Complaints Committee would be fully empowered to grant relief to the aggrieved woman.
Decision of the compensation etc. by a court of law would mean an agonizing wait for justice
for the aggrieved woman as it may take considerable time to come to a decision and
unnecessarily extend her mental trauma. This would in a way defeat the very purpose of
doing justice to her without any uncalled for publicity. The Committee would like to
mention that complaint mechanism as mandated in the Supreme Court guidelines is to be
created in the employer’s organization for redressal of the complaint made by the victim.
(Para 16.8)
The Committee is of the view that first of all, sexual harassment should be clearly
laid down as an offence in the service rules of all Government employees and in the
contracts of all employees in the private sector. This is in consonance with the directive of
the Supreme Court that Rules/Regulations of Government/Public Sector Bodies relating to
conduct and discipline should include rules/regulations prohibiting sexual harassment and
provide for appropriate penalties in such rules against the offender. For the private
employers, steps should be taken to include the aforesaid prohibition in the Standing Orders
under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946. Secondly, to bring clarity in
the phase ‘as may be prescribed’, the Rules should clearly state the kind of penal action
such an offence would attract. Laying down specific penalties for sexual harassment would
certainly clear the air. As for the prescribed procedure to be followed by the employer after
the Complaints Committee gives its report, the Committee notes that same is to be
provided in the Rules to be framed under clause 28. (Para 16.12)
The Committee agrees with the suggestion for use of the term ‘damages’ in place
of ‘compensation’ as ‘damages’ for any amount of compensation cannot ever compensate for
mental and physical trauma a victim of sexual harassment goes through. Further, the word
‘damages’ is much more dignified and appropriate compared to the word ‘compensation’.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends modification in sub-clause (3) (ii). (Para 16.13)
The Committee finds merit in the justification given by the Ministry and believes
that apart from the responsibility of the employer, it is also a personal responsibility of
every individual under the service rules or terms of contract that he would not engage in
any act of sexual harassment. Sexual harassment should be specified as a grave misconduct
in the service rules or terms of contract to emphasize upon personal responsibility of an
individual also. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that compensation should be paid
by the accused only and not by the employer. (Para 16.15)
The Committee was given to understand that several local laws and special laws had
already been amended to set up Complaints Committees to deal with cases of sexual
harassment. The Committee would appreciate if the assessment of existing institutional

70
mechanism for handling of sexual harassment cases which might be in place in different
categories of workplaces in the light of Supreme Court guidelines is undertaken by the
Ministry and viable components were made a part of the inquiry procedure to be prescribed
through rules under the proposed law. (Para 16.16)
A very important and pertinent issue which had been raised by many stakeholders
relates to the rights of the accused. As mentioned earlier, the Bill is silent on this aspect.
It was suggested that the accused should not be denied free and fair trial. The Committee
is of the firm view that every accused person needs to have a free and fair trial as this is
the very basis of the principle of natural justice. The Committee observes that clause 3 (i)
simply mentions that copy of the inquiry report is to be made available to the concerned
parties. The Committee believes that there should be a proper procedure for giving a chance
to the accused and also to the aggrieved woman, if not satisfied to place their side of the story
before the Complaints Committee. Not just this, before forwarding its recommendations, the
Complaints Committee should give a final chance to the accused to convey his position. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to include an appropriate provision in the
Bill or specify in the Rules to ensure a fair and free inquiry proceedings from the point of
view of the accused. (Para 16.17)
XVII. Clause 14 : Punishment for false or malicious complaint and false evidence
The Committee understands the complex position of an aggrieved woman who has to
muster great courage to come forward to file a complaint of sexual harassment. Also, given
the unequal nature of relations with the employer, it would not be easy for the aggrieved
woman to prove her case. The Committee realizes that acts of sexual harassment take place
behind closed doors and it is a tough task to prove the authencity of a complaint. Also, such
instances occur where witnesses are not readily available. If at all a witness gathers courage
to come forward, such a provision may act as a deterrent. The Supreme Court in Vishaka
Guidelines had stated clearly that it had to be ensured that victims or witnesses are not
victimized or discriminated against while dealing with complaints of sexual harassment The
Committee believes that a distinction needs to be made between false and malicious
complaints. For any false complaint, no punishment may be prescribed. However, if it is
proved that a complaint has been filed with malicious intent, only then action against the
aggrieved woman may be considered as it affects the character and credibility of the
accused. The punishment for filing complaints with malicious intent should be provided in
the Rules. (Para 17.6)
The Committee understands the apprehensions of some stakeholders regarding the
misuse of the proposed legislation and takes note of their suggestion to change the word
‘may recommend’ to ‘shall recommend’ so as to make it mandatory for the Complaint
Committee to take action against complainants filing false and malicious complaints. The
Committee would like to point out that the focus of the proposed legislation is to provide
redressal to aggrieved woman who may have faced sexual harassment and not on the misuse
of the law by some. The Committee takes note of the fact that any provision should not
be there which may deter an already aggrieved woman to file a genuine case of sexual
harassment. The Committee observes that malicious intent or falsehood on the part of the
complainant will have to be established after an inquiry to be conducted in accordance with
the prescribed procedure. Such a provision will ensure that this provision will be resorted
to only in genuine cases and disposed of after a proper inquiry. (Para 17.7)
XVIII. Clause 15 : Determination of Compensation
The Committee agrees with the intent of the Ministry for determining compensation

71
based on several factors relating to various forms of suffering and loss of the aggrieved
women. It also takes into consideration the suggestions of the stakeholders and is of the
view that the elaborate procedure for realization of compensation and recovery needs to be
spelt out so that the aggrieved woman is given compensation as determined by ICC or LCC.
The Committee would like to reiterate the stance of the Ministry that compensation does
not go against the spirit of the Bill and is not intended to be an alternative to punishment
for an act of sexual harassment. (Para 18.5)
XIX. Clause 16 Prohibition of publication or making known contents of complaint and
inquiry proceedings and Clause 17 Penalty for publication or making known contents
and inquiry proceedings.
The Committee would like to emphasize upon the sensitivity of a case of sexual
harassment and the essentiality of maintaining confidentiality of the complainant so that
she does not regret filing a complaint of sexual harassment. The justification given by the
Ministry seems to be very convincing. The Committee would like to point out that justice
secured by any victim can be accessed as it is a matter of public interest. Only the identity
of the victim is not to be disclosed. There is no question of highlighting only genuine cases
and hiding the false ones as under clause 22 the employer is required to include the
information regarding cases filed and their disposal in the Annual Report of the
organization. The Committee agrees with the stand of Ministry that in no way the RTI Act
is being subverted. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 22 of the RTI Act, a legislation
enacted subsequently can be outside its purview in case specific exception to this effect has
been made in that subsequent law. In fact, clause 16 is in conformity with section 8 (j) of
the RTI Act and there is no inconsistency between the two. (Para 19.6)
As for clause 17, the Committee is of the view that it should be read with clause 16.
It is meant to safeguard the aggrieved woman against any mischievous intention/deliberate
act so as to put her in awkward position by disclosing the details of case filed by her. Hence,
the Committee finds no problem in clauses 16 and 17 as the intention of provisions is to
protect the aggrieved woman from further harassment of any kind or public ridicule.
(Para 19.7)
XX. Clause 18 : Appeal
The Committee while appreciating the concerns about likelihood of aggrieved woman
as well as witnesses being made to face further harassment and uncalled for exposure in
case of appeal being made in the Court or Tribunal would like to point out that principle
of natural justice has to be adhered to in every case. Sexual harassment cases cannot be
made an exception. The Committee would like to point out that with required steps and
extra precaution taken by making the conduct of appeal proceedings in camera, chances of
victims/witnesses facing undue harassment will not be there. It would also be better if onus
of proving the case should be on the employer. (Para 20.4)
So far as Supreme Court directives in Dr. Medha Kotwal case is concerned, the
Committee observes that the proposed legislation envisages no further inquiry after the
Report of the Complaints Committee has been given which would be mandatorily
implemented by the employer. However, the right to appeal both to the aggrieved woman
and the respondent stays in consonance with principles of natural justice. (Para 20.5)
XXI. Clause 19 : Duties of Employer
The Committee finds that a similar set of duties of the employers are included in

72
the Vishaka Guidelines. The Committee, however, observes that duties covering preventive
action on the part of employer as substantiated in these guidelines have not found a place
in clause 19. The Committee would like to draw attention of the Ministry of the following
duties mentioned in Supreme Court guidelines:
(a) Express prohibition of sexual harassment at the workplace should be notified,
published and circulated in appropriate ways.
(b) The Rules/Regulations of Government and Public Sector bodies relating to
conduct and discipline should include rules/regulations prohibiting sexual
harassment and provide for appropriate penalties in such rules against the
offender.
(c) As regards private employers, steps should be taken to include the aforesaid
prohibitions in the standing orders under the Industrial Employment (Standing
Orders) Act, 1946.
(d) Appropriate work conditions should be provided in respect of work, leisure,
health and hygiene to further ensure that there is no hostile environment
towards women at workplace and no employee woman should have reasonable
grounds to believe that she is disadvantaged in connection with her
employment.
The Committee is of the view that the duties of employers as mentioned above
should be incorporated in this provision along with the existing ones. (Para 21.4)
The Committee is of the opinion that sub-clause (h) seems to be problematic as the
employer cannot in any way take action against non-employee or even make an effort to
locate him. Certain practical difficulties would not make it possible for the employer to rope
in non-employee within the ambit of the Bill. The only way out for the employer, the
Committee feels, would be to assist and give full co-operation to its female employee who
has been sexually harassed in filing a case under the IPC. (Para 21.6)
XXII. Clause 20 : Duties and power of District Officer
The Committee observes that on a comparative analysis of this provision with clause
22 relating to Duties of District Officer as given in the NCW Draft Bill, 2010, role of
District Officer as envisaged under the proposed law seems to be somewhat diluted. This is
further borne out by the fact that a number of duties of employer as indicated in clause
19 are not considered appropriate enough to be assigned to the Distinct Officer. The
Committee strongly feels that this would be a serious anomaly, resulting in non-delivery of
justice to aggrieved woman. The Committee would like to point out that the District Officer
is mandated to set up a Local Complaints Committee in every district and sub-district
wherever required which will be assigned the role of conducting an inquiry against the
employer himself. In such a scenario, absence of such duties like providing necessary
facilities to LCC for dealing with the complaint and conducting inquiry, assisting in securing
these attendances of respondents and witnesses before the Complaints Committee and
making available the required information to it cannot be considered acceptable. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that duties assigned to the District Officer should be
on the same pattern as envisaged for the employer to the extent possible. (Para 22.2)
XXIII. Clause 23 : Appropriate Government to monitor implementation and maintain data
The Committee, suggest that the responsibility of monitoring the implementation of

73
various provisions needs to be given to the National or State Commissions for Women who
would be better equipped for handling such a task in view of their experience and expertise
of working for the cause of women. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
provision relating to Monitoring of the Act stipulated in the draft NCW Bill, 2010 may be
included in the proposed law in place of clause 23. (Para 23.2)
XXIV. Clause 24 : Power to call for information and inspection of records
The Committee, while appreciating the spirit behind this provision as a part of an
effective monitoring mechanism envisaged to be put in place in the proposed law has a word
of caution. The Committee finds that Report on the cases of sexual harassment handled by
an establishment will be submitted to the State Government annually and the appropriate
Government is also mandated to monitor the implementation of the Act and maintain data
on the number of cases filed and properly disposed of. Provision in clause 24 authorizing
any by officer to inspect an establishment in public interest or in the interest of women
employees on the part of the appropriate Government seems to be somewhat unjustified.
The Committee is of the view that such a power may be given only in case of an extreme
case of sexual harassment taking place and not being handled properly by the concerned
authorities and a specific Complaint/Report being made by the complainant/Complaints
Committee/State Commission for Women. (Para 24.2)
XXV. Clause 25 : Penalty for non-compliance with provisions of Act
The Committee agrees that strong deterrent should be provided in the Bill itself so
that a safe and secure workplace is ensured by an employer and the accused should be
brought to book at any cost. However, in doing so, the impact of punishing the employer
for not complying with the provisions of the Act should not adversely affect the other
employees or dependents of an organization. Cancellation of license or withdrawal of non-
renewal or cancellation of registration by the Government or local authority would harm the
interests of many persons associated with a particular organization because it is a matter
of means of livelihood for many. Also adequate opportunity should be given to the employer
to present his case before any such action is taken against him if the clause is proposed
to be retained. (Para 25.3)
The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Ministry to modify the provision in
such a way so as to safeguard the interests of other employees, dependents parties and at
the same time penalize the employer in a certain manner which does not affect innocent
lives. (Para 25.4)
XXVI. Conclusion
The Committee believes that a legislation for the protection of women against sexual
harassment at workplace is a much needed one for ensuring a secure and safe workplace
so that women can work with dignity. It took thirteen years to implement the Vishaka
Guidelines into a full fledged legislation. Sexual harassment is a sad reality of our society.
It is an index of moral degradation of society in recent years. Although it is high time for
such a law to come into effect, a legislation has its own limitation also. It entails the action
of a mechanism for redressal of complaints of cases of sexual harassment but cannot
change the moral fabric of the society. It is where the need for cultural education and
respect for womanhood which has been the cherished value of our culture is felt. The
Committee would like to emphasize on the importance of inculcating such values in a child
at tender age itself so that it is made known since childhood itself that sexual harassment

74
of women or violence against women is most heinous. This would certainly indirectly result
in diminishing acts of sexual harassment. Not just this, proper training programmes and
awareness generation programme should be given due importance so to educate employees
about respect for womanhood by all possible methods. (Para 26.1)
Further, proper implementation of the law and its monitoring is essential for the
success of this legislation which should achieve its objective of protecting women from acts
of sexual harassment at workplace by providing a safe and secure environment/workplace
and also a mechanism for redressal of complaints of sexual harassment. (Para 26.2)
The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
(Para 26.3)
The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
(Para 26.4)
The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the
amendments/additions suggested by it. (Para 26.5)
The Committee would like the Ministry to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill. (Para 26.6)

75
ANNEXURES

LOK SABHA
CORRIGENDA
to
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST SEXUAL  HARASSMENT AT
WORKPLACE BILL, 2010
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha]
1. Page (i), in the arrangement of clause, for the heading below CHAPTER V ,–
for “ENQUIRY INTO COMPLAINT”
read “INQUIRY INTO COMPLAINT”
2. Page (ii), in the arrangement of clauses, above clause No. 17,–
insert “C
LAUSES”
3. Page (ii), in the arrangement of clauses, above clause No. 19,–
omit “C LAUSES”
4. Page 2, line 10,–
for “aggreived”
read “aggrieved”
5. Page 3, line 4,–
for “aggreived”
read “aggrieved”
6. Page 4, line 6,–
for “be woman”
read “be a woman”
7. Page 4, line 15,–
for “committeed”
read “committed”
77

78
8. Page 4, line 19,–
for “committeed”
read “committed”
9. Page 6, line 14,–
for “initiating inquiry”
read “initiating an inquiry”
10. Page 6, line 26,–
for “make inquiry”
read “make an inquiry”
11. Page 6, line 32,–
for “making inquiry”
read “making an inquiry”
12. Page 6, line 44,–
for “or inquiry”
read “of an inquiry”
13. Page 7, line 25,–
for “to legal”
read “to her legal”
14. Page 8, line 29,–
for “contraveness”
read “contravenes”
15. Page 9, line 4,–
for “conducting inquiry”
read “conducting an inquiry”
16. Page 9, against line 11, insert the marginal citation,–
“45 of 1860.”
17. Page 9, in the marginal heading against clause 20,–
for “duties and power of
 ”
read “duties and powers of  ”

79
18. Page 9, line 41,–
for “upon my employer”
read “upon any employer”
19. Page 10, line 22,–
for “rules mae thereunder”
read “rules made thereunder”
20. Page 10, line 22,–
for “women”
read “woman”
21. Page 10, line 39,–
for “making inquiry”
read “making an inquiry”
22. In ‘Notes on Clauses’ (Pages 14 to 20), in pages 16, 17 and 18,–
for “enquiry”
read “inquiry” wherever it occurs.
23. Page 14, lines 27,–
for “shall be nominated from amongst women.”
read “shall be women.”
24. Page 15, line 15,–
for “Local Complaints”
read “Local”
25. Page 17, line 31,–
for “by rule”
read “by rules”
26. Page 18, line 15,–
for “imposition or penalty”
rerad “imposition of penalty”
27. Page 19, line 2,–
for “data appropriate”
read “data by the appropriate”

80
28. Page 21, line 2,–
for “empower”
read “empowers”
29. Page 22, in lines 8 and 9,–
for “enquiry”
read “inquiry”
30. Page 22, line 6 from the bottom,–
for “that any rule”
read “that every rule”
N
EW D ELHI;
December 2, 2010
Agrahayana 11, 1932 ( Saka)

81
81
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 144 of 2010
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST SEXUAL HARASSMENT
AT WORK PLACE BILL, 2010
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Prevention of sexual harassment.
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION  OF I NTERNAL  C OMPLAINTS  C OMMITTEE
4. Constitution of Internal Complaints Committee.
CHAPTER III
CONSTITUTION  OF L OCAL C OMPLAINTS  C OMMITTEE
5. Notification of District Officer.
6. Constitution and Jurisdiction of Local Complaints Committee.
7. Composition, tenure and other terms and conditions of Local Complaints Committee.
8. Grants and audit.
CHAPTER IV
C
OMPLAINT
9. Complaint of sexual harassment.
10. Conciliation.
11. Inquiry into complaint.
CHAPTER V
ENQUIRY INTO COMPLAINT
12. Action during pendency of inquiry.

82
13. Inquiry report.
14. Punishment for false or malicious complaint and false evidence.
15. Determination of compensation.
16. Prohibition of publication or making known contents of complaint and inquiry
proceedings.
17. Penalty for publication or making known contents of complaint and inquiry
proceedings.
18. Appeal
CHAPTER VI
DUTIES  OF EMPLOYER
19. Duties of employer.
CHAPTER VII
DUTIES  AND POWERS  OF D ISTRICT  O FFICER
20. Duties and powers of District Officer.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
21. Committee to submit annual report.
22. Employer to include information in annual report.
23. Appropriate Government to monitor implementation and maintain data.
24. Power to call for information and inspection of records.
25. Penalty for non-compliance with provisions of Act.
26. Cognizance of offence by courts.
27. Act not in derogation of any other law.
28. Power of the appropriate Government to make rules.
29. Power to remove difficulties.

83
83
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 144 of 2010
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST SEXUAL HARASSMENT
AT WORKPLACE BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide  protection against sexual harassment of women at
workplace and for the prevention and redressal of complaints of
sexual harassment and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS sexual harassment results in violation of the fundamental
rights of a woman to equality under articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution
of India and her right to life and to live with dignity under article 21 of
the Constitution and right to practice any profession or to carry on any
occupation, trade or business which includes a right to a safe environment
free from sexual harassment.
A
ND WHEREAS  the protection against sexual harassment and the
right to work with dignity are universally recognised human rights by
international conventions and instruments such as Convention on the
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women, which has been
ratified on the 25th June, 1993 by the Government of India;
And whereas it is expedient to make provisions for giving effect
to the said Convention for protection of women against sexual harassment
at workplace;

84
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Protection of Women
against Sexual Harassment at Workplace Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aggreived woman” in relation to a workplace
means a woman, of any age, who alleges to have been
subjected to any act of sexual harassment by the respondent
and includes a woman whether employed or not;
(b) “appropriate Government” means—
(i) in relation to a workplace which is
established, owned, controlled or wholly or substantially
financed by funds provided directly or indirectly—
(A) by the Central Government or the Union
territory administration, the Central Government;
(B) by the State Government, the State
Government;
(ii) in relation to any workplace not covered
under sub-clause ( i) and falling within its territory, the
State Government;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Local
Complaints Committee nominated under sub-section ( 1) of
section 7;
(d) “District Officer” means an officer notified under
section 5;
(e) “employee” means a person employed at a
workplace for any work on regular, temporary, ad hoc or
daily wage basis, either directly or through an agent, including
a contractor, with or without the knowledge of the principal
employer, whether for remuneration or not, or working on a
voluntary basis or otherwise, whether the terms of
employment are express or implied and includes a co-worker,
a contract-worker, probationer, trainee, apprentice or called by
any other such name; but does not include domestic worker
working at home;
(f) “employer” means—
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.

85
(i) in relation to any department, organisation,
undertaking, establishment, enterprise, institution,
office, branch or unit of the appropriate Government or
a local authority, the head of that department,
organisation, undertaking. establishment, enterprise,
institution, office, branch or unit or such other officer
as the appropriate Government or the local authority,
as the case may be, may by an order specify in this
behalf;
(ii) in any workplace not covered under sub-
clause ( i), any person responsible for the management,
supervision and control of the workplace;
(g) “Internal Committee” means an Internal Complaints
Committee constituted under section 4:
(h) “Local Committee” means the Local Complaints
Committee constituted under section 6;
(i) “Member: means a Member of the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be;
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(k) “Presiding Officer” means the Presiding Officer of
the Internal Complaints Committee nominated under sub-
section (2) of section 4;
(l) “respondent” means a person against whom the
aggreived woman has made a complaint under section 9;
(m) “sexual harassment” includes such unwelcome
sexually determined behaviour (whether directly or by
implication) as—
(i) physical contact and advances; or
(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or
(iii) sexually coloured remarks; or
(iv) showing pornography; or
(v) any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-
verbal conduct of sexual nature;
(n) “workplace” includes
(i) any department, organisation, undertaking,
establishment, enterprise, institution, office, branch or
unit which is established, owned, controlled or wholly
or substantially financed by funds provided directly or
indirectly by the appropriate Government or the local
authority or a Government company or a corporation or
a co-operative society;

86
(ii) any private sector organisation or a private
venture, undertaking, enterprise, institution, establishment,
society, trust, non-governmental organisation, unit or
service provider carrying on commercial, professional,
vocational, educational, entertainmental, industrial,
health services or financial activities including
production, supply, sale, distribution or service;
(iii) hospitals or nursing homes;
(iv) any place visited either by air, land, rail or
sea by the employee arising out of, or during and in the
course of employment;
(o) “unorganised sector” in relation to a workplace
means an enterprise owned by individuals or self employed
workers and engaged in the production or sale of goods or
providing service of any kind whatsoever, and where the
enterprise employs workers, the number of such workers is
less than ten.
3. No woman shall be subjected to sexual harassment at any
workplace which may include, but is not limited to—
(i) implied or overt promise of preferential treatment in
her employment; or
(ii) implied or overt threat of detrimental treatment in
her employment; or
(iii) implied or overt threat about her present or future
employment status; or
(iv) conduct of any person which interferes with her
work or creates an intimidating or offensive or hostile work
environment for her; or
(v) humiliating conduct constituting health and safety
problems for her.
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION  OF I NTERNAL  C OMPLAINTS  C OMMITTEE
4. (1) Every employer of a work place shall, by an order in
writing, constitute a Committee to be known as the “Internal
Complaints Committee”:
Provided that where the offices or administrative units or the
workplace are located at different places or divisional or sub-
divisional level the Internal Committee shall be constituted at all
administrative units or offices.
(2) The Internal Committee shall consist of the following
members to be nominated by the employer, namely:—
(a) a Presiding Oficer who shall be woman employed at
a senior level at workplace from amongst the employees:
Prevention of
sexual
harassment
Constitution of
Internal
Complaints
Committee.

87
Provided that in case a senior level woman employee is
not available, the Presiding Officer shall be nominated from
other officer or administrative units of the workplace referred
to in sub-section ( 1),
Provided further that in case the other offices or
administrative units of the workplace do not have a senior
level woman employee, the District Officer notified under
section 5 may nominate a member of the Local Complaints
Committee to that area to act as the Presiding Officer;
(b) not less than two Members from amongst
employees preferably committed to the cause of women or
who have had experience in social work or have legal
knowledge;
(c) one member from amongst non-governmental
organisations or associations committed to the cause of
women:
Provided that al least one-half of the total Members so
nominated shall be women.
(3) The Presiding Officer and every Member of the Internal
Committee shall hold office for such period, not exceeding three
years, from the date of their nomination as may be specified by the
employer.
(4) The Presiding Officer and Members of the Committee
shall be paid such fees or allowances for holding the proceedings of
the Internal Committee by the employer as may be prescribed.
(5) Where the Presiding Officer or any Member of the
Internal Committee,—
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16; or
(b) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid
employment outside the duties of his office; or
(d) is unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity
of mind or body; or
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; or
(f) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an
offence which in the opinion of the Central Government
involves moral turpitude; or
(g) has so abused his position as to render his
continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest,

88
such Presiding Officer or Member, as the case may be, shall be
removed from the Committee and the vacancy so created or any
casual vacancy shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance
with the provisions of this section,
CHAPTER III
C
ONSTITUTION  OF L OCAL C OMPLAINTS  C OMMITTEE
5. The appropriate Government may notify a District
Magistrate or Additional District Magistrate or the Collector or
Deputy Collector as a District Officer for every District to exercise
powers or discharge functions under this Act.
6. ( 1) Every District Officer shall constitute in the district
concerned, a committee to be known as the “Local Complaints
Committee”.
(2) Where constitution of the Internal Committee at a
workplace is not feasible on account of less than ten persons
being employed at such work place or where the complaint is
against the employer himself, the District Officer shall,
constitute at every concerned block, taluka or tehsil in rural or
tribal area and ward or municipality in urban area, additional
Local Committee also to be known as the “Local Complaints
Committee” for that area concerned.
(3) The jurisdication of the local committee shall extend to the
area within the district, or block, taluka or tehsil or ward or
municipality level where it is constituted.
7. ( 1) The Local Complaints Committee shall consist of the
following members to be nominated by the District Officer,
namely:—
(a) a Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the
eminent women in the field of social work and committed to
the cause of women;
(b) one Member to be nominated from amongst the
women working in block, taluka or tehsil or ward or
municipality in the district;
(c) two Members, of whom at least one shall be a
woman, to be nominated from amongst such non-
governmental organisations or associations committed to the
cause of women, which may be prescribed:
Provided that at least one of the nominees should,
preferably, have a background in law or legal knowledge;
(d) the Protection Officer appointed under sub-
section ( 1) of section 8 of the Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 in the District, in which block,
taluka or tehsil in rural or tribal area or ward or municipality
in urban area, the Local Committee is constituted:
Notification of
District Officer.
Constitution and
jurisdiction of
Local
Complaints
Committee.
Composition,
tenure and other
terms and
conditions of
Local
Complaints
Committee.
43 of 2005.

89
Provided that at least one-half of the total Members so
nominated shall be women.
(2) The Chairperson and every Member of the Local
Committee shall hold office for such period, not exceeding three
years, from the date of their appointment as may be prescribed.
(3) Where the Chairperson or any Member of the Local
Committee contravenes the provisions of section 16, such
Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, shall be removed from
the Local Committee and the vacancy so created or any casual
vacancy shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(4) The Chairperson and Members of the Local
Committee shall be entitled to such fees or allowances for
holding the proceedings of the Local Committee as may be
prescribed.
8.  (1) The Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make
to the State Government grants of such sums of money as the
Central Government may think fit, for being utilised for the
payment of fees or allowances referred to in sub-section ( 4) of
section 7.
(2) The State Government may set up an agency and transfer
the grants made under sub-section ( 1) to that agency.
(3) The agency shall pay to the District Officer, such sums
as may be required for the payment of fees or allowances referred
to in sub-section ( 4) of section 7.
(4) The accounts of the agency referred to in sub-section ( 2)
shall be maintained and audited in such manner as may, in
consultation with the Accountant General of the State, be prescribed
and the person holding the custody of the accounts of the agency
shall furnish, to the State Government, before such date, as may be
prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with auditors’
report thereon.
CHAPTER IV
C
OMPLAINT
9. ( 1) Any aggrieved woman may make, in writing, a
complaint of sexual harassment at workplace to the Internal
Committee if so constituted, or the Local Committee, in case it is
not so constituted:
Provided that where such complaint cannot be made in
writing, the Presiding Officer or any Member of the Internal
Committee or the Chairperson or any Member of the Local
Committee, as the case may be, shall render all reasonable
assistance to the woman for making the complaint in writing.
Grants and
audit.
Complaint of
sexual
harassment.

90
(2) Where the aggrieved woman is unable to make a
complaint on account of her physical or mental incapacity or death
or otherwise, her legal heir or such other person as may be
prescribed may make a complaint under this section.
10. ( 1) The Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the
Local Committee, may, before initiating inquiry under section 11 and
at the request of the aggrieved woman take steps to settle the matter
between her and the respondent through conciliation.
(2) Where a settlement has been arrived at under sub-
section ( 1), the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the
case may be, shall record the settlement so arrived and forward the
same to the employer or the District Officer to take action as
specified in the recommendation.
(3) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the
case may be, shall provide the copies of the settlement as recorded
under sub-section ( 2) to the aggrieved woman and the respondent.
(4) Where a settlement is arrived at under sub-section ( 1), no
further inquiry shall be conducted by the Internal Committee or the
Local Committee, as the case may be.
11. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of section 10 and section 16,
the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be,
shall proceed to make inquiry into the complaint in such manner as
may be prescribed:
Provided that where the aggrieved woman informs the
Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be,
that any term or condition of the settlement arrived at under sub-
section (2) of section 10 has not been complied with by the
respondent, the Internal Committee or the Local Committee shall
proceed to make an inquiry into the complaint.
(2) For the purpose of making inquiry under sub-section ( 1),
the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be,
shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 when trying a suit in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any
person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of
documents; and
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) The inquiry under sub-section ( 1) shall be completed
within a period of ninety days.
Conciliation.
Inquiry into
complaint.
5 of 1908.

91
CHAPTER V
INQUIRY INTO COMPLAINT
12. ( 1) During the pendency of inquiry, on a written request
made by the aggrieved woman, the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be, may recommend to the employer
to—
(a) transfer the aggrieved woman or the respondent
to any other workplace; or
(b) grant leave to the aggrieved woman; or
(c) grant such other relief to the aggrieved woman
as may be prescribed.
(2) The leave granted to the aggrieved woman under this
section shall be in addition to the leave she would be entitled to
otherwise if the case is proved.
(3) On the recommendation of the Internal Committee or the
Local Committee, as the case may be, under sub-section ( 1), the
employer shall implement the recommendations made under sub-
section ( 1) and send the report of such implementation to the
Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be.
13. ( 1) On the completion of an inquiry under this Act, the
Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be,
shall provide a report of its findings to the employer, or as the case
may be, the District Officer and such report be made available to
the concerned parties.
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as
the case may be, arrives at the conclusion that the allegation against
the respondent has not been proved, it shall recommend to the
employer and the District Officer that no action is required to be
taken in the matter.
(3) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as
the case may be, arrives at the conclusion that the allegation against
the respondent has been proved, it shall recommend to the employer
or the District Officer, as the case may be—
(i) to take action for sexual harassment as a
misconduct in accordance with the provisions of the service
rules applicable to the respondent or where no such service
rules have been made, in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) to deduct notwithstanding anything in the service
rules applicable to the respondent, from the salary or wages
of the respondent such sum of compensation to be paid to the
aggrieved woman or to legal heirs, as it may determine, in
accordance with the provisions of section 15:
Action during
pendency of
inquiry.
Inquiry report.

92
Provided that in case the employer is unable to make
such deduction from the salary of the respondent due to his
being absent from duty or cessation of employment it may
direct to the respondent to pay such compensation to the
aggrieved woman.
(4) The employer or the District Officer shall act upon the
recommendation within sixty days of its receipt by him.
14. (1) Where the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be, arrives at a conclusion that the
allegation against the respondent is false or malicious or the for
aggrieved woman or any other person making the complaint has
produced any forged or misleading document, it may recommend to
the employer or the District Officer, as the case may be, to take
action against the woman or the person who has made the
complaint under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 9, as
the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the service
rules applicable to her or him or where no such service rules exist,
in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that a mere inability to substantiate a complaint or
provide adequate proof need not attract action against the
complainant under this section:
Provided further that the malicious intent of falsehood on part
of the complainant shall be established after an inquiry in
accordance with the procedure prescribed, before any action is
recommended.
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as
the case may be, arrives at a conclusion that during he inquiry any
witness has given false evidence or produced any forged or
misleading document, it may recommend to the employer of the
witness or the District Officer, as the case may be to take action
in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to
the said witness or where no such service rules exist, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
15. For the purpose of determining the compensation to be
paid to the aggrieved woman under clause ( ii) of sub-section ( 3) of
section 13, the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the
case may be, shall have regard to—
(a) the mental trauma, pain, suffering and emotional
distress caused to the aggrieved woman;
(b) the loss in the career opportunity due to the incident
of sexual harassment;
(c) medical expenses incurred by the victim for
physical or psychiatric treatment;
(d) the income and financial status of the respondent;
(e) feasibility of such payment in lump sum or in
installments.
Punishment for
false or
malicious
complaint and
false evidence.
Determination
of
compensation.

93
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to
Information Act, 2005, the contents of the complaint made under
section 9, the identity and addresses of the aggrieved woman,
respondent and witnesses, any information relating to conciliation
and inquiry proceedings, recommendations of the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, and the
action taken by the employer or the District Officer under the
provisions of this Act shall not be published, communicated or made
known to the public, press and media in any manner:
Provided that information may be disseminated regarding the
justice secured to any victim of sexual harassment under this Act
without disclosing the name, address, identity or any other
particulars calculated to lead to the identification of the aggrieved
woman and witnesses.
17. Where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or
deal with the complaint, inquiry or any recommendations or action
to be taken under the provisions of this Act, contraveness the
provisions of section 16, he shall be liable for penalty in accordance
with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said person
or where no such service rules exist, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
18. (1) Any person aggrieved from the recommendations
made under sub-section ( 2) of section 13 or under clause ( i) or
clause ( ii) of sub-section ( 3) of section 13 or sub-section ( 1) or
sub-section ( 2) of section 14 or section 17 or non-implementation
of such recommendations may prefer an appeal to the court or
tribunal in accordance with the 35 provisions of the service rules
applicable to the said person or where no such service rules exist
then, without prejudice to provisions contained in any other law for
the time being in force, the person aggrieved may prefer an appeal
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The appeal under sub-section ( 1) shall be preferred within
a period of thirty days of the recommendations.
CHAPTER VI
D
UTIES OF EMPLOYER
19. Every employer shall—
(a) provide a safe working environment at the
workplace which shall include safety from the persons
coming into contact at the workplace;
(b) display at any conspicuous place in the workplace,
the order constituting, the Internal Committee under sub-
section ( 1) of section 4;
22 of 2005.
Prohibition of
publication or
making known
contents of
complaint and
inquiry
proceedings.
Penalty for
publication or
making known
contents of
complaint and
inquiry
proceedings.
Appeal.
Duties of
employer.

94
(c) undertake workshops and training programmes at
regular intervals for sensitising the employees regarding the
provisions of this Act;
(d) provide necessary facilities to the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, for
dealing with the complaint and conducting inquiry;
(e) assist in securing the attendance of respondent and
witnesses before the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be;
(f) make available such information to the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, as it
may require having regard to the complaint made under sub-
section ( 1) of section 9;
(g) provide assistance to the woman if she so chooses
to file a complaint in relation to the offence under the Indian
Penal Code or any other law for the time being in force;
(h) initiate action, under the Indian Penal Code or any
other law for the time being in force, against the perpetrator
after the conclusion of the inquiry, or without waiting for the
inquiry, where the perpetrator is not an employee in the
workplace at which the incident of sexual harassment took
place.
CHAPTER VII
DUTIES AND P OWERS OF D ISTRICT  O FFICER
20. The District Officer shall,—
(a) monitor the timely submission of reports furnished
by the Internal Committee or the Local Committee;
(b) take such measures as may be necessary for
engaging non-governmental organisations for creation of
awareness on sexual harassment and the rights of the women.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
21. (1) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as
the case may be, shall in each calendar year prepare, in such form
and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report and submit
the same to the employer and the District Officer.
(2) The District Officer shall forward a brief report on the
annual reports received under sub-section ( 1) to the State Government.
45 of 1860.
Duties and power
of District
Officer.
Committee to
submit annual
report.

95
22. The employer shall include in its report the number of
cases filed, if any, and their disposal under this Act in the annual
report of his organisation or where no such report is required to be
prepared, intimate such number of cases, if any, to the District
Officer.
23. The appropriate Government shall monitor the
implementation of this Act and maintain data on the number of cases
filed and disposed of in respect of all cases of sexual harassment
at workplace.
24. (1) The appropriate Government, on being satisfied that it
is necessary in the public interest or in the interest of women
employees at a workplace to do so, by order in writing,—
(a) call upon my employer or District Officer to furnish
in writing such information relating to sexual harassment as it
may require;
(b) authorise any officer to make inspection of the
records and workplace in relation to sexual harassment, who
shall submit a report of such inspection to it within such
period as may be specified in the order.
(2) Every employer and District Officer shall produce on
demand before the officer making the inspection all information,
records and other documents in his custody having a bearing on the
subject matter of such inspection.
25. ( 1) Where the employer fails to—
(a) constitute an Internal Committee under sub-
section ( 1) of section 4;
(b) take action under sections 13, 14 and 22; and
(c) contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets
contravention of other provisions of this Act or any rules
made thereunder,
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.
(2) If any employer, after having been previously convicted of
an offence punishable under this Act subsequently commits and is
convicted of the same offence, he shall be liable to—
(i) twice the punishment, which might have been
imposed on a first conviction, subject to the punishment being
maximum provided for the same offence:
Provided that in case a higher punishment is prescribed
under any other law for the time being in force, for the
offence for which the accused is being prosecuted, the court
Employer to
include
information in
annual report.
Appropriate
Government to
monitor
implementation
and maintain
data.
Power to call
for
information
and inspection
of records.
Penalty for
non-
complaince
with provisions
of Act.

96
shall take due cognizance of the same while awarding the
punishment.
(ii) cancellation, of his licence or withdrawal, or non-
renewal, or approval, or cancellation of the registration, as the
case may be, by the Government or local authority required
for carrying on his business or activity.
26.  ( 1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence
punishable under this Act or any rules mae thereunder, save on a
complaint made by the aggrieved women or any person authorised
by the Internal Committee or Local Committee in this behalf.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence
punishable under this Act.
(3) Every offence under this Act shall be non-cognizable.
27. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force.
28. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this
Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:
(a) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Presiding
Officer and Members under sub-section ( 4) of section 4;
(b) the fee or allowances to be paid to the
Chairperson, and Members under sub-section ( 4) of section 7;
(c) the person who may make complaint under sub-
section ( 2) of section 9;
(d) the manner of inquiry under sub-section ( 1) of
section 11;
(e) the powers for making inquiry under clause ( c) of
sub-section ( 2) of section 11;
(f) the relief to be recommended under clause ( c) of
sub-section ( l) of section 12;
(g) the manner of action to be taken under clause ( i)
of sub-section ( 3) of section 13;
(h) the manner of action to be taken under sub-
sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 14;
(i) the manner of action to be taken under section 17;
Cognizance of
offence by
courts.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power of the
appropriate
Government to
make rules.

97
(j) the manner of appeal under sub-section ( 1) of
section 18; and
(k) the form and time for preparation of annual report
by Internal Committee and the Local Committee under sub-
section ( 1) of section 21.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this
Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
(4) Any rule made under sub-section ( 4) of section 8 by the
State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before
that House.
29.  ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central  Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to
be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement
of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

98
98
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Sexual harassment at a workplace is considered violation of
women’s right to equality, life and liberty. It creates an insecure and
hostile work environment, which discourages women’s participation
in work, thereby adversely affecting their social and economic
empowerment and the goal of inclusive growth.
2. The Constitution of India embodies the concept of
equality under articles 14 and 15 and prohibits discrimination on
grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth or any of
them. Article 19(1)(g) gives the fundamental right to all citizens to
practice any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or
business. This right pre-supposes the availability of an enabling
environment for women, which is equitous, safe and secure in
every aspect. Article 21, which relates to the right to life and
personal liberty, includes the right to live with dignity, and in the
case of women, it means that they must be treated with due
respect, decency and dignity at the workplace.
3. Article 11 of the Convention on Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination (CEDAW), to which India is a party, requires
State parties to take all appropriate measures to eliminate
discrimination against women in the field of employment. In its
General Recommendation No. 19 (1992), the United Nations
Committee on CEDAW further clarified that equality in employment
can be seriously impaired when women are subjected to gender-
specific violence, such as sexual harassment at the workplace.
India’s commitment to protection and promotion of women’s
constitutional rights as well as respect for its obligations under
various international treaties is unequivocal.
4. With more and more women joining the workforce, both
in organised and unorganised sectors, ensuring an enabling working
environment for women through legislation is felt imperative by the
Government. The proposed legislation contains provisions to protect
every woman from any act of sexual harassment irrespective of
whether such woman is employed or not.
5. The Supreme Court of India in the case of Vishaka &
Ors. V.  State of Rajasthan & Ors. [1997 (7) SCC 323], also
reaffirmed that sexual harassment at workplace is a form of
discrimination against women and recognised that it violates the
constitutional right to eqliality and provided guidelines to address this
issue pending the enactment of a suitable legislation.
6. It is, thus, proposed to enact a comprehensive legislation
to provide for safe, secure and enabling environment to every

99
woman, irrespective of her age or employment status (other than
domestic worker working at home), free from all forms of sexual
harassment by fixing the responsibility on the employer as well as
the District Magistrate or Additional District Magistrate or the
Collector or Deputy Collector or every District in the State as a
District Officer and laying down a statutory redressal mechanism.
7. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various
provisions contained in the Bill.
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI;
The 18th November, 2010. KRISHNA TIRATH

100
100
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter dated 24 November, 2010 from
Shrimati Krishna Tirath, Minister of State for Women and
Child Development to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter
of the Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment at Workplace
Bill, 2010, recommends the introduction and consideration of the Bill
in Lok Sabha under article 117(1) and (3) of the Constitution.

101
101
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2.—This clause provides for definitions. It defines
the various expressions used in the proposed legislation which, inter
alia , include the expressions “aggrieved woman”, “appropriate
Government”, “Chairperson”, “District Officer”, “employee”,
“employer”, “Internal Committee”, “Local Committee”,
“respondent”, “sexual harassment”, “workplace” and “unorganized
sector.”
Clause 3.—This clause makes provision for prevention of
sexual harassment. It provides that no woman shall be subjected to
sexual harassment at any workplace. The harassment may include,
but is not limited to—(i) implied or overt promise of preferential
treatment in her employment; or (ii) implied or overt threat of
detrimental treatment in her employment; or (iii) implied or overt
threat about her present or future employment status; (iv) conduct
of any person which interferes with her work or creates an
intimidating or offensive or hostile work environment for her; or
(v) humiliating conduct constituting health and safety problems for her.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for the constitution of
Internal Complaints Committee. It provides that every employer of
a workplace shall constitute, by an order in writing, a Committee
to be known as the “Internal Complaints Committee”. It further
provides that where the offices or administrative units of the
workplace are located at different places or divisional or sub-
divisional level, the Internal Committee shall be constituted at all
administrative units or offices.
It also provides that employer shall nominate members of the
Internal Committee which shall consist of—(a) a Presiding Officer
who shall be woman employed at a senior level at workplace from
amongst the employees; (b) not less than two Members from
amongst employees preferably committed to the cause of women or
who have had experience in social work or have legal knowledge
and (c) one member from amongst non-governmental organisations
or associations committed to the cause of women. Out of these
members at least one-half shall be nominated from amongst women.
It also provides that the term of the Presiding Officer and
every Member of the Internal Committee shall be specified by the
employer which shall not exceed three years from the date of their
nomination and their fees or allowances for holding the proceedings
of the Internal Committee, as may be prescribed by rules made in
the behalf, shall be paid by the employer.
It also provides that in case a senior level woman employee
is not available at a work place, the Presiding Officer shall be

102
nominated from other offices or administrative units of the
workplace. It further Provides that in case the other offices or
administrative units of the workplace do not have a senior level
woman employee, the District Officer may nominate a member of
the Local Complaints Committee in that area to act as the Presiding
Officer.
It also provides that the Presiding Officer or any Member of
the Internal Committee shall be removed from the Committee, if
he—(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16 relating to
prohibition of publication or making known contents of complaint
and enquiry proceedings; or (b) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid employment
outside the duties of his office; or (d) is unfit to continue in office
by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or (e) is of unsound mind
and stands so declared by a competent court; or (f) is convicted
and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the opinion
of the Central Government involves moral turpitude; or
(g) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest, and the vacancy so created or any
casual vacancy shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance
with the provisions of this clause.
Clause  5.—This clause provides for notification of the
District Officer. It provides that the appropriate Government may
notify a District Magistrate or Additional District Magistrate or the
Collector or Deputy Collector as a District Officer for every District
to exercise powers or discharge functions under the proposed
legislation.
Clause  6.—This clause provides for constitution and
jurisdiction of the Local Complaints Committee. It provides that
every District Officer shall constitute in the district concerned, a
Committee to be known as the “Local Complaints Committee”.
It further provides that where constitution of the Internal
Committee at a workplace is not feasible on account of less than ten
persons being employed at such work place or where the complaint
is against the employer himself, the District Officer shall, constitute
at every concerned block, taluka or tehsil in rural or tribal area and
ward or municipality in urban area, additional Local Committee
which shall also be known as the “Local Complaints Committee” for
that area concerned.
It also provides that the jurisdiction of the Local Committee
shall extend to the area within the district, or block, taluka or tehsil
or ward or municipality level where it is constituted.
Clause 7.—This clause provides for composition, tenure and
other terms and conditions of Local Complaints Cmmittee. It
provides that the members of Local Complaints Committee shall be
nominated by The District Officer which shall consist of (a) a
Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the eminent women in

103
the field of social work and committed to the cause of women;
(b) one Member to be nominated from amongst the women working
in block, taluka or tehsil or ward or municipality in the district;
(c) two Members, of whom at least one shall be a woman, to be
nominated from amongst such non-governmental organisations or
associations committed to the cause of women, which may be
prescribed, provided that one of the nominees should, preferably,
have background in law or legal knowledge; and (d) the Protection
Officer appointed under sub-section (1) of section 8 of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 in the
District, in which block, taluka or tehsil in rural or tribal area or
ward or municipality in urban area, the Local Committee is
constituted. At least one-half of the total Members so nominated
shall be women.
It further provides that the Chairperson and every Member of
the Local Committee shall hold office for such period as may be
specified by rules which shall not exceed three years from the date
of their appointment.
It also provides that the Chairperson or any Member of the
Local Committee shall be removed from the Local Committee if he
contravenes the provisions of clause 16 relating to prohibition of
publication or making known contents of complaint and enquiry
proceedings and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall
be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the provisions of
this clause. The Chairperson and Members of the Local Committee
shall be entitled to such fees or allowances for holding the
proceeding of the Local Committee as may be prescribed by rules.
Clause  8.—This clause provides for grants and audit. It
provides that the Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the State
Government grants of such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit for being utilised for the payment of
fees or allowances of the Chairperson and Members of the Local
Committee.
It also empowers the State Government to set up an agency
and transfer the grants made under sub-clause (1) to that agency
and the agency shall pay to the District Officer, such sums as may
be required for the payment of fees or allowances of the
Chairperson and Members of the Local Committee.
It also provides that the accounts of the agency shall be
maintained and audited in such manner as may be prescribed by
rules in consultation with the Accountant-General of the State and
the person holding the custody of the accounts of the agency shall
furnish its audited copy of accounts together with auditors’ report
thereon to the State Government before such date as may be
specified by rules.
Clause 9.—This clause provides for making of complaint of
sexual harassment. It provides that any aggrieved woman may, at

104
her option, make in writing a complaint of sexual harassment at
workplace to the Internal Committee if so constituted, or the Local
Committee if an internal Committee is not constituted or if the
complaint is against the employer himself.
It further provides that in a case where such complaint
cannot be made in writing, the Presiding Officer or any Member of
the Internal Committee or the Chairperson or any Member of the
Local Committee, as the case may be, shall provide all reasonable
assistance to the woman for making the complaint in writing.
1t also provides that in a case where the aggrieved woman
is unable to make a complaint on account of her physical or mental
incapacity or death or otherwise, her legal heir or such other
person as may be prescribed may make a complaint under this
clause.
Clause 10.—This clause makes provision for conciliation. It
provides that before initiating enquiry under clause 11 and at the
request of the aggrieved woman, the internal Committee and the
Local Committee may take steps to settle the matter between her
and the respondent through conciliation and where a settlement has
been arrived, the Internal Committee or the Local Committee shall
record the settlement so arrived and forward the same to the
employer or the District Officer to take action as specified in the
recommendation.
It further provides that the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee shall provide the copies of the recorded settlement to the
aggrieved woman and the respondent and no further enquiry shall be
conducted by the Internal Committee or the Local Committee.
Clause 11.—This clause makes provision for inquiry into
complaint. It provides that subject to the provisions of clause 10 and
clause 16, the Internal Committee or the Local Committee shall
proceed to make enquiry into the complaint in such manner as may
be prescribed by rules.
It further provides that if the aggrieved woman informs that
any term or condition of the settlement arrived at under sub-clause
(2) of clause 10 has not been complied with by the respondent, then
the Internal Committee or the Local Committee shall proceed to
make an enquiry into the complaint.
It also provides that for the purpose of making enquiry, the
Internal Committee or the Local Committee shall have the same
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 when trying a suit in respect of the matters relating
to—(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath; (b) requiring the discovery and production
of documents; and (c) any other matter which may be prescribed
by rules. The enquiry under this clause shall be completed within a
period of ninety days.

105
Clause 12.—This clause provides for action during pendency
of enquiry. It provides that during the pendency of enquiry, on a
written request made by the aggrieved woman, the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee may recommend to the employer
to—(a) transfer the aggrieved woman or !he respondent to any
other workplace; or (b) grant leave to the aggrieved woman; or
(c) grant such other relief to the aggrieved woman as may be
prescribed by rules.
It further makes it clear that the leave granted to the
aggrieved woman under this clause shall be in addition to the leave
she would be entitled to otherwise if the case is proved.
It also casts a duty on employer to implement the
recommendations of the Internal Committee or the Local Committee
and send the report of such implementation to the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee.
Clause 13.—This clause provides for enquiry report. It
provides that on the completion of an enquiry under the proposed
legislation, the Internal Committee or the Local Committee shall
provide a report of its findings to the employer or to the District
Officer, as the case may be, and such report shall be made available
to the concerned parties.
It further provides that in case the internal Committee or the
Local Committee arrives at the conclusion that the allegation against
the respondent has not been proved, it shall recommend to the
employer or to the District Officer, as the case may be, that no
action is required to be taken in the matter.
It also provides that in case it arrives at the conclusion that
the allegation against the respondent has been proved, then, it shall
recommend to the employer or the District Officer (i) to take action
for sexual harassment as a misconduct in accordance with the
provisions of the service rules applicable to the respondent or where
no such service rules have been made in such manner as may be
prescribed by rules; and (ii) notwithstanding any thing contained in
the service rules applicable to the respondent to deduct from the
salary or wages of the respondent such sum of compensation to be
paid to the aggrieved woman or to her legal heirs, as it may
determine, in accordance with the provisions of clause 15 and in
case the employer is unable to make such deduction from the salary
of the respondent due to his being absent from duty or cessation of
employment it may direct to the respondent to pay such
compensation to the aggrieved woman.
It also provides that the employer and the District Officer
shall act upon the recommendation within sixty days of its receipt
by him.
Clause 14.—This clause provides for punishment for false or
malicious complaint and false evidence, It provides that where the
Internal Committee or the Local Committee arrives at a conclusion

106
that the allegation against the respondent is false or malicious or the
aggrieved woman or any other person making the complaint has
produced any forged or misleading document, then, it may
recommend to the employer or the District Officer to take action
against the woman or the person who has made the complaint in
accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to her
of him or where no such service rules exist, in such manner as may
be prescribed by rules.
It further provides that a mere inability to substantiate a
complaint or provide adequate proof need not attract action against
the complainant under this clause and the malicious intent or
falsehood on part of the complainant shall be established alter an
enquiry in accordance with the procedure prescribed by rule before
any action is recommended.
It also provides that where the Internal Committee or the
Local Committee arrives at a conclusion that during the enquiry any
witness has given false evidence or produced any forged or
misleading document, then, it may recommend to the employer of
the witness or the District Officer to take action in accordance with
the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said witness or
where no such service rules exist, in such manner as may be
prescribed by rules.
Clause 15.—This clause provides for determination of
compensation. It provides that for the purpose of determining the
compensation to be paid to the aggrieved woman, the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee shall have regard to—(a) the
mental trauma, pain, suffering and emotional distress caused to the
aggrieved woman; (b) the loss in the career opportunity due to the
incident of sexual harassment; (c) medical expenses incurred by the
victim for physical or psychiatric treatment; (d) the income and
financial status of the respondent; and (e) feasibility of such
payment in lump sum or in installments.
Clause 16.—This clause provides for prohibition of
publication or making known contents of complaint and enquiry
proceedings. It provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
the Right to Information Act, 2005, the contents of the complaint
made under clause 9, the identity and addresses of the aggrieved
woman, respondent and witnesses, any information relating to
conciliation and enquiry proceedings, recommendations of the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee, and the action taken by the
employer or the District Officer under the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall not be published, communicated or made known to
the public, press and media in any manner.
It further provides that information may be disseminated
regarding the justice secured to any victim of sexual harassment
under the proposed legislation without disclosing the name, address,
identity or any other particulars calculated to lead to the
identification of the aggrieved woman and witnesses.

107
Clause 17.—This clause provides for penalty for publication
or making known contents of complaint and enquiry proceedings. It
provides that where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or
deal with the complaint, enquiry or any recommendations or action
to be taken under the provisions of the proposed legislation
contravenes the provisions of clause 16 relating to prohibition of
publication or making known contents of complaint and enquiry
proceedings, he shall be liable for penalty in accordance with the
provisions of the service rules applicable to the said person or
where no such service rules exist, in such manner as may be
prescribed by rules.
Clause 18.—This clause provides for appeal. It provides that
any person aggrieved by the recommendations made by the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee or non-implementation of such
recommendations or by imposition or penalty under clause 17 may
prefer an appeal to the court or tribunal in accordance with the
provisions of the service rules applicable to the said person or
where no such service rules exist then, without prejudice to
provisions contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the person aggrieved may prefer an appeal in such manner as may
be prescribed by rules.
It further provides that the appeal under this clause shall be
preferred within thirty days of the recommendations.
Clause 19.—This clause lays down duties of employer. It
provides that every employer shall—(a) provide a safe working
environment at the workplace which  shall include safety from the
persons coming into contact at the workplace; (b) display the order
constituting the Internal Committee at any conspicuous place in the
workplace; (c) undertake workshops and training programmes at
regular intervals for sensitising the employees regarding the
provisions of the proposed legislation: (d) provide necessary
facilities to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the
case may be, for dealing with the complaint and conducting enquiry;
(e) assist in securing the attendance of respondent and witnesses
before the Internal Committee or the Local Committee as the case
may be; (f) make available such information to the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee as it may require having regard
to the complaint; (g) provide assistance to the woman, if she so
chooses to file a complaint in relation to the offence under the
Indian Penal Code or any other law for the time being in force; and
(h) initiate action, under the Indian Penal Code or any other law for
the time being in force, against the perpetrator after the conclusion
of the enquiry, or without waiting for the enquiry, where the
perpetrator is not an employee in the workplace at which the
incident of sexual harassment took place.
Clause 20.—This clause lays down duties and powers of
District Officer. It provides that the District Officer shall monitor
the timely submission of reports furnished by the Internal

108
Committee or the Local Committee; and take such measures as may
be necessary for engaging non-governmental organisations for
creation of awareness on sexual harassment and the rights of the
women.
Clause 21.—This clause provides submission of annual
report by Committee. It provides that the Internal Committee and
the Local Committee shall in each calendar year prepare an annual
report in such form and at such time as may be prescribed by rules
and submit the same to the employer and the District Officer.
It further provides that the District Officer shall forward a
brief report on the annual reports received under this clause to the
State Government.
Clause 22.—This clause lays down information which the
employer shall include in annual report. It provides that the
employer shall include in its report the number of cases filed, if
any, and their disposal under the proposed legislation in the annual
report of his organisation or where no such report is required to
be prepared, intimate such number of cases, if any, to the District
Officer.
Clause  23.—This clause provides for monitoring
implementation and maintainance of data appropriate Government. It
provides that the appropriate Government shall monitor the
implementation of the proposed legislation and maintain data on the
number of cases filed and disposed of in respect of all cases of
sexual harassment at workplace.
Clause 24.—This clause empowers appropriate Government
to call for information and inspection of records. It provides that
the appropriate Government, on being satisfied that it is necessary
in the public interest or in the interest of women employees at a
workplace to do so, by order in writing call upon any employer or
District Officer to furnish in writing such information relating to
sexual harassment as it may require; and authorise any officer to
make inspection of the record and workplace in relation to sexual
harassment, who shall submit a report of such inspection to it
within such period as may be specified in the order.
It further provides that every employer and District Officer
shall produce on demand before the officer making the inspection all
information, records and other documents in his custody having a
bearing on the subject matter of such inspection.
Clause  25.—This clause provides for penalty for non-
compliance with provisions of the proposed legislation. It provides
that where the employer fails to—(a) constitute a Internal
Committee; (b) take action under clauses 13, 14 and 22; and (c)
contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets contravention of
other provisions of the proposed legislation or any rules made
thereunder, then, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to fifty thousand rupees.

109
It further provides that if any employer, after having been
previously convicted of an offence punishable under the proposed
legislation subsequently commits and is convicted of the same
offence, then, he shall be liable to—(i) twice the punishment, which
might have been imposed on a first conviction, subject to the
punishment being maximum provided for the same offence.
However, in case a higher punishment is prescribed under any other
law for the time being in force, for the offence for which the
accused is being prosecuted, the court shall take due cognizance of
the same while awarding the punishment; and (ii) cancellation, of his
licence or withdrawal, or non-renewal, or approval, or cancellation
of the registration, as the case may be, by the Government or local
authority, required for carrying on his business or activity.
Clause 26.—This clause provides for cognizance of offence
by courts. It provides that no court shall take cognizance of any
offence punishable under the proposed legislation or any rules made
thereunder, save on a complaint made by the aggrieved women or
any person authorised by the Internal Committee or Local
Committee in this behalf.
It further provides that no court inferior to that of a
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class
shall try any offence punishable under the proposed legislation and
every offence under the proposed legislation shall be non-cognizable.
Clause 27.—This clause provides that the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Clause  28.—This clause empowers the appropriate
Government to make rules. It provides that the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the proposed legislation. It further specifies the
matters for which such rules may be made.
It also provides that every rule made by the Central
Government shall be laid before each House of Parliament and every
rule made by the State Government shall be laid before each House
of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where
such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Clause  29.—This clause provides for power to remove
difficulties. It provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central Government may, by
order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation, as may
appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty.
It further provides that no such order shall be made under
this clause after the expiry of a period of two years from the
commencement of the proposed legislation.
It also provides that every order made under this clause shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament

110
110
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 6 of the Bill empower every District
Officer to constitute a Local Complaints Committee in the District
concerned and sub-clause (2) provides for additional Local
Complaints Committees at Block, Taluk or Tehsil in rural or tribal
areas and ward or municipality in urban area, wherever required.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 7 provides for payment of fees or
allowances to the Chairperson and Members of the Local Complaints
Committee for conducting the proceedings of the Committee.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides that the
Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament, by law in this behalf, make to the State Government
grant of such sum of money as the Central Government may think
fit for being utilised for the payment of fees and allowances to the
Chairperson and Members of the Local Complaints Committee.
3. The Central Government will meet the entire expenditure
on fees and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members of
the Local Complaints Committee till the financial year 2012 ( i.e. the
end of the 11th Plan period). The annual expenditure of fees and
allowances is estimated at Rs.13.38 crore. The Central Government
will specify the sharing pattern between the Central Government and
State Governments beyond 2012.

111
111
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 28 of the Bill provides the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-
clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may
be made. These matters, inter alia , include-(a) the fees of
allowances to be paid to the Presiding Officer and Member under
sub-clause (4) of clause 4; (b) the fees or allowances to be paid to
the Chairperson, and Members under sub-clause (4) of clause 7;
(c) the person who may make complaint under sub-clause (2) of
clause 9; (d) the manner of enquiry under sub-clause (2) of clause
11; (e) the powers for making enquiry under item (c) of sub-clause
(2) of clause 11; (f) the relief to be recommended under item
(c) of sub-clause (1) of clause 12; (g) the manner of action to be
taken under item (i) of sub-clause (3) of clause 13; (h) the manner
of action to be taken under sub-clauses (1) and (2) of clause 14;
(i) the manner of action to be taken under clause 17; (j) the manner
of appeal under sub-clause (1) of clause 18; and (k) the form and
time for preparation of annual report by Internal Committee and the
Local Committee under sub-clause (1) of clause 21
2. Sub-clause (3) of clause 28 provides that every rule made
by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made before each House of Parliament. Sub-clause (4) of that
clause provides that any rule by the State Government shall be laid
before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before
that House.
3. The matters in respect of which the Central Government
may make rules are matters of procedure and administrative detail
and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

112
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide protection against sexual harassment of women at workplace and for the
prevention and redressal of complaints of sexual harassment and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shrimati Krishana Tirath, Minister of State for Women and Child Development)

MINUTES

XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the
20th April, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao – in the Chair
2. Shri Prakash Javadekar
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri Pramod Kureel
5. Shri N.K. Singh
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
7. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Kirti Azad
9. Shri P. K. Biju
10. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
13. Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela
14. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
15. Shri P. Kumar
16. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
17. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
18. Shri Ashok Tanwar
19. Shri Joseph Toppo
20. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
21. Shri P. Viswanathan
22. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
23. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
115

116
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. ** *
II. THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM SEXUAL HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACE
BILL, 2010
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPENT
1. Shri D.K. Sikri, Secretary
2. Shri Sudhir Kumar, Addl. Secretary
3. Shrimati Vinita Aggarwal, Director
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT, MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to *** the Protection of Women from Sexual Harassment at Work Place Bill, 2010
respectively.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development
on various provisions of the Protection of Women from Sexual Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010.
The Members raised certain queries which were replied to by the Secretary. The Committee
decided to send a questionnaire on the Bill to the Ministry for its written replies.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

117
117
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the
5th May, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Shri N.K. Singh
8. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
11. Shri Rahul Gandhi
12. Shri P. Kumar
13. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
14. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
15. Shri Tapas Paul
16. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
17. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 'Vinnu'
18. Shri P. Vishwanathan
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
** *
*** Relates to other matter.

118
WITNESSES ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST SEXUAL HARASSMENT
AT WORKPLACE BILL, 2010
I. NATIONAL DOMESTIC WORKERS MOVEMENT (NDWM)
1. Sr. Lissy Joseph, Regional Coordinator, Andhra Pradesh
2. Sr. Ranjita Kinto, Coordinator, Delhi
3. Ms. Philomina Tirkey, Domestic Worker's in-charge
4. Ms. Asha Parmar, Domestic Worker
5. Ms. Nirmala, (NDWM)
6. Ms. Shushila Herenj, Domestic Worker
7. Ms. Geeta, Domestic Worker
8. Ms. Farah Naqvi
II. SAHELI
Ms. Vani Subramanian
III. HUMAN RIGHTS LAW NETWORK
1. Adv. Anubha Rastogi
2. Adv. Monika
3. Ms. Aparna Dwivedi
4. Ms. Smriti Minocha
VI. LAWYERS COLLECTIVE, WOMEN'S RIGHTS INITIATIVE
1. Ms. Indira Jaising, Additional Solicitor General of India and Executive Director
2. Ms. Paroma Roy, Programme Officer
3. Ms. Aditi Sachdeva, Research and Advocacy Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear *** four organisations/associations on the Protection of Women against Sexual
Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010. ***
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee reassembled after lunch and heard the views of the representatives of the
National Domestic Workers Movement (NDWM), Human Rights Law Network and SAHELI on the
Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment at Work Place Bill, 2010. The Chairman and
Members sought clarifications which were replied to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to
send questionnaire to each of the organisations/institutions for their written replies.
(The witnesses then withdrew )
6. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of Lawyers Collective,
Women’s Right Initiative, on the Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment at Workplace
Bill, 2010. The Chairman and Members raised some queries which were replied to by the witnesses.
The Committee decided to send questionnaire to the organisation for their written replies.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

119
XXXII
THIRTY SECOND MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
18th August, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Kirti Azad – in the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Oscar Fernandes
3. Shri Prakash Javadekar
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Pramod Kureel
6. Shri Janardhan Waghmare
7. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Shri Jeetendersingh Bundela
10. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
12. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
13. Shri Tapas Paul
14. Shri Ashok Tanwar
15. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM SEXUAL HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACE
BILL, 2010
I. NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN (NCW)
(i) Ms. Zohra Chatterji, Member Secretary
119

120
(ii) Ms. Minakshi Ghose, Joint Secretary
(iii) Ms. Lilabati, Coordinator
(iv) Ms. Smita Singh, Coordinator
** *
2. The Chairman requested Shri Kirti Azad, M.P., Lok Sabha to preside over the meeting of
the Committee. The Chairman then welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the Member-Secretary, National Commission for Women on the Protection of
Women from Sexual Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010 and the Secretary, Ministry of Women
and Child Development Bill, 2011 on the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Bill, 2011.
The Chairman also mentioned that the deadline for the presentation of Reports on these Bills was
31
st August, 2011. Since more time was required to deliberate on both the Bills, the Committee
decided to seek extension of time till 30th November, 2011 for both the Bills.
3. The Committee, then, heard the views of Member-Secretary, National Commission for
Women on the Protection of Women from Sexual Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010. Members
raised some queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to forward
a questionnaire on the Bill to the Commission for their written comments.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
4. * * *
5. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

121
121
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the
29th September, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri M. Rama Jois
6. Shri Pramod Kureel
7. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
8. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
9. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
10. Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg
11. Shri P.K. Biju
12. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
13. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
14. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
15. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
16. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
17. Kumari Saroj Pandey
18. Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla
19. Shri Ashok Tanwar
20. Shri Joseph Toppo
21. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 'Vinnu'
22. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer

122
WITNESSES
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM SEXUAL HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACE
BILL, 2010
I. CENTRE OF INDIAN TRADE UNIONS, NEW DELHI
Ms. Ranjana Nirula, Treasurer
II. ALL INDIA WOMEN’S CONFERENCE, NEW DELHI
(i) Ms. Kuljeet Kaur, Member In-charge
(ii) Ms. Bulbul Das, Member In-charge of Mobile Helpline
III. SELF EMPLOYED WOMEN'S ASSOCIATION (SEWA), AHMEDABAD
Ms. Manali Shah, National Secretary
IV. SOCIETY FOR PARTICIPATING RESEARCH IN AREA (PRIA), NEW DELHI
Ms. Saswati Baruah, Programme Officer
V . YWCA, NEW DELHI
(i) Shrimati Kalpana David, National General Secretary,
(ii) Dr. Jyots ana Chatterjee
VI. NATIONAL COALITION FOR MEN, BANGALORE
(i) Shri Virag R. Dhulia, Liaison Officer
(ii) Shri Pandurang Katti, Co-ordinator
VII. INSAAF (INDIAN SOCIAL AWARENESS AND ACTIVISM FORUM), NEW DELHI
(i) Shri Niladri Shekhar Das, Co-ordinator
(ii) Shrimati Ekta Singh (Paul), General Secretary
VIII. ALL INDIA MEN'S WELFARE ASSOCIATION, CHENNAI
(i) Shri Wasif Ali, Executive Member
(ii) Shri Manish Mittal, Executive Member
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members to the first meeting of the
re-constituted Committee. Drawing the attention of the Committee to the nomination of eight new
Members from Lok Sabha, he felicitated Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai
Bavalia, Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg, Shri Balakrishna Khanderao Shukla and Kumari Saroj Pandey,
Members of Lok Sabha. He hoped that Members would continue to extend their support and
cooperation in the smooth functioning of the Committee.
3. The Chairman then drew the attention of the Members to a status note prepared by the
Secretariat on the work accomplished by the Committee during the last year. The Chairman
informed the Members that as many as fourteen Bills were referred to the Committee for
examination and report in the last year. Some of the Bills referred to it related to major policies/
issues and reforms in the Higher Education Sector in the country. The Committee gave Reports on
twelve Bills after holding extensive deliberations. The remaining two Bills, namely the Protection of
Women against Sexual Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010 and the Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Bill, 2011 were at the initial stages of deliberations and three-four more meetings

123
were required to be held for interactions with stakeholders. He also drew the attention of the
Committee to the time limit, i.e., 31 st October, 2011 for giving reports on these two Bills.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. Thereafter, the Chairman informed the Members that the representatives of some
organisations/associations holding different view points on the Protection of Women against Sexual
Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010 have been called for presenting their views. The Committee
then heard the representatives of the Centre of Indian Trade Unions, New Delhi, All India Women’s
Conference, New Delhi, Self Employed Women’s Association (SEWA), Ahmedabad, Society for
Participating Research in Area (PRIA), New Delhi, YWCA, New Delhi, National Coalition for Men,
Bangalore, INSAAF (Indian Social Awareness and Activism Forum), New Delhi and All India Men’s
Welfare Association, Chennai on the Bill. The Members raised some queerie which were replied to
by the witnesses. The Committee decided to forward questionnaire on the Bill to all the
organisations/associations for their written comments.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 6.20 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the
30th September, 2011.
*** Relate to other matters.

124
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the
13th October, 2011 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Pramod Kureel
LOK SABHA
6. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
7. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
8. Shri Sameer Bhujbal
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
12. Shri Kapil Muni Karwaria
13. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
14. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
15. Kumari Saroj Pandey
16. Shri Prasanna Kumar Patasani
17. Shri Ashok Tanwar
18. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 'Vinnu'
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
124

125
WITNESSES
I. THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST SEXUAL HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACE
BILL, 2010
1. STANDING CONFERENCE OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (SCOPE)
(i) Shri Arup Roy Chaudhary, Chairman
(ii) Dr. U. D. Choubey, Director General
(iii) Shrimati Nisha Sharma, Deputy Manager (CC)
(iv) Shri Ajay Madan, Protocol Officer
(v) Shri Sunil Dwivedi, DGM, CMD - Secretariat
2. OFFICE OF CHIEF LABOUR COMMISSIONER
Shri B.K. Sanwariya, Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central)
3. INDIAN BANKS ASSOCIATION (IBA)
Shri M.R. Umarji, Chief Advisor (Legal)
4. NASSCOM
(i) Ms.Vidya Srinivasan, Senior Vice President
(ii) Ms. Rosita Rabindra, Chief People Officer
(iii) Ms. Nafisa A. Ojha, Senior Manager
5. CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN INDUSTRY
(i) Ms. Rumjhum Chatterjee, Managing Director, Feedback Ventures
(ii) Shri. A.S. Kumar, General Counsel, Dr. Reddys Lab
(iii) Shri S ushanta Sen, Principal Advisor, CII
(iv) Shri Sunil Misra, Director, CII
(v) Shri Shreeram Lakshman, Deputy Director, CII
** *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear a number of stakeholders on the Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment
at Workplace Bill, 2010 and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Bill, 2011. The
Chairman informed the members that deadline for presenting the Reports on these two Bills is
31
st October, 2011. It was deemed appropriate to have a final meeting with the Secretary, Ministry
of Women and Child Development on all the concerns expressed by the various stakeholders on
both the Bills. Thereafter, the Committee would be taking up clause-by-clause consideration of the
Bills. The Secretariat would then prepare draft Reports on these Bills for consideration of the
Committee. The Committee felt that it would be requiring more time for completing the
deliberations on both the Bills. Therefore, the Committee decided to request the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha for granting extension of time. Keeping in view the ongoing Festive Season and also
the forthcoming Winter Session, the Committee decided to seek extension of time on both the Bills
upto 31
st December, 2011.
3. * * *
*** Relates to other matter.

126
*** Relates to other matter.
4. The Committee, then, heard the Chairman, Standing Conference of Public Enterprises
(SCOPE), the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), Delhi, Chief Legal Advisor, Indian
Banks Association, Mumbai, Senior Vice-President, NASSCOM, and the Managing Director, CII on
the Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010. The Chairman and
Members raised some queries which were replied to by witnesses. The Committee decided to
forward a questionnaire to each of these organizations for their comments.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 
P.M.

127
127
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the
2nd November, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A ’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
6. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
7. Shri Kuvarjibhai Mohanbhai Bavalia
8. Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg
9. Shri P.K.Biju
10. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
11. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
12. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
13. Shri Kapil Muni Karwaria
14. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
15. Shri Joseph Toppo
16. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
17. Shri P. Viswanathan
18. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST SEXUAL HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACE
BILL, 2010
(i) Shri D.K. Sikri, Secretary, (WCD)

128
(ii) Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
(iii) Shrimati Sangeeta Verma, Economic Adviser
(iv) Shrimati Vinita Aggarwal, Director
(v) Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
(vi) Shri S.R. Mishra, Deputy Legal Adviser
(vii) Ms. Brototi Dutta, Consultant
(viii) Ms. Tenxing Choesang, Consultant
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to have a final discussion with the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry of
Woman and Child Development on the various issues and concerns expressed by stakeholders and
Members on the Protection of Women against Sexual Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010. He then
informed the Members that clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill would be taken up in the next
meeting of the Committee to be held on the 11
th November, 201 1. The Secretariat was accordingly,
directed to prepare a Statement on various provisions of the Bill based on the entire deliberations
of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, Secretary and other officials of the Ministry of Woman and Child Development
briefed the Committee on the various issues and concerns on the Protection of Women against
Sexual Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010. The Chairman and Members then sought further
clarification on a number of allied/additional issues which were replied to by Secretary.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. to meet at l1 A.M. on Friday, the 11 th November, 2011.

129
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday the
11th November, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai
3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
6. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
10. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
11. Shri Kapil Muni Karwaria
12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
13. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
14. Kumari Saroj Pandey
15. Shri P. Viswanathan
16. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The
Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Protection of Women against Sexual
Harassment at Workplace Bill, 2010. It examined various clauses of the Bill in the light of
129

130
suggestions received from a large number of stakeholders and clarifications given by the Ministry
thereon. Some of the Members gave valuable suggestions in this regard. The Chairman directed the
Secretariat to take note of the suggestions and prepare the draft Report on the Bill for the
consideration of the Committee.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 
P.M.

131
131
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday the
30th November, 2011 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes – Chairman
2. Shri M. Rama Jois
3. Shri Pramod Kureel
4. Shri N.K. Singh
5. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
6. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Mirza Mehboob Beg
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
12. Shri Balkrishna Khanderao Shukla
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the 239
th Report on the Protection of Women Against Sexual
Harassment at Workplace 2010.
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft 239 th Report on the Bill and adopted the
same with some modifications. The Committee also decided to present the Report in both the
Houses of Parliament on 8th December, 2011.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 
P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the
8th December, 2011.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.