Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT
REPORT NO. 
262
The Functioning of National Sports Federations
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th February, 2014)

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT
The Functioning of National Sports Federations
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A BBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—31
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 32—41
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 43—55

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 31st August, 2013)
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
6. Shri Derek O' Brien
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
9. Shri Tarun Vijay
10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suresh Angadi
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Sivasami C.
15. Shrimati Helen Davidson
16. Dr. Charles Dias
17. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
18. Shri Virender Kashyap
19. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
20. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
21. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
22. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
23. Capt. Jai Naraian Prasad Nishad
24. Shri M.K. Raghavan
25. Shri K. Chandrashekar Rao
26. Shri M.I. Shanavas
27. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
28. Vacant
29. Shri Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
30. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana
31. Shri Manicka Tagore

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf
Two Hundred Sixty Second Report of the Committee on the ‘Functioning of National Sports
Federations’.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development constituted a Sub-Committee on the ‘Functioning of National Sports Federations’ for
detailed examination of the subject under the convenorship of Shri Avinash Rai Khanna, MP, Rajya
Sabha. The Sub-Committee had a detailed examination of the subject with special focus on the
development and promotion of the sports disciplines, holding of national/international sports events
by National Sports Federations, training/coaching of sportspersons, problem areas in the functioning
of the federations, coordination with the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and other bodies and
suggestions for improvement of the same.
3. In order to have wide consultations, the Sub-Committee issued a Press Release to elicit
feedback from the general public and also sought view from the State Governments/UTs. The Sub-
Committee also heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Director
General, Sports Authority of India in its meeting on 21
st October, 2013. After that, the Committee
heard the views of Sports Federations like Special Olympic Bharat, All India Sports Council of the
Deaf, Athletics Federation India, Table Tennis Federation of India, Indian Olympic Association,
National Rifle Association of India, Hockey India, Badminton Association of India, All India Football
Federation, Indian Hockey Federation, All India Tennis Association, Clean Sports, eminent
sportspersons like Shri Pargat Singh, Smt. Ashwini Nachappa and other experts like Capt. V .K.
Verma, Principal and Director, Motilal Nehru School of Sports and Prof. V .G. Bhise, Director,
Physical Education Sports from the field of sports education. The Sub-committee had a final
meeting with the Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and Director General, SAI for
clarifications on various issues which came to light while interacting with the stakeholders.
4. The Sub-Committee examined the subject in six meetings held on 21 October, 6 November,
24 December, 2013, 6 and 28 January and 5 February, 2014 and considered and adopted its draft
report in its meeting held on 17 February, 2014. The Report was considered and adopted by the
Main Committee in its meeting held on 19
th February, 2014.
5. For facility of reference, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in bold letters at the end of the report.
NEW D ELHI; BIRENDER SINGH
February 19, 2014 Chairman,
Magha 30, 1935 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.

ABBREVIATIONS
NSFs – National Sports Federations
ACTC – Annual Calender of Training and Competitions
UCs – Utilization Certificates
NADA – National Anti-Doping Agency
NSD – National Sports Development
SAI – Sports Authority of India
IOA – Indian Olympic Association
MPLAD – Members of Parliament Local Area Development
GOI – Government of India
IOC – International Olympic Committee
ATP – Association of Tennis Professionals
WTC – Women Tennis Association
ITF – International Tennis Federation
SCTCs – State Calender For Training and Competitions
SSFs – State Sports Federations
RTI – Right to Information
AGM – Athletes Global Management
FIFA – Federation Internationale de Football Association
AISCD – All India Sports Council of the Deaf
LTDP –s Long Term Player Development
(iv)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Sports and games play a very crucial role in the overall development of one’s personality.
Besides improving physical fitness, their contribution in generating bonding towards community and
inculcating the sharing habit in the innocent minds of our children is an undisputed fact. Role of
sports and games becomes all the more important when tremendous increase in the youth
population is being noticed in our country. Not only this, spectacular performance in international
sports has always proved to be a source of national pride and great achievement.
1.2 Sports is a State subject in our federal set up. The two broad areas of identifying sports
talents and their nurturing are thus mainly the responsibility of States. However, State level efforts
are being given considerable impetus by the various initiatives being taken by the Ministry of Sports
and Youth Affairs.
1.3 The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on HRD has been focussing on
the functioning of National Sports Federations in its reports on Demands for Grants every year.
The Committee has taken note of the crucial role being played by NSFs in the performance of
sportspersons in the national as well as international events, in particular, and development and
promotion of sports in the country, in general. Committee’s attention has also been drawn to a
number of disturbing aspects relating to the functioning of NSFs. Instances of internal conflict
within the federation, de-recognition of federations and also major differences arising at the
international level have been a cause of serious concern for the Committee.
1.4 The Committee strongly felt that there was an urgent need to make an in-depth study of
all the aspects pertaining to the functioning of NSFs. The Committee, accordingly, constituted a
Sub-Committee under the convenorship of Shri Avinash Rai Khanna, M.P, Rajya Sabha on the
‘Functioning of National Sports Federations in the country’ for examination and report. The
purpose of this study is to examine the role of NSFs in the development and promotion of various
sports disciplines, touching upon all the allied aspects like holding of national and international
sports events, training/coaching of national level sportspersons, facilities, incentives for
sportspersons and problem areas noticed in the functioning of NSFs and suggestions for
strengthening their functioning.
1.5 The Committee was given to understand that indicative budget was allotted to each NSF
based on past expenditure and performance in major multi-disciplinary events like Commonwealth
Games, Asian Games and Olympics Games. Budget allocation during the last three years for NSFs
indicated that allocation for NSFs increased from `110.00 crore in 2011-12 to `160.00 crore in
2013-14. NSFs were mandated to maintain annual recognition from the Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports, prepare Annual Calender of Training and Competitions (ACTC) for approval from the
Ministry, submission of proposals within the stipulated time in accordance with approved ACTC
and submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs) within the stipulated period.
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
2.1 In order to have wider consultations on the subject under examination, the Committee
decided to elicit the views of all concerned. The Committee also issued a Press Release in October,
2013 on the subject to elicit public opinion from stakeholders as well as the general public.
Memoranda from few individuals/organizations were received. The main thrust of the feedback
received from the common public was on the plight of sportspersons who had excelled in sports

2
in the past. The Committee also approached all the State Governments/UTs so as to have an idea
about the role of State Governments in the development of sports and efforts made by them in
this direction, their linkage with State/NSFs and also the Central Government. A detailed
questionnaire was sent to all States/UTs regarding these issues for their comments. However, only
four States/UTs were forthcoming.
2.2 The Committee started its deliberations on the subject by hearing the views of the
Secretary, Department of Sports and Director General, Sports Authority of India. The Secretary,
Department of Sports and Director-General, Sports of Authority of India during their presentation
before the Committee on the 21
st October, 2013 submitted that there were 26 priority sports
disciplines, 3 general sports disciplines and 24 other sports disciplines based on the performance
at international level, besides popularity in the country, Weightage was being given to the sports
disciplines where chances of winning of medals were more.
2.3 The Committee was informed that in order to promote adoption of good governance
practices by NSFs and development of healthy sports in the country, the Government of India had
issued comprehensive guidelines in 1975, 1988, 1997 and 2001. Several major initiatives were taken
by the Government post 2001 such as declaration of NSFs availing of Government grants as public
authorities under the Right to Information Act, 2005, introduction of annual recognition for NSFs,
implementation of age and tenure limits in respect of office-bearers of NSFs, notification of NADA
Anti Doping Rules, introduction of guidelines for prevention of age frauds in sports, prevention of
sexual harassment in sports and holding of fair and transparent elections in NSFs. Subsequently,
a comprehensive code titled ‘National Sports Development Code of India NSD(i), 2011’
encompassing all the earlier orders/notifications/instructions/circulars was published and brought
into force with effect from the 31
st January, 2011. NSFs were pursued to amend their constitutions
in accordance with the Sports Code. All 53 recognized NSFs have accepted to do the same so far.
Further, 39 NSFs have, accordingly, modified their constitution and remaining 14 NSFs have agreed
to do the same. The National Sports Federations are the primary agencies and the nodal authorities
for development and promotion of sports in the country. Each sports discipline is taken care of
by its Sports Federation which is responsible for manifold activities like holding of sports events,
selection of sportspersons for participating in national as well as international events, preparing the
sportspersons by providing adequate training, equipment etc, engagement of coaches, conducting
coaching camps, providing medical insurance and sports kits to sportspersons etc. The Government
supplements the efforts of NSFs by providing financial assistance for the different tasks assigned
to them.
2.4 Thereafter, the Committee also held extensive interactions with a number of Sports
Federations which included Special Olympic Bharat, All India Sports Council of the Deaf, Athletics
Federation India, Table Tennis Federation of India, Indian Olympic Association, National Rifle
Association of India, Hockey India, Badminton Association of India, All India Football Federation,
Indian Hockey Federation, All India Tennis Association, Clean Sports, eminent sportspersons like
Shri Pargat Singh, Smt Ashwini Nachappa and other experts like Capt. V .K Verma, Principal &
Director, Motilal Nehru School of Sports and Prof. V .G Bhise, Director, Physical Education Sports
from the field of sports education. The Committee took up the issues which emerged while
interacting with stakeholders with the Secretary, Department of Sports and DG , SAI in its meeting
held on the 5
th February, 2014 and sought clarifications from them.
2.5 The Committee had approached the State Governments to ascertain their views on status
of sports in their States and functioning of National Sports Federations. However, the Committee
could have the feedback from only the State Governments of Bihar and Uttarakhand, NCT of Delhi
and Andaman and Nicobar Administration. All these Governments were making all efforts to give
due attention to sports. State Sports Associations are functioning there. However, with regard to

3
sports schemes being administered by the Ministry with the exception of Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur
Khel Abhiyan to some extent have not reached these States/UTs so far. There are problems with
regard to sports infrastructure and coaches. The Committee is constrained to observe that there
is lack of co-ordination between the Ministry/SAI and State Governments and other sports bodies.
The Committee apprehends that position might be, more or less similar in other States. If that is
so, then it is a cause for worry and serious introspection for the Ministry, SAI as well as the
various National Sports Federations.
2.6 In its very first interaction with stakeholders, the Committee heard the views of the
representatives of Special Olympic Bharat and All India Sports Council of the Deaf. The former
submitted before the Committee that their federation had been functioning since 2001 registered
under the Indian Trust Act to promote, organize and conduct sports activities for persons with
intellectual disabilities in India. It got the status of ‘Federation’ in 2006. Spreading across all
35 States/UTs, there were 5209 trainers and 93,464 coaches associated with the organization which
was conducting more than 34,000 competitions. The Committee was informed that participation of
Special Olympics Bharat had been impressive in the international sports. While in the 13
th World
Summer Games held in 2011, number of medals won was 78 (Gold), 79 (Silver) and 92 (Bronze),
in the 10 th World Winter Games held in 2013, tally of medals won was 13 (Gold), 16 (Silver) and
16 s(Bronze).
2.7  On a specific query about support from the Ministry, the Committee was given to
understand that recognition from the Ministry had given boost to the organization in getting funds
for the training of children and for holding sports events. However, problems started arising since
the last three-four years when their budget was cut down by the GOI. The total budget of
`5 crore for all disabilities had been brought down to `3.5 crore.
2.8 It was emphasized that the federation was not getting much weightage by the Ministry
when compared with other sports federations like hockey, football etc. The representatives also
highlighted the fact that the federation needed more support and funding as the disabled
sportspersons required extra attention leading to higher expenses. Further, it was also pointed that
the major challenge was the lack of sports culture in the country with corporates being interested
in only one or two major sports disciplines. Another major problem-area highlighted was regular
coaches not coming forward to give training to children with specific needs. As a result, one coach
had to train such children in three to five sports disciplines, inspite of not being conversant with
all such sports disciplines. Another major problem being faced by the organization was lack of
interest on the part of the Ministry. One such example was undue delay in the holding of the
meeting for the Long Term Development Plan. Constraints were also being faced due to the
condition for adherence to specific norms like booking of air/rail tickets with only the specified
agencies.
2.9 Representatives of the All India Sports Council of the Deaf deposed before the Committee
that since inception in 1965, the federation had provided a platform and a level playing field to deaf
sportspersons to showcase their talent in sports. One of the major problems faced by the federation
was financial constraints as the deaf faced a communication gap with the hearing world and needed
interpreters. Further, sports for the deaf were not popular. The Committee was also informed that
although the Council was recognized by the sports authorities, its affiliated state units had not been
duly recognized by their respective State Governments/State sports bodies despite legitimate
registration. Another major constraint was that against an estimated expense of about `25 lakhs,
financial grant from the Ministry was only `12 lakhs. The most worrisome aspect highlighted by
the Council was the internal conflict within the organization regarding fair elections of the
federation. There were at present two parallel bodies representing the Council. At the General Body
meeting convened at Nagpur on the 10
th March, 2013, fresh elections were conducted at the

4
directions of the Ministry. The presence of a Government Observer was requested by the Council,
which was unfortunately not provided. Inspite of the complete documentation of the elections being
duly submitted to the Ministry, the Council has been asked to first procure recognition from the
International Sports Council of the Deaf before the same could be given by the Ministry. It was
pointed out that internal national matters could not and need not be resolved by international bodies.
2.10 The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Athletics Federation of India
who submitted that the Federation was the oldest sports federation in the country registered in
1962 and had produced many national and international athletes over the years. Athletics was
considered the mother of all sports and 200 plus countries participated in this sports discipline. It
was one of the most difficult and complex sports as every event was completely different,
technique-wise and physical structure-wise. Further, required norms for diet for athletes varied for
different athletic events. The Committee was informed that in the last Olympics, six athletes were
in the top 20, one in the 6
th position, one in the 8 th, one in the 10 th , one in the 11 th one in the
12th and one in the 19 th position. In the recently concluded Asian Championship in July, athletes had
won 17 medals.
2.11  Shortage of top class foreign coaches was one of the major problem areas cited by the
federation. Additional funds were needed for hiring top class coaches but the federation ended up
hiring Russian coaches or coaches from the Eastern Block as they were cheaper to hire. It was
also pointed out that undue delay was there in getting the clearance from the Ministry for hiring
of foreign coaches. Another issue highlighted was the provision of proper facilities and support to
the athletes who needed experts, masseurs, psychologists, physiologists, physiotherapists, doctors
and other support staff. Availability of proper training camps for the athletes for more than 320
days in a year was yet another challenge. Besides that, athletes also needed to get acclimatized to
all sorts of weather conditions. Also, procuring of food supplements for the athletes like protein
powder etc was another crucial area of concern. Getting authentic food supplements without any
contamination was a big challenge as it could lead to disqualification of athletes. Committee’s
attention was drawn to instances of athletes getting disqualified. It was suggested that these food
supplements should be bought by SAI which had the testing facilities and supplied to athletes. It
was mentioned that girl athletes who had won medals in the Commonwealth and Asian Games
could not participate in Olympics, inspite of their buying food supplements in the Asian Games
Village in Guanzhon, China and having the required documents, i.e. stamped receipts. It was
suggested that in the event of a coach advising a junior athlete to take certain food supplement,
he should be held responsible for it.
2.12 It was clarified that there was no direct funding to the federation from the Government.
Out of the budget allocated to it, `1000/- per athlete went to the Sports Authority of India,
`450/- per athlete to the caterer at SAI and for `250/- either food supplement was bought and
given to every athlete or the money given directly to him. Another problem being faced was athletes
not getting any pocket money while going abroad for training, with only expenses for
accommodation and coaches being taken care of.
2.13 Another crucial issue raised related to the Long Term Development Plan. It was mentioned
that due to concentrating all efforts for getting medals in Commonwealth Games in the recent
years, entire focus was on the senior sportspersons. As a result, junior camps could not be held
for three years. It was also emphasized that the four year Long Term Development Plan was not
serving the purpose. The Long Term Development Plan needed to be for ten years, giving scope
to the identified talents or grassroot athletes for about 12 years. This issue was yet to be addressed
by the Ministry inspite of it being raised in a meeting and supported by all the NSFs.
2.14 Apart from the regular problem of fund constraints, the representatives of the Athletic
Federation of India suggested that there should be flexibility within the budget. An example cited

5
was restriction on change of any participating athelete, inspite of having valid reasons like the
participant falling sick or getting injured. Not only this, insufficient budget allocation resulted in
reduction of strength in senior camps and non-conducting of camps for juniors and sub-junior
athletes.
2.15 Committee’s attention was drawn to high rates of charging by SAI with `1000/- per athlete
per day in camp for infrastructure, `5000/- per day for Field of Play for athletes practising during
the coaching camp. It was also suggested that since the Government could not support the
federation in all respects, especially the infrastructure etc, private participation should be
encouraged. A more congenial environment needed to be created where the private sector could
come in and help in the development of sports. A suggestion made in this regard was to accord
the status of basic infrastructure to sports industry. Further, it was submitted by the representatives
that availability of nutritious food for the sportspersons was an important component as the quality
of food given to the sportspersons was of poor quality, leading to many sportspersons contracting
amoebic dysentery. Effort was being made by them to get the Taj Group involved in it as part of
the CSR mandate wherein the Taj Group of Hotels would run kitchen in the camps with the
nutritionists.
2.16 Another area of concern highlighted by the Athletics Federation of India was that the sports
bodies bound by Government restrictions as envisaged in the Sports Bill which entailed the age
limits of office bearers of the federation and the limit on the tenure to be held etc. It was
suggested that sports bodies should be independent of all sorts of Government restrictions. Further,
paucity of funds was yet another area of concern. It was suggested that a comparison should be
made to see how much money was spent on officials and how much was spent on training of
the players. It was considered essential to increase the funding of NSFs as compared to other
countries of the world. Talent needed to be searched from the grassroot level which required
additional funds. Also, more funds should be given to federation for holding of more and more
championships. Committee’s attention was also drawn to another disturbing trend of participation
of children in marathons. It was informed that norms of International Athletics Federation relating
to children were being flouted by middlemen/companies. It was suggested that clearance from the
Athletics Federation of India should be made mandatory for participation of children in marathons.
2.17 The Committee had the opportunity to interact with the representatives of the Indian
Olympics Association which was a conglomeration of National Sports Federations and State
Olympic Associations. It was submitted before the Committee that sports was neglected in most
of the States as unless one had access to political people, it was not possible to make progress
with respect to release of funds. Committee’s attention was drawn to the positive impact of having
politicians in NSFs, as it resulted in getting the funds released and also utilising the MPLAD funds
for sports. Objection was also raised about having age-limit for office-bearers of NSFs. It was
mentioned that to reach the level of a Vice President, President or General Secretary, it took about
15 to 20 years. There was no age limit for being a MP/Minister/Prime Minister and the same norm
needed to be make applicable for NSFs also. Giving an example of Jharkhand where a lawn ball
stadium was built in Ranchi out of the MP funds, it was pointed out that the performance in that
discipline of sports improved remarkably. The distinction between these stadia and the government
stadium was that the people had access to the former throughout the day without any fees. This
helped in the development of the game and encouraged the tribals of the State to play anytime, free
of charge.
2.18  The Indian Olympic Association was closely involved in spearheading all the activities
related to India’s participation in Olympic, Asian and Commonwealth Games right from sending
entries by number, making arrangement for travel, accommodation, training, all kinds of logistic
support to the various processes, culminating in the participation of National Teams in these

6
Games. IOA also closely monitored and guided NSFs from time to time and also raised their
grievances at appropriate levels in Government, International Federations and IOC.
2.19 An important issue of co-ordination between the Government and the Olympic body was
emphasized upon by the representatives of the Indian Olympic Association. Instead of co-operating
with each other, there had been instances of conflict between the Sports Ministers and the Olympic
movement. It was suggested that Sports Federations should be consulted before the Government
decided about the appointment of coaches and before the Government started camps for training.
This should be totally a joint function of the GOI and Sports Federations. It was further submitted
that the Indian Olympic Association was an autonomous elected body and should be allowed to
function like that only. However, attempt was being made to bring this body under the direct
control of the Government. Instead of trying to regulate the associations, the effort should be made
to develop sports and create stadia all over the districts. The assets created by SAI were also not
being fully utilized. Funds constraint was another area of concern highlighted by the representatives
of IOA. No financial assistance was being given for running the day-to-day business of IOA.
Money being given was meant only for training, tours and air-tickets. It was also felt that funds
were being spent more on establishment as compared to training of sportspersons.
2.20 It was pointed out that grants for championships and national events was very meagre; i.e.
Sub-Junior ( `6 lakhs), Junor ( `4 lakhs) and Senior ( `2 lakhs). There were some disciplines where
number of participants was in thousands. The amount of grant, accordingly, needed to be enhanced
to a pragmatic scale. A number of suggestions were made for giving financial incentives to the
corporate sector which included 100 per cent tax rebate to corporates for donations to sports
organizations, special rebate to corporate entities for adopting a particular sport and for meeting the
expenditure for training of probables at the international events and giving tax exemptions to private
sector for employing state and national level sportspersons. For attracting sports talent, it was
pointed out that there should be at least one sports school in each district where children were
enrolled and provided nutrition and training so that they could reach international level.
2.21 Representatives of the National Rifle Association submitted before the Committee that their
association had been in existence since independence. The association was affiliated to the Asian
Shooting Federation, Commonwealth Shooting Federation, Asian Clay Shooting Federation, South
Asian Shooting Confederation, Indian Olympic Association and the International Shooting Sport
Federation. The association had 53 directly affiliated State Units, having 6000 life members. In the
London Olympics, while India was ranked 48
th globally, in shooting India was ranked 5 th. They
were happy with the funding of the Government in the last two years.
2.22 One major problem area which sportspersons were encountering was the charging of
substantial amount of money by the airlines for bringing their guns on the aircraft with them. They
requested the Committee to look into the issue. Further, emphasis was laid on the fact that for
sportspersons to emerge as super powers in shooting very high quality mental training was needed.
It was felt that SAI could take the lead to provide that kind of facility to sportspersons. It was
also submitted by them that the domestic manufacturing base for weapons and ammunition was
very weak in the country. The Indian ordnance factories were monopolists in the field of
production of weapons and ammunition because of stringent security controls. Their products were
sub-standard and not upto the mark for international competitions. They requested the Committee
to take up this issue with the Ministries of Home Affairs and Defence tie up with some
internationally well-known manufacturers so that quality products could be made in India and made
available at cheaper prices to the under-privileged sections of the athletes. Committee’s attention
was also drawn to the fact that shooting sport was the only sport covered under the Arms Act.
With the efforts of the association, a major amendment has been made in the Arms Act which
would allow minors participating in shooting events to get arms licences from age 12 upwards,
along with certain ammunition for Olympic athletes.

7
2.23 Representatives of Hockey India, registered in May, 2009 with 47 total registered Member
Units, submitted before the Committee that they had tried to adhere to rules and regulations to put
foundations in place. Apart from holding national and international championships, they had been
trying to expose more hockey to the public so that the public was involved in the game as
sportspersons and athletes. They, however, pointed out that the existing norms within the Ministry
and SAI for the basic things such as boarding and lodging charges were quite low which made
it difficult for them to get three meals a day. Even the norms for hiring, support staff like doctors
and physiotherapists were quite low with the result that anyone with calibre not coming forward
to work with top athletes. An important issue raised was the establishment of a development team,
especially in a sport like hockey. There was also a need to have a dedicated budget for youth
development so as to have a sub-junior programme in order to put foundations in place for a
successful future. Further, a need for setting up of a high performance centre as well as a
dedicated sports science centre across all sports was expressed. This would help in educating the
sportspersons analysing behaviour in terms of rehabilitation and support to sportspersons. Lastly,
availability of proper infrastructural facilities, especially the availability of astro turfs for the hockey
players was quite an important issue to be dealt with.
2.24 The Committee was informed that Hockey India was holding National Championships for
talent identification and development. In addition to Performance Director, international coach and
international scientific advisor for women’s team, professionals were being hired by the association
without any support from the Government. Prizes, equipment and grants for kits were the other
initiatives given to players. The key issue emphasized by the organization was sheer lack of
artificial turf for hockey players. Out of the 86 artificial turfs in the country, only 50 were in a
good condition whereas as many as 500 artificial turfs were required in the country.
2.25 The representatives of the Badminton Association of India highlighted the fact that their
association had witnessed tremendous growth in terms of achievement of players and making the
game quite popular in the country. However, insignificant funding for the game was an area of
concern. Cost of holding national tournaments had gone up considerably. They requested that at-
least for national championships, infrastructural facilities which were created out of the public fund
should be made available free to the registered and recognized national federations. A major problem
being faced by the association was non-availability of international standard shuttlecocks due to
strict riders placed by the Ministry of Animal Husbandry on the import of feathers/shuttlecocks.
It was suggested that import norms for import of feathers/shuttlecocks may be eased in line with
other countries. Availability of trained coaches was yet another hurdle, as it was not possible to
attract ex-international players for coaching assignments as they had to be given attractive
honorarium to take up the assignment.
2.26 Representatives of the Table Tennis Federation of India submitted that the federation was
registered in 1961 and had 33 State Associations and 26 Institutions as members. Table tennis was
the second most popular game in the world after volleyball but funds given by the Government
were not as per their requirement. Further, a very unfortunate atmosphere between the Ministry and
the Sports Federation had developed because of the imposition of the guidelines leading to loss of
focus. The focus was more to implement the guidelines rather than monitor the performance of
the Sports Federations. Suspension of IOA by IOC had further vitiated the atmosphere. It was felt
that the organising of games, selecting and sending of teams, organizing international events should
be the job of the Sports Federations and infrastructure, coaching and equipment should be taken
care of the Government. There were only two centres for table tennis (at Patiala and Lucknow)
in the country and one lakh registered players. It was suggested that the Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports should have at least five centres for each region. Shortage of coaches was another
problem as there were only twenty coaches appointed by SAI for the whole country.

8
2.27 It was also pointed out that annual renewal of affiliation should be discontinued. Affiliation
should be given to the federation once but continuous monitoring of its performance should be
done. In case of deficiencies, the federation could be disaffiliated in case the federation failed to
rectify them after repeated reminders. Adequate funds must be provided to NSFs to take care of
coaching of teams, participation of teams in mandatory/important International Events. For
international events, funds, must be sanctioned in advance and it must be ensured that players’
allowances were provided to them before departure. Norms for financial assistance for organising
national/international events must be revised and made reasonable and logical. Sports activity must
be included as one of the items in CSR under the new Companies Act. Profit-making PSUs must
be asked to adopt one or more sport for development, depending upon their financial strength.
Lastly, Government must formulate a structured programme for developing the pool of coaches.
It was pointed out that top national players after retirement were doing desk job. Their talent must
be used to produce players like them. Issue of extreme disparity between Indian and foreign
coaches also needed to be looked into.
2.28 The Committee also had the opportunity to interact with eminent sportspersons like
Shri Pargat Singh and Smt Ashwini Nachappa and Shri B.P.V Rao, Convenor, Clean Sports India.
Based on their varied and rich experience of sports scenario in the country, the Committee was
given an insight into the real status of sports, the kind of problems being faced and some very
valued suggestions for bringing out overall transformation. The Committee was informed that Shri
Pargat Singh was founder President of Clean Sports India, an organization established in 2010. Smt
Ashwini Nachappa was the current President of the organisation.
2.29 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that most of the sports federations were
headed by the non-sportspersons. In other words, the whole federation structure was dominated
by non-sportspersons. Position was the same at state level. As a result, all these federations were
no more sports-oriented. All such heads were powerful people having access to Government but
were extremely busy with Parliamentary/legislative work. Situation was such that governance of
federations has been left in the hands of clerical staff. One example of mis-governance quoted was
sudden change of coach who had been with the Indian archery team for Barcelona Olympics, 1992
for five years with a new coach. As a result, even twenty years later, no medal had been won
in archery. Another glaring incident of mismanagement was relating to Seoul Olympics, 1988.
Teams which included Smt. Nachhapa sent to Seoul had been selected on the basis of 13/14
selections conducted throughout the year. However, to include one athlete who had participated in
a previous Olympic but did not figure in the official team, the entire team had to undergo a
selection trial at the Olympic Games Village, 24 hours before the event. It was emphasized that
sports federations must take the responsibility of training athletes, advise Government on the
training/athlete exposure, must have an education programme on drug abuse and also address the
issue of abuse of women athletes.
2.30 Committee was also given to understand that right approach to sports was missing in the
country. Best example in this regard was that of China where about a crore children in the 3 to
13 age group were being trained by about 4,50,000 physical trainers. On attaining the age of
12/13 years, 9 lakh children according to their physique and requirement out of 9 crore children
were selected for specialization. These selected 9 lakh children were given the weightage of 25 per
cent marks. Out of these, 9 lakh children, 9000 children were selected for super-specialization who
won medals for the country. However, position was totally different in out country with education
and sports being treated on two different platforms. First step to be taken by the Government was
to bring the two together right from the very beginning.
2.31 It was pointed out that the proposed Sports Development Bill was very much required to
make the federations accountantable. The element of autonomy was being misrepresented at

9
present. There was also an urgent need for augmenting the sports budget which was only 0.0007
per cent of the total budget as compared to 10-15 per cent budget of the sports leading countries.
Another suggestion made was to integrate sports in the education system in the real sense. Making
physical education mandatory for schools would not serve the purpose. Role of federations was
to just select the team, appoint a coach and a manager who would be the potential voter for the
next elections. Sometimes, selection was faulty, coaches were mismanaged, managers were
changed every term. There was no financial responsibility and no accountability.
2.32 It was also felt that elections being conducted had to be made totally transparent. In
Archery Association, elections were held after forty years due to court interventions. So called
elections were being conducted by federations themselves. An independent Election Commission had
to be put in place to ensure transparency in elections. Another suggestion was to have 50 per cent
sportspersons in every sports body. Also required was an Ethics Commission to resolve ethical
problems, corruption cases, wrong selection, matters of conflicts of interest, pecuniary interest etc.
Committee’s attention was also drawn to thousands of cases running in different courts of the
country. There were disputes between a player and a federation, disputes between State units and
federation units, disputes between coaches and federations, disputes between Government and IOA,
non-adherence to Sports Code, harassment of women athletes etc. For such matters, a Sports
Tribunal needed to be set up.
2.33 The Committee interacted with the Principal and Director, Motilal Nehru School of Sports,
Sonepat on the subject. He submitted before the Committee that the office- bearers in most of the
Sports Federations had no connection with sports and did not know much about the game. Hence,
a condition that one of the five office bearers of a federation should be related to the field of sports
should be imposed. Not just this, details of the Government support to Federations needed to be
made public and federations should submit their duly audited financial details at the end of the
financial year. Actual work done by Federations, especially promotion of sports in rural areas
needed to be monitored. There should only be one federation for managing the affairs of one sport
discipline. It was also felt that sports as a career or profession was not encouraged in the country.
Sports as a profession needed to be encouraged with the guarantee of providing security of means
of livelihood.
2.34 The Director of Physical Education & Sports, Vidya Bharati, Raipur, in his deposition before
the Committee, pointed out that NSFs were only concentrating on holding of national and
international tournaments. They were not helping the children or the schools in the development of
sports. The schools did not have enough funds and needed the support of NSFs, be it financial
support or coaching assistance. It was suggested that NSFs should adopt few schools and provide
all support to the students so that they were prepared from an early stage to compete nationally
or internationally. Further, registered sport bodies ie. sports clubs or sport schools etc should be
given funds and other support. Lack of monitoring of SAI hostels and implementation of Panchayat
Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) which focussed on children of rural areas was also pointed
out. Multiplicity of federations for one discipline of sports and setting up of federations for sports
disciplines which were not even recognized as a discipline were highlighted.
2.35 Interacting with the representatives of the All India Football Federation, the Committee was
given to understand that Indian Football was ranked at 168
th two years ago and at present, it was
ranked 145 th. Regarding the problems, it was highlighted that there were not enough finances to
promote the game. It was pointed out that every game was different and should be seen in a
different perspective. However, the projections of the Government remained the same for all the
games. Every team and sport discipline had a different age-group going for tournaments at national
and international level. Another aspect highlighted was regarding the high rentals of the SAI stadia
which they requested to be brought down and made reasonable and rational. About the availability

10
of coaches, they submitted that the federation was giving licensing courses to SAI coaches and
also encouraged ex-sportspersons to come for coaching. It was also felt that a sportsperson of
repute could be equated with some licensing by virtue of his experience in the national game. Lack
of support from the States was another hurdle in the promotion of the game.
2.36 The representatives of the All India Tennis Association submitted before the Committee that
among the 210 active nations playing tennis in the world, India was currently ranked 26 th in the
world and 3 rd in Asia which was a good achievement for a sport like tennis which was an
individual sport. India was ranked 5 th in the under-14 girls and ranked 13 th in the under-14 boys
and 11 th in the world in under 16 boys. Three important elements were emphasized upon the
growth of tennis i.e 3Cs-courts, competition and coaches. Fortunately, number of coaches were
increasing and even the infrastructure was growing. Their Association was amongst the two Asian
nations approved by the International Tennis Federation to certify education programme for
coaches. V ocational training to coaches’ was also being provided all over India which would help
in gainfully employing them as tennis coaches. Another aspect pointed out was that coaching
camps needed to be increased for the game. Players depended upon ATP ranking point or WTA
ranking point by playing international tournaments which had recognition of ATP and ITF. The
players had to travel all over the world for this to get small points. The Association was pursuing
the matter with SAI for holding maximum number of tournaments within India itself to avoid high
cost of sending players abroad for a tournament. It was also suggested that for development of
tournament, prize money should be given also for the conduct of these tournaments so that they
benefit the players. Further, planning the programme for the entire year instead of going through
SCTCs and meeting on project to project basis was suggested.
2.37 Representatives of the Indian Hockey Federation informed the Committee about the
unfortunate legal dispute regarding their federations and the emergence of another federation for
hockey. They requested the Committee to help in sorting out the issue so that their federations got
their status restored and due recognition to be given by the Ministry/SAI. Apart from this, they
highlighted the problem of their players who were not getting railway concession for participating
in championship across the country and requested for intervention in the matter. They also
supported the idea of sports schools for development of hockey and identifying such pockets in
the country where talent for the game could easily be found.
2.38 Interactions with a number of National Sports Federations, some leading ex-sportspersons,
experts and representatives of the Ministry and Sports Authority of India enlightened the Committee
on various aspects relating to status of sports in general and functioning of National Sports
Federations in particular in the country. This enabled the Committee to identify the underlying
factors about the not very encouraging sports scenario in the country and not very visible impact
of initiatives taken by the Ministry and the role of National Sports Federations. Quite a few
suggestions for improving the sports scenario in the country were also placed before the
Committee. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee has made an attempt to highlight the
genesis of the various problematic issues/aspects impacting the functioning of NSFs as a whole,
some redeeming features inherent in the existing system and certain drastic remedial measures
required to be taken on an urgent basis.
III. LACK OF SPORTS CULTURE IN THE COUNTRY
3.1 Almost one half of country’s population belongs to the young, the future of our country.
It is a well-known fact that abundant energy of our youth has to be channellized in the right
direction and sports is the best option. Sports orientation not only leads to physical strengthening
of the body but also brings about positive changes in one’s personality by inculcating community
feeling, patriotism, bonding with fellow-beings and in the process adorning the country with

11
moments of pride. In a vast country like India, there is no dearth of sports talent, with some
of the regions, the breeding ground of natural talent in specific sports disciplines. A number of
central flagship sports programmes having the broad objective of nurturing sports talent have
been in place for many decades, being reviewed from time to time and getting the required
funding from the Government. Inspite of that, with the exception of very few glorious moments
in the sports history of the country, sports culture still remains to take roots. The stand of the
Government is that ‘Sports’ is a State subject and the primary responsibility of development and
promotion of any sports discipline lies with the National Sports Federations of the relevant
disciplines. NSFs are autonomous bodies registered under the Registration of Societies Act, 1860,
and the Government does not interfere in their day-to-day activities. Governments’ role is
restricted to supplementing the efforts of NSFs. In other words, sports related activities continue
to be sidelined in the absence of a centralized nodal authority their being handled by different
authorities in their own way.
3.2 The Committee can easily draw the conclusion that sports has failed to receive the
importance and exposure which it deserves. The situation has become more complex due to
the goal of every young student being to excel in academic achievements, especially in view
of very stiff competition facing him in the job market later on. Not only this, with the
tremendous growth of Information Technology, one indirect fall out has been that children
are simply not inclined towards sports related activities.
3.3 The Committee strongly feels that very urgent and drastic efforts are required to be
made by all concerned to imbibe the spirit of sports in the young minds. Committee’s
attention has been drawn to the example of China in this regard. Athletics, swimming and
gymnastics are the compulsory games for Chinese students in schools. In that country,
children at a very tender age are involved in sports-related activities. From the age of
3 years, about 9 crore children are identified and trained by 450,000 physical trainers. On
attaining the age of 12/13 years, out of these 9 crore children, 3 crore children are selected
for specialization and in the end 9000 children are short listed for super-specialization. In
a very structured and well-organized manner, sports talent is nurtured in every conceivable
way. The Committee is of the firm view that need of the hour is to follow the same
strategy, with required adaptations in our country also.
3.4 The Committee is of the view that desired results would be there if NFSs work in
perfect co-ordination with their counter-parts in the States, duly supported by the Central
and State Governments. In all these efforts, schools and colleges will have to play a very
active role. Incentives like extra weightage in examinations for spectular performance in
sports and admission in higher educational institutions need to be given. Another major
initiative can be involvement of corporate sector by getting the industrial houses adopt
either a sports discipline or adopt schools/colleges for sports activities. The Committee
also feels that exclusive sports schools can be established in selected districts having
abundance of natural sports talent. In this exercise, armed forces can play a very fruitful
role. Also, the many sports-related schemes administered by the Ministry have to reach
the targeted beneficiaries. Here, NSFs will have to be directly involved in co-ordination
with the Sports Authority of India. Another aspect which has not been in addressed in the
right perspective is to work in co-ordination with other related Ministries. A beginning can
be made by involving the Youth Clubs under the Nehru Yuva Kendras in sports-related
activities .
3.5 The Committee would like to point out that the role of the Ministry is definitely to
complement the efforts of the State Governments as well as NSFs but this role should not
end here. The Committee firmly believes that the Ministry is the nodal body to give a

12
direction to sports and steer the States and NSFs in promoting a culture of sports in the
country. Not only this, they should take another initiative by focussing on inculcation of a
vibrant and visible sports culture in the country by linking its efforts with other Ministries
like HRD, Women and Child Development etc. The Committee is of the view that
synchronized efforts of the Department, SAI, NSFs and States would go a long way in the
gradual inculcation of a positive spirit and culture of sports in the country.
IV. LACK OF CO-ORDINATION BETWEEN NSFs AND THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH
AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
4.1 During its interaction with various sports federations, one underlying issue which kept on
emerging directly or indirectly was the existence of more or less a workable co-ordination between
most of the NSFs and the Ministry. The only linkage of NSFs with the Ministry and with SAI was
mostly related and limited to the release of funds and making available the existing infrastructure
for sports-related activities. Element of regular interaction between NSFs and the Ministry/SAI to
devise ways and means of developing sports was not visible. The Ministry and SAI were not being
given any first hand information of the performance of sportspersons and consequently no
knowledge about the ground-level requirements of coaching, equipments and exposure etc so as to
ensure the right environment for sportspersons to make their mark both at the national and
international level. The Committee is also not aware about any regular linkage between NSFs and
State Federations and between State Governments and State Federations. Same situation prevailed
with regard to the nodal Ministry at the Centre and State Governments. In fact, even the regional
centres of SAI in the States were functioning independently without any involvement of the State
Governments.
4.2 On a specific query in this regard, the Ministry submitted that the recognised NSFs were
responsible for the promotion and development of sports disciplines. NSFs had to discharge the
responsibilities in accordance with the principles laid down in the Olympic Charter or Indian
Olympic Association or the relevant International Federation. The Government of India only
supplemented the efforts of NSFs by providing financial assistance for participation in
international events abroad, conducting national/international tournaments and training/coaching of
national teams under Indian and foreign coaches/experts etc under the Scheme of ‘Assistance to
National Sports Federations’. SAI closely coordinated with NSFs in all these matters. The
Committee was also given to understand that the Ministry regularly consulted NSFs in major
decision-making like NSFs were consulted while formulating criteria for Sports Awards, revision
of Schemes etc. The Ministry also either directly or through SAI consulted NSFs, while
implementing its various Schemes.
4.3 Many stakeholders suggested that a closer partnership or connect was required between the
Central and State Governments and also the National as well as States Sports Federations. The
initiative for a partnership had to come from the Government of India by making the States and
the federations their partners in the sports activities at all levels right from the grass roots level
to the highest level. The Committee was given to understand that NSFs also wanted to work
closely with the Ministry and SAI and other sports bodies for ensuring fulfilment of their objective
to deliver a world class, competitive high performance participation in all sports disciplines.
4.4 The issue of role of NSFs in the implementation of various Schemes was also taken up
with the Ministry, whose response was that there was close interaction between the Ministry and
NSFs. The Committee was given to understand that the Ministry either directly or through the
Sports Authority of India consulted NSFs, while implementing its various Schemes. Examples given
by the Ministry pertained to the Scheme of Assistance to NSFs, Sports/Cash Awards to
Sportspersons and sending of Coaches for attending advanced studies/courses.

13
4.5 Feedback given by various stakeholders as well as the Ministry clearly indicates that
there is lack of coordination between the NSFs and the Ministry /SAI as well as between
NSFs and SSFs. Whatever linkage is there can only be considered very negligible. The
Committee strongly feels that the Ministry has a larger role to play in the implementation
of all Sports Schemes along with all the allied aspects. The Ministry needs to give a positive
direction, all conceivable help and assistance to the NSFs, State Governments, States Sports
Federations and forge a partnership in order to have effective coordination which would
certainly change the scene of Indian Sports for the better. Workable and regular
coordination between NSFs and the Department/SAI and between NSFs and SSFs was
essential for proper training of sportspersons, availability of coaches, proper usage of
infrastructural facilities and also addressing the problem areas being faced by sportspersons
or Sports Federations. If NSFs continue to remain in constant touch with the Ministry/SAI,
the latter would get to know about all the problem-areas, ways and means to resolve the
same and take all the right initiatives for promotion of sports disciplines. The Committee
is of the view that a common platform by having quarterly meetings of the Ministry, SAI
and NSFs should be evolved so that the problems of the federations are sorted out at the
earliest.
4.6 During its interactions, the Committee also got an idea about the sheer lack of any
linkage among the various NSFs and State Federations. The Committee strongly feels that
there is an urgent need for having a common platform for all NSFs so as to have an idea
not only about the problem-areas being faced by them and possible solutions but also make
available common facilities for different Sports Federations. Such a mechanism if put in the
right place and made viable would easily lead to resolving the various problems- right from
the grievances of individual sportspersons but also broad areas of conflict. The Committee
strongly feels that it is high time that the Ministry takes an initiative in this direction. The
problem-areas relating to functioning of NSFs like lack of professional management,
factionalism within NSFs leading to court cases, over-dependence on the Government for
funding their major activities etc. can be successfully tackled through this common
platform. Instances of some very genuine problems being faced by one or two NSFs were
brought to the notice of the Committee.
4.7 The representatives of the All India Sports Council of the Deaf submitted before the
Committee that even though co-ordination between the Ministry and their Organisation was healthy
and supportive, the channel of effective communication with the Ministry was not deaf-friendly at
all leading, to delay in sending the message and receiving the response.
4.8 Another problem being faced by the Rifle Association was that sportspersons were
compelled to pay additional charges for the guns being carried by them during air travel. Similarly,
problems were there in getting the quality ammunition. There were hurdles in procuring
shuttlecocks for the badminton players. Here again, there was an urgent need for having a co-
ordinated approach with all the concerned Ministries so as to ensure that our sportspersons
were not made to face any inconvenience.
4.9 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the fact that the Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports, SAI and the Sports Federations are facing fund constraints for the promotion and
development of sports. Infrastructure development was yet another area of concern. The
Committee is of the view that although the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports is the
nodal Ministry for the development and promotion of sports, avenues can be explored for
convergence with the Department under the Ministry i.e. Department of Youth Affairs and
other Ministries like the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry of Woman
and Child Development, Ministry of Panchayati Raj etc. which could provide support through
infrastructural and other means.

14
V. LACK OF AWARENESS AMONGST NSFs REGARDING THE SCHEMES OF THE
MINISTRY
5.1 The Ministry has been implementing important schemes which include major Schemes like
Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyaan, Scheme of Assistance for the Creation of Urban Sports
Infrastructure, Scheme relating to Promotion of Excellence in Sports, Scheme relating to Incentives
to Sportspersons and Scheme relating to Participative Sports. All the Sports Federations appearing
before the Committee were specifically asked about their views on these Schemes. Unfortunately,
by and large, Federations were not involved directly or indirectly in the implementation of these
Schemes.
5.2 The Committee is surprised by the actual position at the ground level. As is evident,
NSFs are being involved only in the implementation of the Scheme related to NSFs. NSFs
seem to be completely left out with respect to other sports-oriented schemes of the
Ministry. The Committee observes that NSFs are primarily responsible for all the
development and promotion of sports in the country. Rightfully speaking, they need to be
involved both directly and indirectly in the promotion of their respective sports disciplines
in all the schemes of the Ministry,. This can be easily achieved by assigning a decisive role
in the implementation of all the major schemes of the Ministry.
5.3 The Committee would like to point out that the mandate of NSFs and of the major
schemes being administered by the Ministry is one and the same. Only difference is that
one NSF is responsible for one particular sports discipline and the area of operation of the
schemes is quite large. A perusal of the objectives of the schemes confirms this assessment.
The two main objectives of the Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan, the flagship
scheme of the Ministry are providing universal access to sports in rural areas and
promoting a sports culture and harnessing available and potential sporting talent among
rural youth, through a well-designed competition structure from the block level. State
Governments/UT Administrations are entitled to funds amounting to `50,000/- @ `10,000/- per
disciplines for 5 disciplines for holding Block Level Competitions,  `2 lakhs @ `20,000/- per
discipline for 10 disciplines for holding District Level Competitions, `10 lakh @ `1 lakh per
disciplines for holding State Level Competitions and `70 lakh @ `3.50 lakh per discipline
for 20 disciplines to host State for holding National Level Competitions. The Committee
finds no justification for not involving the NSFs and State Federations for their sports
discipline in holding the competitions at various levels under PYKKA.
5.4 Similarly, the Scheme of Assistance for the Creation of Urban Sports Infrastructure
envisages development of playfields by the State Governments through Playfield Association,
Coach Development Programme through Central and State Governments, setting up of
players academies. This scheme also mandates the implementing agencies to identify and
develop new talent, provide free pubic access to informal play spaces, affordable Pay and
Play Schemes for other facilities, availability of Coaching facilities, linkages with local
clubs, sports clubs and leagues. Here also, State Sports Federations can play a very viable
role.
5.5 The Committee would like to point out that the Scheme relating to Participate Sports
pertain to holding of competitions at different levels for sportspersons including differently
abled sportspersons, sports coaching and training of coaches.  The Committee finds no
reason in not involving the various NSFs/State Federations, both directly and indirectly. The
Committee also takes note of the fact that all the NSFs are mainly concerned with holding
of tournaments and providing coaching facilities to sportspersons. They are nowhere in the
spotting of sports talent, nurturing of talented sportspersons through all kinds of initiatives.
Rightful scenario would be to make them the major stakeholder in the promotion of their

15
assigned sports discipline by having their presence in all the related Sports-oriented
schemes of the Department and the State Governments.
5.6 Committee’s attention has been drawn by some of the SAI, Sports Promotional
Schemes like National Sports Talent Contest Scheme, Army Boys Sports Company Scheme,
SAI Training Centres, Special Area Games Scheme and Centre of Excellence Scheme. The
Committee feels that ground level reality is that every stakeholder is working in isolation.
Their goal is the same but all their energy and attention instead of being pooled together
and making the maximum impact is lying scattered. It is high time that all these
stakeholders work together as a team for the achievement of their common goal.
VI. STRUCTURE, COMPOSITION AND ELECTIONS OF NSFs
6.1 The National Sports Federations are autonomous bodies registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860. They frame their own constitution/bye-laws under the provisions of the said
Act. There are a number of conditions which have to be adhered to by every federation for seeking
the status of National Sports Federation from the Ministry. The most important conditions are
existence of affiliated State units in at least 2/3 States, more than three years of existence on the
date of application for recognition, affiliation to the international federation and exhaustive written
constitution.
6.2 The Committee has been given to understand by the Ministry that some of the major
problem areas of functioning of NSFs were lack of professional management, factionalisation
within NSFs etc. Clean Sports submitted before the Committee that NSFs were functioning as
fiefdoms and were not democratic in their functioning. In fact, the structure and composition of
NSFs had been such that it seemed to be dominated by politicians, bureaucrats and generals. Some
of the examples given were that of Archery, Athletics, Judo and IOA where these NSFs were
headed by politicians. In other words, most of the sports federations were headed by non-
sportspersons. It was emphasized that such federations failed to do justice in selection of athletes
and coaches. Even the managers were changed every term because it was a privilege ticket for
them to go abroad and also meant a sure vote in the elections. Internal disputes in the Federations
also led to mis-governance.
6.3 It was felt by stakeholders that there was a need to bring about reforms in the structure
and composition of NSFs. The first and foremost reform suggested to be was the holding of
timely, fair and transparent elections. Ground reality at present was that the elections were being
conducted by the federations themselves, they appointed their own Returning Officers and the
election was conducted according to the current boss. It was emphasized that there was a need
for having an independent body like the Election Commission of India for the conduct of
transparent elections of all NSFs thereby ensuring a fair chance to contest to all concerned.
6.4 Since there was no boundation on NSFs to give representation to sportspersons, it was
suggested that fifty per cent of composition of NSFs should be of sportspersons. As per the
proposed Sports Development Bill, twenty five per cent of the composition of NSFs would be of
sportspersons. It was also suggested that representation of ex-sportspersons and other persons
related to the field of sport must be given in NSFs. The idea behind giving representation to these
was to give a say to those persons who were directly or indirectly from the field of sports so
that they understood the in-and-outs of the game and could suggest ways to better the game
through their first hand knowledge and experience. It also meant minimizing the influence of non-
sportspersons in a sports body.
6.5 The Committee was also given to understand by the stakeholders that the functioning of
some NSFs was mismanaged as they had no financial responsibility and accountability. Ethical

16
conduct of the administrators, players and coaches also needed to be monitored to avoid
corruption, wrong selection of players/coaches, pecuniary interest, conflict of interest etc. It was,
therefore, suggested that on the lines of an Ethics Commission of the International Olympic
Committee, a similar independent body headed by a judge with one member as a non-sportsperson
and a member as a sportsperson should be there. The three member Ethics Commission should be
formed to look after the ethical conduct of all concerned in NSFs.
6.6 The Committee observes that the functioning of most of the NSFs was dominated by
non-sportspersons. Issues of mis-governance, maladministration, wrongful selection of
players/coaches, no transparency in elections etc have come to light. The Committee agrees
with the suggestions of the stakeholders with regard to bringing about reforms in the
structure and composition of NSFs and for holding their elections. There is a need to give
due representation to sportspersons, ex-sportspersons and other experts from the field of
sports in these bodies. The idea of having an independent Election Commission for the
conduct of free and fair elections of NSFs is justified so that the functioning of NSFs is in
the hands of democratically elected persons. Further, the ethical conduct of all functionaries
of NSFs, players etc needs to be monitored so that instances of corruption, wrong selection
etc are avoided. The Committee feels that the functioning of NSFs needs to be streamlined
so that the development and promotion of sports does not suffer and the country is able
to enhance its performance in the international events and make its presence felt.
VII. ACCEPTANCE OF CODE OF CONDUCT BY NSFs
7.1 Adoption of good governance practices by NSFs, including the Indian Olympic Association
is essential for healthy sports development in the country. Towards this end, Government of India
had issued comprehensive guidelines in 1975, 1988, 1997 and 2001. Post 2001 also, several major
initiatives were taken by the Government. With a view to bringing together all orders/notifications/
instructions/circulars issued on the subject, it was decided to publish one comprehensive code titled
‘National Sports Development Code (NSDC) of India, 2011’ which has become effective from
31
st January, 2011. NSFs are required to comply with the provisions of the code for getting various
concessions from the Government which entailed inter alia democratic, healthy management
practices, providing for greater accountability and transparency at all levels, following guidelines of
good governance, compliance with RTI Act, introduction of annual recognition for NSFs,
enforcement of age and tenure limit of officers bearers, holding elections as per model election
guidelines, notification of NADA Anti-Doping Rules, introduction of guidelines for prevention of age
frauds in sports, prevention of sexual harassment in sports. The Committee was informed that all
the 53 recognized NSFs had agreed to amend their constitution as per the Sports Code and uptil
now, 43 NSFs had actually done so.
7.2 The Committee while studying the code of conduct notes that the objective of these
guidelines is three fold:–
– to define the areas of responsibility of the various agencies involved in the promotion
and development of sports
– to identify NSFs eligible for coverage under these guidelines, to set priorities and to
detail the procedures to be followed by the federations, to avail of Government
sponsorship and assistance
– to state the conditions for eligibility to receive government recognition and grant.
7.3 On being asked about their views on the National Sports Development Code, NSFs
appearing before the Committee by and large conveyed their acceptance. However, some
reservations were also voiced. Representatives of the Indian Olympic Association submitted that

17
restriction of age and tenure of office bearers was detrimental to sports. It was pointed out that
neither NGOs working in the area of social development nor the Members of Legislative Assemblies
or Parliament were subject to these restrictions. Therefore, the imposition of such restrictions on
the sports administrators, officer-bearers of NSFs was arbitrary and without any justification. The
issue was problematic because a person could not get elected to the international sports federation.
It took fifteen to twenty years for a person to move from state to national and to international
federations. Further, recognition from the International Olympic Committee was dependent on the
acceptance of the Sports Code which imposed restrictions on the sports bodies. They requested
that terms of tenure and age limit must not be imposed upon NSFs and these bodies should be
independent of Government restrictions. NSFs were an elected body and should not be treated as
a department. Focus of the Ministry should not be on regulating the federations but on development
of sports.
7.4 Representative of the Table Tennis Federation of India conveyed, that an unfortunate
atmosphere between the Ministry and the NSFs had developed because of the imposition of the
guidelines in the Sports Code. The focus was to implement the guidelines rather than monitor the
performance of the federations, what the federations were actually doing, what they were
delivering. The focus was lost as entire attention was on tenure and age terms of the Sports Code.
7.5 Another pertinent observation made was that the system of annual recognition did not serve
any purpose, except increasing the paper work. It was being done only on the basis of documents
submitted by NSFs without actually knowing their activities at the ground level. NSFs should be
recognized once and thereafter Ministry/SAI should monitor and evaluate their performance in a fair
and unbiased manner, particularly their field activities like coaching, holding of championships,
organizing international events, holding of AGM, submitting Annual Audited Accounts.
7.6 The Committee feels that the adoption of the Sports Code will go a long way in
promoting the sports culture in NSFs. The Committee is happy to note that 43 out of 53
NSFs have agreed to amend their constitution. However, 10 NSFs still remain to do so. The
Committee would like to point out that these NSFs need to be persuaded to adopt the Sports
Code in order to bring about greater transparency and promote good practices in the
federations. Further, it is also not clear as to the present status of the 43 NSFs who have
agreed to adopt the Sports Code. Whether these NSFs have actually adopted the Sports
Code and implementing the same in true spirit is not clear.
7.7 With regard to age and tenure restrictions on the office-bearers of NSFs, the
Committee feels that the issue needs to be studied more in detail. However, the Committee
feels that age and tenure restrictions are imposed so that the same set of persons do not
head the federation over a long period of time and in the process develop vested interests.
On the other hand, it needs to be seen whether an office bearer of a NSF could actually
make it to any International Federations and whether his chances are lost due to age and
tenure limits. The Committee, in principle, endorses the age and tenure restrictions
imposed on NSFs as part of the Sports Code. The Committee would appreciate if a study
is got conducted as to what improvement has come in the working of various NSFs after
implementing the Sports Code, particularly the most contentious issue of age and tenure.
7.8 The Committee would also like to highlight the fact that in its interaction with
stakeholders, other aspects of the Sports Code did not find mention but they were of vital
importance for the status of sports of the country. Issues like holding of elections as per
guidelines, selection of players and coaches, holding of national and international events etc.
were not focused upon. The Committee finds that the Ministry/SAI do not have any
mechanism for monitoring the extent of adherence of the guidelines under the Sports Code.
The Committee feels that in such a case where there is no supervision, NSFs can easily get

18
away, without actually enforcing the guidelines relating to various aspects of the sports
federations and yet show their acceptance for the same. The Committee, therefore, feels
that the Ministry/SAI should play a pro-active role in monitoring and supervising the
enforcement of the Sports Code.
VIII. FUNDING OF NSFs
8.1 The Committee was informed that since NSFs were autonomous in their functioning, they
got funding through donations, sponsorships, receipts from international federations etc for their
administrative set up. The Government only supplemented the efforts of NSFs by way of providing
financial assistance for participation in international competitions abroad, holding international
competitions in India, conducting national championships, purchase of equipments, conduct of
coaching camps, hiring of foreign coaches etc. under the Scheme of ‘Assistance to the National
Sports Federations.’ The Government also reimbursed the salary of one Assistant Secretary for
handling the day to day work of the federations.
8.2 As per the provision of the Scheme of Assistance to NSFs, financial assistance of
`2.00 lakhs was provided to NSFs for organizing a national level championship for seniors (men
and women), `4.00 lakhs for juniors (boys and girls) and `6.00 lakhs for sub-juniors (boys and
girls) in a year. In case, the federation organized championships for men and women separately,
only fifty per cent of the admissible grant was considered for sanction for each category. For zonal
championships, financial assistance of `1.00 lakh for each zonal championship was provided,
subject to a maximum of six zonal championships per year.
8.3 All National Sports Federations were financially accountable to the Government and were
required to submit Utilization Certificates for the grants received from the Government. Fresh
assistance was not sanctioned to those NSFs which defaulted in submission of UCs. Audited
accounts, UCs, report of the event, number of units participating in an event, result of the event,
press clippings, photographs of the events etc were sought from NSFs before releasing the final
instalment of the grant. Further, recurring grants were released only after the settlement of
accounts in respect of previous releases.
8.4 The Committee observes that `1219 crore was earmarked for the Ministry for the year
2013-14 and the Scheme for Assistance to National Sports Federations got an allocation of
`160 crore which was higher than the previous year’s allocation of `110 crore. While interacting
with the stakeholders, it was pointed to the Committee that the total allocation in the Budget for
Sports was highly inadequate. In comparison with other sports leading countries, the budgetary
allocation for sports was quite meagre. These sports leading countries set aside ten to fifteen per
cent of allocation for sports out of their total budget whereas in India, sports budget was a mere
0.0007 per cent of the total budget. It was suggested that adequate allocation for sports must be
made in the budget as funds were required for improving the performance of India in sports in
the international sphere.
8.5 Majority of NSFs, which deposed before the Committee, highlighted the acute shortage of
funds for their federations. Many of them even pointed out that allocation of funds in recent times
had been declining. Constraint of funds was felt across all the federations and various problem-
areas relating to this were highlighted by them. Representatives of the Indian Olympic Association
submitted before the Committee that allocation for sports was given to the Ministry and SAI and
most of the funds was spent on the establishment. A comparison should be made to see how much
money was spent on officials and how much was spent on training of the players. The funds given
by the Government for holding championships were found to be inadequate. There should not be
dearth of money for holding championships. Most of the federations were facing fund constraint

19
having no support from other sectors like the corporate houses through sponsorships. The need
of the hour was to make the federations financially viable.
8.6 The Committee takes note of the fact that majority of NSFs were not having the
required financial support. The funds allocated were quite low and not as per the
requirement of federations. Unlike the general perception that NSFs were getting all the
funds directly from the Ministry/SAI, the funds allocated to each federation spent on the
training/participation of players, food coaches etc. were not given in the hands of the NSFs.
They were directly given to the concerned parties. NSFs were receiving funds only for
holding sports tournaments. Funds provided by the Ministry were meant exclusively for
players and not for running the activities of NSFs. Even the funds for the players were
insufficient having an adverse impact on technical coaching and international exposure to
players. Existing norms of SAI or basic things like food, boarding and lodging charges were
quite low. Problems were also being faced in buying equipments for players. Funds were also
required for having a team of support staff for the athletes comprising of doctors,
physiotherapists etc. Grants given by the Government for holding national as well as
international sports events to NSFs were considered highly inadequate and NSFs were
finding it difficult to fill in the gap of funds constraints.
8.7 The Committee finds that even though NSFs were receiving inadequate funds from
the Ministry/SAI, they were trying to manage more funds from other sources. NSFs were
of the view that since the Government was not in a position to take care of all the fund
requirements of NSFs, private participation in the development of sports should be welcome.
Elaborating on the other sources of funds which could be explored apart from sponsorships,
private donations and capitation fee, the following suggestions were made:–
– amendment of the term ‘corporate social responsibility’ under Rule 7 of the
Company’s Act so as to include sports as one of the activities which could be
undertaken by the corporate houses as their contribution to social responsibility.
This would then make it possible for many public sector undertakings and
private undertakings to invest two per cent of their profits for promotion and
development of sports.
– private participation wherein the private sector could build infrastructure for the
use of Indian sportspersons. A congenial environment needed to be created for
inviting private players in the sports industry.
– lessons from international experiences for raising money for sports should be
learnt. Example of Germany cited where a lottery system was there for football
matches which was the biggest way to collect funds for sports development.
– big corporate houses could adopt one or two games (except cricket) and support
it financially. These corporate houses could be given tax exemption for a number
of years like a tax holiday to promote the sports sector of the country.
– hundred per cent tax rebates should be given for donations to sports
organization by the corporate sector so as to provide incentives to them for
promoting sports.
– access for promotion and development of sports could be levied.
– a per centage of the revenue earned by the sports industry may be given to the
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for the promotion and development of
sports.

20
8.8 The Committee welcomes the suggestions put forth by the stakeholders for tackling
the problem of fund constraints of NSFs. The idea of including sports as one of the activities
in corporate social responsibility is indeed a good suggestion for raising funds. Adoption of
certain sports disciplines by NSFs can also go a long way in supporting and developing
games. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Ministry to explore the various
avenues suggested for bridging the gap of inadequate funds for NSFs.
8.9 With regard to monitoring of the fund spent by NSFs and even by SAI, the Ministry had
submitted that in order to ensure accountability by NSFs, they were required to submit UCs for
the grants received from the Government. Also, to enhance accountability, federations receiving a
grant of more than ‘1.00 crore from the Government in a year were required to get their accounts
audited by the CAG. Observers were also appointed by the Government of India to keep a watch
on the functioning of NSFs including conduct of coaching camps and selection of teams.
8.10 The Committee is of the firm view that the scenario of Indian sports would only
change for the better if adequate funds for the promotion and development of sports were
allocated. Sports budget needed to reflect the priorities to be focused upon and desired
achievements to be made by Indian sportspersons, both in the national and international
sphere. It definitely called for enhanced allocation for sports of the country so that best
infrastructure, training, coaching etc could be provided to the sportspersons to excel in all
the disciplines of sports. NSFs, whose primary job was to select sportspersons, select
coaches, holding training camps and national and international sports tournaments needed
all financial support for delivering the tasks assigned to them. The Committee also believes
that other avenues of raising funds from different sources need to be explored so that there
is no dearth of funds for Indian sports. However, financial accountability coupled with
achievement of physical targets by NSFs needs to be ensured through a well set monitoring
mechanism for effective functioning of the NSFs.
IX. ROLE OF NSFs-PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY THEM AND THEIR SHORTCOMINGS
9.1 The Committee has been given to understand that NSFs were facing several problems apart
from the problem of fund constraints. Problems faced by various NSFs were highlighted before
the Committee which are as follows:–
Special Olympic Bharat
– no infrastructure for training of sportspersons
– shortage of coaches
Athletics Federation of India
– shortage of coaches especially foreign coaches
– lack of support staff for athletes
– no provision for small daily allowance for athletes going abroad
Table Tennis Federation of India
– only two training centres for TT (at Patiala and Lucknow)
– shortage of coaches
– high rent for hiring SAI stadia

21
Indian Olympic Association
– limited access to stadia and other sports infrastructure
National Rifle Association of India
– sub-standard quality of weapons and ammunitions
– high charges of airlines for carrying rifles/guns of sportspersons.
Hockey India
– lack of youth development programme in the country
– SAI norms for food, boarding and lodging were quite low
– problem of availability of artificial turfs
Badminton Association of India
– high rent of the infrastructural facilities
– problem in import of shuttles on the pretext of bird flu
– problem of availability of coaches.
9.2 The Committee observes that the problem areas pointed out by NSFs are
genuine and need to be resolved with the co-operation of the Ministry and SAI. Usually
NSFs are in touch with SAI regarding release of funds. The Committee, however,
feels that the interaction and coordination between NSFs and SAI needs to be worked
upon so that such areas of concern are fully taken care of. This would help SAI in
getting to know the ground realities and problems faced by sportspersons and also
resolving the same.
9.3 The Committee would also like to emphasize that the role of National Sports Federations
is of immense importance in the development and promotion of sports in the country. They have
been assigned specific tasks which were crucial importance for the performance of Indian
sportspersons in national as well as international sport events.
9.4 The Committee has been given to understand that the basic tasks of NSFs were not being
properly carried out and instances of mis-governance in some NSFs have come to light regarding
selection of teams, coaches and managers. There was no proper procedure within NSFs to carry
out their tasks with objectivity and fair play. Internal strife, conflict of interests etc were also
making things worse. Lack of professionalism and non-representation of sportspersons in the NSFs
were also emphasized upon.
9.5 The Committee observes that NSFs are the sole custodians of one sports discipline,
fully responsible for its development and promotion. Given the crucial role of NSFs, the
Committee feels that it is essential for NSFs to streamline their processes for fair selection
of teams/sportspersons for different sports events, selection of coaches, managers and other
related issues. Their selection of team/sportsperson will have a direct impact upon the
performance of the country in the national and international sports events. Efforts need to
be made by NSFs to steer the teams/sportspersons in such a way either through proper
training/coaching or through the help of support staff and required equipments so as to
bring out best results.

22
X. GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM FOR SPORTSPERSONS
10.1 The issue of Grievance Redressal Mechanism for sportspersons was an important one to
resolve the disputes relating to sports. The Committee has been given to understand by the Ministry
that the National Sports Development Code, 2011 emphasized on a system to handle players
grievances and introduction of an impartial machinery for redressal of their grievances. The
Committee was given to understand that NSFs had internal mechanisms like Disciplinary
Committee, Committee to provide for presentation of sexual harassment of women in sports etc.
to deal with issues relating to corrupt practices in sports, age fraud, sexual harassment at
workplace. An essential feature of the conditionalities included in the guidelines related to the
protection of interest of sportspersons and their welfare. This mechanism was required to be
vested with authority to redress such grievances speedily. The Ministry did not have any
mechanism of its own for redressal of grievances.
10.2 To a specific query about the grievance redressal mechanism in NSFs, the Badminton
Association of India (BAI), in its presentation, highlighted that the Core Committee looked into these
matters and solved them. The sportspersons could also appeal to the President of BAI for addressing
their grievances. The representatives of the Table Tennis Federation of India (TTFI) submitted that
a Grievance Mechanism Cell existed in TTFI. If any player or any affiliate had any grievances then
he/she could approach the Grievance Committee and the Committee took a view after hearing the
complainant and the grievance was redressed. On the other hand, the representatives of Clean Sports
submitted before the Committee that majority of the federations did not have any dispute mechanisms
to solve problems between sportspersons and Federations. There were various issues like drug abuse
and other disciplinary matters between players vs federations, federations vs State Units on elections
and recognition, coaches vs federations, Government vs IOA adhering to sports code, harassment of
women athletes etc. In this backdrop, Clean Sports suggested that there was a need for a Sports
Tribunal to resolve disputes of various kinds related to the field of sports. Such a Tribunal was also
said to be proposed in the Sports Development Bill.
10.3 The Committee strongly feels that an effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism has
to be in place in every sports federation, both at the national and state level. Besides that,
in the event of grievances of sportspersons going unaddressed or not being handled in the
right perspective, there has to be an independent body having the power to examine all such
cases. Such a body can have one or two representatives from NSFs on a rotation basis, ex-
sportspersons, experts and Government nominee.
10.4 The proposed Sports Tribunal can be assigned the role of the final authority for
resolving various disputes including those emanating from the internal cell as well as the
appellate body above them. This three tier Grievance Redressal Mechanism would go a long
way in resolving the issues effectively and more speedily. The Committee takes note of the
fact that few federations have such a mechanism for dispute resolution while most of the
NSFs had no mechanism at all. Therefore, the Committee recommends to the Department
to ensure that all NSFs have their internal grievance redressal mechanism in place.
XI. FACILITIES AND INCENTIVES FOR EX-SPORTSPERSONS
11.1 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the plight of various ex-sportspersons who
were leading a difficult life and struggling for earning their means of livelihood without any support
from the Government. The Committee also finds that neither NSFs were involving the ex-
sportspersons in their functioning nor the Ministry/SAI were doing anything for them.

23
11.2 Deposing before the Committee, the Badminton Association of India (BAI) submitted that it
was providing financial assistance to ex-players and technical officials for medical treatment and
on humanitarian grounds and a separate budget was earmarked for the players benefit fund. The
association also submitted that ex-sportspersons were in the Selection Committee which selected
sportspersons both for the National and international sports events.
11.3 To a specific query about ex-sportspersons, the Ministry submitted that they had a Scheme
of Pension for Ex-sportspersons after retirement. They also had the option to apply for posts of
coaches in SAI. It was also submitted that NSFs were not mandated under the Sports Code to
look after sportspersons. However, the guidelines in the code provided for inclusion of prominent
sportspersons of outstanding merit as members of the respective sports federation. The strength
of such prominent sportspersons with voting rights should be certain minimum percentage ie. 25
per cent of the total members representing the federations. The Ministry submitted that spirit
behind the inclusion of sportsperson is to ensure welfare of sportspersons including the ex-
sportspersons.
11.4 The Committee is of the view that one cannot forget the contribution of ex-
sportspersons to Indian sports. Well-being and welfare of such ex-sportspersons should be
taken care of by the Ministry/SAI and NSFs. They should be providing financial help like
pension etc and also involving them in the sports bodies so as to benefit from their
experience. Their experience and expertise can be gainfully utilized for coaching
sportspersons. It also recommends to the Ministry and NSFs to formulate a policy for their
welfare.
XII. SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN ATHLETES
12.1 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to various media reports about the issue of
sexual harassment of women sportspersons. Smt. Ashwini Nachappa in her representation
highlighted the issue of abuse of women athletes/sportspersons which was never addressed by the
respective federations.
12.2 The Ministry submitted that many NSFs had internal mechanism like Discipline Committee,
Committee to provide for prevention of sexual harassment of women in sports and sexual
harassment at workplace wherein they investigated the matter and took action against the guilty.
To a specific query about the details of complainants about sexual harassment received from
women sportspersons and other complaints received from sportspersons during the last three years,
the Ministry submitted that action was taken by the National Rifle Association of India against four
persons.
12.3 The Committee takes a serious view of the sexual harassment of women
sportspersons. Such instances of abuse of women need to be dealt with utmost strictness
and urgency so as to curb further such instances. The Committee feels that women
sportspersons should be motivated and not discouraged to enter into the field of sports due
to cases of sexual harassment and abuse. The Committee is of the view that a proper
grievance redressal mechanism should be in place in each NSFs so that such cases are dealt
with urgently.
XIII. SHORTAGE OF COACHES
13.1 A vailability of qualified and experienced coaches is a must for every sports discipline. It is
a well known fact that to nurture a talented sportspersons, guidance of a coach is the most crucial

24
requirement. The Committee in its Demands for Grants Report has been focussing on this major
problem area every year. However, the scenario continues to remain very grim. On a specific query
in this regard, the Committee was informed that the required number of coaches in SAI as per the
sanctioned strength was 1524 against which 1175 coaches were available as on 4
th February, 2014.
SAI had recently completed the process of recruitment of 174 coaches in 16 disciplines. The
Committee notes that as many as 16 disciplines in Archery, Badminton, Cycling, Gymnastics,
Fencing, Hockey, Kayaking and Canoeing, Rowing, Swimming, Weight Lifting, Wrestling, Wushu
and Shooting are facing maximum shortage. Recently recruited coaches have not covered sports
disciplines like Fencing, Rowing and Shooting. Feedback of the Department that the remaining
required number of coaches will be recruited in a phased manner on yearly basis as per the
assessed required clearly indicates that situation is no likely to improve in the near future. It was
submitted by the Director-General SAI that since there was a total ban on creation of new posts
in SAI, adhoc measures like appointment of coaches on contract basis were being adopted. This
mechanism of hiring of coaches on contract basis was not considered the most suitable as coaches
needed to be fully functional for training of sportspersons. The Committee was also informed that
the Ministry was coming out with a system for monitoring the performance of coaches and all the
trainees in the SAI. Progress of all the coaches/trainees would be tracked by a unique identity
number along with improvement in performance.
13.2 All the Sports Federations appearing before the Committee dwelt upon the problem of acute
shortage of coaches being faced by them. Representatives of Special Olympic Bharat submitted
before the Committee that there was a shortage of coaches because funds were not available for
the training and each coach had to train athletes in two to three sports even though the coach did
not know about other sports. The Special Olympic Bharat were engaged in coaching training
programme for training 1200 coaches with the help of Austalian and UK Sports Federations.
LNIPE, Gwalior were training around 600 coaches every year to tackle the problem of deficiency
of coaches. Another programme called the Advanced Coaches Training Programme was being run
by the Federation. Representatives of All India Sports Council of the Deaf pointed out the same
problem of non-availability of specialized coaches for training the specially abled atheletes. It was
emphasized that specialized coaches who understood the needs of the special athletes were
required. Many talented deaf sportspersons were being made to take coaching from normal
sportspersons who were more often than not co-operative and refused to take the challenging
responsibility of coaching of a deaf child. It was suggested that interpreters could be engaged from
Institutes like Ali Yarav Jung National Institute of Hearing Handicapped.
13.3 The Badminton Association of India informed the Committee about the availability of
coaches and coaching facilities. Three National Centres for the training of its players were being
managed by the Association. They had also organized two weeks coaching programme for coaches
to get them certified where internationally renowned coaches were invited for imparting training to
them. Hockey India also had a similar plan of national level certification of coaches. Representatives
of the Athletics Federation of India pointed out that in order to win medals at international events,
top foreign coaches were required. However, inspite of the Department agreeing for obtaining the
services of foreign coaches, there was undue delay in approving such proposals. As a result,
foreign coaches having other options started working for other countries. The Federation could
only make do with the Russian coaches and coaches from the Eastern Block as they were
affordable to hire. Lack of support staff for the athletes was yet another problem area.
Representative of the Table Tennis Federation of India informed the Committee that for the whole
country, there were only twenty coaches given by SAI. There was not even one coach for each
State with there being only one coach for the entire North-East. It was also pointed out that there

25
were only two coaching centres which were totally inadequate for a vast country like India. It was
felt that there was a need for having five more coaching centres to cover South Zone, Central
Zone, East Zone, West Zone and North East States.
13.4 The problem was that there was no structured programme for having coaches in the
country. National level champions after retiring ended up doing odd jobs and their skills and
experience were not being utilized for producing new sportspersons. It was also emphasized that
the requirement of coaches in the country could not be met by foreign coaches. The need of the
hour was to develop coaches of the country itself. Moreover, hiring of foreign coaches was quite
expensive. Giving an example of the sports of table tennis where two foreign coaches had been
hired. The chief coach of table tennis being an Indian received a consolidated salary of `50,000,
whereas a German foreign coach got 6000$ plus lodging which indicated a huge gap between the
salaries of both of them. It was suggested that a structured programme for development of
coaches should be undertaken similar to China where the top sportspersons after retiring could only
coach and help produce sportspersons like themselves. Further, preparations for participation in
games events like 2020 Olympics should start beforehand and concentration should be on coaching
cadres for juniors, sub-juniors etc. In order to prepare a second line of sportspersons, a proper
coaching programme needed to be devised.
13.5 All India Tennis Association informed the Committee that this association was amongst the
two Asian nations approved by the International Tennis Federation to certify education programme
for coaches. V ocational training to coaches all over India was also being given and they would then
be gainfully employed as tennis coaches all over the country. Representatives of the All India
Football Federation submitted that the Federation had started giving licenses courses (as per the
Licensing system by FIFA) to SAI coaches. Ex-sportspersons could come to coaching and if they
had represented a national team, it could be equated with some licensing by virtue of his experience
in the game. A good number of coaches had come under the Scheme and around 200 registered
and licensed coaches were working successfully.
13.6 The Committee understands the seriousness of the problem of shortage of coaches
for most of the sports disciplines in the country. The Committee takes note of serious
constraints being faced by NSFs due to this. The Committee observes that some of the
federations have made efforts to augment the number of coaches through training of
coaches, registration/licensing of coaches and other measures in this regard. However,
ground realities continue to be very discouraging as highlighted by all the NSFs appearing
before it. The Committee, would, however, like to point out that stop-gap measures like
hiring of coaches on contract basis by SAI would not solve the problem. The Committee
believes that a proper time-bound plan/programme has to be devised by the Ministry/SAI
in consultation with NSFs for having a pool of coaches for all disciplines of sports. Foreign
coaches could also be hired for having a different perspective and learning techniques
which are top class and highly professional. But country’s sportspersons cannot rely
entirely on foreign coaches. Therefore, a structured programme should be made for
developing our own coaches. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry/
SAI/NSFs need to focus on this area as it directly affects the performance of our
sportspersons. Further, attention needs to be given to the availability of coaches for the
differently abled sportspersons who need extra assistance and help in order to overcome
their disabilities and excel in sports. Training of coaches is an important component
directly related to the performance of the sportspersons. This area also needs to be taken
up on priority basis.

26
XIV. DISABLED SPORTSPERSONS
14.1 During its interactions with the representatives of Special Olympics Bharat and All India
Sports Council of the Deaf (AISCD), the Committee got an insight into some very genuine
problems being faced by the Sports Federations working for differently-abled sportspersons.
14.2 The Representatives of AISCD submitted that the Council was set up for focussing on
sports and giving the deaf people a proper platform at the national and the international level. They
highlighted that there was a communication barrier for the deaf sportspersons with the other
people. There were major challenges for the deaf, especially the availability of interpreters for the
deaf sportspersons. The representatives of AISCD further added that handicapped sportspersons,
who were actively participating in sports and games, should be given regular scholarships like
Talent Sports Scholarships by SAI. It was pointed out that most of the handicapped sportspersons
were from the poor background and these scholarships were the only means to pursue sports. It
was also mentioned that these scholarships from SAI were given regularly till 2006-2007 and the
reasons for their being discontinued were unknown. There were many instances that many deaf
sportspersons could not participate in sports activities or continue due to non-availability of
scholarships from SAI and also many schools for deaf students were reluctant to send athletes to
State/National games due to it. Hence, it was emphasized that the scheme of scholarships should
be restored forthwith as it would help the handicapped to pursue their sport career.
14.3 The representatives of Special Olympic Bharat were of the view that there should be a Co-
ordination Committee that would work both for disabled children and for regular children. Also,
there should be a fund mobilization agency which would distribute the funds equally to each
federation. He also pointed out that regular coaches were not ready to give training to children with
specific needs. The mission of Special Olympics Bharat was to provide year-round sports training
and athletic competition in a variety of Olympic-type sports for children and adults with intellectual
disabilities, giving them opportunities to develop physical fitness. Some of the NSFs did not have
organizational structure, facilities and regulations. They neither had adequate employees to do the
necessary work, nor did they get enough funds from the Government, which could help them to
function effectively. The other important aspect was lack of willingness to approve, sanction and
to finalize the proposal at SAI. For months, the LTDP meetings were being delayed and when the
time ran out of hand, either the sanctions were given ex post facto or they were given at the
eleventh hour.
14.4 The Committee has been given to understand that these federations for disabled
sportspersons often felt neglected by the Ministry/SAI. Apart from the regular problem of
fund constraints, these federations had their own set of problems like non-availability of
specialized coaching, interpreters, support staff etc. The Committee understands that the
challenges faced by the federations for differently abled sportspersons were much more
when compared with other federations. The Committee is of the firm view that federations
working for differently-abled sportspersons need extra attention and focus both from the
Ministry and SAI. The Committee feels that the Ministry/SAI need to be sensitive to the
requirements of the differently-abled sportspersons and focus on the development and
promotion of sports for them by taking initiatives in removing all the hurdles.
XV. DISPUTES IN THE NSFs
15.1 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to a number of ongoing disputes in some of
the NSFs like Indian Hockey Federation, the All India Sports Council of the Deaf and Indian
Olympic Association.

27
15.2 The Indian Olympic Association was suspended on the 4 th November, 2012 by the
International Olympic Council. Reasons cited by IOC were IOA’s failure to comply with the
Olympic Charter and its statutes, failure to inform IOC in a timely manner and as a protective
measure against Government interference in IOA’s election process. To resolve the issue, a
delegation led by MOS had a meeting with IOA in May, 2013. During the meeting, issues relating
to principles of good governance, transparency and accountability in the functions of IOA and
NSFs were also discussed. Subsequently, IOC asked IOA on the 5
th September, 2013 to convene
General Assembly meeting of IOA by the 31 st October, 2013 and proceed with the amendments
indicated by IOC. A Special General Body meeting of IOA was held on 27 th October, 2013. Some
of the amendments to its constitution as required by IOC were not agreed to by IOA. IOC made
it clear to IOA on the 15 th November, 2013 that amendments should include a clause mentioning
expressly that members charge-framed by any Indian Courts with respect to a serious offence will
not be eligible to run for the 1OA elections and will be provisionally suspended from IOA until a
final ruling was made. General Assembly of suspended IOA at its meeting held on the 8
th December,
2013 decided to amend its constitution to bar charge-framed individuals from contesting its
elections. IOC, however, wanted the member concerned must resign immediately and if not, will
be provisionally suspended and will not be eligible to run for election. This mechanism must be
implemented automatically and will be valid for as long as the charges were framed by the Court.
In the meeting of IOA held on the 9
th February, 2014, interpretation of the above clause was
ratified. Thereafter, suspension of IOA has been lifted.
15.3 The Committee feels very concerned on the uncalled developments taking place with
regard to the Indian Olympic Association. IOA, the Apex Body of Olympic Sports in the
country, is a conglomeration of NSFs and State Olympic Associations. IOA is closely involved
and spearheading all the activities related to India’s participation in Olympic, Asian and
Commonwealth Games right from sending entries by number, making arrangement for
travel, accommodation, training, all kind of logistic support for the various processes
culminating in the participation of National Teams in these Games. The Committee is
dismayed at the turn of events adversely impacting the state of affairs in the premier apex
sports body of the country. What should be a cause of serious concern is that this situation
continued for more than a year. Not only it was a loss of face for our country in the sports
world but also a symbol of discouragement and worst demotivating development for our
sports fraternity. As a result of this very unfortunate situation, our country was going to
be unrepresented in the recent Winter Olympics but the clearance from IOC to IOA finally.
The Committee can only say that it is high time that the country is not made to face such
an embarrassment again.
15.4 Representatives of the Indian Hockey Federation (IHF) submitted to the Committee that
problems started in April, 2008 when IHF was illegally suspended by the IOA and the Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports over an alleged sting operation on a TV channel showing previous
Secretary General allegedly accepting cash for selecting a player. IOA in its Executive Committee
meeting held on the 28
th April, 2008 suspended the IHF on the alleged misconduct of its Secretary
General without giving any show cause notice to IHF or the allegedly tainted official. Even the
Ministry followed the action of IOA and suspended the IHF without following principles of natural
justice as no opportunity of explanations was given to IHF. Subsequently, IOA and the Ministry
disaffiliated and de-recognized the IHF in August 2009, and the matter was subjudice and pending
in the Delhi High Court. The aggrieved IHF filed a writ petition in Delhi High Court which restored
the status of the IHF as the only governing body for Hockey in India by quashing all orders of
suspension, disaffiliation and de-recognition issued by the IOA and the Ministry, Meanwhile, a

28
parallel body i.e Hockey India was created in May, 2009 for governing the same game of hockey
in India and was granted provisional recognition/affiliation to this parallel body. Also, the
International Hockey Federation transferred the affiliation of IHF to Hockey India without any
intimation to IHF in November, 2008 when Hockey India was not even in existence as it was
registered in Delhi on 20
th May, 2009. In 2010, the Ministry de-recognized Hockey India and
restored the status of IHF as the only body to govern the game of Hockey in India. Hockey India
also violated the guidelines of the Government relating to age and tenure during its election and also
having declared itself as a private body not amenable to writ jurisdiction. Hockey India had filed
a SLP against the orders of the High Court restoring the authority of IHF and a writ petition against
the order of High Court de-recognizing Hockey India in the Supreme Court. The Apex court
permitted Hockey India to field the national team in the international tournaments in the interest of
the game and also because Hockey India was only affiliated to International Hockey Federation. In
this background, the IHF pointed out that :
– IHF inspite of being legally recognized body was deprived of its rights and priviliges.
– Hockey India was over-stepping their jurisdiction by conducting National championship
and the Government was giving them support.
– as per government guidelines and IOA constitution, there could only be one sports
federation for each game which should be IHF alone.
– confusion amongst players and officials who were victimized for participating in the
tournaments organized by the IHF.
– performance of Indian Hockey Team adversely affected as India finished last on 12
th
position in the London Olympics.
15.5  The Committee is of the firm belief that because of such a situation of impasse, the
performance of Indian Hockey was being adversely affected as evident from the results of
the London Olympics. Due to the unfortunate turn of events, IHF was first derecognized
and then its status was restored by the Delhi High Court. Meanwhile, a different body
emerged as the federation for hockey. The Committee finds that existence of two
federations for one single sport discipline as a very unwelcome development and not at all
workable for the development and promotion of the game of hockey. As already stated by
IHF, it would create confusion for the players, coaches and others related to the game of
hockey. The Committee is of the view that a solution needs to be found to resolve the
dispute and the initiative must be taken by the Ministry/ SAI to settle the matter once and
for all. The game of hockey needs to be reinvigorated to reclaim the lost glory of the
country. Attention has to be given to the sportspersons, coaching etc and not on such
disputes in or between federations.
15.6 Another matter of dispute which has come to light is the existence of two groups of
office bearers functioning as federations in the All India Sports Council of the Deaf. One group
was led by Mr. E.K Jose elected as General Secretary who was accused of fund misappropriation
by a fellow member and was subsequently voted out. General elections were conducted in
March, 2013 where 18 and 20 originally affiliated State units of AISCD participated. Mr. Walter
Fernandez was elected as the General Secretary but Mr. E.K. Jose refused to co-operate with
the Committee to produce documents or to step down from office. He was continuing to
proclaim himself as the General Secretary of AISCD and was functioning as an illegal and
autocratic parallel body. These instances had been brought to the notice of SAI and the Ministry

29
but no initiative had been taken by them to resolve the issues and even were entertaining the
parallel body which did not enjoy democratic support. The Council was at the brink of being de-
recognized by the ISCD if they failed to produce the recognition certificate from the GOI
whereas the Ministry/SAI were adamant that recognition would be granted only if the same was
first granted by the international body.
15.7 The Committee is quite unhappy with the state of affairs in the All India Sports
Council of the Deaf. Two sets of office bearers are trying to run a federation that too for
differently abled sportspersons. The Ministry and SAI have not been able to resolve the
issues in the Council. The matter should properly be examined at the earliest and the
democratically elected functionaries be given the charge to manage the federation while de-
recognizing the second group. The Committee is apprehensive that amidst such a dispute
and with no efforts being taken to resolve it, the Council may lose its recognition from the
international body. This would certainly affect the sportspersons who inspite of being
disabled were making their best efforts to excel in sports. Interest of the game,
sportspersons and the name of our country must be borne in mind before the matter
becomes worse. The Committee recommends to the Ministry and SAI to take on this issue
on a priority basis and find a solution for the same.
15.8 Committee’s attention was also drawn towards two instances of violation of
Government guidelines leading to derecognition of the Archery Association of India and
suspension of recognition of the Indian Amateur Boxing Federation on the 7
th December, 2012.
The Archery Association of India violated the provisions relating to age and tenure limit
contained in the National Sports Development Code in the election of its officer-bearers despite
the Delhi High Court’s directive to the Association. Recognition of the Indian Amateur Boxing
Federation was suspended due to the flawed publication of the electoral roll, sufficient time not
given for filing of nominations to Members and nomination of candidates taken after the last
date of nomination.
15.9 The Committee is disappointed with regard to the functioning of two federations
dealing with sports disciplines where our sportspersons have been doing exceptionally well.
Both these federations continue to be derecognized/in suspended animation. In other
words, our sportspersons in archery and amateur boxing continue to suffer for no fault
of theirs. The Committee is not aware when the things would come back to normal.
Already more than a year has elapsed. Commonwealth and Asian Games are to take place
this year. The Committee apprehends that in such a scenario, our sportspersons are going
to face lot of constraints adversely impacting their performance. The Committee takes
note of the fact that inspite of the two federations being derecognised in the second half
of 2012-13, funds were duly released to them in 2013-14. The Committee can only hope
that the assistance was judiciously utilized. The Committee would urge upon the
Government to resolve all the disputes in the two federations so as to start functioning
without any further delay.
XVI. INFRASTRUCTURE FOR SPORTSPERSONS
16.1 The Committee has been given to understand by most of the NSFs that infrastructural
facilities for sportspersons were inadequate. It has also come to light that the facilities/stadia of
the SAI were given to the NSFs for the use of their sportspersons at a very high rent. Even though
the stadia of SAI were of top class standard, most of the infrastructural facilities in the country
were not up to the mark when compared to international standards.

30
16.2 The representatives of the Athletic Federation of India, and the Table Tennis Federation of
India highlighted the inadequate number of centres/stadia of their federations. Even where the basic
infrastructure was provided, required equipments were not made available for the sportspersons.
Another aspect was the under-utilization of the infrastructure available as their access was limited
or high rent was being charged.
16.3 Representatives of the Indian Olympic Association emphasized upon the free and unlimited
access to stadia and other infrastructural facilities for the budding sportspersons which could help
them to practise anytime, improve their game and help in hunting talent from the grassroot level.
Sportspersons needed the basic infrastructure free of cost for unlimited time for the development
of the sport discipline. The example of Tehran was given where they had created a five star
Olympic Village and hotel where the athletes and sportspersons could use the stadia throughout the
year led to full occupation of the hotel all year. This improved their game due to regular practice
and training. Such a provision for of free infrastructural facilities was required for Indian
sportspersons too to improve the level of Indian Sports.
16.4 Representatives of Hockey India highlighted the fact that compared to other countries in the
world, India did not have sufficient artificial turfs in the country. Indian players needed to practice
on the artificial turf from the very beginning so as to compete in the real sense with the other
countries as artificial turf had different demands, skills and tactics. Presently, there were only 86
astro turfs in the country out of which only 50 were in good condition. Inspite of being a small
country, Holland had 900 astro turfs. It was suggested that at least 500 artificial turfs were
required to be made available in the country to improve the performance of hockey players of the
Indian team.
16.5 The Committee has been informed that the infrastructural facilities/stadia of SAI were being
used by NSFs on payment of rent which was being considered quite high by them. SAI had certain
norms for hiring of stadia for sports as well as non-sports activities. According to SAI, they
received a very limited amount of money from the GOI for maintaining the stadia. SAI got only
`49 crores for maintenance and upkeep of the stadia against the requirement of `79 crores.
However, charges for holding sport activities by State Federations or National Federations were
quite low compared to charges for other bodies like schools, colleges, universities etc. Most of the
NSFs suggested before the Committee that the rent/charges for hiring of SAI stadia needed to
brought down. Representatives of All India Football Federation suggested for reasonable and rational
charges for hiring of SAI stadia. Athletic Federation of India and All India Tennis Association
highlighted the fact that infrastructure for sports needed to be developed and private participation
should be welcomed. A public-private partnership to make the stadia financially viable could also
be explored.
16.6 The Committee is of the view that adequate and proper infrastructural facilities/
stadia of SAI need to be provided to sportspersons to play, train and practice their game.
Even the budding sportspersons required the basic infrastructural facilities for playing the
desired sports. The Committee observes that infrastructural facilities/stadia of SAI were of
international standard and should be utilized to an optimum level. There was no point
having the infrastructure and not utilizing it for the benefit of sportspersons. However, the
Committee agrees with the stakeholders that a reasonable charge should be levied on the
use of the stadia for their maintenance. The Committee further believes that there was a
need to develop more infrastructure for sports in the country, be it stadia, astro turfs,
running tracks etc. The Department/SAI should focus on the development of infrastructure

31
for sports and also maximum usage of the existing ones. The Committee would also like
the Department /SAI to explore the option of public-private partnership for the development
and maintenance of sports stadia and other infrastructural facilities.
XVII. CONCLUSION
17.1 National Sports Federations are the main stakeholders which are mandated to work
from the grassroot level to identify and nurture the hidden sports talent. NSFs are required
to work in close co-ordination with their State counterparts, Ministry, Sports Authority of
India, other sports bodies and the Indian Olympic Association. Our young sportspersons’
hopes, aspirations and ambitions are solely dependent on NSFs. Their entry into the
competitive sports scenario, both at the national and international level is governed by
these NSFs. This study and analysis of the functioning of NSFs by the Committee has
brought forth one underlying fact that the goal of every agency/authority connected directly
or indirectly with sports is to give the right impetus to uplift the status of sports in all
viable disciplines. However, it seems that there are underlying, not very visible factors,
resulting in the stakeholders working at cross purposes. In the process, our young aspiring
sportspersons become the victim of circumstances. The Committee has made an attempt to
highlight all the problem-areas, constraints being faced by NSFs, the nodal Ministry and last
but not the least, our sportspersons. The Committee hopes that its observations and
recommendations will pave the way for opening up the thought process for all the
stakeholders involved with sports in our country and enable them to move in the right
direction.

32
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
III. LACK OF SPORTS CULTURE IN THE COUNTRY
With the exception of very few glorious moments in the sports history of the
country, sports culture still remains to take roots. The stand of the Government is that
‘Sports’ is a State subject and the primary responsibility of development and promotion of
any sports discipline lies with the National Sports Federations of the relevant disciplines.
NSFs are autonomous bodies registered under the Registration of Societies Act, 1860, and
the Government does not interfere in their day-to-day activities. Governments’ role is
restricted to supplementing the efforts of NSFs. In other words, sports related activities
continue to be sidelined in the absence of a centralized nodal authority their being handled
by different authorities in their own way. The Committee can easily draw the conclusion
that sports has failed to receive the importance and exposure which it deserves. The
situation has become more complex due to the goal of every young student being to excel
in academic achievements, especially in view of very stiff competition facing him in the job
market later on. Not only this, with the tremendous growth of Information Technology, one
indirect fall out has been that children are simply not inclined towards sports related
activities. (Para 3.2)
The Committee strongly feels that very urgent and drastic efforts are required to be
made by all concerned to imbibe the spirit of sports in the young minds. Committee’s
attention has been drawn to the example of China in this regard. Athletics, swimming and
gymnastics are the compulsory games for Chinese students in schools. In that country,
children at a very tender age are involved in sports-related activities. From the age of 3
years, about 9 crore children are identified and trained by 450,000 physical trainers. On
attaining the age of 12/13 years, out of these 9 crore children, 3 crore children are selected
for specialization and in the end 9000 children are short listed for super-specialization. In
a very structured and well-organized manner, sports talent is nurtured in every conceivable
way. The Committee is of the firm view that need of the hour is to follow the same
strategy, with required adaptations in our country also. (Para 3.3)
The Committee is of the view that desired results would be there if NFSs work in
perfect co-ordination with their counter-parts in the States, duly supported by the Central
and State Governments. In all these efforts, schools and colleges will have to play a very
active role. Incentives like extra weightage in examinations for spectular performance in
sports and admission in higher educational institutions need to be given. Another major
initiative can be involvement of corporate sector by getting the industrial houses adopt
either a sports discipline or adopt schools/colleges for sports activities. The Committee also
feels that exclusive sports schools can be established in selected districts having abundance
of natural sports talent. In this exercise, armed forces can playa very fruitful role. Also,
the many sports-related schemes administered by the Ministry have to reach the targeted
beneficiaries. Here, NSFs will have to be directly involved in co-ordination with the Sports
Authority of India. Another aspect which has not been in addressed in the right perspective
32

33
is to work in co-ordination with other related Ministries. A beginning can be made by
involving the Youth Clubs under the Nehru Yuva Kendras in sports-related activities.
(Para 3.4)
The Committee would like to point out that the role of the Ministry is definitely to
complement the efforts of the State Governments as well as NSFs but this role should not
end here. The Committee firmly believes that the Ministry is the nodal body to give a
direction to sports and steer the States and NSFs in promoting a culture of sports in the
country. Not only this, they should take another initiative by focussing on inculcation of a
vibrant and visible sports culture in the country by linking its efforts with other Ministries
like HRD, Women and Child Development etc. The Committee is of the view that
synchronized efforts of the Department, SAI, NSFs and States would go a long way in the
gradual inculcation of a positive spirit and culture of sports in the country. (Para 3.5)
IV. LACK OF CO-ORDINATION BETWEEN NSFs AND THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH
AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
Feedback given by various stakeholders as well as the Ministry clearly indicates that
there is lack of coordination between the NSFs and the Ministry/ SAI as well as between
NSFs and SSFs. Whatever linkage is there can only be considered very negligible. The
Committee strongly feels that the Ministry has a larger role to play in the implementation
of all Sports Schemes along with all the allied aspects. The Ministry needs to give a positive
direction, all conceivable help and assistance to the NSFs, State Governments, States Sports
Federations and forge a partnership in order to have effective coordination which would
certainly change the scene of Indian Sports for the better. Workable and regular
coordination between NSFs and the Department/SAI and between NSFs and SSFs was
essential for proper training of sportspersons, availability of coaches, proper usage of
infrastructural facilities and also addressing the problem areas being faced by sportspersons
or Sports Federations. If NSFs continue to remain in constant touch with the Ministry/SAI,
the latter would get to know about all the problem-areas, ways and means to resolve the
same and take all the right initiatives for promotion of sports disciplines. The Committee
is of the view that a common platform by having quarterly meetings of the Ministry, SAI
and NSFs should be evolved so that the problems of the federations are sorted out at the
earliest. (Para 4.5)
During its interactions, the Committee also got an idea about the sheer lack of any
linkage among the various NSFs and State Federations. The Committee strongly feels that
there is an urgent need for having a common platform for all NSFs so as to have an idea
not only about the problem-areas being faced by them and possible solutions but also make
available common facilities for different Sports Federations. Such a mechanism if put in the
right place and made viable would easily lead to resolving the various problems- right from
the grievances of individual sportspersons but also broad areas of conflict. The Committee
strongly feels that it is high time that the Ministry takes an initiative in this direction. The
problem-areas relating to functioning of NSFs like lack of professional management,
factionalism within NSFs leading to court cases, over-dependence on the Government for
funding their major activities etc. can be successfully tackled through this common
platform. Instances of some very genuine problems being faced by one or two NSFs were
brought to the notice of the Committee. (Para 4.6)

34
The Committee is of the view that although the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
is the nodal Ministry for the development and promotion of sports, avenues can be explored
for convergence with the Department under the Ministry i.e. Department of Youth Affairs
and other Ministries like the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry of
Woman and Child Development, Ministry of Panchayati Raj etc. which could provide support
through infrastructural nad other means. (Para 4.9)
V. LACK OF AWARENESS AMONGST NSFs REGARDING THE SCHEMES OF THE
MINISTRY
The Committee is surprised by the actual position at the ground level. As is evident,
NSFs are being involved only in the implementation of the Scheme related to NSFs. NSFs
seem to be completely left out with respect to other sports-oriented schemes of the
Ministry. The Committee observes that NSFs are primarily responsible for all the
development and promotion of sports in the country. Rightfully speaking, they need to be
involved both directly and indirectly in the promotion of their respective sports disciplines
in all the schemes of the Ministry, This can be easily achieved by assigning a decisive role
in the implementation of all the major schemes of the Ministry. (Para 5.2)
The Committee would like to point out that the mandate of NSFs and of the major
schemes being administered by the Ministry is one and the same. Only difference is that
one NSF is responsible for one particular sports discipline and the area of operation of the
schemes is quite large. A perusal of the objectives of the schemes confirms this assessment.
The two main objectives of the Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan, the flagship
scheme of the Ministry are providing universal access to sports in rural areas and
promoting a sports culture and harnessing available and potential sporting talent among
rural youth, through a well-designed competition structure from the block level. State
Governments/UT Administrations are entitled to funds amounting to `50,000/- @ `10,000/-
per disciplines for 5 disciplines for holding Block Level Competitions, `2 lakhs @ `20,000/-
per discipline for 10 disciplines for holding District Level Competitions, `10 lakh @ `1 lakh
per disciplines for holding State Level Competitions and `70 lakh @ `3.50 lakh per
discipline for 20 disciplines to host State for holding National Level Competitions. The
Committee finds no justification for not involving the NSFs and State Federations for their
sports discipline in holding the competitions at various levels under PYKKA. (Para 5.3)
The Scheme of Assistance for the Creation of Urban Sports Infrastructure envisages
development of playfields by the State Governments through Playfield Association, Coach
Development Programme through Central and State Governments, setting up of players
academies. This scheme also mandates the implementing agencies to identify and develop
new talent, provide free pubic access to informal play spaces, affordable Pay and Play
Schemes for other facilities, availability of Coaching facilities, linkages with local clubs,
sports clubs and leagues. Here also, State Sports Federations can playa very viable role.
(Para 5.4)
The Committee would like to point out that the Scheme relating to Participate Sports
pertain to holding of competitions at different levels for sports persons including differently
abled sportspersons, sports coaching and training of coaches. The Committee finds no
reason in not involving the various NSFs/State Federations, both directly and indirectly. The

35
Committee also takes note of the fact that all the NSFs are mainly concerned with holding
of tournaments and providing coaching facilities to sportspersons. They are nowhere in the
spotting of sports talent, nurturing of talented sportspersons through all kinds of initiatives.
Rightful scenario would be to make them the major stakeholder in the promotion of their
assigned sports discipline by having their presence in all the related Sports-oriented
schemes of the Department and the State Governments. (Para 5.5)
Committee’s attention has been drawn by some of the SAI, Sports Promotional
Schemes like National Sports Talent Contest Scheme, Army Boys Sports Company Scheme,
SAI Training Centres, Special Area Games Scheme and Centre of Excellence Scheme. The
Committee feels that ground level reality is that every stakeholder is working in isolation.
Their goal is the same but all their energy and attention instead of being pooled together
and making the maximum impact is lying scattered. It is high time that all these
stakeholders work together as a team for the achievement of their common goal.
(Para 5.6)
VI. STRUCTURE, COMPOSITION AND ELECTIONS OF NSFs
The Committee observes that the functioning of most of the NSFs was dominated by
non-sportspersons. Issues of mis-governance, maladministration, wrongful selection of
players/coaches, no transparency in elections etc have come to light. The Committee agrees
with the suggestions of the stakeholders with regard to bringing about reforms in the
structure and composition of NSFs and for holding their elections. There is a need to give
due representation to sportspersons, ex-sports persons and other experts from the field of
sports in these bodies. The idea of having an independent Election Commission for the
conduct of free and fair elections of NSFs is justified so that the functioning of NSFs is in
the hands of democratically elected persons. Further, the ethical conduct of all functionaries
of NSFs, players etc needs to be monitored so that instances of corruption, wrong selection
etc are avoided. The Committee feels that the functioning of NSFs needs to be streamlined
so that the development and promotion of sports does not suffer and the country is able
to enhance its performance in the international events and make its presence felt.
(Para 6.6)
VII. Acc eptance of Code of Conducts by NSFs
The Committee feels that the adoption of the Sports Code will go a long way in
promoting the sports culture in NSFs. The Committee is happy to note that 43 out of 53
NSFs have agreed to amend their constitution. However, 10 NSFs still remain to do so. The
Committee would like to point out that these NSFs need to be persuaded to adopt the Sports
Code in order to bring about greater transparency and promote good practices in the
federations. Further, it is also not clear as to the present status of the 43 NSFs who have
agreed to adopt the Sports Code. Whether these NSFs have actually adopted the Sports
Code and implementing the same in true spirit is not clear. (Para 7.6)
With regard to age and tenure restrictions on the office-bearers of NSFs, the
Committee feels that the issue needs to be studied more in detail. However, the Committee
feels that age and tenure restrictions are imposed so that the same set of persons do not
head the federation over a long period of time and in the process develop vested interests.

36
On the other hand, it needs to be seen whether an office bearer of a NSF could actually
make it to any International Federations and whether his chances are lost due to age and
tenure limits. The Committee, in principle, endorses the age and tenure restrictions
imposed on NSFs as part of the Sports Code. The Committee would appreciate if a study
is got conducted as to what improvement has come in the working of various NSFs after
implementing the Sports Code, particularly the most contentious issue of age and tenure.
(Para 7.7)
The Committee would also like to highlight the fact that in its interaction with
stakeholders, other aspects of the Sports Code did not find mention but they were of vital
importance for the status of sports of the country. Issues like holding of elections as per
guidelines, selection of players and coaches, holding of national and international events
etc. were not focused upon. The Committee finds that the Ministry/SAI do not have any
mechanism for monitoring the extent of adherence of the guidelines under the Sports Code.
The Committee feels that in such a case where there is no supervision, NSFs can easily get
away, without actually enforcing the guidelines relating to various aspects of the sports
federations and yet show their acceptance for the same. The Committee, therefore, feels
that the Ministry/SAI should play a pro-active role in monitoring and supervising the
enforcement of the Sports Code. (Para 7.8)
VIII. FUNDING OF NSFs
The Committee takes note of the fact that majority of NSFs were not having the
required financial support. The funds allocated were quite low and not as per the
requirement of federations. Unlike the general perception that NSFs were getting all the
funds directly from the Ministry/SAI, the funds allocated to each federation spent on the
training/participation of players, food coaches etc were not given in the hands of the NSFs.
They were directly given to the concerned parties. NSFs were receiving funds only for
holding sports tournaments. Funds provided by the Ministry were meant exclusively for
players and not for running the activities of NSFs. Even the funds for the players were
insufficient having an adverse impact on technical coaching and international exposure to
players. Existing norms of SAI or basic things like food, boarding and lodging charges were
quite low. Problems were also being faced in buying equipments for players. Funds were also
required for having a team of support staff for the athletes comprising of doctors,
physiotherapists etc. Grants given by the Government for holding national as well as
international sports events to NSFs were considered highly inadequate and NSFs were
finding it difficult to fill in the gap of funds constraints. (Para 8.6)
The Committee finds that even though NSFs were receiving inadequate funds from
the Ministry/SAI, they were trying to manage more funds from other sources. NSFs were
of the view that since the Government was not in a position to take care of all the fund
requirements of NSFs, private participation in the development of sports should be welcome.
Elaborating on the other sources of funds which could be explored apart from sponsorships,
private donations and capitation fee, the following suggestions were made:–
– amendment of the term ‘corporate social responsibility’ under Rule 7 of the
Company’s Act so as to include sports as one of the activities which could be
undertaken by the corporate houses as their contribution to social responsibility.

37
This would then make it possible for many public sector undertakings and
private undertakings to invest two per cent of their profits for promotion and
development of sports.
– private participation wherein the private sector could build infrastructure for the
use of Indian sportspersons. A congenial environment needed to be created for
inviting private players in the sports industry.
– lessons from international experiences for raising money for sports should be
learnt. Example of Germany cited where a lottery system was there for football
matches which was the biggest way to collect funds for sports development.
– big corporate houses could adopt one or two games (except cricket) and support
it financially. These corporate houses could be given tax exemption for a number
of years like a tax holiday to promote the sports sector of the country.
– hundred per cent tax rebates should be given for donations to sports
organization by the corporate sector so as to provide incentives to them for
promoting sports.
– access for promotion and development of sports could be levied.
– a per centage of the revenue earned by the sports industry may be given to the
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for the promotion and development of
sports. (Para 8.7)
The Committee welcomes the suggestions put forth by the stakeholders for tackling
the problem of fund constraints of NSFs. The idea of including sports as one of the activities
in corporate social responsibility is indeed a good suggestion for raising funds. Adoption of
certain sports disciplines by NSFs can also go a long way in supporting and developing
games. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Ministry to explore the various
avenues suggested for bridging the gap of inadequate funds for NSFs. (Para 8.8)
The Committee is of the firm view that the scenario of Indian sports would only
change for the better if adequate funds for the promotion and development of sports were
allocated. Sports budget needed to reflect the priorities to be focused upon and desired
achievements to be made by Indian sportspersons, both in the national and international
sphere. It definitely called for enhanced allocation for sports of the country so that best
infrastructure, training, coaching etc could be provided to the sportspersons to excel in all
the disciplines of sports. NSFs, whose primary job was to select sportspersons, select
coaches, holding training camps and national and international sports tournaments needed
all financial support for delivering the tasks assigned to them. The Committee also believes
that other avenues of raising funds from different sources need to be explored so that there
is no dearth of funds for Indian sports. However, financial accountability coupled with
achievement of physical targets by NSFs needs to be ensured through a well set monitoring
mechanism for effective functioning of the NSFs. (Para 8.10)
IX. ROLE OF NSFs-PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY THEM AND THEIR SHORTCOMINGS
The Committee observes that the problem areas pointed out by NSFs are genuine and
need to be resolved with the co-operation of the Ministry and SAI. Usually NSFs are in

38
touch with SAI regarding release of funds. The Committee, however, feels that the
interaction and coordination between NSFs and SAI needs to be worked upon so that such
areas of concern are fully taken care of. This would help SAI in getting to know the ground
realities and problems faced by sportspersons and also resolving the same. (Para 9.2)
The Committee observes that NSFs are the sole custodians of one sports discipline,
fully responsible for its development and promotion. Given the crucial role of NSFs, the
Committee feels that it is essential for NSFs to streamline their processes for fair selection
of teams/sports persons for different sports events, selection of coaches, managers and
other related issues. Their selection of team/sports person will have a direct impad upon the
performance of the country in the national and international sports events. Efforts need to
be made by NSFs tosteer the teams/sportspersons in such a way either through proper
training/coaching or through the help of support staff and required equipments so as to
bring out best results. (Para 9.5)
X. Grievance Redressal Mechanism for Sportspresons
The Committee strongly feels that an effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism has
to be in place in every sports federation, both at the national and state level. Besides that,
in the event of grievances of sportspersons going unaddressed or not being handled in the
right perspective, there has to be an independent body having the power to examine all such
cases. Such a body can have one or two representatives from NSFs on a rotation basis, ex-
sports persons, experts and Government nominee. (Para 10.3)
The proposed Sports Tribunal can be assigned the role of the final authority for
resolving various disputes including those emanating from the internal cell as well as the
appellate body above them. This three tier Grievance Redressal Mechanism would go a long
way in resolving the issues effectively and more speedily. The Committee takes note of the
fact that few federations have such a mechanism for dispute resolution while most of the
NSFs had no mechanism at all. Therefore, the Committee recommends to the Department
to ensure that all NSFs have their internal grievance redressal mechanism in place.
(Para 10.4)
XI. FACILITIES AND INCENTIVES FOR EX-SPORTSPERSONS
The Committee is of the view that one cannot forget the contribution of
ex-sportspersons to Indian sports. Well-being and welfare of such ex-sportspersons should
be taken care of by the Ministry/SAI and NSFs. They should be providing financial help like
pension etc and also involving them in the sports bodies so as to benefit from their
experience. Their experience and expertise can be gainfully utilized for coaching sports
persons. It also recommends to the Ministry and NSFs to formulate a policy for their
welfare. (Para 11.4)
XII. SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN ATHELTES
The Committee takes a serious view of the sexual harassment of women
sportspersons. Such instances of abuse of women need to be dealt with utmost strictness
and urgency so as to curb further such instances. The Committee feels that women
sportspersons should be motivated and not discouraged to enter into the field of sports due

39
to cases of sexual harassment and abuse. The Committee is of the view that a proper
grievance redressal mechanism should be in place in each NSFs so that such cases are dealt
with urgently. (Para 12.3)
XIII. SHORTAGE OF COACHES
The Committee understands the seriousness of the problem of shortage of coaches
for most of the sports disciplines in the country. The Committee takes note of serious
constraints being faced by NSFs due to this. The Committee observes that some of the
federations have made efforts to augment the number of coaches through training of
coaches, registration/licensing of coaches and other measures in this regard. However,
ground realities continue to be very discouraging as high-lighted by all the NSFs appearing
before it. The Committee, would, however, like to point out that stop-gap measures like
hiring of coaches on contract basis by SAI would not solve the problem. The Committee
believes that a proper time-bound plan/programme has to be devised by the Ministry/SAI in
consultation with NSFs for having a pool of coaches for all disciplines of sports. Foreign
coaches could also be hired for having a different perspective and learning techniques which
are top class and highly professional. But country’s sportspersons cannot rely entirely on
foreign coaches. Therefore, a structured programme should be made for developing our own
coaches. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry/SAI/NSFs need to focus
on this area as it directly affects the performance of our sports persons. Further, attention
needs to be given to the availability of coaches for the differently abled sports persons who
need extra assistance and help in order to overcome their disabilities and excel in sports.
Training of coaches is an important component directly related to the performance of the
sportspersons. This area also needs to be taken up on priority basis. (Para 13.6)
XIV. DISABLED SPORTSPERSONS
The Committee has been given to understand that these federations for disabled
sportspersons often felt neglected by the Ministry/SAI. Apart from the regular problem of
fund constraints, these federations had their own set of problems like non-availability of
specialized coaching, interpreters, support staff etc. The Committee understands that the
challenges faced by the federations for differently abled sports persons were much more
when compared with other federations. The Committee is of the firm view that federations
working for differently-abled sportspersons need extra attention and focus both from the
Ministry and SAI. The Committee feels that the Ministry/SAI need to be sensitive to the
requirements of the differently-a bled sportspersons and focus on the development and
promotion of sports for them by taking initiatives in removing all the hurdles.
(Para 14.4)
XV. DISPUTES IN THE NSFs
The Committee feels very concerned on the uncalled developments taking place with
regard to the Indian Olympic Association. IOA, the Apex Body of Olympic Sports in the
country, is a conglomeration of NSFs and State Olympic Associations. lOA is closely involved
and spearheading all the activities related to India’s participation in Olympic, Asian and
Commonwealth Games right from sending entries by number, making arrangement for
travel, accommodation, training, all kind of logistic support for the various processes

40
culminating in the participation of National Teams in these Games. The Committee is
dismayed at the turn of events adversely impacting the state of affairs in the premier apex
sports body of the country. What should be a cause of serious concern is that this situation
continued for more than a year. Not only it was a loss of face for our country in the sports
world but also a symbol of discouragement and worst demotivating development for our
sports fraternity. As a result of this very unfortunate situation, our country was going to
be unrepresented in the recent Winter Olympics but the clearance from IOC to IOA finally.
The Committee can only say that it is high time that the country is not made to face such
an embarrassment again. (Para 15.3)
The Committee is of the firm belief that because of such a situation of impasse, the
performance of Indian Hockey was being adversely affected as evident from the results of
the London Olympics. Due to the unfortunate turn of events, IHF was first derecognized
and then its status was restored by the Delhi High Court. Meanwhile, a different body
emerged as the federation for hockey. The Committee finds that existence of two
federations for one single sport discipline as a very unwelcome development and not at all
workable for the development and promotion of the game of hockey. As already stated by
IHF, it would create confusion for the players, coaches and others related to the game of
hockey. The Committee is of the view that a solution needs to be found to resolve the
dispute and the initiative must be taken by the Ministry/ SAI to settle the matter once and
for all. The game of hockey needs to be reinvigorated to reclaim the lost glory of the
country. Attention has to be given to the sportspersons, coaching etc and not on such
disputes in or between federations. (Para 15.5)
The Committee is quite unhappy with the state of affairs in the All India Sports
Council of the Deaf. Two sets of office bearers are trying to run a federation that too for
differently abled sports persons. The Ministry and SAI have not been able to resolve the
issues in the Council. The matter should properly be examined at the earliest and the
democratically elected functionaries be given the charge to manage the federation while de-
recognizing the second group. The Committee is apprehensive that amidst such a dispute
and with no efforts being taken to resolve it, the Council may lose its recognition from the
international body. This would certainly affect the sports persons who inspite of being
disabled were making their best efforts to excel in sports. Interest of the game, sports
persons and the name of our country must be borne in mind before the matter becomes
worse. The Committee recommends to the Ministry and SAI to take on this issue on a
priority basis and find a solution for the same. (Para 15.7)
The Committee is disappointed with regard to the functioning of two federations
dealing with sports disciplines where our sportspersons have been doing exceptionally well.
Both these federations continue to be de recognized/in suspended animation. In other
words, our sportspersons in archery and amateur boxing continue to suffer for no fault
of theirs. The Committee is not aware when the things would come back to normal.
Already more than a year has elapsed. Commonwealth and Asian Games are to take place
this year. The Committee apprehends that in such a scenario, our sportspersons are going
to face lot of constraints adversely impacting their performance. The Committee takes
note of the fact that in spite of the two federations being derecognised in the second half
of 2012-13, funds were duly released to them in 2013-14. The Committee can only hope
that the assistance was judiciously utilized. The Committee would urge upon the

41
Government to resolve all the disputes in the two federations so as to start functioning
without any further delay. (Para 15.9)
XVI. INFRASTRUCTURE FOR SPORTSPERSONS
The Committee is of the view that adequate and proper infrastructural facilities/
stadia of SAI need to be provided to sportspersons to play, train and practice their game.
Even the budding sportspersons required the basic infrastructural facilities for playing the
desired sports. The Committee observes that infrastructural facilities/stadia of SAI were of
international standard and should be utilized to an optimum level. There was no point
having the infrastructure and not utilizing it for the benefit of sportspersons. However, the
Committee agrees with the stakeholders that a reasonable charge should be levied on the
use of the stadia for their maintenance. The Committee further believes that there was a
need to develop more infrastructure for sports in the country, be it stadia, astro turfs,
running tracks etc. The Department/SAI should focus on the development of infrastructure
for sports and also maximum usage of the existing ones. The Committee would also like
the Department/SAI to explore the option of public-private partnership for the development
and maintenance of sports stadia and other infrastructural facilities. (Para 16.6)
XVII. CONCLUSION
National Sports Federations are the main stakeholders which are mandated to work
from the grass root level to identify and nurture the hidden sports talent. NSFs are
required to work in close co-ordination with their State counterparts, Ministry, Sports
Authority of India, other sports bodies and the Indian Olympic Association. Our young
sportspersons’ hopes, aspirations and ambitions are solely dependent on NSFs. Their entry
into the competitive sports scenario, both at the national and international level is governed
by these NSFs. This study and analysis of the functioning of NSFs by the Committee has
brought forth one underlying fact that the goal of every agency/authority connected directly
or indirectly with sports is to give the right impetus to uplift the status of sports in all
viable disciplines. However, it seems that there are underlying, not very visible factors,
resulting in the stakeholders working at cross purposes. In the process, our young aspiring
sportspersons become the victim of circumstances. The Committee has made an attempt to
highlight all the problem-areas, constraints being faced by NSFs, the nodal Ministry and last
but not the least, our sports persons. The Committee hopes that its observations and
recommendations will pave the way for opening up the thought process for all the
stakeholders involved with sports in our country and enable them to move in the right
direction. (Para 17.1)

MINUTES

II
SECOND MEETING
Sub-Committee-II of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 21 st October, 2013 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna — Convenor
2. Shri Baishnab Parida
3. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Charles Dias
5. Shri Manicka Tagore
6. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
I. Department of Sports
(i) Shri Rajeev Gupta, Secretary, Sports
(ii) Dr. G .S.S. Ayyangar, Joint Secretary, (Development), Youth Affairs and Sports
(iii) Shri Vivek Narayan, Director, (Sports)
II. Sports Authority of India
(i) Shri Jiji Thomson, Director General, Sports Authority of India
(ii) Shri Neeraj Kansar, Secretary, Sports Authority of India
(iii) Shri Mukul Chatterjee, Joint Secretary (Inst.)
(iv) Shri R.D. Chouhan, Director (Scheme)
(v) Shri Rajinder Singh, Director (T eam)
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the members to the meeting of Sub-Committee-II
convened to have a preliminary interaction with the Secretary, Department of Sports on the subject
‘Functioning of Sports Federations.
45

46
3. The Committee, then, heard the views of the Secretary and other officials of the
Department of Sports on the subject ‘functioning of Sports Federations’. Members and the
Convenor raised queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to
forward a questionnaire to the Department for their written comments.
4. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The meeting of the Sub-Committee-II then adjourned at 1.10  
P.M. to meet again at
11.30 A.M. on the 6 th November, 2013.

47
III
THIRD MEETING
Sub-Committee-II of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6 th November, 2013 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna — Convenor
2. Shri Baishnab Parida
3. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Virender Kashyap
5. Shri P.K. Biju
6. Shri Manicka Tagore
7. Shri M.K. Raghwan
8. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
FUNCTIONING OF SPORTS FEDERATIONS
I. Special Olympic Bharat, New Delhi
(i) Mr. Syed Ali Kazim, National Director
(ii) Mr. V irender Kumar, Area Director
II. All India Sports Council of the Deaf, New Delhi
(i) Shri Somesh Sharma
(ii) Shri Arjun Bahri
(iii) Ms. Angel Singhal
III. Athletics Federation of India, New Delhi
(i) Shri Adille J. Sumariwalla, President, AFI
(ii) Shri C.K. Valson, Hony. Secretary, AFI
47

48
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the members to the meeting of Sub-Committee-II
convened to have interaction with the representatives of Special Olympics Bharat, All India Sports
Council of the Deaf and Athletics Federation of India on the functioning of National Sports
Federations.
3. The Committee, then, heard the views of the representatives of Special Olympics Bharat and
All India Sports Council of the Deaf on the functioning of National Sports Federations, problems
being faced by them and suggestions for strengthening their functioning, their contribution towards
the promotion of relevant sports disciplines etc. The members raised some queries which were
replied to by the representatives.
4. The Committee, thereafter, held extensive interaction with the representatives of the
Athletics Federation of India, dwelling upon their role in the promotion of various sports disciplines,
governance structure of Sports Federations, their co-ordination with the Ministry and other sports
bodies, problems being faced by them and suggestions for strengthening their functioning etc.
5. The Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to the Special Olympics Bharat, All India
Sports Council of the Deaf and Athletics Federation of India for their written replies.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting of the Sub-Committee-II then adjourned at 1.40 
P.M.

49
IV
FOURTH MEETING
Sub-Committee-II of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday the 24 th December, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna — Convenor
2. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
3. Dr. Charles Dias
4. Shri M.K. Raghvan
5. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
(i) Shri Prabhat Chaturvedi, President, Table Tennis Federation of India
2. At the outset the Convenor welcomed the members to the meeting of the Sub-Committee-II
convened to have an interaction with the President of Table Tennis Federation of India on the
Functioning of National Sports Federations.
3. The Committee, then, heard the views of the President of Table Tennis Federation of India
on the Functioning of National Sports Federations, problems being faced by them and suggestions
for strengthening their functioning, their contribution towards the promotion of relevant sports
discipline etc. The members raised some queries which were replied to by the representative. The
Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to the Table Tennis Federation of India for their
written replies.
4. The Committee also decided to have the views or hold interactions with some State
Governments representing different-regions of the country to assess the Functioning of  Sports
Federations at ground level. The Committee authorized the Convenor to seek the permission of
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in this regard.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The meeting of Sub-Committee-II then adjourned at 12.15 
P.M. to meet again at 11.30 A.M.
on 6 th January, 2014.
49

50
V
FIFTH MEETING
Sub-Committee-II of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday the 6 th January, 2014 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna — Convenor
2. Shri Baishnab Parida
3. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
LOK SABHA
4. Shri P.K. Biju
5. Dr. Charles Dias
6. Shri Manicka Tagore
7. Shri M.K. Raghvan
8. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
I. Indian Olympic Association
(i) Shri Tarlochan Singh, Vice-President (Former M.P., Rajya Sabha)
(ii) Shri R.K. Anand, Vice-President (Former M.P., Rajya Sabha)
(iii) Shri Regunathan, Vice-President
(iv) Shri Rakesh Gupta, Joint Secretary
II. National Rifle Association of India
(i) Shri Raninder Singh, President
(ii) Shri Baljit Singh Sethi, Advisor
III. Hockey India
(i) Ms. Elena Norman, CEO
(ii) Shri Roelant Olmans, Chief Coordinator and Director
50

51
IV. Badminton Association of India
(i) Prof. A.K. Mitra
(ii) Shri M.K. Singh
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the members to the meeting of Sub-Committee-II
convened to have a discussion with the representatives of the Indian Olympic Association, Hockey
India, National Rifles Association of India and the Badminton Association of India on the
Functioning of the National Sports Federations in the country
3. The Committee first heard the representatives of the Indian Olympic Association on its
functioning/problems faced by them for development and promotion of sports training/coaching of
national/international level sportspersons, facilities/incentives for sportspersons and suggestions for
improvement of the same. The members raised some queries which were replied to by the
representatives. The Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to the Association for their
written response.
4. The Committee, thereafter, heard the representatives of the National Rifles Association of
India, Hockey India and the Badminton Association of India on the functioning of their
Organization/Association, various steps taken by them for development and promotion of sports
disciplines, holding of national/international sports events, training/coaching of sportspersons and
problem areas being noticed and suggestions for improvement of the same. The members raised
some queries which were replied to by the representatives of the Organizations/Associations. The
Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to the Organizations/Associations for their written
comments.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.s
5. The Committee then adjourned at 2.10 
P.M. to meet again on 28 th January, 2014.

52
VI
SIXTH MEETING
Sub-Committee-II of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday the 28 th January, 2014 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna — Convenor
2. Shri Baishnab Parida
3. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
LOK SABHA
4. Shri P.K. Biju
5. Dr. Charles Dias
6. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
(i) Shri Pargat Singh
(ii) Shrimati Ashwini Nachappa
(iii) Shri B.V .P. Rao, Clean Sports
(iv) Capt. V .K. Verma, Principal and Director, Motilal Nehru School of Sports, Sonepat
(v) Prof. V .G. Bhise, Director of Physical, Education and Sports, Vidya Bharati, Raipur
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the members to the meeting of Sub-Committee-II
convened to hear some eminent sports personalities and sports organizations on the functioning of
National Sports Federations in the country.
3. The Committee first heard the views of Shri Pargat Singh and Smt. Ashwini Nachappa,
eminent sportspersons and Shri B.V.P Rao, Convenor of Clean Sports on the sports culture in the
country, problems faced by them for development and promotion of sports, training/coaching of
national/international level sportspersons, facilities/incentives for sportspersons and suggestions for
improvement of the same. Members raised some queries which were replied to by the
representatives. The Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to the representatives for their
written response.
52

53
4. The Committee, thereafter, heard the views of Capt. V .K. Verma, Principal and Director of
Motilal Nehru School of Sports, Sonepat and Prof. V .G. Bhise, Director of Physical Education and
Sports, Vidya Bharti, Raipur on the functioning of their Organization/Association, various steps
taken by them for development and promotion of sports disciplines, holding of national/international
sports events, training/coaching of sportspersons and problem areas being noticed and suggestions
for improvement of the same. Members raised some queries which were replied to by the
representatives. The Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to the representatives for their
written comments.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The meeting then adjourned at 1.30 
P.M. to meet again on 5 th February, 2014.

54
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
Sub-Committee-II of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday the 5 th February, 2014 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna — Convenor
2. Shri Baishnab Parida
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Virender Kashyap
4. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
5. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
I. Department of Sports
(i) Shri Ajit M. Sharan, Secretary
(ii) Shri Onkar Kedia, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shri Jiji Thomson, Director General, Sports Authority of India
(iv) Shri Vivek Narayan, Director (Sports)
(v) Shri R.D. Chouhan, Director (lFD)
II. All India Football Federation, New Delhi
(vi) Shri Shubhanker Mukherjee, Director Competitions
(vii) Shri Harendra Swain, Senior Manager Accounts
III. Indian Hockey Federation
(viii) Dr. K.K. Verma, Vice President
(ix) Shri Ashok Mathur, Secretary General
54

55
IV. All India Tennis Association
(x) Mr Anil Khanna, President
(xi) Col. Amarbir Singh (R), Executive Director
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the members to the meeting of Sub-Committee-II
convened to hear the Secretary, Department of Sports and the officials of the Sports Authority of
India and the representatives of the All India Football Federation, the Indian Hockey Federation and
the All India Tennis Association on the functioning of National Sports Federations in the country.
3. The Committee first heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Sports and Director
General, Sports Authority of India on the various issues relating to governance of Sports
Federations, problem-areas being noticed, inherent weaknesses in the present set up, role of NSFs
vis-a-vis Ministry/SAI, facilities/incentives for sportspersons and suggestions for improvement of
the same. Members raised some queries which were replied to by the Department.
4. The Committee, thereafter, heard the Views of representatives of the All India Football
Federation, the Indian Hockey Federation and the All India Tennis Association on the functioning
of their Organizations/Associations, various steps taken by them for development and promotion of
sports disciplines, holding of national/international sports events, training/coaching of sportspersons
and problem areas being noticed and suggestions for improvement of the same. Members raised
some queries which were replied to by the representatives. The Committee decided to forward a
questionnaire to the representatives for their written comments.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The meeting then adjourned at 6 
P.M.S

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.