 
 
1  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021 /Sravana, 1943, (Saka)  
REPORT  
327 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in its Three Hundred and Seventeenth Report on 
the Subject “Preparation for Olympic Games, 2021 ” of the Department 
of Sports, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2021) 

 
 
2  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken by the  Government on the Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in its Three Hundred and Seventeenth Report on the Subject 
“Preparation for Olympic Games, 2021” of the Department of Sports, Ministry 
of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021 /Sravana, 1943, (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


 
 
3  
 CONTENTS  
  PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i-ii) 
2. PREFACE (iii) 
3. ABBREVIATIONS (iv-v) 
4. REPORT 1-56 
 Chapter-I RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT 2-14 
 Chapter -II RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF 
THE DEPARTMENT 
15-34 
 Chapter-III RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE DEPARTMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
35-37 
 Chapter-IV RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
DEPARTMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
38 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A 
GLANCE 
 
6. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
7. ANNEXURES               39-56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
 

 
 
4  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS  
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th   September, 2020) 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
6. ** Vacant 
7. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
8. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
10. Shri G.K. Vasan 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. * Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
17. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21 Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
29. Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
____________________________ 
* Nominated  w.e.f.  30.12.2020. 
** Vacant  w.e.f. 7.7.2021 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
5  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri K. Sudhakaran, Director 
Ms. Chitra G., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
Shri K.Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director 
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer (in-situ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  

 
 
6  
 
Introduction 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports , having been authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Twenty Seventh Report of the 
Committee on the Action Taken b y the Government on t he Observat ions/Recommendations 
contained in t he Three Hundred and Seventeenth Report on the Subject “Preparation for Olympics  
Games, 2021”. The Action Taken Notes were received from the Department of Sports on 11th March 
and 23rd June, 2021. 
2. Three Hundred and Seventeenth Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee o n Edu cation, Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports  was presented to  the  Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on  24th  December, 2020  and Replies of the Government to the 
bservations/recommendations contained in the Report were considered by the Committee at its 
meeting held on the  5th August, 2021. 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on  
5.8.2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
NEW DELHI                                                                                    
5th August, 2021 
Saravana / 1943 (Saka)                                                               
 
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on   Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
7  
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
ACTC  Annual Calendar for Training and Competition 
ASSOCHAM Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industries in India  
BWF   Badminton World Federation 
CII   Confederation of Indian Industry 
CSR   Corporate Social Responsibility 
CSRI   Confederation of Sports and Recreational Industries  
FICCI   The Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry  
GB   Governing Body 
GOI   Government of India 
HPC    High Powered Committee 
IOA   Indian Olympic Association 
IOC   International Olympic Committee 
ISSF   International Shooting Sports Federation 
KRA   Key Result Area 
LOC   Local Organising Committee 
MHA   Ministry of Home Affairs 
MOC   Mission Olympic Cell 
MOHFW  Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
MYAS  Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports 
NADA  National Anti-Doping Agency 
NCOE  National Centre of Excellence 
(iv) 

 
 
8  
NGO   Non Governmental Organisation 
NOC   National Olympic Committee 
NSDF   National Sports Development Fund 
NSF   National Sports Federation 
NSTC   National Sports Talent Contest 
POCSO  Protection of Children from Sexual Offences 
PPDUNWF  Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay National Welfare Fund  
RE   Revised Estimates 
RR   Recruitment Rule 
SAI   Sports Authority of India 
SGFI   School Games Federation of India 
SME   Subject Matter experts 
SOP   Standard Operating Procedure 
STC   SAI Training Centre 
TOPS   Target Olympic Podium Scheme 
TSC   Talent Screening Committee 
TUE   Therapeutic Use Exemption 
UT   Union Territory 
WADA  World Anti Doping Agency 
 
 
 
 
(v)  

 
 
9  
 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department-Related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee o n Edu cation, 
Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports deals with the Action T aken by the Department of Sports on 
the Recommendations contained in its 3 17th  Report on the subject “Preparation for Olympics 
Games, 2021” which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24 th December, 2020 and laid on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on 24th December, 2020. 
2. The Action Taken Replies in res pect of Recommendations contained in the 317 th  Report 
were received from the Department of Sports on  11 th March and 23 rd June, 2021. These have been 
categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I :  Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
  Paras -1(b), 1(c), 1(d), 1(f), 2(a), 3(b), 3(c), 4(b), 4(c), 4(d), 5(a), 5(c),  7(a), 
9(a), 10(a), 11(i) and 11(j) 
  TOTAL- 17 
Chapter II : Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of Government's replies: 
  Paras – 1(a), 1(e), 2(b), 2(c), 2(d), 3(a), 4(a), 4(e), 4(f), 4(g), 5(b), 5(d), 5(e), 
5(f), 5(g), 7(b), 7(c), 8(a), 8(b), 9(c), 10(b), 11(a), 11(b), 11(c), 11(d), 11(e), 
11(f), 11(g) and 11(h) 
  TOTAL- 29 
Chapter III : Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee. 
  Paras- 9(b), 6 
  TOTAL- 2 
Chapter IV : Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited. 
  Paras- Nil 
  TOTAL- Nil 
  
 
 
 

 
 
10  
 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recovery from COVID impact 
Recommendations 
1. Providing athletes with support and training customised to the results of the assessment 
report card. 
[Para.1(b)] 
Action Taken 
1.1 In addition, a quick response injury and management rehabilitation cell has been established 
under the Mission Olympic Cell (MOC) comprising of a core group of physicians, physiotherapists, 
and musculoskeletal experts to monitor the injury prevention protocols of Olympic boun d athletes. 
The Cell includes eminent experts such as Dr. S.K.S Marya - Chairman and Chief Surgeon 
(Orthopaedics & Joint Replacement), Max Hospital, New Delhi, Dr. Col Bibhu Kalyan Nayak - 
Head of Sports Injury Centre (Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi), Dr. Amol  Patil – Team Doctor (Boxing 
Federation of India), Dr. Pralay Majumdar – Head of Sport Science (SAI) Shrikant Iyengar - Former 
Head Physiotherapist (Hockey India). 
 
1.2 A sport psychology cell has been established to map the requirements of athletes headed  by 
Sr. SAI Sports Psychologist, the Cell is responsible for monitoring the psychological and mental 
training requirements of the athletes and providing them with necessary assistance where required. 
 
1.3 Apart from above, the requirements of sports psycho logists were mapped earlier and hiring 
of personal psychologists was approved under TOP Scheme for various Olympic bound athletes. 
 
1.4 For other future probable athletes, sport specific scientific assessment protocols are devised 
under Khelo India (includ ing cardio-pulmonary markers) and testing of athletes across NCOEs has 
begun post lockdown. 
Recommendations 
 
2. Identifying the training facilities, stadiums, and sports centres for Olympic qualified athletes 
which have not opened yet. Re -open these centres at the earliest or relocating athletes to alternate 
centres which have opened. 
[Para 1(c)] 

 
 
11  
 
Action Taken 
 
2.1 National coaching camps have commenced for all Olympic bound athletes with effect from 
June 2020 at various SAI centres and private academies as per the SOP and applicable local 
guidelines. 
 
2.2 Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) were earlier laid down to resume sports activities in the 
training centres under the name of “Khelo India -Firr Se”. All key training facilities, stadiums, and  
sports centres for Olympic qualified athletes have been opened and fully operational. 
 
Recommendations 
 
3. Due to lockdown and travel restrictions, there was loss of international/national 
competition exposure which has hugely affected the training of the  athletes. The Department and 
NSFs must ensure that players get an opportunity to play maximum international tournaments 
before the 2021 Olympic Games. International competitions should be accorded priority as they 
prepare athletes for pressure situations they may find themselves in during actual Olympics. 
[Para 1(d)] 
 
Action Taken 
3.1 International exposures for Indian athletes have already resumed in all sports where the 
international calendar has commenced. Few notable exposures include: 
i. Indian swimmers were sent to a foreign training camp in Dubai. 
ii. 15 Indian boxers were sent to Italy for foreign training. During the training stint, the boxers 
also participated in two international competitions. 
iii. Indian badminton players were sent to competitions in Denmar k in October, 2020 and are in 
Thailand since Jan 2021 for key competitions. 
iv. Indian weightlifter Mirabai Chanu was sent for a strength training and rehabilitation camp in 
USA in Dec 2020. 
v. Indian wrestler Bajrang Punia was sent to USA for training and compet ition, where he 
continues to train till date. Further, Vinesh Phogat is currently training in Bulgaria. 
vi. The Indian Wrestling team also participated in the UWW World Cup held between 12 th-18th 
December, 2020 in Serbia. 
vii. The Indian Judo team participated in t he Grand Slam 2020 held between 23 rd-26th October,  
2020 in Budapest, Hungary. 
 
The above exposures are funded under the Assistance to NSFs Scheme (Annual Calendar for 
Training and Competitions) or in other cases under TOP Scheme.  
3.2. Further, for all forthcoming sports competitions as per the international calendar have been 
approved as proposed by the National Sport Federations (NSFs). 

 
 
12  
 
Recommendations 
4. Due to the halting of domestic and international sporting competitions, athletes may not 
have experienced adequate competition in the run up to Olympics 2021. This need may be felt more 
severely in competitive sports, illustratively wrestling and badminton. It is important to identify and 
organise competitive matchups to give the necessary experience to the qualified athletes. 
[Para 1(f)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.1 Necessary measures are already being taken towards the same as explained  in the Action 
Taken Reply to the recommendation at para 1(d). 
4.2 SOP for national competitions have already been formulated and the following tournaments 
have been conducted/are scheduled as mentioned below: 
 
Athletics 
 
 National Federation Cup U-20 Championships (25th-27th Jan 2021 at Bhopal, MP) 
 National Jr. Championship (6th-10th Feb 2021 at Guwahati, Assam) 
 Indian Grand Prix (12th Feb 2021 at Trivandrum, Kerala) 
 National and International Race -Walking Championship (13 th-14th Feb 2021 at Ranchi, 
Jharkhand) 
 Indian Grand Prix 2 (25th Feb. 2021, SAI NSNIS Patiala) 
 Indian Grand Prix 3 (5th March, 2021, SAI NSNIS Patiala) 
 National Inter District Junior Athletics Meet ( 10th April to 14th April 2021, venue is to be 
decided) 
 Sr. National Federation Cup (15th to 19th March 2021 - SAI NSNIS Patiala) 
 
Wrestling: 
 
 Senior National Championship in Men’s Freestyle (23rd-24th Jan 2021 at Noida, UP) 
 Senior National Championship in Women’s Freestyle (30th-31st Jan 2021 at Agra, UP) 
 Senior National Championship in Greco Roman (20th-21st Feb 2021 at Jalandhar, Punjab) 
Boxing 
 
 Selection Trials for Youth (18th-21st Jan 2021 at SAI NBA Rohtak) 
 
Archery 
 
 Open Selection Trial (23rd-27thNov 2021 at Tata Archery Academy, Jamshedpur) 
 1st Selection Trial (18th-22nd Jan 2021 at ASI Pune) 
 2nd Selection Trial (5th-9th Mar 2021, at ASI, Pune) 
 

 
 
13  
Shooting 
 
 Selection Trials 1 & 2 (6th -18th Jan 2021 at KSSR, New Delhi) 
 Selection Trials 3 & 4 (8th-14thFeb 2021at KSSR, New Delhi) 
 ISSF Shooting World Cup (18th - 29th Mar 2021 at KSSR, New Delhi) 
 
 
Recommendations 
5. Creating bio-bubbles in the training facilities such that athletes can be isolated in a secure 
environment and train with minimal possibility of being infected. 
[Para 2(a)] 
Action Taken 
5.1 Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) were earlier laid down to resume sport activities in the 
training centres under the name of “Khelo  India-Firr Se”. Consequently Bio -Bubbles are being 
maintained at all training centres where Olympic bound athletes are training. 
5.2 A COVID Task Force Committee has been set -up to ensure the guidelines are strictly 
implemented at the training centre. The  committee is responsible for the constant monitoring and 
management of the health protocols of the Government. 
5.3 Training is underway as per a fixed timetable to ensure limit ed interaction between athletes 
across different sports. 
Institutional Sports 
Recommendations 
6. Selection process : Qualification and selection of the Olympic core probable should be 
completed on time. The selection schedule should be announced well in advance and the timeline 
should be adhered to. All efforts should be made to avoid any last-minute selections. 
[Para 3(b)] 
Action Taken 
6.1 Qualification of athletes for Olympics is either by: 
i. Quota by name : In this case the quota is won by the athlete and issued to the athlete by name. 
The athlete therefore directly gets qualification and a separate selection process is not required. 
ii. Quota to National Olympic Committee (NOC) : In this case the quota is won by the athlete but it 

 
 
14  
is issued in the name of the Country and not athlete. The NSF in such a case decides which 
player to send against the received quota as per its declared selection policy. This is applicable in 
the following sports and the status of selection policy is as below: 
1. Archery- Selection roadmap is already finalized. 
2. Shooting-Selection policy is already finalized. 
3. Hockey - Core probables are already selected in national camp. 
 
Wrestling -The NSF have been advised to finalise their selection policy at the earliest. 
Recommendations 
7. Coaches : 
i. Several foreign coaches resigned and returned to their respective countries during  the 
pandemic. Besides, most sporting disciplines have foreign experts who are either 65 or above. 
Those above 65 were asked by their respective NSFs to not visit training venues. 
 
ii. About 561 vacancies exist of Coaches. This is unacceptable. These should be  filled up within 
specific time-bound manner so that Olympic preparations don’t suffer. 
 
iii. Additionally, an immediate survey should be carried out in collaboration with the NSFs to gauge 
requirements for coaches, including personal coaches for athletes. 
 
iv. The Department should lay out timelines to recruit vacancies for foreign experts and   
     coaches. 
[Para 3(c)] 
Action Taken 
7.1  The situation regarding foreign coaches, arising out of the Covid -19 pandemic, was unfortunate 
and beyond control of NSFs or SAI. Wherever foreign coaches have resigned, suitable replacements 
are being hired. For e.g., foreign coaches - Analytical Coach in  Hockey and Middle and Long 
Distance Coach in Athletics have already been finalized. All foreign coaches under employment of 
NSF and funded by SAI have now returned to the respective training venues. 
7.2 For the Olympic bound athletes, the coaches have alr eady been provided to all NSFs under 
Assistance to NSF Scheme. For future probables, hiring of coaches on contract/deputation for all 
NCOEs till Olympics 2024 is underway to fulfil the requirements in each sport and fill up the vacant 
positions. Periodic performance review of these coaches is based on Key Result Area (KRA) being 

 
 
15  
undertaken to ensure only the best coaches are available for training of future Olympic probables. 
 
7.3 To fill the vacancies of 23 posts reserved for Olympian/ para -Olympian in the  Assistant 
Coach grade and 04 vacancies in the coach grade, applications have already been received (Direct 
Recruitment). 
 
7.4 Recruitment rules have been revised to engage coaches on deputation and contract basis at 
different levels. Advertisement for eng agement of coaches on deputation is already issued with last 
date as 31.03.2021. Further, RRs have been revised to facilitate promotion of coaches at various 
grades. Accordingly, DPC is being held to fill the vacancies on promotion.  
 
7.5 Recruitment of coaches on contract/deputation for various NCOEs is already initiated and 90 
coaches on contract and 38 coaches on deputation are given Offer of Appointment and expected to 
join shortly. 
 
7.6 This exercise has already been done and personal coaches for several athletes have 
been included in the National Coaching Camps. Funding for several personal coaches of key athletes 
in sports such as Wrestling, Shooting, etc. are provided under TOPS Scheme. In addition, personal 
coach/support staff requirements of all Ol ympic probable have been mapped and additional 
accommodation at Tokyo is being booked by IOA under Govt. funding. 
 
7.7   Wherever foreign coaches have resigned, suitable replacements are being hired. For e.g., 
foreign coaches - Analytical Coach in Hockey and Middle and Long Distance Coach in Athletics 
have already been finalized. In addition, hiring of foreign coaches and experts in various sports is 
also underway keeping in mind the 2024 Olympic Games. 
Further Comments of the Committee: 
 
7.8    The Committee sought clarification from the Ministry on the following points:  
- Details of the present vacancies and timeline for completion of the hiring process of 
coaches on contract/deputation for all NCOES; 
- The timeline for completion of recruitment process of Assistant Coaches and Coaches 
reserved for Olympians/Para-Olympians; 
- The number of coaches who have joined on contract/deputation and whether all 
vacancies have been filled up; 
- Timeline for hiring of Foreig n Coaches and experts and sports disciplines for 2024 
Olympics 
-  
 

 
 
16  
Further Action Taken: 
7.9         The details of present vacancies as on 01.06.2021 are as under : 
Post  Sanctioned 
Strength 
Present Strength 
(Regular + 
Deputation) 
Vacancies to be 
filled upto 
30.09.2021 (on 
deputation/contract 
Vacancy* 
Ch. Coach 152 128 31 0 
Sr. Coach 305 199 35 71 
Coach 457 185 149 123 
Asst. Coach 610 175 321 114 
 
* Cadre restructuring of Coaching Cadre is in progress. The remaining vacancies will be filled after 
finalization of Cadre restructuring as the proposed numbers in different grades are different from 
existing sanctioned strength. The Advertisement for the same has already been issued. 
7.10 Recruitment process already completed. Total of 23 vacancies were published out of which 
only 06 candidates were found eligible, 01 for the post of Coach and 05 for the post of Assistant 
Coach. A fresh notification for filling up the remaining post will be published after finalization of 
Cadre Restructuring. 
7.11 281 con tract coaches are working in SAI on contract basis. 08 coaches are working on 
deputation basis. As stated at point no. 3c (i) the vacancies available will be filled up accordingly. 
 
7.12 Review of foreign coaches and experts would be undertaken after Tokyo  Olympics 2021 and 
new coaches and experts for Paris Olympics 2024 and beyond would be recruited thereafter. The list 
of foreign coaches and experts recruited is enclosed herein. List of Foreign Coaches presently 
employed with Sports Authority of India is at Annexure-I. 
 
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
7.13 The Committee further recommends that the Cadre Restructuring and recruitment 
process of coaches should be completed as expeditiously as possible so that coaching of sports 
persons and medal pros pects in various national and international sports events is not 
adversely affected. 
 
Human and Technical resource Support 
Recommendations 
8. Asking head coaches to undertake a sports equipment availability analysis across their 
respective sporting facilities. Requests for essential equipment in shortage should be immediately 
escalated to the MOC who can fast track procurement and provisioning of the equipment. 
[Para 4(b] 

 
 
17  
Action Taken 
8.1 The NSFs through their head coaches have already undertaken a sports equipment 
requirement analysis for their respective sport disciplines. The same is approved under Assistance to 
NSF Scheme and the funding is being provided directly to the NSF as per their projection. Further, 
for the upgradation of sports medicine and Sports Science Lab in 13 NCOEs, a pproval was obtained 
in the 52nd  GB for the procurement of Sports Science equipment. 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
8.2 The Committee asked the Ministry to   provide timeline for procurement of sports science 
equipment in 13 NCOEs approved in 52 nd  GB and also funds utilized for this along with details of 
equipment purchased. 
Further Action Taken 
8.3 The details of sports science equipments procured for 13 NCOEs is at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
Recommendations 
 
9. Governing bodies for respective sports like Wrestling Federation of India, National Rifle 
Association of India, Hockey India can coordinate special training camps to concentrate training 
efforts for qualified athletes. 
[Para 4(c)] 
Action Taken 
 
9.1 Specialised training camps are already underway in all sports as per the Annual Calendar for 
Training and Competition (ACTC) of the NSFs. 
 
Recommendations 
10. Creating a dedicated digital portal for all athletes to list their equipment, training, and 
nutritional requirements. Fulfilment of these requirements can be centrally coordinated by the 
MOC, TOPS. 
[Para 4(d)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
10.1 Noted for future action.  
 

 
 
18  
10.2 At present, under Assistance to NSF Scheme, funding for equipment proposed by the NSFs 
is being provided directly to the respective NSFs for faster procurement. Equipment is being 
procured and provided at NCOE where Olympic bound athletes are training. 
 
10.3 Individual athlete requirements are provided under the TOPS Scheme and is centrally 
coordinated through athlete relationship managers, who are in contact with the athletes to 
understand their present requirements and future needs. All the athletes in the training camps are 
also provided support of in-house nutritionist. 
 
Medical & Doping 
Recommendations 
11. Medical facilities: Medical staff and other medical equipment (like X -Ray and MRI) should 
be made available within select SAI and other training centres. This will ensure that athletes do not 
lose any time for treatment and recovery. This will also keep them from travelling to hospitals where 
the chances of contracting COVID are the highest. 
Dedicated physiotherapists should be made available in all the national training centres. 
[Para 5(a)] 
Action Taken 
11.1 Dedicated physiotherapists are employed in all National Coaching Camps with the NSFs and 
funded by the Government. Personal physiotherapists are also provided to several Olympic probable 
under the TOP Scheme. Further, approval has been obtained from Governing Body for engaging 20 
Doctors and 87 Physiotherapist for the NCOEs. Further, approval has been obtained in the 52 nd GB 
for engaging scientific staff for the 13 NCOEs for posts viz, Anthropometry (25), Biochemistry(2), 
Biomechanics(2), Physiology(37),  Psychology(4), S&C(67), Lab Technician (45). 
 
11.2 Procurement  of  medical  and  sport  science  equipment worth  approximately ₹ 80 Crore 
has been approved in 52 nd Governing Body. This includes equipment for blood testing at NCOE 
Patiala and Bengaluru. In addition, for medical procedures such as MRI, tie ups with local hospitals 
are done for timely assessment and reporting. 
Further Comments of the Committee 
11.3 The Committee asked the Ministry to provide the timeline for completion of recruitment 
process of Doctors, Physiotherapists and Scientific staff in NCOEs. 
Further Action Taken 
11.4 The details has been provided at Annexure-III. 

 
 
19  
Medical & Doping 
Recommendations 
12. COVID-19 Vaccination : Athletes as well as coaches and support staff going for the 
Olympics should be put in the priority group for the vaccination process. 
[Para 5(c)] 
Action Taken 
12.1 Secretary Sports (MYAS) has already written a letter dated 23rd Dec 2020  to Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA) to accord priority to all the Olympic bound athletes and athletes training in 
NCOEs. Consequently, MHA has written to the Ministry of Health and Fami ly Welfare (MoHFW) 
for the same. 
Women Athletes 
Recommendations 
13. Gender sensitization: Gender sensitization of all male athletes and coaches should be done 
to prevent incidences of sexist behaviour and sexual harassment. 
[Para 7(a)] 
Action Taken 
13.1 Several workshops have been conducted by Subject Matter Experts (SME) between April, 2020 
to Decembe r, 2020 to sensitize the coaches and administrative staff of SAI on the topic. This 
include: 
1. Gender Sensitization on 01.05.2020 
2. Sexual Harassment of Women a t Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 
on 05.05.2020 
3. Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, 2012 on 14.05.2020 
4. Sexual Harassment and Disciplinary Proceedings on 22.07.2020 
5. Gender Sensitization on 13.08.2020 
6. Awareness on POCSO and Prevention Of Sexual Harassment on 14.08.2020 
7. Child Safety Measures and POCSO on 13.11.2020 
8. Prevention of Sexual Harassment of Women in Workplace on 23.11.2020. 
 
 

 
 
20  
Financial Security for medal winning athletes and their coaches during and post their sports 
careers 
Recommendations 
 
14. The Ministry must place before the Standing Committee on Education, Women, Children, 
Youth and Sports a formula at the earliest for ensuring financial security for medal winning athletes 
and their coaches during and post their sports careers. The Ministry must formulate such a formula 
based on the sportsperson and coach’s contribution to the Flag for the Sports. This formula must 
take care of financial security as mentioned above including consideration regardi ng stipends, jobs, 
post-retirements annuities, etc 
[Para 9(a)] 
Action Taken 
 
14.1 Noted for compliance. 
 
 
14.2 In this regard the following Schemes are already being implemented: 
Scheme of special awards to medal winners in international Sports events and t heir coaches 
(amended as on 20th  June 2017) 
 The award is given to incentivize the achievements of outstanding sportspersons, encourage and 
motivate them for higher achievements and to  act as inspiring role models for attracting the 
younger generation to take up sports. 
 The Awards are given for Sports disciplines which are in Olympics/Asian 
Games/Commonwealth Games and Chess. 
 The Awards are given for achievements in Olympic Games, Asian  Games, Commonwealth 
Games, World Championship, Asian Championship, Commonwealth Championship, World 
Cup, World University Games, Para Sports, Special Olympics, Blind Sports, Deaf Sports, etc. 
 In addition, up to 3 coaches of medal winners are provided cash awards as below: 
 30% of amount: Coach at grass root level who initially spotted the talent and groomed. 
 30% of amount: Coach at the developmental level who further groomed and nurtured the 
medal winning sportspersons which also includes personal coach. 
 40% of amount: Coach at the elite level who have been part of the coaching camps or 
imparted training to the medal winner for at least 180 days. 
 
14.3 Financial Security for medal winning athletes - as mentioned in the action taken reply to the 
recommendation at Para 8 (a). 
 
14.4 Secondly, In order to provide the financial security for the sports person post their careers 
Khelo India Centres are to be set up in each district which will engage past champions as coaches 
 
 

 
 
21  
Budgetary Allocation 
Recommendations 
15 Increased allocation for TOPS programme: TOPS is being used as a top-up programme for 
covering discretionary expenses that NSFs cannot fund. This is unacceptable. TOPS as an 
independent programme should be reaffirmed and increased allocation for Olympic preparations 
should be made at the earliest. 
[Para 10(a)] 
Action Taken 
 
15.1 Noted for compliance.  
 
15.2 Customised support under TOP Scheme is already provided to athletes as per requirement 
with no financial restriction. 
 
15.3 Expenses in connection with TOPS athletes requirements in training, tournaments, travel and 
acquisition of equipment, etc. are met out of the Block Grant placed at the disposal of the Sports 
Authority of India / TOPS by the National Sports Development Fund (NSDF).   Funds for the Out of 
Pocket Allowance are being released directly by the NSDF to the TOPS athletes. 
 
15.4 NSDF releases funds to SAI / TOPS immediately on receipt of demand from the TOPS so 
that the TOP Scheme functions without any hindrance.   It has also been decided that all the benefits 
(including OPA) will be paid out of the Block Grants released from NSDF to SAI. The MYAS is 
also streamlining the procedures in this regard. 
 
15.5 In addition, a policy is being framed for supporting the TOPS Development Group athletes 
for Paris 2024 Games. 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
15.6 The Committee requested   the Ministry  to furnish  the details of the policy framed for 
supporting TOPS Development Group athletes for Paris 2024 Games and by when it would be 
implemented? 
 
Further Action Taken 
15.7 The new TOPS Policy shall take effect from 1 st September, 2021 and is in the final stages of 
finalization. 

 
 
22  
Best Practices 
Recommendations 
16. States should recognise ‘sports’ as an industry via their respective industrial policies  to 
provide an impetus to the sector, and encourage investment in infrastructure development. This 
would open up opportunities for availing of subsidy, loan and assistance from private and 
government sources. 
[Para 11(i)] 
Action Taken 
16.1 A meeting was co nvened in Jan 2021 by Union Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports Sh. 
Kiren Rijiju with representatives of sports goods and equipment manufacturers and discussed in 
detail ways to improve the coordination between the government and sports manufacturers in t he 
country, with an effort to work towards the common goal of strengthening the sports ecosystem of 
India. 
16.2 The meeting was attended by over 30 representatives of sports manufacturing companies 
who are members of four major trade bodies in India -- The Federation of Indian Chambers of 
Commerce & Industry (FICCI), Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Associated Chambers of 
Commerce and Industries in India (ASSOCHAM) & Confederation of Sports and Recreational 
Industries (CSRI). 
Recommendations 
17. The Department should consider encouraging private investments in the sector. Current CSR 
contributions to sport only amount to about a paltry 2% of all CSR funds. Providing special 
incentives to invest in sports will aid in attracting the corporate world. 
[Para 11(j)] 
Action Taken 
17.1 At present matter of soliciting CSR from Private sector is being considered.  As regards 
investments and incentives to pvt. Sector, matter of providing incentives will be taken up with the 
Ministry concerned. Policy instructions are issued by Ministry of Corporate Affairs.   
  

 
 
23  
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Recovery from COVID impact 
Recommendations 
 
1. Undertaking physiological, mental, and nutritional assessment of all athletes in the Olympics 
contingent to find strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats in their preparation. Making it 
mandatory for athletes to undergo indepth cardio -pulmonary function tests to monitor recovery to 
top fitness level. Also arranging for very scientific Musculo -skeletal rehab to original fitness to 
avoid injuries due to sudden loads, specially at remote centers if athletes are not training at main  
centers. 
[Para 1(a)] 
 
Action Taken 
1.1 To provide adequate  scientific support to the athletes in National Centres of Excellence 
(NCOEs) for achieving excellence in identified sports disciplines, it was decided that NCOEs needs 
to be provided with suitable manpower for monitoring and evaluating the performance and  training 
of selected athletes. To begin with, approval was obtained in 52 nd Governing Body for engaging  
manpower in 13 NCOEs across the country as phase -I on contract basis in various department of  
Sports Science and Sports Medicine, viz, Anthropometry (25), Biochemistry(2), Biomechanics(2), 
Physiology(37), Physiotherapy(51), Psychology(4), Strength & Conditioning (S&C) (67), Lab 
Technician (45). Besides, Nutritionists and Asst. Nutritionists have been appointed for various 
NCOEs to cater to the Nutritional requirement of the athletes.  
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.2 The Committee sought further clarification from the Ministry on the following points: 
(i) when the 52nd Governing Body Meeting held and the decisions taken therein; 
(ii) whether the manpower approved for appointment in 13 NCOEs across the country on 
contract basis in various Departments of Sports Science and Sports Medicine have 
been appointed and if so, the details thereof?  If no, the time frame for completion of 
such appointments be provided? 

 
 
24  
Further Action Taken 
1.3 It was further informed that t he 52nd  Governing Body Meeting of Sports Authority of  India 
(SAI) was held on 13 th  March, 2020. The following decisions were approved in 52 nd Governing 
Body Meeting w.r.t. NCOEs:  
a. Restructuring of SAI Sports Promotional Schemes by starting 23 NCOEs  
To maintain uniformity of the financial norms and to dispense with the differentiation between 
various athletes getting training in the same campus/ premises at SAI Regional Centre/ Academic 
Institutions/ Stadia, it was decided to merge all Schemes Operating in the same Campus/premises in 
SAI Regional Centre/Academic Institution and Stadia as SAI National Centre of Excellence 
(NCOE). In order to achieve excellence and win medal in the 2024 & 2028 Olym pics, 14 sports 
disciplines were identified as priority/focused sports at these NCOEs.  
b. Engagement of man-power to provide diet  
It was decided that trainees in NCOEs should be provided with quality food as per their requirement 
without any monetary cei ling irrespective of age & category of athletes. Accordingly, approval for 
sought for engagement of Nutritionist, Assistant Nutritionist, Chef, Assistant Chef and Catering 
Managers (01 for each NCOE).  
c. Engagement of man-power on contract basis for Sports Science support  
With the introduction of NCOE for achieving excellence of identified sports discipline, there was a 
need of providing adequate scientific support to the athlete undergoing training Hence, it was 
decided that these NCOEs need to be provid ed with suitable manpower for monitoring and 
evaluating the performance and training of selected athletes. It was also decided that to begin with, 
necessary manpower would be provided in 13 NCOEs across the country as phase -I on contract 
basis.  
d. Procurement of Sports Science Equipment for 13 NCOEs  
It was decided that scientific equipment to be procured for 13 NCOEs at 13 locations including 
NSNIS Patiala and Bangalore Centre so as to get scientific support to the elite athletes. As regard to 
scientific backup for NCOE’s it was also decided that scientific equipment required for evaluating 
the performance of young athlete should also be made available in a phased manner. Accordingly, 
the proposal for procurement of Sports Science Equipment for 13 NCOEs of  Sports Authority of 
India at an estimated cost of ₹ 80,07,50,000/- was approved in 52nd Governing Body. 
 
1.4 The status of manpower for 13 NCOEs is provided at Annexure-II.. 
 

 
 
25  
Recommendations 
2. It has been observed that travelling to far away tournaments is a  big challenge for athletes. 
Besides, countries like France and Germany that host tournaments at home, have produced more 
champions. India should host more international tournaments, so that players can reduce travel to 
collect more points and move up the ranking ladder. Also, a larger number of athletes can benefit 
from the same amount that India spends on sending athletes abroad for exposure. 
[Para 1(e)] 
Action Taken 
2.1 Key International competitions are already hosted in India such as, ISSF Shooting World 
Cup, BWF India Open as well as Asian Championships in various sports.  
2.2 Organisation of International competitions in India falls under the purview of respective 
National Sport Federations (NSFs). Govt. funding is made available under Assistance to NSF 
Scheme to encourage organisation of international competitions in India. 
2.3 Enhancement of funding for international competition is also under process to encourage 
the NSFs to hold more international competitions in India, which is also being emphasized for 
inclusion in the Annual Calendar for Training and Competition (ACTC) for the respective sports. 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
2.4 The Committee sought details o f enhancement of funds (funds earmarked) for international 
competition, which the Department has stated is currently under process. 
Further Action Taken 
22.5 As per present norms, ₹ 30 Lakhs per competition is provided to NSFs for hosting 
international competitions in India. This amount is over and above the funds generated by the 
NSFs through sponsorship, entry fee, etc. for the competition. 
 
 
Bio-Bubbles 
 
Recommendations 
3. Using bio -bubbles for ensuring championship participation in games for athletes  and 
sportspersons before the Olympics commence in foreign countries. 
[Para 2(b)] 
 
 

 
 
26  
Action Taken 
3.1 A general guideline/SOP for conduct of championships in India has been formulated and 
published by SAI. Respective NSFs have been advised to use this SOP t o create sport/championship 
specific guidelines for conduct of championships in a bio bubble secure environment. Domestic 
competitions are already being hosted as explained  in the Action Taken Reply to the 
recommendation at para 1(f). 
3.2 Indian teams have  been travelling for international exposures post lock down as per the 
international calendar published following the guidelines as laid down by the 
organisers/international body and the respective host country/city.  
 
Recommendations 
4. Ensuring bio-bubbles for the Indian athletes and sportspersons at the Olympics. 
[Para 2(c)] 
 
Action Taken 
4.1 Olympic Games will be conducted as per the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and 
the Local Organizing Committee (LOC) guidelines.  
 
4.2 In view of the run-up to finalizing safety measures for the Games, it has been decided by the 
organisers that the special entry of athletes and Games staff to Japan will be under established 
“Athlete Track” system which allows athletes, coaches and Games s taff participating in 
competitions and preparations for the Games an entry into Japan under the condition of 
implementation of all necessary preventive measures against infectious disease. These measures also 
include testing of Games participants, use of a n app as a COVID -19 countermeasure, physical 
distancing, etc. 
 
Recommendations 
5. Giving individualized programs to athletes capable of reaching finals or medal hopefuls and 
also providing for sending them abroad as soon as possible in a bubble environment  where top 
scientific infrastructure is available. 
[Para 2(d)] 
 
 

 
 
27  
Action Taken 
5.1 Individualised training programs for athletes are already being followed in consultation with 
the respective NSFs, coaches, support staff and athletes in this regard. International exposures are 
already being covered as explained in the action taken reply to the recommendation at para 1(d). 
 
Institutional Support 
 
Recommendations 
 
6. Swift decision making : The government should be swift in making decisions and granting 
approvals, viz, financial grants, equipment, representation in international competitions , etc. to 
avoid unnecessary delays. GOI should be prepared in dealing smoothly and quickly with any 
unforeseen situations that may arise due to COVID. 
[Para 3(a)] 
Action Taken 
 
6.1 The Annual Calendar for Training and Competition (ACTC) which is proposed by the NSF 
is approved at the beginning of each FY during the meeting of Assistance to NSF Scheme. This is 
done for ease of approval of subsequent expenses arising out of competitions and training plans 
listed in the ACTC. Contingencies, if any, arising out of altering schedule, is also timely catered for. 
For the Olympic cycle, the ACTC approved is till 31 st Aug 2021, i.e., till the end of the Olympic 
Games. 
 
6.2 Proposals from individual athletes - Dedicated athlete relationship managers are appointed in 
the TOPS team for individual athletes who are the single point of contact between the athletes and 
TOPS and interact with the athletes on regular basis to understand their future requirements as w ell. 
Timely clearance of athlete proposals is therefore facilitated through this process. 
 
6.3 Any unforeseen situations arising are therefore timely resolved under the current reformed 
process. For example, two members of the Indian badminton team were pl aced under quarantine by 
organisers after a coach travelling with the team tested positive for Covid -19 in Germany. SAI 
moved swiftly to get in touch with the athlete and funded the extension of stay mandated by the 
quarantine protocol. MYAS/SAI was in con stant contact with the Indian embassy in Germany, 
Organisers and local authorities to facilitate the team’s swift return to India thereafter. 
 
 

 
 
28  
Human and Technical Resource Support 
Recommendations 
 
7. Appointing a chief procurement officer in the Mission O lympic Cell (MOC) created under 
the Chairmanship of the Director General, Sports Authority (DG, SAI) as part of The Olympics 
Podium Scheme (TOPS) to coordinate and fast track procurement of training equipment which is in 
shortage. 
[Para 4(a)] 
Action Taken 
7.1 Once the MOC approves the proposal for equipment under TOP Scheme, the funding is 
provided directly to the athlete to fasten the process of procurement. 
 
7.2. The MOC meets twice a month to ensure timely clearance of all proposals and any urgent 
requirements are processed immediately with approval of DG (SAI), Chairman MOC. The same is 
ratified in the subsequent MOC. 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
7.3 The Committee further comments whether Chief Procurement Officer has been appointed in 
MOC as recommended by the Committee? If not, reasons therefor. 
 
Further Action Taken 
 
7.4 It was further informed that  for equipment sanctioned under TOP Scheme the funds are 
directly transferred to the athlete for faster procurement to facilitate the athletes in proc uring brands 
preferred by the athlete since they are primarily individual specific. Once procured, the athlete is 
required to submit bills and enter the item in the stocks of the nearest SAI Centre. The need to 
appoint a Chief Procurement Officer in/under the MOC for equipment sanctioned under TOP 
Scheme is therefore not felt at present. 
 
Recommendations 
 
8. Engaging professional sports performance analysis experts to assist in statistical and data 
backed inputs to athletes on their performance and techniques. 
[Para 4(e) 
 
 

 
 
29  
Action Taken 
8.1 A dedicated team of sport professionals with necessary experience in sports management, 
science, research and analysis already comprise the TOPS Division.  The team of professionals is 
responsible for: 
i. Conducting research and analysis 
ii. Maintaining athlete relations 
iii. Evaluating funding proposals 
iv. Liaising with stakeholders - Coaches, NSF, subject matter experts and NGO’s 
 
Recommendations 
 
9. Engaging domestic ex -players, regularised sportspersons, as well as global 
experts/consultants in a virtual mode to guide preparations of the athletes in the final stages of 
preparation for Olympics 2021. 
[Para 4(f)] 
Action Taken 
 
9.1 To ensure holistic development of athletes, Athlete Development Work shops are being 
conducted to sensitize and educate Indian athletes on essential holistic skills, such as dealing with 
pressures, communication, media management, sport science etc. Under this initiative workshops 
are regularly conducted by eminent experts for Olympic bound athletes.  
9.2 Workshops were also conducted in Delhi and Patiala for athletes, aimed at creating Japanese 
cultural sensitivity amongst Indian hopefuls in contention to qualify for Tokyo 2021. 
9.3 Seminars and workshops by experts in sports psychology, sport science/medicine, nutrition 
in COVID, strength & conditioning, high performance sports environment, anti -doping have been 
organized for athletes via, video conferencing, social media like Facebook Live, Instagram Live etc., 
to educate athletes about how to cope with stress during tough times and focusing on their objectives 
so that the training is not hampered. 
9.4 In addition, a series of webinars has commenced from 2 0th January 2021 under the “Gearing 
for Tokyo: Athlete Education Programme” for Olympic Games  initiative. The webinars cover 
various topics such as the Olympic movement, goal setting for Olympic cycle, anti -doping, 
workload management, harassment and abuse , mental health, dealing with injuries, grooming and 
wellbeing. 

 
 
30  
9.5 Many such workshops/webinars comprise eminent ex -athletes, coaches and subject matter 
experts as guest speakers 
 
Recommendations 
 
10 Asking head coaches to create a customised 200 -day plan  for every qualified athlete. The 
plan should list the focus areas for training, guidelines for preparation, and nutritional advice that 
athletes can follow to streamline their preparation. 
[Para 4 (g)] 
Action Taken 
 
10.1 This is already followed as per the Long-Term Plan and the periodization plan of the athlete 
under the National Coaching Camp. 
 
Medical & Doping 
 
Recommendations 
11. Medical Insurance : Sport injury insurance schemes should be put in place for 
sportspersons, through a collaborative framework by the central and state governments. The 
insurance schemes should be tailored as per the needs of each sports discipline, each state, and 
should cover players from different categories. 
[Para 5(b] 
Action Taken 
11.1 As per current norms all National Campers are already covered under medical insurance for 
injuries sustained in Camps. In addition, athletes training in NCOE are also covered under medical 
insurance funded by the Govt. It has also been decided to cover all athletes of NCC, NCOEs, Khelo 
India and STC under health & accidental insurance. 
 
Recommendations 
 
12 Doping Sensitization : Regular webinars and e -learning courses should be organized to 
educate athletes and coaches about doping. 
 
[Para 5 (d)] 
 
13. World Anti -Doping Code : They should also be made aware of the changes in the 2021 
World Anti-Doping Code. 
[Para 5 (e)] 

 
 
31  
Action Taken 
13.1 National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA) is conducting education/awareness program on anti-
doping in sports by way of educating the sportspersons, coaches and support personnel on the ill 
effects of doping information. 
 
13.2 However, in view of COVID -19 Pandemic, various activities including sports training and 
competition were suspended to avoid spreading novel corona virus.  In this current situation, NAD A 
has been conducting online educational programs/webinar on anti -doping in sports, with greater 
emphasis on new WADA Code 2021 to be effective from 01.01.2021.  42 nos of such anti -doping 
awareness sessions were successfully organized by NADA in 2020. 
 
13.3 To run anti doping awareness campaign vigorously, two agencies/NGOs are empanelled by 
NADA as educational partners.  To further outreach the stakeholders wrt anti -doping information 
and awareness campaign, regional coordinators are also engaged in region. 
 
Recommendations 
 
14 NADA AS AN INDEPENDENT BODY : Expedite efforts to setup NADA as an autonomous 
body independent of Government 
[Para 5(f)] 
Action Taken 
 
14.1 NADA is already an Autonomous Body. The Government does not interfere in the core 
activities of NADA, since the entire functioning of NADA is on the basis of Grants -In-Aid provided 
by the Government. The Government only oversees the functioning of NADA to ensure that it 
fulfills the desired objectives for which it has been set up. 
 
14.2 Further in order to provide legislative sanction to the activities of NADA, the Government 
has initiated a proposal to introduce National Anti Doping Bill, 2021 in the Parliament. So that 
NADA can undertake its Anti-Doping activities with greater authority. 
 
Recommendations 
 
15. National Anti-Doping Authority (NADA) helpline : They should have access to a full time 
functional National Anti-Doping Authority (NADA) helpline where they can seek  

 
 
32  
advice in case of any doubt. It should be made clear to all the athletes that instances of doping will 
not be taken lightly. 
[Para 5(g)] 
Action Taken 
 
15.1 National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA) toll free helpline for athletes is in place from year 
2017(office hours).   This helpline assists athletes on information   prohibited subst ances as per 
WADA and guidance for Therapeutic Use Exemption (TUE) if required by athlete is provided and 
proper procedure for same is explained to athletes.   Athletes are regularly informed that any 
substance mentioned in Prohibited list should not be taken under any circumstances. 
 
Women Athletes 
 
Recommendations 
 
16. All schemes and incentives designed for the athletes should be gender neutral. 
 
[Para 7(b)] 
Action Taken 
 
16.1 It is gender neutral. 
Recommendations 
17. Women should be encouraged to participate in as many sporting events as possible so that 
atleast 50% of the Olympic contingent consists of women in the near future. 
[Para 7 ( c)] 
Action Taken 
 
17.1. Sports Authority of India runs following schemes across the country to identify talented 
sports persons in the age group of 8 -25 years and nurture them to excel at national and international 
competitions:- 
 National Centres of Excellence (NCOE) 
 SAI Training Centre (STC) 
 Extension Centre of STC 
 National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC) 
 

 
 
33  
17.2. All the schemes of SAI are gender neutral. However, to  pay special emphasis for promotion 
of sports among the talented women sportspersons, SAI has established one National Centres of 
Excellence (NCOE) and three SAI Training Centre (STC) exclusively for women as given below:- 
 
1. NCOE Dharamshala (Himachal Pradesh) having 58 women athletes (Athletics, Kabaddi, Kho -
Kho & Volleyball) 
2. STC Badal (Punjab) having 58 women athletes (Athletics, Hockey & Volleyball) 
3. STC Medikeri (Karnataka) having 17 women athletes (Hockey) 
4. STC Tellicherry (Kerala) having 102 women athletes (Athletics, Fencing, Gymnastics, 
Volleyball & Wrestling). 
 
17.3 Further, all the components of Khelo India Scheme are gender neutral and afford 
opportunities to women too for participating in sporting activities and development of sports. 
Among the twelve verticals of Khelo India, there is one which is exclusively dedi cated to the 
women namely Sports for Women.  
 
17.4 Under this vertical, emphasis has been laid on such sports disciplines where there is less 
participation of women.  In the pursuit of the above the following leagues were planned: 
 Khelo India U-17 Girls Football League  
 Khelo India U-17 Girls Basketball League 
 Khelo India U-21 Women Hockey League  
Hockey and Basketball League were put on hold due to Covid- 19 Pandemic 
 
Financial Aid for athletes during their tenure as Sportspersons 
Recommendation 
18. The Committee recommends undertaking a National Olympic Scholarship Programme in a 
phased manner. It must guarantee minimum, but fixed financial aid to every athlete who does well at 
the national level. This funding needs to be scaled up as athletes begin to co mpete on the world 
stage. 
[Para 8 (a)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
18.1This is already catered for through the following Schemes: 
 
 TOP Scheme for Core Group: Scholarship/Out of Pocket Allowance of ₹ 50,000 per month 
is provided to each athlete who is part of the Scheme. This is in addition to relevant training 

 
 
34  
and allied support provided under the Scheme. There are 104 athletes currently who are 
beneficiaries of this. 
 TOP Scheme for Development Group : Scholarship/Out of Pocket Allowance of ₹. 25,000 
per month is provided to each athlete who is part of the Scheme. This is in addition to 
relevant training and allied support provided under the Scheme. There are 269 athletes 
currently who are beneficiaries of this. 
 
 Khelo India: Scholarship/Out of Pocket Allowance of ₹10,000 per month is provided to each 
athlete who is part of the Scheme. This is in addition to relevant training and allied support 
provided under the Scheme. There are 2947 athletes currently who are beneficiaries of this. 
 
 Pension Scheme: ‘Scheme of Sports Fund for Pension to Meritorious Sportspersons’ is already 
in effect, by MYAS, to provide additional financial security to sportspersons, post retirement 
from active sports career i n the form of life -time pension ranging from ₹ 12,000 to ₹ 20,000 per 
month for winning medals in Olympic Games, World Cup in Olympics and Asian Games 
Disciplines, Asian Games, Commonwealth Games and Paraolympic Games. 
 
Recommendations 
 
19. Private funding to individual athletes is still very low, as compared to other nations. Athletes 
should be trained to raise funds from private sources as well. Besides, incentives to donors and 
sponsors will also spur such private sector participation. 
[Para 8 ( b)] 
Action Taken 
 
19.1. Efforts are underway to increase corporate investment in sports. Towards this effect and 
proposal is being prepared for preliminary meetings with industry leaders.  
 
19.2 There are several Athlete Management agencies who manage marketin g, PR and 
engagements of athletes. Further, in order to help athletes manage their finances better, a capsule on 
financial management is being planned as part of the athlete development workshop covering the 
following aspects: 
 
 The common sources of income in sport and the phases of a typical athlete’s career. 
 Solutions available to linearize erratic income patterns. 
 Need and benefits of professional financial services for athletes. 

 
 
35  
 Pros and cons of various investment options including the returns across the various asset 
classes. 
 Basic principles to keep in mind prior to forming an investment portfolio. 
 Understanding the unique benefits of compounding – using it as a means to prepare a resource 
pool for a career transition. 
 Bankruptcy and the ways in which athletes can avoid that. 
 
19.3 The session will conclude with a mock consultation routine to give the athletes an idea of 
how a consultation with a typical professional advisor takes place, and the benefits it can bring. 
 
Financial Security for medal win ning athletes and their coaches during and post their sports 
careers 
Recommendations 
 
20. The Ministry must give the cover of Life Insurance and Health Insurance to all Olympians as 
a mark of respect for their services to the country. 
[Para 9 (c)] 
 
Action Taken 
20.1 Most of the elite as well as top level sportspersons, undergoing training at centres of Sports 
Authority of India (SAI) are already being provided expenses towards medical treatment and 
insurance under various schemes of SAI. Moreover, Sportsper sons, who are working in Central 
Government, State Governments, Central PSUs and State PSUs are entitled for same facilities for 
medical treatment as are available to other employees, as per their respective schemes.  
 
20.2. Besides, under the scheme of Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay National Welfare Fund 
(PDDUNWF) Fund for Sportspersons (i) Financial assistance not exceeding ₹10 lakh is provided for 
medical treatment of an outstanding sportsperson or of any of his/her family members living in 
indigent circumstances; (ii) A lumpsum ex-gratia financial assistance subject to a maximum of ₹10 
lakh is granted to an outstanding sportsperson for injuries sustained during training for and 
participation in sports competitions ; (iii) Assistance of ₹2 lakhs is also prov ided to coaches, 
umpires, referees and support personnel or their family members living in indigent circumstances. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
36  
Budgetary Allocation 
 
Recommendations 
 
21. Stop practice of slashing “Support to NSF” funds : It has become a practice to keep 
slashing funds in Revised Estimates (RE) as compared to Budgeted allocation under “Support to 
NSF”. This fund should not be seen as a soft target and funds slashed indiscriminately which affects 
Olympics preparations. 
[Para 10 (b)] 
Action Taken 
21.1. Allocation of funds at Revised Estimates (RE) stage for different schemes of the Department 
including the Scheme of Assistance to NSFs is done keeping in view the overall funds allotted at RE 
stage to the Department and the requirements of funds of the particular schemes.  
21.2. As far as allocation of funds to Scheme of Assistance to NSFs at RE stage is concerned, it is 
ensured that adequate funds are available for catering to the requirements of the sportspersons for 
training and competitive exposure.   
 
Best Practices 
 
Recommendations 
 
22. Talent Spotting: In the identified Priority and High Priority Sports by the Ministry, the focus 
should be on talent spotting from the bottom -up, from the Panchayats, Blocks and Districts of India. 
Talent should be spotted from the School levels and nurtured to the Olympics level. 
[Para 11 (a)] 
Action Taken 
22.1. The revamped Khelo India Scheme has a mandate for identification of talent from grass root 
level and nurturing them to attain highest levels of achievement at international levels. Under the 
vertical of Talent Identification and Development, which is being implemented by Sport s Authority 
of India (SAI), athletes are selected from pan India covering tribal, rural and backward areas of the 
country in 21 sports disciplines namel y; Archery, Athletics, Badminton, Basketball, Boxing, 
Cycling, Fencing, Football, Gymnastics, Hockey, Judo, Kabaddi, Kho -Kho, Rowing, Shooting, 
Swimming, Table-Tennis, Volleyball, Weightlifting, Wrestling and Para Sports. 
 
22.2    Under the vertical Talent Search and Development of Khelo India Scheme, a detailed strategy 
has been formulated as mentioned below: 

 
 
37  
 
a. Elite Level Talent Identification 
The talent is identified from various avenues like, Khelo India Games, National Championships 
conducted by the concerned national sports federations and School Games Federation of India 
(SGFI) etc. Further, the players shortlisted by the Talent Screening Committee (TSC) members from 
various competitions of same/varied age groups are called for an assessment camp wherein the 
Talent Identification and Development Committee members finally select the talented players, who 
are then subjected to Age Verification Test (TW3 method).  
 
It is a two layer process for finally selecting the players for the scheme as mentioned below: 
 
 Talent Scouting Committee (TSC) –The committee comprises of eminent coaches and players. 
They initially shortlist the players from various  national level competitions. Shortlisted players 
are called for the assessment camp. 
 Talent Identification and Development Committee (TIDC) – This committee comprises of 
eminent coaches / players which recommends the final selected list to various sportin g 
academies for systematic and scientific training/coaching after assessment camp. 
The players who clear the age verification test are finally selected to the Scheme of Khelo India with 
approval of the High Powered Committee (HPC). 
 
b. Grassroot Talent Identification 
Talent search has also been started at grass root level in two categories:- 
 Sports potential talent identification   
 Proven talent identification. 
22.3 Sports potential identification is done by assessment of fitness of school going children using 
Khelo India Fitness mobile application. The Assessment of more than 22,00,000 students has 
already been done on mobile application from various schools across various states. The shortlisted 
students will be retested & sports specific talent/sports science tests will also be conducted. 
 
22.4   Identified potential sporting talent will be given option to join various sports training centres 
across India. Sports proven talent identification will be done by:- 
 Grass root talent from potential areas (mapping of each district with sporting talent). 
 Talent scouting at block, district, state & national competitions. 
 The talent identified by local scout to be screened at State level. 

 
 
38  
Further, India is divided into 05 zones namely North, East, West, South and North -East Zones to 
carry out talent identification. Grassroot Zonal Talent Identification Committees are formed to 
reach out to each and every corner of the country to shortlist the potential and proven athletes. 
Talent Identification is to be carried out in 20 sport disciplines of Khelo India in age group of 8 to 
14 years, wherein the country has the potential /advantage to excel at the international level. 
Further the sports persons identified under SAI Sports Promotional Schemes belong to the rural, 
backward and tribal population of the country and are provided with regular training on Residential 
and Non Residential basis as per the scheme approved norms. 
22.5   Accordingly, SAI has established 23 NCOEs and 67 STCs (One started from 30.01.2021)  
to implement the sports promotional schemes across the country. A total of 188 Centres including 
NCOEs, STCs, Extension Centres, etc. are functional for implementation of above sports 
promotional schemes of SAI. Presently, 9313 talented sports persons (5726 boys and 3587 girls) are 
being trained in 27 sports disciplines on residential and non-residential basis.  
 
22.6  The selection criteria is placed at Annexure-IV 
 
Recommendations 
23. Comparative analysis: of top medal winning Countries in these priority  and high priority 
Sports and strategies employed by them in their: 
(i) Talent Spotting 
(ii) Training 
(iii) Event-Day peaking and build-up for the Sportsperson and Athlete\ 
(iv) Nutrition, Diet and Physio Support 
[Para 11(b)] 
Action Taken 
23.1. An internal study has already been undertaken of leading Nations such as USA, UK and 
Australia and appropriate strategies are being implemented keeping in mind 2024 and 2028 Olympic 
Games. 
 
Recommendations 
24. Ministry should work towards building world -class infrast ructure and facilities as per 
international standards. A sincere and institutionalized effort should be made to ensure maintenance 
of the infrastructure so created. 
[Para 11(c)] 

 
 
39  
 
Action Taken 
24.1. SAI has established 23 NCOEs and 66 STCs  to implement the above sports promotional 
schemes across the country. A total of 188 Centres including NCOEs, STCs, Extension Centres, 
etc. are functional for implementation of above sports promotional schemes of SAI.  
 
24.2 The salient features of NCOEs are as follows: 
 
1. Focused/ Priority Sport Discipline: In order to achieve excellence and win medal in the 2024 
& 2028 Olympics, the following 14 sports disciplines are identified as priority/ focused sports at 
NCOEs across India: 
 
1.  Archery  
2.  Athletics  
3.  Badminton 
4.  Boxing  
5. Cycling  
6.  Fencing  
7.  Hockey  
8.  Judo  
9.  Rowing  
10. Swimming  
11. Shooting  
12. Table Tennis 
13. Wrestling  
14. Weightlifting 
 
2. Sanctioned Strength: The total sanctioned strength of 23 NCOEs is 4000 for Residential 
Athletes and 500 for Non-Residential athletes 2020-21. 
 
3. Diet as per requirement: Specialists have been engaged for assessing Nutritional requirements 
and ensuring nutritious and healthy diet. 
4. Trained and Skilled Manpower (Coaching, Scientific & Administrative Staff):  To provide 
best training to the athletes, apart from qualified SAI Coaches, reputed and experienced 
manpower are being hired or taken on deputation/contract from other departments. 
5. Sports Science Facilities: The following departments are being set up in N COEs for Sports 
Science Support. 

 
 
40  
 
1. Anthropometry 
2. Biochemistry 
3. Biomechanics 
4. Nutrition 
5. Performance analysis 
6. Physiology 
7. Physiotherapy 
8. Psychology 
9. S&C 
 
More than 200 skilled manpower have been approved for operating NCOEs.  
 
24.3. Also, under State Level Khelo India Centres vertical of Khelo India Scheme, to upgrade the 
existing facilities in States to world class, 01 existing centre in each State is  to be designated as 
Khelo India State Centre of Excellence and provided funding for  spots science, manpower, 
equipments, coaching, etc. based on viability gap assessment. So far, 24 Centres in 23 States/UTs 
have been approved as Khelo India State Centre of Excellence. 
 
Recommendations 
25. Training abroad : Focus should be on sending sportspersons and athletes for  training 
abroad so that they have the best training at international standards of excellence. 
[Para 11(d)] 
 
Action Taken 
25.1. This is already the current practice, wherein international training is proposed by NSF as part 
of the Annual Calendar for Training and Competition. Individual international training for athletes is 
also funded under the TOPS Scheme as per the Long Term Plan submitted. 
 
25.2. In addition, efforts are underway to improve the infrastructure within India to reduce 
dependency on foreign training and therefore also save costs in the long term. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
41  
Recommendations 
 
26. Specialisation in Supporting Staff and their dedicated availability : To ensure that the 
Supporting Staff for the athletes and sportspersons have the requisite specialisation or are provided 
substantial training for improving their specialisation and their dedicated availability is ensured. 
[Para 11 (e)] 
Action Taken 
 
26.1 Provisions already exists for this under the Human Resource Development (HRD) Scheme 
of the Govt of India. Several coaches and support staff are sent abroad for international courses for 
up skilling. Further, recently (including during the lockdown) several online workshops and 
seminars were conducted by eminent Indian and for eign sport science experts for coaches and 
support staff working with the Indian athletes. 
 
Recommendations 
 
27. There have been cases of high -performing players being excluded from the TOPS scheme. It 
is suggested to reassess the list and create a wider net to include those deserving and left out from 
the TOPS list. 
[Para 11 (f)] 
Action Taken 
 
27.1. The current TOPS list caters to all meritorious high performing Olympic probable. The 
following selection criteria apply for athletes to be eligible for consideration under TOPS: 
i. Athletes deemed medal probable for Olympic or Paralympic Games. 
ii. Athletes deemed probable for reaching finals of their Olympic events, where medals are deemed 
an unrealistic target presently. 
iii. Athletes who can achieve India’s best r esult in the discipline, considering last three editions of 
the Olympic or Paralympic Games. 
27.2 The methodology used to determine the above is primarily sport specific and data driven, 
while considering relevant factors as below: 
i. Performance benchmarks 
ii. Age specific progression standards. 
iii. Discipline specific high-performance age. 
iv. Competitor analysis, head-to-head, etc. 

 
 
42  
v. Qualitative feedback from NSF, coaches, and subject matter experts. 
 
Regular performance review is also undertaken to ensure funds used prudently. 
 
27.3   Along the same guidelines Development Athletes for 2024 and 2028 Olympic Games have 
also been identified under TOPS.  Other than TOPS, the bench strength is included in the National 
Coaching Camp and given full support from the Govt. for training and competition exposure. 
 
Recommendations 
28. Though the Department of Sports has already identified High priority Disciplines and 
Priority Disciplines based on winning potential, an outcome -oriented approach should be deployed 
in training of the athletes belonging to these disciplines. 
[Para 11 (g)] 
 
Action Taken 
28.1. An outcome driven approach has been devised for assessment of each sport and NSF. NSFs 
have been directed to submit their Long Term Development Plan including their Key Result Area s 
(KRAs) earmarked for 2024 and 2028 Games and beyond. 
 
28.2 These KRAs would be assessed periodically and funding for each NSF would be linked to 
these goals and outcome, which are projected in the ACTC meeting with Secretary (Sports), MYAS. 
 
Recommendations 
 
29. With the postponement of the games, India can gain from a bigger pool of athletes who could 
win an Olympic quota for the 2021 games. A transparent selection process, along with the calendar 
for each priority discipline should be laid out. 
[Para 11 (h)] 
 
Action Taken 
 
29.1. Selection of teams come under the purview of the respective NSFs. The National Camp is 
based on 1:3 or 1:4 ratio (in some cases even higher), as proposed by the respective NSFs. 
 
29.2. This is done to have a larger pool of athlet es training together to increase internal 
competitiveness and so as to have higher chance of qualification for Indian athletes. 

 
 
43  
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Financial Security for medal winning athletes and their coaches during and post their sports 
careers 
 
Recommendations 
1 There have been several instances of athletes not getting government jobs even after 
bringing medals in major international games. There should be  an assured 3% sports quota 
reservation in government jobs for all the medal -winning athletes. For the period of unemployment, 
the Department should grant easily accessible financial aid. 
[Para 9 (b)] 
 
Action Taken 
1.1. 5% post in the grade of Assistant Coach (Level 6) is reserved for Olympian and 1% for 
Paralympian. In addition, 10 posts in the grade of Coach (Level 10) is reserved for Olympian.  For 
the recruitment of above, notification is already issued and application is received which is under 
process. 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.2 The Committee sought clarification as to whether any scheme has been evolved for granting 
financial aid to medal winning athletes during their period of unemployment, as recommended by 
the Committee? Please provide details in this regard. 
Further Action Taken 
1.3 It was further informed that there is no such scheme in the Department to provide stipend or 
any regular financial assistance during the period of unemployment of medal winners. However, the 
Department pro vides suitable financial assistance to sportspersons under the Pandit Deendayal 
Upadhyay National Welfare F und for Sportspersons S cheme. Under the scheme, assistance is 
provided to sportspersons as follows: - To yester years sportspersons (medal winners) a nd their 
dependents now living in indigent circumstances to alleviate distress and also for their training, 
procurement of sports equipment, participation in national and international sports events, etc.; and - 
To sportspersons injured during training depending on injury and also for their medical treatment. 

 
 
44  
Further Recommendation of the Committee 
1.4 Sportspersons who bring laurels to the country need to be honoured as they are a 
collective pride of the nation.  Further, sports being fitness intensive , sportspersons are able to 
remain in high form and take part in major competitions for a limited period and thereafter 
some career option /opportunity needs to be d evised for meritorious sportspersons , who have 
won medals not only in Olympics but other majo r international and national sporting events.  
The Committee therefore recommends that the Department should take concerted efforts  for 
ensuring sustainable employment opportunities for all meritorious sportspersons .  The 
Committee again recommends that there should be an assured 3% sports quota reservation in 
govt jobs for all medal winning athletes and also for the period of unemployment, the 
Department should grant financial aid to the athletes. 
 
Corporate Sponsorship 
Recommendations 
2 For the 2016 Rio Olympics, Indian Olympic Association (IOA) had signed up with a sport 
management firm and a huge amount as sponsorship was raised from the private and corporate 
sector. However, due to COVID, many NSFs have lost their sponsors this time - as has been pointed 
out by IOA in their presentation to the Committee. It is suggested that IOA should sign up with a 
sponsorship management firm on an immediate basis for this edition of the Olympics as well, and 
try to rope in the private sector for funds. 
[Para 6] 
Action Taken 
2.1 Indian Olympic Association has informed that it has already engaged a marketing agency for 
arranging sponsorship from the private sector. 
Further Recommendations of the Committee 
2.2 Sponsorship in the field of sports has the potential of providing much needed support 
for infrastructure development and better performance by the sportspersons. In its 311 th 
report on “Khelo India Scheme”, this Committee had recommended t hat the Public Private 
Partnership mode for creating sports infrastructur e in the country be adopted and focused 
strategies to rope in public -private sector are needed, as has been done in the State of Odisha, 
where the State Government and corporate sector have come together to fund ten high 
performance centres like hockey, ba dminton and shooting etc. The Committee in its collective 

 
 
45  
wisdom has appreciated the initiative and efforts taken by Shri Naveen Patnaik, Hon’ble Chief 
Minister of Odisha in setting up the High Performance Sports centres and sponsoring both 
men’s and women’s Hockey team through Hockey India since 2018, which has translated into 
better performances by both these teams at Tokyo Olympics 2020.  
The Committee, therefore, further recommends that with a view to continue this 
momentum in sports performance, apart from getting corporate sponsorship, every State 
should be encouraged to focus on one sport specific to that region besides taking up other 
sports in general and create and develop High Performance Sports Centres on the line of 
Odisha model. They should als o identify and promote the raw talent from a tender age and 
provide them with the much needed support of international standards in terms of equipment, 
sports kit, coaching (team and individual), exposure and mental conditioning in order to 
nurture them for participation and podium finish at the international level.   
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
46  
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  OF THE GOVERNMENT IS 
STILL AWAITED. 
 
 
 
      -NIL- 
 
 

 
 
47  
Annexure-I 
SSEELLEECCTTIIOONN  CCRRIITTEERRIIAA  
  
OOFF    
  
SSAAII  SSPPOORRTTSS  PPRROOMMOOTTIIOONNAALL  SSCCHHEEMMEESS  
  
  
11..  SSAAII  NNaattiioonnaall  CCeennttrree  ooff  EExxcceelllleennccee  ((NNCCOOEE))      
22..  SSAAII  TTrraaiinniinngg  CCeennttrreess  ((SSTTCC))      
33..  EExxtteennssiioonn  CCeennttrreess  ooff    SSTTCC      
44..  NNaattiioonnaall  SSppoorrttss  TTaalleenntt  CCoonntteesstt  ((NNSSTTCC))      
(its sub-schemes Regular Schools,  IGMAs &  Akharas) 
 
NATIONAL CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE (NCOE) 
 
Admission Criteria:  
Talent Identification and Development Committees of All the discipline are empowered to select/ 
weed out athletes from NCOEs. 
 
Trained and Skilled Manpower: 
 
i. Coaching Staff: 
 
NCOEs are providing the best training environment and coaching to the athletes training at NCOEs. 
To provide best training to the athletes, apart from qualified SAI Coaches, reputed and experienced 
coaches are being hired or taken on deputation from other departments. Coaching division is looking 
after the Hiring/Selection/Transfer/ of the coaches in all the NCOEs.  
 
ii. Scientific Staff: 
In order to evaluate/support the performance of young athletes, the scientific experts in the 
specialised field of Sport s Anthropometry, Exercise physiology, Strength & Conditioning, bio - 
mechanics, Sport Psychology, Sports Medicine, Physio-therapy etc. are being hired at each NCOEs.  
 
SAI TRAINING CENTRES (STC) 
 
SELECTION CRITERIA   
 
Criteria for Induction: Age: 12 to 18 years. 
(a)  Individual Events: Upto eighth (08) place in Sub -Junior (including Cadet) and Junior National 
Championships organized by a recognized National Sports Federation and upto sixth (06) place in 
Inter-University Championships conducted by Association of Indian Universities, and School Games 
Federation of India during the current or the year preceding admission. 
OR 
Sports persons who obtain first three (03) places in the State Championship Conducted by the 
recognized State Sports Association. 
OR 
Sports persons who secure any of the first three (03) positions in the North East Games and PYKKA 
National Rural and Women Championships. 
OR 

 
 
48  
Sports person who has represented India in any recognized Championship/ Tournament by the 
recognized international federation concerned. 
OR 
The first three (03) position-holders of District Championships, Inter-Education District Level small 
Competition, Championships held by Confederation of Public Schools, CBSE, Kendriya Vidyalaya, 
Navodaya Vidyalaya, PYKKA, etc.; may be considered for participation in the selection trials. 
 
b) Team Events: (i)  Age: 10 to 18 years. 
The talent who could not reach the minimum level of motor quality as per battery of tests may be 
provisionally selected for six months and only after passing the motor quality tests and specific skill 
test subsequently, formal induction may be made, if found fit.  
 
Training diary of each individual trainee must be maintained, which will be taken into consideration 
at the time of retention and weeding out process. 
 
Performance criteria for induction: 
Any member of a team which has obtained first four (4) pos itions in Sub-Junior and Junior National 
Championships o rganized by recognized National Sports Federation and first two (02) position 
holder in Inte r-Zonal and Inte r-University Championships conducted by Association of Indian 
Universities and School Games Federation of India. 
OR 
Member of a team which obtained first (01) or second (02) position in the State Championship 
organized by a recognized State Sports Association. 
OR 
Sports person who has represented India as a member of the Sub -Junior and Junior tea m in any 
recognized Championship/ Tournament for which team was officially sent by the Govt. of India. 
OR 
Member of Winner and Runners-up in team games in the North East Games. 
OR 
Sports persons who have participated in the recognized State level competitio ns organized by State 
Sports Associations, State Sports Council, and State Sports Departments may be considered for 
participation in the selection trials. 
 
Pre-condition for Admission: The admission in the above two categories may be made based on 
the performance indicators, Anthropometric measurement, Physiological & Psychological tests and 
depending on age, discipline, event and evaluation of future potential by appearing in the select ion 
Tests. There will be no direct admission. The admission will be only on the basis of performance 
and battery of test result and are to be documented at the time of induction. 
 
Lateral Entry: Those who achieved the desired performance in the District, S tate, National and 
International level competitions and successfully completed the battery of tests, technical and 
specific skill tests may be inducted at any time of the year. 
 
Retention Criteria: Retention of the athlete is based on his/her maintaining t he minimum level of 
performance on the basis of which he/she was admitted and also achieving the target set for the year. 
 

 
 
49  
Battery of test result, specific test result and performance appraisal record considered at the time of 
admission should be properly documented as base performance so as to compare the performance 
enhancement of the trainees periodically.  
 
Training diary of each individual trainee is maintained, which is taken into consideration at the time 
of retention and weeding out.     
 
Medical Checkup, and Age Verification is essential especially when admission is done on the 
basis of performance in the Sub -Junior and Junior level Competitions as an e ffective preventive 
measure against age fraud. 
 
 
Weeding out: 
a) Not maintaining the expected level of performances. 
b) Injury in capacitating for more than six months from training and or competition; and  
c)  Dope abuse, age fraud, misconduct etc. 
 
Monitoring, Half Yearly Scientific Assessment & Academic backup for trainees admitted:  
a) Close monitoring and half yearly scientific assessment of all trainees admitted is done by the 
Institutional/Regional Heads by engaging the services of in -house sports science facilities or 
through renowned Sports Science Institutions. 
b) As far as possible, efforts are made admission in near by schools; 
c) Induction of talent may be a continuous process instead of linking with Academic session so as 
to enable SAI to admit the talent whenever a talent is spotted and found eligible for admission 
 
Relaxation in the reten tion of trainees beyond the age of 18 years of age and upto 21 years can be 
considered by the Head of Academic Institutions/Regions in special cases only where there is strong 
justification based on performance and future prospects.  
 
EXTENSION CENTRES OF STCs 
 
SSEELLEECCTTIIOONN  OOFF  TTRRAAIINNEEEESS: 
Upto 20 trainees in a School/College are adopted under the Scheme.  The students of nearby 
schools/colleges can also be admitted.  The selection of athletes is done by a duly constituted 
Committee consisting of (1) Regional Director (SAI) or his representative (2) The Head of the 
College/Institute or his representative (3) Experts/Coaches from the school/college of the 
concerned discipline (4) Outstanding sports persons of the area. Age is relaxed in cases of 
commendable results / exceptional talent.   
 
These Extension Centres are attached to nearest STC and monitored by Heads of SAI Regional 
Centres under whom the respective School/College falls.    
 
SELECTION CRITERIA 
SCHOOLS 
 
(a) Individual Events: Any of first four positions holders of  District Champion ships, Inter -
Educational Institutions District Level Competitions held by the Confederation of Public 
Schools, CBSE, KVs, JNVs. 

 
 
50  
(b) Team Games: Winner or Runners -up of District Championships, Inter -Educational Institutions 
District Level Competitions held by the Confederation of Public Schools, CBSE, KVs, JNVs 
and PYKKA and qualify under Battery of Tests as per the norms. 
 
COLLEGES:  
(a) Individual: Upto 4
th place/ position holders in the Sub-Junior and Junior State Championships 
organized by recognized State Sports Associations, Inter-College Championships conducted by 
the University and State level SGFI Championships organized as per SGFI norms. 
(b)  Team Games: Winner or Runners -up of District Championships, Inte r-Educational Institutions 
District Level Competitions held by the Confederation of Public Schools, CBSE, KVS, JNVS 
and PYKKA and qualify under Battery of Tests as per the norms. 
 
 
UNIVERSITIES: Individual &Team: 
Sports persons who have represented University, State in the Zonal / National Championships 
organized by Association of Indian Universities and by recognized State Association/National 
Sports Federations. 
 
Age: 10 to 18 years. 
 
The performance of the trainees in the battery of tests and achievements at the time of induction 
should be clearly documented.  
 
The trainees, who failed in the Battery of tests are provisionally selected and will be evaluated after 
six months for retention.  
 
Battery of tests result, specific test result and performance appraisal record considered at the time of 
admission should be properly documented as base performance so as to compare the performance 
enhancement of the trainees periodically.  
 
Pre-condition for Admission: 
The admission in the above two categories may be made based on the performance indica tors, 
Anthropometric measurement, Physiological & Psychological tests and depending on age, 
discipline, event and evaluation of future potential and battery of test results and are to be 
documented at the time of induction. 
 
Lateral Entry: 
Those who achieved the desired performance in the District, State, National and International level 
competitions and successfully completed the battery of tests, technical and specific skill tests may be 
inducted at any time of the year. 
 
Retention Criteria: 
Retention of the inmate will be based on his/her maintaining the minimum level of performance on 
the basis of which the inmate was admitted and also achieving the target set for the year. 
 

 
 
51  
Weeding out: 
a) Not maintaining the expected level of performance  
b) Dope abuse, age fraud, misconduct. 
 
Monitoring, Half Yearly Scientific Assessment & Academic back up for trainees admitted: 
a) It is recommended that close monitoring and half early scientific assessment of all trainees 
admitted may be done by Institutional/Regional Heads by  engaging the services of in -house 
sports science facilities or by engaging the services of renowned Sports Science Institutions. 
b) As far as possible, efforts must be made to set up National Open Schooling System under NIOS, 
Ministry of HRD and Indira Gandh i Open University to do away with the regular academic 
pressure on the talent admitted. 
c) Induction of talent may be a continuous process instead of linking with Academic session so as 
to enable SAI to admit the talent whenever a talent is spotted and found eligible for admission. 
d) Concerted efforts may be under -taken with various Public Sectors/Armed Forces/ Corporate to 
ensure social/job security of the inducted inmates. 
 
Relaxation: However relaxation both for lower and upper age limit as well as inducti on can be granted in 
exceptional cases based on outstanding performance in Battery of Tests and also taking into account 
specific nature of sports limited to 25% of the new induction. 
 
 
NATIONAL TALENT CONTEST SCHEMES (NSTC) 
 
 Selection Criterion of Regular Schools (NSTC) 
 
Age: 8 to14 years. 
 
The performance of the trainees in the battery of tests and achievements at the time of induction 
should be clearly documented.  
 
Individual/Team Events: 
a.  Trainees, who are medal winners in State/National Level Competitions are admitted into the 
scheme, subject, to their being found medically fit. 
b.  Trainees who are medal winners at District Level Competition or have participation in State 
Level Competitions are admitted subject to their being found fit medically and physically and 
also have the required potential which is assessed by battery of tests. 
c.  For selection from the remote, tribal & coastal areas, the trainees are also selected by o rganizing 
competitions among participants. Selection is done by a selection committee consisting of 
representatives of SAI, School/ Akharas, SAI coaches, sports scientists etc. The sports persons 
identified on this basis are o ffered admission after age verification, m edical examination and on 
found suitable by applying battery of tests. 
 
Pre-condition for Admission: 
The admission in the above two categories may be made based on the performance indicators, 
Anthropometric measurement, Physiological & Psychological tests and depending on age, 
discipline, event and evaluation of future potential and battery of test result and are to be 
documented at the time of induction. 
 

 
 
52  
Retention Criteria: 
a) Retention of the athletes will be based on his/her maintaining the minimum leve l of 
performance on the basis of which the inmate was admitted and also achieving the ta rget set for the 
year. 
 
 
Weeding out: 
a) Not maintaining the expected level of performance       
b) Dope abuse, age fraud, misconduct. 
 
Monitoring, Half Yearly Scientific Assessment & Academic back up for trainees admitted: 
It is recommended that close monitoring and half yearly scientific assessment of all trainees 
admitted may be done by Institutional/Regional Heads by engaging the services of in -house sports 
science facilities or by engaging the services of renowned Sports Science Institutions. 
 
Relaxation: However relaxation both for lower and upper age limit as well as induction can be 
granted in exceptional cases based on outstanding performance in Battery of Tests and also taking 
into account specific nature of sports, for which prior approval of DG, SAI would be needed. 
 
INDGIENOUS GAMES AND MARTIAL ARTS (IGMA) (Sub-Scheme of NSTC) 
 
With a view to promote indigenous games & martial arts in the schools in r ural and semi -urban 
areas and scouting of talent in these games for nurturing in modern sports this scheme was launched 
in November, 2001 schools runs by Educational Institutions having cluster of Schools like Kendriya 
Vidyalayas, Navodaya Vidyalayas, DAV,  Vidya Bharati & similarly placed institutions for 
promotion & development of indigenous games & martial arts were also included as part of NSTC 
Scheme. 
 
SELECTION CRITERIA 
Age: 8 to14 years. 
 
The performance of the trainees in the battery of tests and achievements at the time of induction 
should be clearly documented.  
 
Selection Criteria for Induction: 
a.  Talents, who are medal winners in State/National Level Competitions are admitted into the 
scheme, subject, to their being found medically fit. 
b.  Talents who are medal winners at District Level Competition or have participation in State Level 
Competitions are admitted subject to their being found fit medically and physically. 
c. The scouting of the talent in indigenous games is to be done on the bas is of open competitions 
among participants. Selection is done by a selection committee consisting of representatives of 
SAI, Institutions, SAI coaches, guru/mentor of the concerned game. The sports persons 
identified on this basis are offered admission after age verification, medical examination etc. 
 
Retention Criteria: 
a) Retention of the inmate will be based on his/her maintaining the minimum level of performance 
on the basis of which the inmate was admitted and also achieving the target set for the year. 
 

 
 
53  
Weeding out: 
a) Not maintaining the expected level of performance  
b) Dope abuse, age fraud, misconduct. 
 
Monitoring: 
Close monitoring and half yearly evaluation of the adopted Clubs/Institutions is carried out through 
Institutional Heads/ Regional Centres. Exce ptionally talented boys & girls may be admitted in the 
SAI SAG Centre or SAI Sports Academy as per the discipline and eligibility criteria. 
 
Relaxation: However relaxation both for lower and upper age limit as well as induction can be 
granted by DG SAI in exceptional cases based upon outstanding performance in Battery of Tests 
and also taking into account specific nature of sports, for which prior approval of DG, SAI would be 
needed. 
 
AADDOOPPTTEEDD  AAKKHHAARRAASS  UUNNDDEERR  NNSSTTCC  SSCCHHEEMMEE  
 
SELECTION CRITERIA: The selection criteria of NSTC regular adopted schools is applied for 
selecting talented wrestlers. 
 
 
  

 
 
54  
Annexure 
 
Sub: Action Taken Notes on recommendations/observations contained in 317 th Report of  
Department related Parliament Standing Committee on Education, Women, Children, 
Youth and Sports on “Preparation for Olympic Games, 2021” - reg 
 
S. 
No. 
Recommendations 
/Comments of the 
Committee 
Reply/Clarification 
1. Recovery from COVID impact 
 
 (a) The reply only 
mentions about facilities 
in 13 NCOEs. Kindly 
provide information on 
the following: 
 
 (i) When was the 52nd 
Governing Body Meeting 
held and what were the 
decisions taken therein? 
The 52 nd Governing Body Meeting of Sports Authority of 
India (SAI) was held on 13th March, 2020. 
The following decisions were approved in 52 nd Governing 
Body Meeting w.r.t. NCOEs: 
 
a. Restructuring of SAI Sports Promotional Schemes by 
starting 23 NCOEs 
 
To maintai n uniformity of the financial norms and to 
dispense with the differentiation between various athletes 
getting training in the same campus/ premises at SAI 
Regional Centre/ Academic Institutions/ Stadia, it was 
decided to merge all Schemes Operating in the same 
Campus/premises in SAI Regional Centre/Academic 
Institution and Stadia as SAI National Centre of 
Excellence (NCOE). In order to achieve excellence and 
win medal in the 2024 & 2028 Olympics, 14 sports 
disciplines were identified as priority/focused spo rts at 
these NCOEs, 
 
b. Engagement of man-power to provide diet 
 
It was decided that trainees in NCOEs should be provided 
with quality food as per their requirement without any 
monetary ceiling irrespective of age & category of athletes. 
Accordingly, appro val for sought for engagement of 
Nutritionist, Assistant Nutritionist, Chef, Assistant Chef 
and Catering Managers (01 for each NCOE). 
 
c. Engagement of man-power on contract basis for 
Sports Science support 
 
With the introduction of NCOE for achieving excellence of 
identified sports discipline, there was a need of providing 
adequate scientific support to the athlete undergoing 

 
 
55  
training. 
 
Hence, it was decided that these NCOEs need to be 
provided with suitable manpower for monitoring and 
evaluating the perfo rmance and training of selected 
athletes. It was also decided that to begin with, necessary 
manpower would be provided in 13 NCOEs across the 
country as phase-I on contract basis. 
 
d. Procurement of Sports Science Equipment for 13 
NCOEs 
 
It was decided that scientific equipment to be procured for 
13 NCOEs at 13 locations including NSNIS Patiala and 
Bangalore Centre so as to get scientific support to the elite 
athletes. As regard to scientific backup for NCOE’s it was 
also decided that scientific equipmen t required for 
evaluating the performance of young athlete should also be 
made available in a phased manner. Accordingly, the 
proposal for procurement of Sports Science Equipment for 
13 NCOEs of Sports Authority of India at an estimated 
cost of Rs.80,07,50 ,000/- was approved in 52 nd Governing 
Body. 
 (ii)  Whether the 
manpower approved for 
appointment in 13 NCOEs 
across the country on 
contract basis in various 
Departments of Sports 
Science and Sports 
Medicine have been 
appointed and if so, the 
details thereof? If no, the 
time frame for completion 
of such appointments may 
be provided. 
The status of manpower for 13 NCOEs is provided at 
Annexure 
– I. 
 (e) Kindly provide details 
of enhancement of         
funds        (funds 
earmarked) for 
international competition, 
which the Department  
has stated  is currently 
under process. 
As per present norms, INR 30 Lakhs per competition is 
provided to NSFs for hosting international competitions in 
India. This amount is over and above the funds generated 
by the NSFs through sponsorship, entry fee, etc. for the 
competition. 
3.   Institutional Support 
 (e) Kindly provide the 
information on the 
following: 
 
 i.  Details of the present The Details of present vacancies as on 01.06.2021 are as 

 
 
56  
vacancies and timeline for 
completion of the hiring 
process of coaches on 
contract/deputation for all 
NCOEs 
under : 
Post Sanctioned 
Strength 
Present 
Strength 
(Reguglar+ 
Deputation) 
Vacancies 
Filled upto 
30.09.2021 
(on 
Deputation 
/Contract) 
*Vacancy 
Ch. 
Coach 
 
152 128 31    0 
Sr. 
Coach  
305 199 35 71 
Coach  457 185                   
149 
123 
Asstt 
Coach 
610 175 321 114 
* Cadre restructuring of Coaching Cadre is in progress. 
The remaining vacancies will be filled after finalization 
of Cadre restructuring as the proposed numbers in 
different grades are different from existing sanctioned 
strength. The Advertisement for the same has already 
been issued. 
 
 ii. The timeline for 
completion of 
recruitment process of 
Assistant Coaches and 
Coaches reserved for 
Olympians/Para- 
Olympians 
Recruitment process already completed. Total of 23 
vacancies were published out of which only 06 candidates 
were found eligible, 01 for the post of Coach and 05 for the 
post of Assistant Coach. A fresh notific ation for filling up 
the remaining post will be published after finalization of 
Cadre Restructuring. 
 iii. The number of 
coaches who have joined 
on contract/deputation 
and whether all vacancies 
have been 
filled up 
281 contract coaches are working in SAI o n contract basis. 
08 coaches are working on deputation basis. As stated at 
point no. 3c (i) the vacancies available will be filled up  
accordingly. 
 iv. Timeline for  hiring of 
Foreign Coaches and 
experts and sports 
disciplines for 2024 
Olympics 
Review of foreign coaches and experts would be 
undertaken after Tokyo Olympics 2021 and new coaches 
and experts for Paris Olympics 2024 and beyond would 
be recruited thereafter. The list of foreign coaches and 
experts recruited is enclosed herein. 
List of Foreign Coaches presently employed with Sports 
Authority of India is at Annexure-II. 
4. Human and Technical resource Support 
 (a) Whether Chief 
Procurement Officer has 
been appointed in MOC 
as recommended by the 
Committee?  If not, 
reasons therefor. 
For eminent sanctioned under TOP Scheme the funds are 
directly transferred to the athlete for faster procurement 
to facilitate the athletes in procuring brands preferred by 
the athlete since they are primarily individual specific.  
Once procured, the athlete is required to submit bills and 
enter the item in the stock of the nearest SAI Centre.  
The need to appoint a Chief Procurement officer in/under 
the MOC ffor equipment sanctioned under TOP Scheme 

 
 
57  
is therefore not felt at present 
 (b) Kindly provide 
timeline for 
procurement of sports 
science equipment in 13 
NCOEs approved in 
52nd GB and also funds 
utilized for this along 
with details of 
equipment purchased 
The details of sports science equipment procured for 13 
NCOEs is provided at Annexure-III. 
5. Medical & Doping 
 (a) Kindly provide the 
timeline for completion of 
recruitment process of 
Doctors, Physiotherapists 
and Scientific staff  in 
NCOEs 
The details are provided at Annexure-I 
9. Financial Security for medal winning athletes and their coaches during and post their 
sports careers 
 (b) Whether any scheme 
has been evolved for 
granting financial aid to 
medal winning athletes 
during their period of 
unemployment,  as 
recommended by the 
Committee? Please 
provide details in this 
regard. 
There is no su ch scheme in the Department to provide 
stipend or any regular financial assistance during the 
period of unemployment of medal winners. 
 
However, the Department provides suitable financial 
assistance to sportspersons under the Pandit Deendayal 
Upadhyay National Welfare Fund for Sportspersons 
(PDUNWFS) scheme. Under  the scheme, assistance is 
provided to sportspersons as follows: 
-  To yester years sportspersons (medal winners) 
and their dependents now living in indigent 
circumstances to alleviate distress and also for 
their training, procurement of sports equipment, 
participation in national and international sports 
events, etc.; and 
To sportspersons injured during training depending on 
injury and also for their medical treatment. 
9. Budgetary Allocation 
 (a) Kindly furnish the 
details of the policy 
framed for supporting 
TOPS Development 
Group athletes for Paris 
2024 Games and by when 
it would be 
implemented? 
The new TOPS Policy shall take effect from 1 st 
September 2021 and is in the final stages of finalization. 

 
 
58  
Annexure – I 
 
 
DETAILS OF APPOINTMENT OF SPORTS MEDICINE & SPORTS 
SCIENCE 
(as on 3rd June 2021) 
 
S.N. Designation Sanctioned Strength 
as per 52nd& 54th 
GB & 
Monthly 
Remuneration 
Status of Appointment & Timeline 
1 Doctors Lead-19 
(1,00,000-1,50,000) 
Grade II-1 
(60,000-
80,000) 
The appointment process has been 
completed however only 10 doctors 
opted to join. 
2 Physiotherapist Grade II -39 
(Rs 60,000 to 80,000) 
The appointment process has been 
completed however only 54 
physiotherapists have opted to join. 
 
The appointment process has been 
completed however only 52 S &C Expert 
s have opted to join. 
 
The appointment process has been 
completed however only 22 
Anthropometrists have opted to join 
 
The appointment process has been 
completed however only 28 Exercise 
Physiologist have opted to join. 
 
 
 
Process has been completed and all the 
posts are filled. 
 
 
Process has been completed and all the 
posts are filled 
  Grade I – 48 
(Rs 40,000 to 60,000) 
3 S &C Expert Lead – 13 
(Rs 1,00,000 to 
1,50,000) 
  Grade II – 54 
(Rs 60,000 to 80,000) 
4 Anthropometris
t 
Grade II -12 
(Rs 60,000 to 80,000) 
  Grade I -13 
(Rs 40,000 to 60,000) 
5 Exercise 
Physiologist 
Grade III – 11 
( Rs 80,000 to 1,00,000) 
  Grade II -14 
(Rs 60,000 to 80,000) 
  Grade I -12 
(Rs 40,000 to 60,000) 
6 Biomechanist Lead -01 
(Rs 1,00,000 to 
1,50,000) 
  Grade II – 02 
(Rs 60,000 to 80,000) 
7 Psychologist Grade III-1 
(Rs 80,000to 1,00,000) 
Grade II-2 
(Rs 60,000 to 80,000) 
Grade I -1 
(Rs 40,000 to 60,000) 
8 Biochemist Grade II-02 
(Rs 60,000 to 80,000) 
Process has been completed and all the 
posts are filled 

 
 
59  
9 Nursing Asst Grade I-39 (25000/-) Under process. 
10 Lab tech 
for 
medical 
lab 
13 (25000/-)  
11 Masseur 78(35000/-)  
12 Pharmacist  
Grade I -13 (25000/-) 
The process has been put in abeyance due 
to 
COVID lockdown. 
13 Lab Tech 
for Non 
Medical 
Lab 
Grade-II-24 (35000/-)  
Out of 13 categories, the processes for 8 categories have been completed and 175 
experts have already been appointed out of 245 sanctioned experts. Wherever the 
vacancies exist due to less number of candidates, the process will be reinitiated after the 
Covid pandemic lockdown eases and activities at NCOEs resume. For rest five 
categories the process will also be completed as soon as the lockdown restrictions eases. 
The targeted timeline to complete all appointment process is by December 2021 subject 
to pandemic situation. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Annexure – II 
 
DETAILS OF FOREIGN COACHES/SUPPORT STAFF FOR THE F.Y.2020-21 (01.03.2020-31.05.2021) 
S. 
N. 
Discipline  
Event 
 
Name 
 
Designation 
Date of Joining and 
Date of Expiry of 
contract 
Remuneration 
(In Rupees) 
Place of 
Posting 
1 Athletics Javelin Mr. Uwe Hohn Coach 25.10.2017 to 
30.09.2024 
USD@8000 Patiala 
2 Athletics Javelin Dr. Klaus Coach 14.03.2019 to 
30.09.2022 
USD@6000 Patiala 
3 Athletics 400m & Relay Ms. Galina Coach 19.05.2017 to 
30.09.2024 
USD@10000 Patiala 
4 Athletics Race Walk Mr. Alexander Coach 22.03.2019 to 
30.09.2021 
USD@5445 Bengaluru 
5 Athletics 4x400m Relay Mr. Stashu K Coach 14.03.2019 to 
30.09.2021 
USD@5000 Patiala 
6 Athletics Support Staff Mr. Dimitri Support Staff 19.04.2017 to 
30.09.2022 
USD@3000 Bengaluru 
7 Athletics Support Staff Ms. Elmira Support Staff 19.04.2017 to 
30.09.2022 
USD@3000 Bengaluru 
8 Athletics Recovery 
Expert 
Mr. Andrei Support Staff 30.06.2019 to 
30.09.2024 
USD@8000 Patiala 
9 Athletics Support Staff Ms. Kinga Support Staff 5.03.2019 to 
30.09.2022 
USD@3000 Patiala 
10 Badminton Singles Coach Agus Dwi 
Santosa 
Coach 12.03.2020 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 8000 PGBA, 
Hyderabad 
11 Badminton Singles Coach Park Tae Sang Coach 13.08.2019 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 7000 PGBA, 
Hyderabad 
12 Badminton Doubles 
Coach 
Namrih Suroto Coach 16.08.2019 to 
30.009.2021 USD 4000 PGBA, 
Hyderabad 
13 Badminton Singles and 
Doubles Dwi Kristiawan Coach 03.03.2012 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 3000 PGBA, 
Hyderabad 

 
 
 
14 Badminton Singles and 
Doubles 
Muhammad 
Miftak Coach 14.03.2017 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 3000 PGBA, 
Hyderabad 
15 Badminton Singles and 
Doubles Eska Riffan Jaya Support Staff 15.02.2017 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 2500 PGBA, 
Hyderabad 
16 Badminton Singles and 
Doubles Ade Kurniawan Support Staff 16.08.2019 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 2200 PGBA, 
Hyderabad 
17 Badminton Singles and 
Doubles Heri Setiawan Support Staff 13.08.2019 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 3000 PGBA, 
Hyderabad 
18 Boxing Boxing Mr. Santiago 
Nieva 
Coach, (High 
Performance 
Director) 
08.06.2017 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 7000 Patiala 
19 Boxing Boxing Mr. Raffaele 
Bergamasco 
Coach, 08.07.2017 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 7000 IGSC, 
New Delhi 
 
 
20 
 
 
Boxing 
 
 
Boxing 
 
Mr. Daniel 
Scott 
Jefferson 
 
Supporting Staff 
(Strength & 
Conditioning 
Expert) 
01st August 2020 to 
Olympic Games 2021 
(August 2021) & 
extendable till Olympics 
2024 
 
 
USD 4500 
 
 
Patiala 
21 Hockey Hockey ROBIN 
ARKELL 
Scientific Advisor, Sr 
Men 
31.05.2017 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 5500 SAI, 
Bengaluru 
22 Hockey Hockey SJOERD 
MARIJNE Coach, Sr Women 
Team 
23.02.2017 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 9500 SAI, 
Bengaluru 
23 Hockey Hockey WAYNE 
LOMBARD Scientific Advisor, Sr 
women 
10.04.2017 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 5500 SAI, 
Bengaluru 
24 Hockey Hockey ERIK 
WONINK 
Coach, Jr Women 
Team 
23.02.2017 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 8500 SAI, 
Bengaluru 
 
25 Hockey Hockey GRAHAM 
REID 
Coach, Sr Men Team 18th April 2019 to 
30.09.2021 USD 13500 SAI, 
Bengaluru 

 
 
 
26 Hockey Hockey JOHANNA 
SCHOPMAN 
Analytical Coach, Sr 
Women 
Team 
17.01.2020 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 7000 SAI, 
Bengaluru 
27 Hockey Hockey Mr Gregg Clark Analytical Coach, Sr 
Men Team 
15.01.2021 to 
31.08.2021 
USD 8100 SAI, 
Bengaluru 
28 Shooting Rifle Mr. Smirnov 
Pavel 
Rifle Coach 01.09.2020 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 7500/- NCC 
29 Shooting Pistol Mr. Mikhailov 
Oleg Pistol Coach 01.09.2020 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 7500/- NCC 
30 Shooting Skeet Mr. Ennio Falco Skeet Coach Not yet Joined 
(30.09.2021) 
EURO 1000 
PER DAY NCC 
31 Wrestling Greco Roman Mr. Temo Coach feb,2019 to 30th sept, 
2021 USD 4000 SAI, Sonepat 
 
32 
 
Judo 
 
Judo 
 
Miyazaki Ren 
 
Coach 
21.02.2020 To 
31.01.2021 (contract 
ended on 31.10.2020) 
 
USD 5000 SAI 
NCOE 
Bhopal 
33 Swimmin 
g Diving Yoendis Salazar Coach 1st Sept 2020 to 31st 
August 2021 USD 3500 ASI, PUNE 
34 Table 
Tennis Table Tennis Yin Wei Coach Current Tenure - June 
2020 to June 2024 
USD 3500 
p.m. Kolkata 
35 Basketbal 
l Basketball Mr. Veselin 
Matic 
Head Men coach 13.05.2019 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 7000 Bangalore 
36 Basketbal 
l Basketball Mr. Zoran Visic Head Women Coach 08.07.2019 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 5000 Bangalore 
37 Football Football Mr. Igor Stimac (Head coach) 16.05.2019 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 13500 Delhi 
38 Football Football Mr. Luka 
Radman 
(Fitness/ strength 
& 
Conditioning 
coach) 
25.06.2019 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 6000 Delhi 
 
39 Yachting Yachting Mr. Tomasz 
Januszewski Coach 17.09.2019 to 
30.09.2021 
USD 8000 Mumbai 

 
 
 
 

 
 
File No.H-11013/5/2021-SP-
CDN 
 
Annexure – III 
Procurement of Sports Science Equipment 
Phase – I – Procurement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SN Name of 
Discipline 
No. of Items Remarks 
Proposed Procured Remaining 
1 Physiotherapy 12 12  
Nil 
 
2 Anthropometry 11 11 
3 Physiology      6       6 
4 Biochemistry      9      9 
5 Nutrition     1      1 
6 Strength & 
Conditioning 
50      26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 Remaining Items: 
 18 Items to be retendered as 
No responsive bid were 
received in First tender 
 06 Items are high -end items 
which are imported items to 
be utilized by our elite 
athletes. A tender was 
floated but could not be 
finalized due to non -
availability of manufactures 
in India. Global tender could 
not be floated for 
procurement value below 
200 crores as per revised 
guidelines. Matter has been 
sent to IFD for their advice. 
Currently, it is under 
examination of them. 
 

 
 
 
 
 Phase-II-Procurement 
SN Name of 
Discipline 
No. of Items Re
mar
ks 
Proposed Procured Remaining 
1. Psychology 8 0 8 These items are meant for 
2nd Phase procurement and 
are to be initiated after 
complete resumption of 
training at NCOEs which is 
stalled due to existing 
pandemic 
situation. 
2. Biomechanics 3 0 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 