Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December 9, 2013/Pausha 18, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT
(Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 27th November, 2013)
(Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 27th November, 2013)
REPORT NO. 
259
The National Institutes of Technology, Science 
Education and Research (Amendment) Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT
The National Institutes of Technology, Science
Education and Research (Amendment) Bill, 2013
(Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on  27 th November, 2013)
(Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 27th November, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December 9, 2013/Pausha 18, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A BBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—8
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 9—11
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 13—18
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 19 —32

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 31st August, 2013)
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
9. Shri Tarun Vijay
10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suresh Angadi
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Sivasami C.
15. Shrimati Helen Davidson
16. Dr. Charles Dias
17. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
18. Shri Virender Kashyap
19. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
20. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
21. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
22. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
23. Capt. Jai Naraian Prasad Nishad
24. Shri M.K. Raghavan
25. Shri K. Chandrashekar Rao
26. Shri M.I. Shanavas
27. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
28. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
29. Shri Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
30. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana
31. Shri Manicka Tagore
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and
Fifty Ninth Report of the Committee on the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education
and Research (Amendment) Bill, 2013 *
2. The National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research (Amendment)
Bill, 2013 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 4th March, 2013. In pursuance of Rule 270
relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha
in consultation with Speaker, Lok Sabha referred ** the Bill to the Committee on HRD on 17
th May,
2013 for examination and report.
3. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied on the following:
(i) Background Note on the Bill received from the Department of Higher Education;
(ii) Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the Department of Higher Education;
(iii) Presentation made and clarification given by the Secretary, Department of Higher
Education; and
(iv) Replies to questionnaire received from the Department of Higher Education.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in two sittings held on 1
st and 17 th October, 2013.
5. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 17 th October, 2013.
6. For facility of the reference, observations and recommendations of Committee have been
printed in bold letters at end of Report.
New Delhi; BIRENDER SINGH,
17th October, 2013 Chairman,
Kartika 25, 1935 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II Section 2 dated the 4 th March, 2013.
** Lok Sabha Secretariat Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 5307 dated the 17 th May, 2013.

ABBREVIATIONS
1. MHRD – Ministry of Human Resource Development
2. IIEST – I ndian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology
3. BESU – Bengal Engineering and Science University
4. NITSER – National Institute of Technology, Science Education and Research
5. REC – Regional Engineering College
(iv)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research (Amendment)
Bill, 2013 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 4 th March, 2013 and referred to the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development on the
17th May, 2013 for examination and report.
1.2 The National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research Act, 2007, is
proposed to be amended by the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 in order to upgrade the Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur,
West Bengal to Indian Institute of Engineering, Science and Technology, Shibpur, West Bengal.
1.3 The Ministry of Human Resource Development submitted that it constituted Anandakrishnan
Committee in 2005 to assess the potential of some selected institutions for their transformation to
high level technological ‘Institutes of National Importance’. This Committee in its report submitted
to the Ministry in February, 2006 recommended five institutes to become Indian Institute of
Engineering Science and Technology (IIEST) through an Act of Parliament. Bengal Engineering and
Science University, Shibpur (BESU) was one of the five recommended institutes. The UPA
Government through Union Cabinet meeting held on the 12 th October, 2010 approved in-principle
the proposal of taking over of Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur and converting
it to Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur as an ‘Institution of National
Importance’ by amending the ‘National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research
Act, 2007’ with an outlay of ` 592.20 crore over a period of five years. The Ministry vide their
letter dated the 28 th December, 2007 communicated to the Government of West Bengal that
the Government of India had in-principle decided to upgrade BESU, Shibpur to IIEST, Shibpur,
West Bengal. The Government of West Bengal supported the proposal of Government contained
in the Cabinet Note to repeal the West Bengal Act XIII of 2004 vide their letter dated the
2nd November, 2012. Subsequently, Cabinet Note was moved to seek the approval of the Cabinet
on the 30 th November, 2012 to introduce the Bill for incorporating BESU as an IIEST by amending
the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research (NITSER) Act, 2007.
1.4 Dwelling upon the prestigious background of the University, the Secretary, Department of
Higher Education in his presentation before the Committee submitted that the Bengal Engineering
and Science University, established in the year 1856 as ‘Civil Engineering College, Calcutta’ was
the second oldest engineering college of the country. First Degree Examination was held in 1864
by the College for the first time in Asia. Ph.D in Engineering was introduced way back in 1962.
The college was converted to a Deemed University in 1992. Tracing the background of the
proposed legislation, the Secretary informed the Committee that arising out of the recommendations
of the Committee of Experts under the Chairmanship of Prof. S.K. Joshi on upgradation of seven
institutions to the level of IIITs, a three-member Expert Committee headed by Prof. M.
Anandakrishnan was appointed to undertake an in-depth evaluation of the identified institutions. The
main objective of the Expert Committee was to assess the potential of these institutions to be
transformed into high level technological institutes of national importance, comparable to the status
of the IITs. The features of the conceptual model/formulated by the Expert Committee were that
it was an institute of national importance formed by an Act of Parliament. All IIESTs would
together constitute a new system of institutions in technical education, developed by transforming
promising existing technological institutions. Its governance system would be comparable to that of

2
the IITs, including a Common Council for all IIESTs. Its policies for admission of students and
appointment of faculty and staff would be analogous to those of the IITs.
1.5 In the year 2004, BESU was converted into a State University with its present name.
10 BE courses, 24 M.E., 04 M.Sc. and 01 MBA programmes are being offered by the University.
The University has 205 regular faculty and 34 on contract basis. The University had 1900 students
at the under-graduate level, 900 students at the post-graduate level and 250 students have registered
for Ph.D. Besides an Academic and Residential Complex of 121 acres, the University has a rich
centre library, an in-campus school and hospital and sports facilities including students’ recreation
centre. With the conversion of BESU into IIEST, it was expected to give a big boost to research
leading to enrolment of more students in Ph.D. Further, it was highlighted that the State University
was reeling under fund constraints which was likely to be addressed once it was converted into
an IIEST.
1.6 The Committee was also apprised that the Ministry had protracted correspondence with the
State Government which initially did not want to part away from this institution but eventually gave
its resolution allowing the repealing of the Act which gave BESU the status of a State University.
Another aspect which the State Government of West Bengal had reservation was the admission
process fixed by the State Government and students were selected through the JEE of the State
Government which was now proposed to be changed to JEE Main All India as a State University
was being converted to an all-India institution.
1.7 The Committee has been given to understand that the Department of Higher Education had
sought views on the Bill from the concerned Ministries/Departments and also State Government.
While the Department of Expenditure, Central Scientific and Industrial Research, Planning
Commission, Department of Technical Education, Government of West Bengal and Department of
Legal Affairs supported the proposal, no comments were received from the Ministry of Science and
Technology and Prime Minister’s Office. The Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice,
however, suggested that inclusion of word ‘engineering’ was apparently not needed in the existing
title ‘National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research’. The Department had
clarified that it had no objection to changing the existing title as suggested by the Legislative
Department.
1.8 The Committee is happy to note that the issue of conversion of the Bengal
Engineering and Science University to an Institution of National Importance has been
proposed based on consultations with the university authorities and faculty associations.
They have supported the proposed upgradation of BESU, Shibpur to an Institution of
National Importance. The Committee observes that it is for the first time that a State
University is proposed to be converted into an Institution of National Importance.
1.9 The Committee welcomes the proposed amendment Bill for upgrading the Bengal
Engineering and Science University into an Indian Institute of Engineering Science and
Technology for integrating under-graduate, post-graduate education and research in
Engineering and Science under the same umbrella and have international standards for
producing quality manpower for the field of engineering and science education. This exercise
will facilitate the offering of high degree of flexibility and generous interdisciplinary options
with scope for joint degree programmes amongst departments. It would also result in
generating scientifically and technologically capable manpower to lead in India’s strategic
sectors like Space, Energy, Advanced material, Defence Research, ULSI, Sensors, Water and
Environment etc. Such a move is likely to have a positive impact on the functioning of the
University with the support of the Ministry of HRD leading to better infrastructure and
quality of education.

3
II. The Committee makes recommendations/observations on the following provisions of the
Bill:–
Clause 3
2.1 Clause 3 relates to amendment to Section 3 pertaining to ‘Definitions’ of the Principal Act.
Sub-clause (iii) states that in clauses (g), (k) and (m), for the words “the First Schedule and the
Second Schedule” wherever they occur, the words “the First Schedule, the Second Schedule and
the Third Schedule” shall be substituted.
2.2 The Committee notes that clause (m) gives the definition of the word ‘Society’. The Bengal
Engineering and Science University, Shibpur is not sponsored by any Society but is a University
established and incorporated by an Act of the State Legislature. The Committee would like to point
out that other institutions mentioned in the First and the Second Schedule of the Principal Act may
have been promoted by different Societies but BESU cannot be accommodated in any of the said
Schedules and any reference to the Third Schedule in the definition of the word ‘Society’ would
not be appropriate.
2.3 The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the following definition of the word
‘University’ may be inserted after clause (n) of Section 3 of the Principal Act.
“University” means any University established and incorporated by or under any State or
Central Act and mentioned in column (2) of the Third Schedule.
2.4 Clause 3(iii) may read as under:–
(iii) in clauses (g) and (k) for the words “the First Schedule and the Second Schedule”
wherever they occur, the words “the First Schedule, the Second Schedule and the Third
Schedule” shall be substituted.
Clause 5
2.5 The proposed amendment Bill seeks to insert new section 5A relating to ‘Effect of
incorporation of Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur’ to clause 5 of the principal
Act with a view to incorporate the Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur within the
principal Act. Clause 5A (d) entails protection of the terms, conditions, rights and privileges as to
pensions, leave gratuity, provident fund of the employees (Director, officers and other employees),
once BESU is upgraded to an IIEST.
2.6 The Committee has been given to understand that the Legislative Department had sought
clarification in respect of freezing the service benefits accrued to the employees of BESU to an
amount equivalent to three months’ remuneration under the proposed legislation in view of different
permanent employees having different period and different service benefits be treated alike in the
light of guarantee of equality and equal opportunity in matters of employment under Article 14 and
Article 16 of the Constitution. In response to this, the Department clarified that freezing the service
benefits accrued to employees of the BESU to an amount equivalent to three months’ remuneration
under the proposed legislation were in consonance with the provisions contained under Section 5
of the NIT Act, 2007, as well as under Section 30 of the first Statutes of NITs. It was also
pointed out that the clause on freezing the service benefit accruing to the employees of NIT to
an amount equivalent to 3 months’ remuneration did not get challenged and no representation in
this regard were received, as the transition was widely accepted.
2.7 The Committee would like to mention that transition of RECs and Indian Institutes
of Science Education and Research and transition of a State University like BESU into an

4
Institution of National Importance are entirely two different issues, keeping in view their
very diverse structural set-up. The Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that, while
incorporating the Bengal Engineering and Science University under the NITSER Act, 2007,
utmost care will have to be taken to safeguard the interests of the employees, officers
and faculty of the University. Even though it has been mentioned in the proviso of Section
5A (d) that the tenure, remuneration, terms and conditions of service of such persons
shall not be altered to their disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central
Government, the Committee feels that the transitional phase of upgradation of BESU into
an IIEST should not in any way adversely affect all those involved in the running of
BESU.
2.8 The Committee has been given to understand that tenure, remuneration, terms and
conditions of service of employees would remain same until employment is terminated or until such
tenure, remuneration, terms and conditions are altered by the Statutes or Ordinances. Comparing
the proposed amendment Bill to the parent NIT Act, 2007, the Committee finds that the proviso
to Clause 5(d) of the parent Act does not find mention in the present Bill. Proviso to clause 5 (d)
of the principal Act reads as below:–
‘Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment
may be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of contract with the
employee or, if no provision is made therin in this behalf, on payment to him by the
Institute, of compensation equivalent to three month’ s remuneration in the case of
permanent employee and one month’ s remuneration in the case of the other employee’.
Apparently, the above provision in the parent Act protects the interests of employees
in accordance with the terms of employment/contract made. The Committee is, therefore,
of the view that this proviso should be incorporated in a suitable manner in the proposed
Section 5A.
Clauses 7 and 8
2.9 Clauses 7 and 8 of the proposed Bill deal with the amendment of Section 30 and omission
of Section 30 A. Section 30 (i) in the NITSER Act, 2007 dealt with the establishment of a central
body to be called the Council for all Institutes specified in column (3) of the First Schedule.
Section 30A dealt with the establishment of a central body to be called the Council for all Institutes
specified in column (3) of the Second schedule.
2.10 The Committee notes that the group of institutions under the first and second Schedule to
the NITSER Act, 2007, are 30 NITs and 5 IISERs respectively. NITs are primarily engineering and
technology institutions with a different academic curricula and domain expertise whereas IISERs
have five year integrated post-graduate sciences curriculum with focus on research in basic
sciences. Hence, the issues to be deliberated at the Council would be quite diverse for each group
of institutions placed in separate schedules of the Act. It was apprehended that having a single
Council would defeat the purpose of the Council.
2.11 On a specific query of the Committee regarding having a single Council to handle the affairs
of 30 NITs and 5 IISERs, the Department submitted that a single Council would become unwieldy
due to sheer high number of members since the total number of institutes would now be more than
36. It was, therefore, suggested that separate Councils for each set of institutions as per each
schedule in the Act could only serve the purpose of the Council system.
2.12 The Committee is in full agreement with the justification given by the Department
of Higher Education. The Committee is of the view that the three sets of institutions i.e.

5
NITs, IISERs and IIESTs are three different types of institutions having different curricula,
domain expertise and focus. Having a single central body for all the three is likely to be
unwieldy and could lead to compromising on its various functions due to the heavy work
load. It would be difficult for a single Council to regulate as many as 36 institutions and
the number of institutions is likely to increase in the near future. In the interest of the
different sets of institutions which are the epitome of quality education in sciences,
engineering and technology, the Committee feels that having a separate Council for each
set of institutions would be more suitable and feasible for efficient administration and
overall supervision of these institutions. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the
Department to review Clauses 7 and 8 and bring out amendments to have separate Councils
for NITs, IISERs and IIESTs.
III. IMPORTANT ISSUES/CONCERNS
During the deliberations of the Committee, certain very crucial areas of concern although
not directly related with the Bill, were raised which the Committee thinks need to be emphasized
upon.
ISSUE OF RESERV ATION FOR STUDENTS OF WEST BENGAL IN IIEST, SHIBPUR
3.1 The most important issue which was raised during the deliberations of the Committee was
the reservation of seats for the students of West Bengal in the upgraded IIEST, Shibpur. Many of
the members of the Committee pointed out that the Bengal Engineering and Science University
Shibpur, being a State University, represented the ethos of the State of West Bengal. Keeping in
sync with this, they suggested that fifty per cent of the seats should be reserved for the students
of the State. This was considered important for protecting the interests of students residing in the
State of West Bengal. Reserving the seats for the students of that State in the IIEST, Shibpur
would form the crux of operative federalism. It was also pointed out that since a State University
was being upgraded into an IIEST, it should be considered as a special case with the State being
the main stakeholder and playing a very crucial role in its functioning so far. Nobody could deny
the fact that rights of majority of students of the State would be curtailed and adversely affected
in case reservation of seats not being made for them under the new set-up.
3.2 The Department of Higher Education clarified that there would be no provision for having
fifty per cent reservations in an IIEST. According to them, IIEST would be one of the top
institutions of the country leading into strategic sectors like space, energy, defence, new
materials science etc. Therefore, it was considered appropriate to have an admission process on
pan-India basis on real merit to achieve the objective of setting up of IIESTs. The Committee
would, however, like to point out that the fact that in the present case, a State University was
proposed to be converted into an Institution of National Importance could not be ignored. There
was already a precedent under the same Act by having the provision for reserving fifty per cent
seats for local students in NITs. Regional Engineering Colleges were converted into National
Institutes of Technology with structural changes in governance but full central funding. The
interests of local students in erstwhile RECs were properly addressed by continuing the existing
admission policy.
3.3 Keeping in view the fact that a State University was being converted into an institution of
national importance, the Committee sought the views of the State Government of West Bengal on
the Bill. While conveying their approval, the State Government drew the attention of the Committee
to Ministry’s letter No. 11-5/2006-TS dated 27
th/28th December, 2007 informing the State
Government that admission to the Institute would be through the All India Engineering Entrance
Examination (AIEEE) and the admission policy would be similar to that of the NITs, i.e.

6
“50% of the students to be admitted from the State of West Bengal and the remaining 50% to be
admitted from outside the State”. In its response to the Committee, the State Government reiterated
its preference to the above-quoted position with regard to the policy of admission in the proposed
IIEST.
3.4 The Committee fails to understand the reasons for the Central Government
withdrawing from its earlier categorical commitment on an issue having very far-reaching
ramifications so far as the students of the State are concerned. The Committee strongly
feels that like in the case of NITs, where special relaxation was given by having an MoU
between State Governments and MHRD entailing reservation of seats for the local students,
the same has to be extended to IIEST, Shibpur also. It has all the more reason to do so
as a very old and well-established engineering college turned into State University in the
year 2004 catering to the educational needs of the students of West Bengal was being up-
graded to an IIEST. Such an upgradation should not in any way turn out to be detrimental
for the interests of the student community of West Bengal. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to address this area of concern so as to safeguard the
interests of the students in the statutes as done in the case of NITs. The Committee would
like to point out that the proposed legislation is being brought forward for converting
another institution run by the State Government catering to the needs of State Students
into an Institution of National Importance. The Committee is, therefore of the view that
reservation for students of West Bengal to the extent possible may be retained in IIEST,
Shibpur. Similarly, the interest of students belonging to SC/ST/OBC may also be protected
as per the Government of India norms.
ISSUE OF V ACANT POSITIONS OF FACULTY AND NON-TEACHING STAFF
3.5 The Committee has been informed that there were many vacant positions with respect to
faculty as well as non-teaching staff in BESU at present. As many as 69 faculty positions were
vacant and there were 150 vacant non-teaching staff positions. Further, there were 34 faculty and
40 non teaching staff working on contract basis. The reason for vacant positions was delay in
framing of new regulations by the State Government. The Committee was, however, given to
understand that the process of selection of faculty members was going on.
3.6 The Committee is of the view that shortage of faculty was a very serious area of
concern which needed to be addressed in the right spirit, particularly, when a State
University is being upgraded into an institution of national importance. The Committee
believes that there would be requirement for more posts, both faculty and non-faculty in
view of the up-gradation of the university in the near future. The Committee would
appreciate if preliminary exercise in this regard is initiated at the earliest.
ISSUE OF TRANSITION OF UPGRADATION OF BESU INTO AN IIEST
3.7 The Committee has been given to understand that there had been by and large smooth
transition of 20 NITs and 5 IISERs by way of their conversion from Institutes run as Societies
under the Societies Registration Act to Institutions of National Importance under the erstwhile NIT
Act, 2007. The bodies governing the Institutes and other authorities of the Institute continued to
function until the fresh Governing Bodies were constituted as per the provisions of the Act.
However, there were problems of different positions in the Institutes for technical and other
non-faculty positions in terms of nomenclature and service conditions.
3.8 The Committee would like to point out that in the case of BESU, a State University
was being upgraded to an IIEST and it meant major transition from being a State entity into

7
a national one. The Committee apprehends similar problems in the transition with respect
to position, its nomenclature and benefits etc. Further, the Committee notes that since
BESU is a State University, it had many authorities constituted under it like the Executive
Council, Board of Studies, Court and other bodies of the University. The Committee feels
that it would not be easy to transform the State University into an IIEST. It, therefore,
suggests that in order to have a smooth transition phase, regulations and statutes should
be formulated under the new Act as soon as possible so as to leave no room for confusion
and delay in the efficient functioning of an IIEST.
EXPERT COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS
3.9 The Committee takes the opportunity to highlight the important recommendations of the
Anandakrishnan Committee which are as follows:–
– The five IIESTs should function as a consortium with an IIEST Council which will
be an Advisory Body for major common policy decisions.
– Each IIEST shall have a Board of Governors chaired by an eminent academic/engineer/
scientist/industrialist. The Board of Governors shall be the highest decision making
authority of the Institute. The Visitor shall appoint the Chairman of the Board.
– Each IIEST will establish two to three major R&D Centers of Excellence in frontier
areas of science and technology based on expert assessments of the available talent,
emerging demands and overall institutional growth pattern.
– While transforming their existing programmes, care be taken to rationalize them to
eliminate proliferation of degree nomenclature for programmes of similar nature.
– The faculty strength should eventually be determined on the basis of a student-teacher
ratio of about 8:1.
– Specific action-oriented strategies should be evolved by these Institutions to realize the
goals of industry-institute interaction. Each IIEST should articulate its goals in
accordance with its strength and faculty expertise, design programmes and prepare an
action plan to achieve them and sustain them.
– Curricula should be designed to respond to new trends of technology requirements by
changing existing courses and introducing new ones in a timely and purposeful manner.
– The University on transformation as an IIEST should offer 5-year integrated dual
degrees B.Tech-M.Tech programmes and also 5-year integrated M.Sc programmes.
This should be rationalized in a manner to offer greater flexibility for interdisciplinary
programmes with good scope for research output.
3.10 The Committee would like to emphasize on the fact that the recommendations/
suggestions of the Anandakrishnan Committee regarding the pattern of governance,
academic system, infrastructure etc. need to be taken into account in the right spirit once
the Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur is upgraded to IIEST. The
Committee is of the view that since BESU, Shibpur is the first University to be upgraded
to an IIEST, it would be setting an example for the other similar IIESTs which would be
established in the near future. It is imperative that the quality of education, research and
infrastructure be upgraded and maintained so that the institutes of national importance
justify their designated objective. In order to do so, the Committee is of the firm view that
the recommendations/suggestions of the Anandakrishnan Committee be implemented at the
earliest. The Committee also takes the opportunity to emphasize that with the upgradation

8
of Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur as an Institution of National
Importance it should be ensured that maximum placements are made available for the
students passing out from this institution.
4. The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
5. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the
amendments/additions suggested by it.
6. The Committee would like the Ministry to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill.

9
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
I. INTRODUCTION
The Committee is happy to note that the issue of conversion of the Bengal
Engineering and Science University to an Institution of National Importance has been
proposed based on consultations with the university authorities and faculty associations.
They have supported the proposed upgradation of BESU, Shibpur to an Institution of
National Importance. The Committee observes that it is for the first time that a State
University is proposed to be converted into an Institution of National Importance.
(Para 1.8)
The Committee welcomes the proposed amendment Bill for upgrading the Bengal
Engineering and Science University into an Indian Institute of Engineering Science and
Technology for integrating under-graduate, post-graduate education and research in
Engineering and Science under the same umbrella and have international standards for
producing quality manpower for the field of engineering and science education. This exercise
will facilitate the offering of high degree of flexibility and generous interdisciplinary options
with scope for joint degree programmes amongst departments. It would also result in
generating scientifically and technologically capable manpower to lead in India’s strategic
sectors like Space, Energy, Advanced material, Defence Research, ULSI, Sensors, Water and
Environment etc. Such a move is likely to have a positive impact on the functioning of the
University with the support of the Ministry of HRD leading to better infrastructure and
quality of education. (Para 1.9)
II. The Committee makes recommendations/observations on the following provisions of the Bill:–
Clause 3
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the following definition of the word
‘University’ may be inserted after clause (n) of Section 3 of the Principal Act.
“University” means any University established and incorporated by or under any
State or Central Act and mentioned in column (2) of the Third Schedule. (Para 2.3)
Clause 3(iii) may read as under:–
(iii) in clauses (g) and (k) for the words “the First Schedule and the Second Schedule”
wherever they occur, the words “the First Schedule, the Second Schedule and the Third
Schedule” shall be substituted. (Para 2.4)
Clause 5
The Committee would like to mention that transition of RECs and Indian Institutes
of Science Education and Research and transition of a State University like BESU into an
Institution of National Importance are entirely two different issues, keeping in view their
very diverse structural set-up. The Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that, while
incorporating the Bengal Engineering and Science University under the NITSER Act, 2007,
utmost care will have to be taken to safeguard the interests of the employees, officers
9

10
and faculty of the University. Even though it has been mentioned in the proviso of Section
5A (d) that the tenure, remuneration, terms and conditions of service of such persons
shall not be altered to their disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central
Government, the Committee feels that the transitional phase of upgradation of BESU into
an IIEST should not in any way adversely affect all those involved in the running of
BESU. (Para 2.7)
A provision in the NIT Act, 2007, protects the interests of employees in accordance
with the terms of employment/contract made. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that
this proviso should be incorporated in a suitable manner in the proposed Section 5A.
(Para 2.8)
Clauses 7 and 8
The Committee is in full agreement with the justification given by the Department
of Higher Education. The Committee is of the view that the three sets of institutions i.e.
NITs, IISERs and IIESTs are three different types of institutions having different curricula,
domain expertise and focus. Having a single central body for all the three is likely to be
unwieldy and could lead to compromising on its various functions due to the heavy work
load. It would be difficult for a single Council to regulate as many as 36 institutions and
the number of institutions is likely to increase in the near future. In the interest of the
different sets of institutions which are the epitome of quality education in sciences,
engineering and technology, the Committee feels that having a separate Council for each
set of institutions would be more suitable and feasible for efficient administration and
overall supervision of these institutions. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the
Department to review Clauses 7 and 8 and bring out amendments to have separate Councils
for NITs, IISERs and IIESTs. (Para 2.12)
ISSUE OF RESERV ATION FOR STUDENTS OF WEST BENGAL IN IIEST, SHIBPUR
The Committee fails to understand the reasons for the Central Government
withdrawing from its earlier categorical commitment on an issue having very far-reaching
ramifications so far as the students of the State are concerned. The Committee strongly
feels that like in the case of NITs, where special relaxation was given by having an MoU
between State Governments and MHRD entailing reservation of seats for the local students,
the same has to be extended to IIEST, Shibpur also. It has all the more reason to do so
as a very old and well-established engineering college turned into State University in the
year 2004 catering to the educational needs of the students of West Bengal was being
upgraded to an IIEST. Such an upgradation should not in any way turn out to be
detrimental for the interests of the student community of West Bengal. The Committee,
therefore, recommends to the Department to address this area of concern so as to
safeguard the interests of the students in the statutes as done in the case of NITs. The
Committee would like to point out that the proposed legislation is being brought forward for
converting another institution run by the State Government catering to the needs of State
Students into an Institution of National Importance. The Committee is, therefore of the
view that reservation for students of West Bengal to the extent possible may be retained
in IIEST, Shibpur. Similarly, the interest of students belonging to SC/ST/OBC may also be
protected as per the Government of India norms. (Para 3.4)
ISSUE OF V ACANT POSITIONS OF FACULTY AND NON-TEACHING STAFF
The Committee is of the view that shortage of faculty was a very serious area of

11
concern which needed to be addressed in the right spirit, particularly, when a State
University is being  upgraded into an institution of national importance. The Committee
believes that there would be requirement for more posts, both faculty and non-faculty in
view of the upgradation of the university in the near future. The Committee would
appreciate if preliminary exercise in this regard is initiated at the earliest. (Para 3.6)
ISSUE OF TRANSITION OF UPGRADATION OF BESU INTO AN IIEST
The Committee would like to point out that in the case of BESU, a State University
was being upgraded to an IIEST and it meant major transition from being a State entity into
a national one. The Committee apprehends similar problems in the transition with respect
to position, its nomenclature and benefits etc. Further, the Committee notes that since
BESU is a State University, it had many authorities constituted under it like the Executive
Council, Board of Studies, Court and other bodies of the University. The Committee feels
that it would not be easy to transform the State University into an IIEST. It, therefore,
suggests that in order to have a smooth transition phase, regulations and statutes should
be formulated under the new Act as soon as possible so as to leave no room for confusion
and delay in the efficient functioning of an IIEST. (Para 3.8)
The Committee would like to emphasize on the fact that the recommendations/
suggestions of the Anandakrishnan Committee regarding the pattern of governance,
academic system, infrastructure etc. need to be taken into account in the right spirit once
the Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur is upgraded to IIEST. The
Committee is of the view that since BESU, Shibpur is the first University to be upgraded
to an IIEST, it would be setting an example for the other similar IIESTs which would be
established in the near future. It is imperative that the quality of education, research and
infrastructure be upgraded and maintained so that the institutes of national importance
justify their designated objective. In order to do so, the Committee is of the firm view that
the recommendations/suggestions of the Anandakrishnan Committee be implemented at the
earliest. The Committee also takes the opportunity to emphasize that with the upgradation
of Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur as an Institution of National
Importance it should be ensured that maximum placements are made available for the
students passing out from this institution. (Para 3.10)

MINUTES

II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the
1st October, 2013 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Derek O’ Brien
6. Shri Baishnab Parida
7. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
8. Shri Tarun Vijay
LOK SABHA
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
11. Shrimati Helen Davidson
12. Dr. Charles Dias
13. Shri Virender Kashyap
14. Shri Mahadeo Singh Khandela
15. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
16. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
17. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
18. Shri M.K. Raghavan
19. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
20. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
21. Ms. Ramya Divya Spandana
22. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
15

16
The National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
I. Department of Higher Education
(i) Shri Ashok Thakur, Secretary
(ii) Ms. Amita Sharma, Additional Secretary
(iii) Shri Alok Mishra, Director
(iv) Shri Rajesh Singh, Director
II. Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur, West Bengal
(i) Prof. Ajoy Kumar Ray, Vice Chancellor, IISET (BESU), Shibpur
(ii) Dr. Indraneel Manna, Director, IIT, Kanpur
(iii) Dr. Gautam Biswas, Director, CMERI-Durgapur
(iv) Prof. Amitabh Ghosh, Professor, BESU
(v) Dr. Baldev Raj, Former Director, NIT-Puducherry
(vi) Prof. P.P Chattopadhyay, Dean, BESU
(vii) Prof. Prabir Pal, In-Charge, BESU
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the Secretary, Department of Higher Education on the National
Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and Indian
Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013. *** ***.
3. * * *
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary and other officials of
Department of Higher Education on the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and
Research (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013
followed by presentations on both the Bills. The members raised some queries on both the Bills
which were replied to by the Secretary. The Committee decided to forward questionnaire on both
the Bills to the Department of Higher Education for their written comments.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 2.10 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on the 10 th October, 2013.
*** Relates to other matter.

17
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the
17th October, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Birender Singh — Chairman
2. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
6. Shri Baishnab Parida
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Suresh Angadi
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Shrimati Helen Davidson
10. Dr. Charles Dias
11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
12. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
13. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
14. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the draft 259
th Report on the National Institutes of Technology,
Science Education and Research (Amendment) Bill, 2013.
3. The Committee considered the draft 259 th Report on the National Institutes of Technology,
Science Education and Research (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and adopted the same with some minor
changes. The Committee decided to present the Report to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha as
the Parliament was not in session and accordingly authorized the Chairman of the Committee to
approach the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in this regard.
17

18
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.25. P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

19
ANNEXURES

AS I NTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
ON 26 TH N OVEMBER , 2012
Bill No. 30 of 2013
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY , SCIENCE
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the National Institutes of Technology, Science
Education and Research Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Institutes of
Technology, Science Education and Research (Second Amendment)
Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the National Institutes of Technology,
Science Education and Research Act, 2007 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), for the words “the First Schedule and the
Second Schedule”, the words “the First Schedule, the Second
Schedule and the Third Schedule” shall be substituted.
21
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.29 of 2007.

22
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause ( c), for the words “the First Schedule and
the Second Schedule” at both the places where they occur,
the words “the First Schedule, the Second Schedule and the
Third Schedule” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( d), the words, brackets, figures and letter
“or sub-section ( 1) of section 30A” shall be omitted;
(iii) in clauses ( g), ( k) and ( m), for the words “the
First Schedule and the Second Schedule” wherever they
occur, the words “the First Schedule, the Second Schedule
and the Third Schedule” shall be substituted.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “the First
Schedule and the Second Schedule”, the words “the First
Schedule, the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule” shall
be substituted;
(b) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“( 1A) The Bengal Engineering and Science
University, Shibpur shall be deemed to have been
incorporated under this Act, and on such incorporation,
be called the Indian Institute of Engineering Science and
Technology, Shibpur.”.
5. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“5A. On and from the commencement of the National
Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research
(Amendment) Act, 2013—
(a) any reference to the Bengal Engineering and
Science University, Shibpur in any law, contract or
other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the
Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology,
Shibpur;
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or
belonging to the Bengal Engineering and Science
University, Shibpur, shall vest in the Indian Institute of
Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur;
(c) all the rights and liabilities of the Bengal
Engineering and Science University, Shibpur shall be the
rights and liabilities of the Indian Institute of
Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur;
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 4.
Insertion of
new sub-
section ( 1A).
Insertion of
new section
5A.
Effect of
incorporation
of Bengal
Engineering
and Science
University,
Shibpur.

23
(d) every person (including Director, officers and
other employees) who is employed in the Bengal
Engineering and Science University, Shibpur,
immediately before the date of commencement of the
National Institutes of Technology, Science Education
and Research (Amendment) Act, 2013, shall, on and
after such commencement, become an employee of the
Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology,
Shibpur and shall hold his office or service by the same
tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same
terms and conditions and with the same rights and
privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund
and other matters as he would have held the same on
the date of the commencement of the National
Institutes of Technology, Science Education and
Research (Amendment) Act, 2013, as if the said Act
had not been brought into force and shall continue to
do so until his employment is terminated or until such
tenure, remuneration, terms and conditions are altered
by the Statutes or Ordinances:
Provided that the tenure, remuneration, terms and
conditions of service of such person shall not be altered
to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the
Central Government:
Provided further that any reference to the
Chancellor and the Vice-Chancellor of the Bengal
Engineering and Science University, Shibpur in any law,
instrument or other document made before the
commencement of the said Act, shall be construed as a
reference to the Visitor and the Director, respectively,
of the Indian Institute of Engineering Science and
Technology, Shibpur;
(e) Vice-Chancellor of the Bengal Engineering and
Science University, Shibpur shall be the Director of the
Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology,
Shibpur till such date the Central Government appoints
new Director for the Indian Institute of Engineering
Science and Technology, Shibpur;
(f) any examination conducted by the Bengal
Engineering and Science University, Shibpur
immediately before the commencement of the National
Institutes of Technology, Science Education and
Research (Amendment) Act, 2013 for admission or
award of degrees shall be valid examination and shall be
deemed to have been conducted by the Indian Institute
of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur.”.

24
6. In section 11A of the principal Act,—
(a) in the marginal heading for the words “Second
Schedule”, the words “Second Schedule and Third Schedule”
shall be substituted;
(b) in the opening portion, for the words “the Second
Schedule”, the words “the Second Schedule and the Third
Schedule” shall be substituted.
7. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after
the words “the First Schedule”, the words “the Second Schedule
and the Third Schedule” shall be inserted.
8. Section 30A of the principal Act shall be omitted.
9. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the
words, brackets, letters and figures “and clause (j) of sub-section
(2) of section 30A” shall be omitted.
10. In section 37 of the principal Act, after clause ( d), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(e) the court, the Academic Council and the Executive
Council of the Bengal Engineering and Science University,
Shibpur performing functions as such immediately before the
commencement of the National Institutes of Technology,
Science Education and Research (Amendment) Act, 2013 shall
continue to function until a Board is constituted for the Indian
Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur
under this Act, but on and after the constitution of a Board
under this Act, the members of the court, the Academic
Council and the Executive Council, shall cease to hold office;
(f) the authorities of the Bengal Engineering and Science
University, Shibpur, by whatever names so called, performing
functions as such immediately before the commencement of
the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and
Research (Amendment) Act, 2013 shall continue to function
until a new Authority is appointed or constituted for performing
the same functions under the said Act, but on and after such
appointment or constitution, the authorities performing the
functions under the Bengal Engineering and Science University,
Shibpur Act, 2004 or any Statutes or Ordinances made
thereunder shall cease to hold office;
(g) every Senate or any other authorities in the names
so called constituted in relation to every Institute before the
commencement of the National Institutes of Technology,
Science Education and Research (Amendment) Act, 2013 shall
be deemed to be the Senate constituted under the said Act
until a new Senate is constituted under this Act for that
Amendment of
section 11A.
Amendment
of section 30.
Omission of
section 30A.
Amendment of
section 31.
Amendment of
section 37.
XIII of 2004.

25
Institute, but on the constitution of a new Senate under this
Act, the members of the Senate holding office before such
constitution shall cease to hold office;
(h) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made
and brought in force under the National Institutes of
Technology, Science Education and Research (Amendment)
Act, 2013, the Statutes, Ordinances and rules made for the
Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur
immediately before the commencement of the said Act shall
continue to apply to the Indian Institute of Engineering
Science and Technology, Shibpur in so far as they are not
inconsistent with the provisions of the said Act.”.
11. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of the National Institutes of Technology, Science
Education and Research (Amendment) Act, 2013, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as
appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of
two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
12. After the Second Schedule of the principal Act, the
following Schedule shall be inserted, namely:—
“THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See sections 3( g), (k)( m), 4( 1) and 11A]
LIST OF INDIAN INSTITUTES OF ENGINEERING SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY
Sl. University or Society Corresponding Institute
No.
(1) (2) (3)
Bengal Engineering and Indian Institute of Engineering
Science University, Shibpur. Science and Technology, Shibpur.”.
13. (1) The Bengal Engineering and Science University,
Shibpur Act, 2004 is hereby repealed.
(2) The provisions of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall
apply to the repeal of the said Act as if the Act referred to in sub-
section (1) were a Central Act.
(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action
taken under the repealed Act, shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of that Act, as amended
by this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Amendment of
Schedule.
Repeal and
savings.
XIII of 2004.
10 of 1897.

26
26
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007 came into
force on the 15th August, 2007. This Act was amended in 2012 and
named as the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education
and Research (Amendment) Act, 2012. The Ministry of Human
Resources Development in December, 2007 communicated to
the State Government of West Bengal that the Government of
India decided in principle to upgrade Bengal Engineering and
Science University—Shibpur, West Bengal to Indian Institute of
Engineering Science and Technology—Shibpur, West Bengal. For
the aforesaid purposes, it has been felt necessary to bring the
Bengal Engineering and Science University—Shibpur, West Bengal
under the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education
and Research Act, 2007 by an amending legislation, namely, the
National Institute of Technology, Science Education and Research
(Amendment) Bill, 2013.
2. The National Institutes of Technology, Science Education
and Research (Amendment) Bill, 2013 inter alia, provides for:—
(i) conversion of the Bengal Engineering and Science
University—Shibpur, West Bengal as Indian Institute of
Engineering Science and Technology—Shibpur, West Bengal,
under the National Institutes of Technology, Science
Education and Research Act, 2007;
(ii) insertion of a sub-section (1A) in section 4 of the
National Institues of Technology, Science Education and
Research Act, 2007 for deemed incorporation of the Indian
Institute of Engineering Science and Technology—Shibpur,
West Bengal specified in the proposed Third Schedule;
(iii) omission of section 30A of the Act so as to
establish a common Council for all the Institutes listed in the
First Schedule, the Second Schedule and the proposed Third
Schedule; and
(iv) to repeal the Bengal Engineering and Science
University, Shibpur, West Bengal Act, 2004.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU.
The 18th December, 2012.

27
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 33-6/2012-TS.III, dated 19th February, 2013
from Shri M.M. Pallam Raju, Minister of Human Resource
Development to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of
the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and
Research (Amendment) Bill, 2013, recommends the introduction and
consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha under clauses (1) and (3) of
article 117 of the Constitution of India.
The 15 May, 2012.

28
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill proposes to declare the Indian Institute of
Engineering Science and Technology— Shibpur, West Bengal as an
Institution of national importance under the provisions of National
Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research
Act, 2007. The substantial assistance of the Central Government
would be provided to the Indian Institute of Engineering Science and
Technology—Shibpur, West Bengal under Plan Heads by the
Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development.
2. For the current financial year, an amount of one crore
rupees has been allocated for setting up of the Indian Institute of
Engineering Science and Technology—Shibpur, West Bengal. An
outlay of 592.20 crore of rupees [300.30 crore of rupees as non-
recurring towards capital expenditure and 291.90 crore of rupees as
recurring expenditure] over a period of five years with the
stipulation that sanction of funds would be on incremental basis
after assessing the requirement as part of the annual budgetary
exercise.
28

29
29
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE N ATIONAL I NSTITUTES OF T ECHNOLOGY A CT, 2007
(29 OF 2007)
**** *
2. Whereas the objects of the institutions mentioned in the
First Schedule and the Second Schedule are such as to make them
Institutions of national importance, it is hereby declared that each
such Institute is an Institution of national importance.
3. (1)* * * * *
(c) “Corresponding Institute”, in relation to a society
mentioned in column ( 2) of the First Schedule and the Second
Schedule, means the Institute as specified in column ( 3) of
the First Schedule and the Second Schedule;
(d) “Council” means the Council established under sub-
section ( 1) of section 30 or sub-section ( 1) of section 30A,
as the case may be;
**** *
(g) “Institute” means any of the Institutions mentioned
in column ( 3) of the First Schedule and the Second Schedule;
**** *
(k) “Schedule” means the First Schedule and the
Second Schedule annexed to the Act;
**** *
(m) “Society” means any of the societies registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and mentioned in
column ( 2) of the First Schedule and the Second Schedule;
**** *
CHAPTER II
T
HE I NSTITUTES
4. (1) Each of the Institutes mentioned in column ( 3) of the
First Schedule and the Second Schedule shall be a body corporate
having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall, by its
name, sue and be sued.
**** *
Declaration of
certain
Institutions as
Institutions of
national
importance.
Definitions.
21 of 1860.
Incorporation
of Institutes.

30
11A. The Board of every Institute mentioned in the
Second Schedule shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
**** *
CHAPTER III
T
HE C OUNCIL
30. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf, there shall be established
for all the Institutes specified in column ( 3) of the First Schedule,
a central body to be called the Council.
**** *
30A.  ( 1) With effect from such date as the Central
Government may, by  notification, specify in this behalf, there shall
be established for all the Institutes specified in column 3 of the
Second Schedule, a central body to be called the Council.
(2) The Council under sub-section ( 1) shall consist of the
following members, namely:—
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government having administrative
control of the technical education, ex-officio, Chairman;
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge
of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government
having administrative control of the technical education,
ex-officio, Vice-Chairman;
(c) the Chairperson of every Board of the Institutes
mentioned in the Second Schedule, ex-officio;
(d) the Director of every Institute mentioned in the
Second Schedule, ex-officio ;
(e) the Chairman, University Grants Commission,
ex-officio;
(f) the Director General, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research, ex-officio ;
(g) four Secretaries to the Government of India to
represent the Ministries or Departments of the Central
Government dealing with bio-technology, atomic energy,
information technology and space, ex-officio;
(h) the Chairman, Defence Research and Development
Organisation, ex-officio ;
(i) not less than three, but not more than five persons
to be nominated by the Visitor, at least one of whom shall be
Board of
Institutes of
Second
Schedule.
Establishment
of Council.
Establishment
of Council for
the Institutes
of Second
Schedule.

31
a woman, having special knowledge or practical experience in
respect of education, industry, science or technology;
(j) three members of Parliament, of whom two shall be
chosen by the House of the People and one by the Council of
States:
Provided that the office of member of the Council shall
not disqualify its holder for being chosen as or for being, a
member of either House of Parliament;
(k) two Secretaries to the State Government, from
amongst the Ministries or Departments of that Government
dealing with technical education where the Institute is located,
ex-officio;
(l) financial Advisor, dealing with the Human Resource
Development Ministry or Departments of that Government
dealing with technical education where the Institute is located,
ex-officio; and
(m) one officer not below the rank of the Joint
Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government having administrative
control of the scientific or technical education, ex-officio,
Member-Secretary.
31. (1)* * * * *
(2) The term of office of a member elected under clause ( j)
of sub-section ( 2) of section 30 and clause ( j) of sub-section 2 of
section 30A shall expire as soon as he ceases to be member of the
House, which elected him.
**** *
37. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act—
**** *
Term of office
of, vacancies
among, and
allowances
payable to
members of
Council.
Transitional
provisions.

32
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the National Institute of Technology, Science Education and Research
Act, 2007.
(Shri M.M. Pallam Raju, Minister of Human Resource Development)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.