189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED EIGHTY-NINETH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN
THE HUNDRED SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT ON
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2006-2007 (DEMAND NO. 57)
OF THE
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 1ST MARCH, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 1ST MARCH, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2007/ PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
 
1.                  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     
2.                  PREFACE
3.                  REPORT
CHAPTER I      Recommendations/Observations which have been           accepted by the Government.
CHAPTER II       Recommendations/Observationswhichthe committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government's reply
CHAPTER III             Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee
CHAPTER IV            Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited
4.                  OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE.
5.                   MINUTES
6.                  *ANNEXURES .
________________________________________________________
*Will be appended at the printing stage.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2006-07)
      Shri Janardan Dwivedi            --            Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
1
        Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
2        Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3        Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
4        Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
5        Shri Uday Pratap Singh
6        Shrimati Brinda Karat
7        Shri S. Anbalagan
8        Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
9        Shri Ali Anwar
LOK SABHA
10    Shri Ashok Argal
11    Shri Basudeb Barman
12    Shri Harishchandra Chavan

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
13    Shri Harisinh Chavda
14    Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
15    ^Shri R.L. Jalappa
16    Shri Ramswaroop Koli
17    Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
18    ##Shri Manjunath Kunnur
19    Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
20    Smt. Archana Nayak
21    Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
22    Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
23    #Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
24    Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
25    Shri Chengara Surendran
26    Dr. Meinya Thokchom
27    Shri K. Virupakshappa
28    #Dr. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
29    *Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
30    @Shri Rahul Gandhi
31    @Shri Ram Lakhan Singh
^ Ceased to be a member of the committee w.e.f .28.11.2006
## Ceased to be a member of the committee w.e.f. 31.8.2006
# Ceased to be a member of the committee w.e.f. 25.09.2006
* nominated w.e.f. 25.09.2006
@ nominated w.e.f. 10.10.2006
(i)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji, B., Committee Officer
 (ii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Hundred Eighty-nineth
Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on Demands
for Grants (Demand No. 57) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development for the year 2006-07.
 
2.
                  The Hundred Seventy-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22 nd May, 2006. Replies of the
Government to the recommendations/observations contained in the Report, were considered by the Committee at its meeting
held on the 25th January, 2007.
 
3.
                  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 25th January, 2007.
NEW DELHI;                    JANARDAN DWIVEDI
January 25, 2007,Chairman,
Magha 5, 1928(Saka)Committee on Development
  Department-related Parliamentary Standing  Human
Resource
(iii)
REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its
One Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No.57) of the Ministry of Women and Child
Development, for the year 2006-2007.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the
Report.  They have been categorized as follows:
(i)
                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
1.5, 3.10, 3.20, 9.3
(Chapter I) Total – 4
(ii)                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
2.4, 2.5, 3.15, 3.24, 4.2, 4.4, 5.2, 5.6, 5.8, 5.10, 6.9, 8.1, 8.4, 10.5, 10.7, 11.4, 12.3, 15.3, 16.1, 17.5, 17.6, 17.10,
18.4, 18.5, 18.6
             (Chapter II)  Total – 25
(iii)               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
2.7, 2.9, 2.10, 2.12, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.9, 3.13, 3.18, 3.22, 3.23, 4.5, 5.3, 6.2, 6.3, 6.5, 6.6, 6.8, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 8.2, 9.2,
13.4, 14.5, 14.6, 15.5, 16.5
 (Chapter-III)  Total - 29
(iv)
              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:
 (Chapter – IV) Total - Nil
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
I.            Introduction
Recommendations/Observations
1.5       The Committee appreciates the Government’s move to bring all the child related issues under one Ministry and desires
that all out efforts should be made by the Ministry in implementing these schemes in an effective way.
Action Taken   
The observations of the Committee have been noted for guidance/compliance.
III.            Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme
Recommendations/Observations
3.10            Keeping in view the special needs in NE States, the Central Government sanctioned construction of 4800 AWCs at
the cost of Rs. 60 crore in 2001-2002 and 7600 AWCs at a cost of Rs. 95 crore in 2002-2003. Another 7600 AWCs at a cost of
Rs. 95 crore have been sanctioned in 2004-2005. Further it has been decided to undertake construction of AWCs @ Rs. 1.75
lakh per center. Funds would be allocated out of savings available in the NE component of plan budget of the Ministry. The
Committee hopes that in NE States all the AWCs would be provided with pucca buildings.
 
Action Taken
 
Government of India has approved construction of all AWCs sanctioned upto 2004-05 in North Eastern region. The
first instalment of funds for construction of remaining AWCs (17174) to the States who have finished constructing the earlier
ones has been released in 2005-06.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.20     The Committee is happy to note the decision of convergence between ICDS scheme and SSA & DPEP. The success of
ICDS programme depends purely on effective supervision, monitoring, co-ordination and convergence with other
Departments and also with better and effective participation of local bodies and community. Convergence of various
components is a good idea. The Committee recommends that the revised guidelines, if need be, may be issued without any
delay and the State Governments and implementing agencies be pursued for smooth implementation of the converged scheme.
Keeping in view the expansion of the ICDS scheme and its proposed convergence with other programmes, the Committee
strongly feels that an effective monitoring mechanism at all levels need to be put in place at the earliest. Only then, services
envisaged under ICDS scheme can reach the intended beneficiaries. The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps
taken in this direction.
Action Taken
Instructions regarding convergence of services/facilities under different programmes, issued from time to time, have
been reiterated on 22.2.2005 and States/UTs requested to activate/set-up Coordination Committees at State, District/Block and
Village level to ensure proper delivery of services at Anganwadi level by concerned line functionaries of various Departments.
Instructions have also been issued on 18.2.2005 with regard to strengthening the synergy between ICDS and  Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan (SSA). Appreciating the need to strengthen, monitoring and supervision it is proposed to set up three tier monitoring 
viz.          (i) State Level - State Monitoring Unit comprising, State Secretary (WCD), State Secretary (Health) & Selected
Institution(s); (ii) District & Below – Existing monitoring System to be strengthened. District will report to State Monitoring

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
Unit; (iii) State monitoring Unit to report Central Monitoring Unit. The proposal is under consideration by the Ministry.
IX.            Support for Training and Employment Programme for Women(STEP)
Recommendations/Observations
9.3       The Ministry has cited the inadequate number of staff as one of the reasons for underutilization of funds. Lack of staff
for a national level programmes aimed to benefit thousands of women in traditional sectors is hardly a convincing argument.
The Committee also notes that the technical team is taking undue time in clearing the projects. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should initiate assessment of the scheme so that procedural bottlenecks can be removed and scheme can be
implemented effectively. 
Action Taken
Views of the August committee regarding the no. of staff has been noted down and it will be complied with in letter
and spirit.  Earnest efforts are also being made to explore the avenues to ensure that less possible time is taken by the
Technical Departments to clear the projects and also to facilitate removal of the procedural bottlenecks, if any.  The entire
scheme is being evaluated presently. 
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
II.            Budgetary Allocation
Recommendations/Observations
2.4       Out of the total plan allocation for the Ministry, maximum funds are earmarked for the child welfare schemes whereas
the women welfare schemes are getting the benefit of a very small proportion. However, one prominent feature being noticed
by the Committee year after year is that there has been optimum utilisation of Plan funds under the child welfare sector in
spite of steady increase in the allocation.  In contrast, both allocation and utilization position in respect of women related
schemes shows a declining trend as indicated below:-
Rs. in crores
 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 (upto
3.3.06)
2006-07
Women’s
welfare
Scheme
Allo.          Exp.
202.50   115.14
Allo.          Exp.
174.03   151.90
Allo.          Exp.
132.27     78.45
Allo.          Exp.
121.48         --
Allo. – Allocation;   Exp. - Expenditure
2.5       The Committee strongly feels that women welfare related schemes need to be reviewed as a whole to analyze the
reasons for this trend of utilization of funds. Possible reasons can be overlapping of some of these schemes, lack of awareness
in the targetted beneficiaries, role of implementing agencies, specially NGOs etc. The Committee would appreciate if such an
exercise is initiated by the Ministry at the earliest.
Action Taken 
It is true that the allocation has been declining over the years in respect of women welfare schemes but the major
reason for this is not non-performance of schemes. The decline in allocation in 2004-05 as compared to 2003-04 is because of
a decision to transfer Balika Samriddhi Yojana to the States and hence only a token provision is being made for this scheme
from 2004-05. Again in 2005-06, the decline is due to closure of Swa-Shakti Project in June 2005.  The allocation for women
welfare schemes in 2006-07 is Rs.131.48 crore (not Rs. 121.48 crore as shown para 2.4 of the report) which is comparable
with the provision for 2005-06 at Rs.132.27 crore. However, the Ministry has already started looking into the schemes from
the point of view of merging overlapping schemes in the 11
th Plan. CSWB is also examining its schemes to revamp them in
the 11th Plan.
III.            Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme
Recommendations/Observations
3.15     The Committee is of the considered opinion that the large number of responsibilities entrusted with the Anganwadi
Workers (AWWs) will seriously affect the primary work of the Anganwadi Centres for which they were mainly appointed.
With the burden of large number of additional duties the Anganwadi Workers can do justice neither to AWCs nor to the
additional responsibilities. The Committee notes that the Central Government provides an honorarium of Rs. 1000 p.m and Rs.
500 p.m to an AWW and AWH respectively. This is quite meager an amount compared to the burden of responsibilities
entrusted on them. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the honorarium paid to these two important functionaries of
AWCs may be suitably increased. A hike in their remuneration would help in increasing their motivation for better results.
Resource constraints should not come in the way of such justified increase.
Action Taken
The Anganwadi Workers in some States are being assigned work relating to Schemes/Programmes other  than the
ICDS. The States have been requested to ensure that AWWs are not drawn into every programme diluting their core functions
under the ICDS Scheme. The Government has been conscious of the significant services being rendered by these grass roots
workers. The honoraria of AWWs and AWHs was last increased from April, 2002.   Further increase of honoraria will be
considered at the time of formulation of proposals for the   XI Plan.

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
Recommendations/Observations
3.24     The Committee understands that a study on ‘Three Decades of ICDS: An Appraisal’ has been conducted in all the
States/UTs. Draft Report was likely to be completed by the end of March 2006. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the findings of this study as and when finalised and reported.
Action Taken
National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development conducted an Appraisal of ICDS taking sample of
150 ICDS projects consisting of 92 rural, 24 urban and 34 tribal from all the 35 States and UTs.  Data was collected from
41,842 respondents spread over 750 Anganwadi Centres from 150 districts of the country.  Respondents included parents of
beneficiaries, pregnant and nursing mothers, women between 15-45 years, Members of PRIs, school teachers, ICDS
functionaries namely CDPOs, Supervisors, Medical Officers,  LHVs/ANMs and Anganwadi workers. The Study attempted to
compare the performance of ICDS over the years by comparing the results with earlier study conducted by NIPCCD in 1992. 
Salient findings are at Annexure-V. The Institute has already submitted a draft report of the Study “Three Decades of ICDS –
An Appraisal” to Ministry of Women & Child Development in the first week of April, 2006.    The draft report has been sent
to four national level institutions for a peer review.  On receipt of the comments of the reviewers, the report will be finalized
and submitted to MWCD.
IV.            Training Programme under ICDS (UDISHA)
Recommendations/Observations
4.2       The plan allocation in BE 2005-2006 was Rs. 40.00 crore and raised to Rs. 82.50 crore due to extension of project
from 1.7.2005 to 31.3.2006. The actual expenditure incurred upto 3.3.2006 was Rs. 62.77 crore (Statement VI-BE, RE and
Actuals for 2005-06). The Committee would, however, like to point out that on a specific query, the Ministry, while giving the
State wise allocation of funds under UDISHA during 2005-06, has informed that as on 16.3.06, there was an expenditure of
Rs. 60.99 crores.   The Committee would like to know the actual expenditure incurred under the scheme.
Action Taken
In ICDS Training Programme, in addition to State Governments/UT Administrations, funds are also released to by
National Institute of Public Cooperation & Child Development (NIPCCD), Food and Nutrition Board (FNB), New Delhi for
the training programmes conducted by them.  Some expenditure is also incurred on training of officials of State and Central
Governments abroad.  As on 3-3-2006, an amount of Rs.59.80 crore was released to the States/UTs and 2.97 crore to other
institutions/organisations making a total of Rs.62.77 crore.  As on 16-3-2006, an amount of Rs.60.99 crore was released to the
States/UTs only and 2.97 crore to other training institutions/organisations.  As on 31-3-2006 a total amount of Rs.64.11 crore
was released under the programme (Rs.61.09 crore to States/UTs and Rs.3.02 crore to other institutions/organisations).
Recommendations/Observations
4.4       There is no denying the fact that judicious utilization of the allocation alone would yield desired results. The Ministry
can better monitor the utilization by way of getting UCs and monthly progress reports from all the States/UTs and other
agencies on quarterly basis. The Committee strongly feels that regular interaction with the States facing constraints will help
in achieving the desired results.
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The system of submission of Quarterly Progress Reports and
regular review at the Central level by organizing Review Meetings with Secretaries and Project Directors are already in place. 
Besides, regular visits to the States are made by the officials of the Ministry as well as with the World Bank Missions.
V. Rajiv Gandhi National Creche Scheme for the Children of Working Mothers
Recommendations/Observations
5.2       The allocation for BE 2006-2007 has been enhanced to Rs. 81.00 crore for setting up of proposed crèches by the end of
Tenth Plan across the country and for meeting expenditure required on enhanced norms.  Against an allocation of Rs. 31.50
crore in 2005-2006 Rs. 28.50 crore were utilized. The Committee would, however, like to point out that uptil 31
st December,
2005, utilization figures stood  at Rs. 10.03 crores.   However, thereafter, in the last quarter of the year, Rs. 18.47 crore were
released.   The Committee is not happy with this uneven spread of fund allocation.   Besides, the Committee  is also
constrained  to observe that allocation meant for NE states has remained underutilized during the last few years, with nil
expenditure been reported during 2004-05 and 2005-06. The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for non-utilisation of
funds in NE region.
Action Taken
During the financial years 2004-05 and 2005-06 there was budget provision of Rs. 44 Crores (Rs.30.00 Crore Plan and
Rs. 14.00 Crore Non Plan) and Rs. 44.50 Crores (Rs. 31.50 Crore Plan and Rs. 13.00 Crore Non Plan) respectively.  Against
this there was an expenditure of   Rs. 20.29 Crore during the year 2004-05 and Rs. 43.14 Crore during the year 2005-06.  The
fund under the scheme is released to the Central Social Welfare Board and two National level Voluntary Organizations i.e.
Indian Council for Child Welfare and Bhartiya Adim Jati Sevak Sangh.  During the previous years fund was released to these
organizations on bi annually basis and normally IInd installment of grant delayed due to non receipt of utilization certificate
and audited statement of accounts from these organizations.  The funds released during the year 2004-05 and 2005-06 include
funds for the Creches being run by these organizations in the North-East Region.  However, as reported by these organizations
an amount of Rs. 234.42 lakhs and Rs. 339.48 lakhs was utilized during 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively for running crèches

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
in North East States.  The reason for under utilization of funds is non-receipt of sufficient number of deserving proposal for
the North East especially from the States of Sikkim and Meghalaya.
Recommendations/Observations
5.6       The Committee is satisfied with the steps taken to strengthen the monitoring of scheme, but has its reservations about
the actual implementation aspect. It is surprising that the scheme has started functioning but consultations with State
Governments are yet to take place. The Committee recommends that a time schedule may be prepared urgently in consultation
with State Governments and implementing agencies for implementing its various aspects of the scheme. The aspect of
utilization of funds also needs to be addressed properly.
Action Taken
Baring a few states, consultations with the States/Women Study Centres of the Universities and State Women
Development Corporations have been held and MoU signed with them. Funds have been released for monitoring of the
Creches.  It is expected to start receiving monitoring reports from the monitoring agencies soon.
Recommendations/Observations
5.8       The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that  2514 creches which were earlier provided grants are
not given further grants under the New Scheme. The monitoring process need to be strengthened and responsibility fixed for
any delay.
Action Taken
The Crèches sanctioned under erstwhile National Creche Fund (NCF) have been transferred to the Central Social
Welfare Board for further funding till the completion of five years of their inception.  The Board has been specifically
instructed not to release fund to any organization who has completed five years of receiving funds under the NCF scheme. 
The monitoring system of the crèches has been laid down under the scheme to ensure proper monitoring of the crèches
through independent monitoring agencies.  Time schedule for submitting monitoring report by the implementing agencies has
also been laid down in the MoU signed with the monitoring agency.
Recommendations/Observations
5.10     The Committee recommends that the training module should be finalised in a time frame and a suitable plan of action
devised so that the targets of the training are achieved.
 
Action Taken
For Creche workers training 10 days training module has been finalized and it is expected that the training would
commence soon before the end of financial year 2006-07.
VI.            CONDENSED COURSES FOR WOMEN EDUCATION
 Recommendations/Observations
6.9       The Committee recommends that strict monitoring is required to keep check on the unspent balances. It seems that
either the implementing agencies do not have the capacity to utilize the allocated funds or there are inherent flaws in the
scheme which should be removed. The Committee may be apprised of the specific steps taken by the Ministry for utilization
of unspent balances lying with the State Governments.  The Committee recommends that funds may be allocated only for
viable projects/schemes.
Action Taken
As regards unspent balance lying with various State Boards, the CSWB have issued guidelines to State Boards
indicating the time framework for release of funds to voluntary organizations. The funds are being released to State Boards
keeping the target of 25 beneficiaries for each course. However, at the time of settlement of accounts of voluntary
organizations the releasable amount is worked out on the basis of actual number of beneficiaries enrolled for the courses. The
State Boards have been directed to ensure that funds are placed timely at the disposal of voluntary organizations for
implementation of the scheme.
In addition to above, most of the courses under the scheme are of two years duration. Funds are to be placed at the disposal of
voluntary organization in instalments, according to the progress of the course. Thus, in many cases, the funds released to State
Boards are being carried forward to the next financial year. As release of funds from Govt. to CSWB and from CSWB to State
Boards and from State Boards to voluntary organizations is a time consuming process, it is desirable to make available
adequate funds with the State Boards so that implementation of scheme is not hampered due to non-availability of funds with
voluntary organizations. Guidelines issued to State Boards indicating framework is enclosed at Annexure-VII.
VIII.            Assistance for Construction/Expansion of Hostel Buildings for Working Women with Day Care Centres
for Children
Recommendations/Observations
8.1       This scheme envisages provision of safe and affordable accommodation to working women including women being
trained for employment and also the girl students studying in post-school professional courses. The expenditure alongwith
allocation for the last three years are:
                                                                                    (Rs. in crore)
 BE RE Actual
2003-2004 9.00 4.50 4.66

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
2004-2005 9.00 6.20 4.73
2005-2006 6.00 4.50 2.15
 
       The Physical Performance was as under:
 
Year Target (No. of new hostels) Achievement (No. of
new hostels)
Target (Capacity –
No. of women)
Achieve-ment
(Capacity– No. of
women
2002-03 25 21 2500 2533
2003-04 25 13 2500 1188
2004-05 25 3 2500 535
2005-06 25 2 2500 116
The Committee finds that both the financial and physical performance under the scheme have shown declining trend
over the years. The utilization has been below the target.   It seems that there is no activity under this scheme in the NE region 
as there was an expenditure of only Rs.9 lakhs against an allocation of Rs.1.00 crore in 2004-05 and nil expenditure  has been
reported in 2005-06 as on 3.3.2006. The Committee is not aware whether any exercise has been initiated so far to make an
assessment about the unsatisfactory performance of this scheme  and take remedial measures.   If not, done so far, the
Committee feels that this is the right time to initiate the same.
Action Taken
The Ministry has initiated action to revamp the scheme in 11
th Plan. A committee has been set up for the purpose
under the chairpersonship of Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development.
Recommendations/Observations
8.4       The Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry should not finance such projects or scheme, wherein it has
no control over its implementation. In the present scheme, the Committee feels the accountability is lacking and control is
missing. Implementation Agencies should not have the sole discretion to select construction agencies.   In any case, projects
need to be handled by Government agencies. The Committee would also like to point out that there is an increasing need for
setting up more Hostels. If need be, norms for opening of Hostels can be reviewed and revised. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the scheme needs to be revamped and started afresh.
Action Taken
The Ministry has initiated action to revamp the scheme in 11
th Plan. A committee has been set up for the purpose
under the chairpersonship of Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development
X.            Swawlamban
Recommendations/Observations
10.5     The Committee finds that as many as 1988 Utilization Certificates (UCs) are pending with the implementation
agencies spread over in different States with the maximum number of UCs being in Andhra Pradesh (321), Uttar Pradesh
(206), J & K (180) and M.P. (148).    The Committee is surprised to note that even Central Social Welfare Board has to
account for 173 Utilization Certificates.
Action Taken
            The Ministry is making vigorous efforts to liquidate the pending Utilisation Certificates(UCs) in collaboration with the
State Women Development Corporations(WDCs).  As per our records, only 1484 UCs are pending as of date under the
Swawlamban Scheme.  The main problem in liquidation of UCs is that some of them pertain to the year 1985-1986 and
onwards. Original files in some cases are not traceable.  Even then, the Ministry has been writing to the State
Governments/WDCs continuously to make efforts to obtain UCs and Audited Accounts from the organisations/ Institutions
concerned and furnish the same to this Ministry for further necessary action.  It is expected that this Ministry would be in a
position to liquidate substantial number of UCs during the year 2006-2007 as well.
 
Central Board has submitted all the utilisation certificates under its various programmes for the year 2005-06.  Few
UCs under Swavlamban programme are pending with Central Board.  Necessary action is being taken on them on priority. 
Recommendations/Observations
10.7     The Committee in its 160
th Report had expressed its concern that transfer of the schemes not performing well to the
States cannot be considered a wise decision.  The Committee is of the view that perhaps no efforts were made by the Ministry
to sensitize the State/UTs before the transfer of the scheme.   As per the Performance Budget (2005-06) Rs. 2.00 crore have
been provided under the scheme for 2006-07 also. The Committee fails to comprehend the reason for allocating fund for 2006-
07 when the scheme stands transferred to the States from 1.4.2006.  The Committee would like the Department to clear the air
of confusion about its committed liabilities as well as the mechanism concerning flow of funds under the scheme.
Action Taken
            The decision to transfer the Swawlamban Scheme to the States was taken in consultation with the Planning
Commission with a view to having an effective implementation and monitoring of the Swawlamban projects.  This was in

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
view of a proposal from Planning Commission to consider transfer of some schemes to the States. Once the formal approval of
Planning Commission was obtained all States at the level of Chief Secretaries were informed of the decision,. They were
requested to make provision in the State Plan Budget from April, 2005.
            As regards the allocation of Rs.2.00 crores for the Swawlamban Scheme in the Ministry’s budget for the year 2006-
2007, it is stated that the Planning Commission while conveying their approval for the transfer of the scheme to the States,
inter-alia, observed that GOI would liquidate its committed liabilities on the ongoing projects/activities under the scheme.  The
State Governments/WDCs were accordingly requested to furnish all pending proposals for release of balance funds due to the
NGOs/ Institutions, to this Ministry on priority.  Though a number of proposals were furnished by the State
Governments/WDCs to this Ministry during 2005-2006 and the funds due were released to the NGOs/ Institutions by this
Ministry in all eligible cases, the  State Governments/WDCs could not furnish all proposals to this Ministry for release of
funds due.  In order to ensure that the NGOs/ Institutions do not suffer in the implementation of projects on account of funds, a
small provision of Rs.2.00 crores has been kept in the budget of the Ministry for the year 2006-2007.  A Statement indicating
the committed liabilities liquidated during the years 2005-2006 and 2006-2007 (till 25.9.2006) is enclosed as Annexure-IX.
The State Governments/WDCs are yet to submit some proposals for release of second instalment to this Ministry.  We
have again requested them to expedite all such proposals by 31.12.2006 to enable this Ministry release the funds due to the
NGOs/ Institutions and this fulfill our committed liability.    
XI.            Central Social Welfare Board (CSWB)
Recommendations/Observations
11.4            The Committee observes that CSWB is entrusted with the implementation of large number of schemes.
The assignments have been spread to such an extent that CSWB has failed to devise proper monitoring mechanism for such
schemes. CSWB is a central organisation directly under Ministry’s control and it is very surprising to the Committee that the
Ministry has not made any effort to strengthen the network of CSWB.   It would be a better situation, according to the
Committee, if CSWB is asked to focus its attention on onespecific assignment for a particular period of time. Declining Girl
child ratio is a problem which is assuming alarming proportion nation- wide. The Committee notes some initiative have been
taken by a few States for improving the lot of girl child. But some sort of scheme totally dedicated for development of girl
child needs to be initiated at national level. The Committee feels that CSWB can play a major role by focusing on this social
problem.             Nationwide campaign by CSWB in co-ordination with all States Boards and other concerned agencies will
have a lasting impact on the thinking of public at large. The issue of huge unspent balances with the different agencies of
CSWB would be addressed in case its mandate is specifically defined. The Committee would, therefore, appreciate if the
Ministry identifies some focused subjects for implementation by CSWB.
Action Taken
Regarding the monitoring of the programmes being implemented by the voluntary organisations, it is informed that in
all the fresh cases, pre-funding appraisal is obtained before consideration of sanction of grant. Continuation grant to the
voluntary organisations is considered on receipt of Inspection Reports of the field machinery. 
Monitoring of the programmes is being done by the field officers deputed in each State Board.  The officers of Central
Board and State Board members also visit the organisations on regular intervals.
Monitoring is also done by Central Board at desk level by inviting progress reports from the aided organisations and
their examination in the office of Central Board.
Besides above, in order to have an independent view on the functioning of VOs implementing programmes, Central
Board has initiated action on the setting up of Task Force by setting up a state-wise committee having experts from
Department of Social Works and eminent social workers in its pilot project.  At present, Task Force is functioning in the States
of Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh.  The constitution of Task Force is in process in the States of Bihar, U.P., Madhya
Pradesh, Assam and Tamilnadu.
In order to strengthen the network of field machinery, Central Board has submitted proposal to the MWCD. 
Regarding declining Girl Child ratio Central Board has taken various steps during all these years.  The year of 2003-
2004 was dedicated as “Manavi Sanrakshan Abhiyan”,  Various activities such as holding of torch rallies, human chains,
debate, painting, poetry competitions in  the schools, organising seminar, workshops etc. were conducted through State Social
Welfare Boards and involving VOs to create mass awareness on the evils of this problem.
Under Awareness Generation Programme, issue related to gender sensitization has been included in the syllabus and
awareness is created on regular basis to counter the growing trend of female foeticide.
Central Board has also launched nationwide campaign on female foeticide during the year 2006.  Series of meets are
being held at State Level involving the voluntary organisations to create awareness in the masses.  So far meet has been held
in the States of Punjab, Haryana and Andhra Pradesh.   The Board proposes to hold such meets in the States of Rajasthan,
Delhi and Karnataka in near future.  Proposals are also being obtained from other States.
In the 11
th Prospective Plan, Central Board is in process of formulating projects for the survival, protection and development
of Girl Child.
XII      Short Stay Homes(SSHs)
Recommendations/Observations
12.3     The Committee observes that a number of Short Stay Homes had to be discontinued due to bad performance.  10

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
organizations spread over in different States have been issued show cause notices.  This confirms Committee’s apprehension
about the shortcomings of a scheme which is meant for the welfare of the down-trodden.   The Committee strongly feels that
the Government  needs to play a more pro-active role in co-ordination with the State Governments so that the scheme is
strengthened. Scheme may therefore be evaluated and revamped.
Action Taken
Action is underway to evaluate the progress of Swadhar, Short Stay Homes and Women’s Helplines. The Scheme will
be revamped on the basis of findings of the evaluation.
XV.      New Schemes
Scheme for Rescue of Victims of Trafficking
Recommendations/Observations
15.3     The Committee observes that allocation of Rs. 3.00 crore for this scheme was made in 2004-05 which was reduced to
Rs. 30 lakhs in 2005-06.   Allocation in 2006-07 stands at Rs.45 lakhs.  The Committee is not happy with the undue delay in
launching of this scheme. The scheme needs more publicity and proper implementation. Since the scheme is to be
implemented through NGOs, the Ministry has to be very careful while releasing funds. Monitoring of the scheme is to be
strictly followed. The publicity should focus on protection and awareness-raising among parents and guardians.
Action Taken
The SFC Note for the scheme for Rescue, Rehabilitation and Reintegration of Trafficked Women and Children in
source, destination and traditional areas has been circulated to concerned Ministries for their views/comments and the same is
being processed and it is likely to be launched in 2007-08. The major components include preventive aspects, including
awareness generation programmes in source areas and rescue, rehabilitation, repatriation and reintegration of victims of
trafficking. Enabling mechanism for monitoring the scheme is already an integral part of the SFC proposal.
XVI            Prevention of Sexual Harassment at Work Place
Recommendations/Observations
16.1     The Government of India constituted a Central Committee under the Chairpersonship of the Secretary, Ministry of
Women and Child Development to monitor the implementation of the Supreme Court’s Guidelines for prevention of Sexual
Harassment of Women at Workplace. The Committee in its Meeting held on 29.10.2002 recommended that Awareness needs
to be given on this issue and this task had been assigned to National Commission for Women (NCW) and Central Social
Welfare Board alongwith Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. The National Commission for Women has taken up
sexual harassment of women at work place as one of the focal issues in the realm of promotion of gender equality and
women's empowerment.  The Commission had widely circulated the Visakha Judgement for compliance along with a code of
conduct for workplace formulated by the NCW. The Committee is not aware of the activities/initiatives undertaken by the
CSWB and Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to create awareness on the SC Guidelines. This has become all the more
important in view of increasing incidents of sexual harassment in BPOs and other private institutions.
Action Taken
The Central Social Welfare Board (CSWB) has already issued instructions to all the State Social Welfare Boards to
form Complaint Committee as per the guidelines of the Supreme Court judgement and to create awareness on the issue
through the NGOs. The Board also encourage discussion on the topics in the Awareness Generation Programmes, which is an
important Programme implemented throughout the country by the CSWB. During 2004-05, 30 seconds video spot on Sexual
Harassment at Workplace was telecast repeatedly from DD-I and 18 regional channels in between Hindi Samachar/English
News, prime time serial and tea time film. 13 episodes on the subject were broadcast from AIR and Vividh Bharati in Hindi,
English and Regional Languages under the Ministry’s 15-minute duration weekly programme `Akash Hamara Hai’.
Advertisements were also published in prominent Hindi, English and regional languages news papers and in prominent
magazines during 2004-05.
XVII    Nutrition
Recommendations/Observations
17.5     The Committee notes that the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) provides training to the Anganwadi functionaries.
However the Committee notices huge gap between the target and achievement especially in case of training of grass-root level
functionaries. The Committee wonders how the Ministry can take a casual approach to the gap reflected and let on increase in
the number of malnourished children.
Action Taken
The field infrastructure of FNB comprising of 43 Community  Food and Nutrition  Extension Units (CFNEUs) located
in 29  States/UTs are providing 5-day orientation training to the senior field officers like CDPOs and Instructors of Anganwadi
Training Centres on Nutrition and Health Education.  These Master Trainers are then expected to impart two-day orientation
training to Anganwadi Workers, women volunteers from the community on infant and young child nutrition, nutrition and
health education and management of malnourished children. The basic pre-service job training and refresher training for
Anganwadi functionaries is provided by the Anganwadi Training Centres.  The National Institute of Public Cooperation and
Child Development (NIPCCD), which is an apex body for training of ICDS functionaries, is the overall incharge of training of
different level functionaries under ICDS.  The huge gap in the targets and achievements under training of anganwadi workers
relates to the basic training of Anganwadi Workers.

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
Recommendations/Observations
17.6     The Committee’s attention is drawn by the media reports appearing on regular basis about large number of deaths of
children due to malnourishment in the tribal belts of different parts of the country. Such incidents shows the non existence of
Government machinery in those areas which can effectively cater to the nutrition requirement of the poor and deprived
sections of the Society. The Committee recommends that it is the bounden duty of the Government to ensure that not a single
child is dying due to malnourishment especially in view of the facilities being provided through AWCs  under ICDS. The
Committee strongly feels that the FNB needs to train maximum number of functionaries of AWCs so as to sensitize them
about the preventive measures to be taken in malnutrition cases of children and mothers. The Committee would appreciate if
FNB makes an effective beginning by targetting the functionaries of AWCs located in tribal belts.
Action Taken
            Nutrition Education and Training programmes of FNB of the Ministry have been intensified during the year 2006-07
with special emphasis on covering SC/ST, adolescent girls and housewives.  The field infrastructure of FNB comprising of 43
CFNEUs located in 29 States/UTs have been advised to organise the following during the year:
 
·          Five day Training on Home Scale Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables, and Nutrition for SC/ST adolescent girls and
housewives has been increased from 24 courses to 201 courses during 2006-07.  In these courses a stipend of Rs. 100/- is
provided to each SC/ST participant.
      In all 804 training courses are organised in different parts of the country.
·          Two day Orientation Training Courses for anganwadi workers and other grassroot level workers from the village, each
covering 30 participants – 516 OTCs each year.
 
·          Five day Training of Trainer Courses, each covering 25 CDPOs etc – 172 TOT courses per year.
 
·          Nutrition Education Programme in Rural, Urban and Tribal areas covering abut 50 members from the community – 4620
programmes per year.
 
·          Nutrition education sessions at the time of inspecting supplementary feeding at AWCs – 4536 per year.
 
            In addition to these, the CFNEUs in Maharashtra located at Nagpur, Pune and Mumbai have organised special
programmes covering tribal belt, and have distributed nutrition education material including a set of 7 CDs with 27 video
films on nutrition to district authorities for regular nutrition education of the community.
 
            Mass awareness campaigns in Hindi, English and regional languages is undertaken through newspaper supplements,
exhibitions in development fairs and celebration of national events like World Breastfeeding Week, National Nutrition Week,
World Food Day, Global IDD Day etc.
 
            A separate budget provision for North Eastern States for nutrition Education activities has been made in the budget
provision for 2006-07 amounting to Rs. 55.00 lakhs.
 National Nutrition Mission(NNM)
Recommendations/Observations
17.10   The Committee notes that not much progress has been achieved in the implementation of the scheme. The Committee
notes that the objectives of the mission are realistic in nature and if implemented in its totality a healthy child population will
be the result. The Committee emphasize that the Ministry should make the scheme functional so as to achieve the desired
result of nutrition in a time bound manner.
 
Action Taken
 
            The first meeting of the Executive Committee on National Nutrition Mission (ECNNM) was held on 3.9.2004 under
the chairpersonship of MOS-WCD.  The Hon’ble Prime Minister was requested by HRM for a date for holding the meeting of
NNM in November 2004 and again by MOS-WCD in early 2006.  The PMO advised to convene the second meeting of the
ECNNM and apprise them about the deliberations.  The 2
nd meeting was held on 17.5.2006.
 
Although the meeting of the NNM is yet to take place, various advocacy measures for accelerating reduction in
malnutrition levels have been undertaken through the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB).  Some of these include advocacy for
reinstatement of the ban on sale of non-iodized salt which has been notified on 17 th November, 2005, early launch of double
fortified salt with iron and iodine, exploring the possibility of fortified wheat flour with iron and folic acid, other innovative
methods of reaching micronutrients to young children like lozenges, prescribing norms for micronutrients for supplementary
feeding under ICDS and organizing Regional Consultation Meets on Nutrition for promoting nutrition through developmental
programmes in the country.  Five such Meets have been organised for:

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
 
            North Eastern States at Shillong on February 17-18, 2005
            Western States at Pune on May 19-20, 2005
            Eastern States at Bhubaneswar on July 18-19, 2005
            Northern States at Chandigarh on January 9-10, 2006
Central States at Bhopal on 9-10 June, 2006.
 
XVII      Gender Budgeting
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
18.4     The Committee recommends that being the nodal Ministry, the Ministry of WCD should ensure that Gender Budget
Cells which are set up in the Ministries have become operational and also pursue this issue with the remaining Ministries.
18.5            Committee’s attention has been drawn by a few gender concerns that the Ministry has raised with various
Ministries in Government of India as indicated below:
-            Secretary, Sports and Youth Affairs has been addressed on the need for raising participation of women in sports and
according due recognition to success stories.
-           The subject of Health Insurance Scheme for women in view of their vulnerabilities and barriers to access to medical
services has been raised with Secretary (Health).
-           The Planning Commission has been requested to engender State Plans.
-            Secretary (Exp.) and Member-Secretary Planning Commission have both been requested to include a column on
gender outcomes in the Outcome Budget of GOI
 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the implementation status of the aforesaid initiatives taken by the
Ministry.
 
18.6            Committee’s attention has been drawn by the details regarding scheme-wise provisions and physical targets
benefiting women in the Budget of Ministry of Women and Child Development as given in the Performance Budget (2006-
07). The Committee finds that all the schemes whether targeting children or women have been shown to be providing 100%
benefit to women alone. The Committee does not dispute the fact that welfare of the child is ultimately the welfare of its
mother. However, in view of the emerging concept of child budgeting, it cannot be claimed that flagship schemes like ICDS
are benefiting cent percent women. The Committee recommends that the allocation on programmes and schemes benefiting
women may be delineated specifically. The Committee also recommends that the components of gender budgeting may be
made more clear and included in the guidelines for gender budgeting.
 
Action Taken (Para No.18.4, 18.5 & 18.6)
 
The Ministry of  Women and Child Development is vigorously pursuing creation of Gender Budgeting(GB) Cell by all
the central Ministries/Departments.  Regular follow-up is being done in this regard.  As a result, 50 Ministries/Departments
have set up GB Cells.  Efforts are also on to ensure that the GB Cells are made operational.  It may also be mentioned that a
Sub-Group on Gender Budgeting was set up under the Working Group for Women Development and Empowerment for 11
th
Five Year Plan. The  Sub-Group has submitted its report to Working Group.
 
Regarding the issues  of gender concerns that have been  raised with various Ministries.  It is stated that while we are
regularly pursuing the issues  with the concerned Ministries/Departments, the Ministry of Sports and Youth Affairs  has
informed that the Indian Women Cricketers is being brought under the BCCI and the Ministry is also making efforts for
gender initiatives.  Training Workshops for Ministries/Departments (including Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Planning
Commission, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and Ministry  of Finance etc.) on Gender Budgeting are also being
organized.
 
The allocation under programmes and schemes specifically benefiting women is already indicated in the Annual Plan
document of MWCD.  Preparation of a manual for gender budgeting is being proposed.  The components of gender budgeting
will be clearly outlined in the manual which would also incorporate guidelines for Gender Budgeting.
CHAPTER - III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
 

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
II. Budgetary Allocation
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
2.7       The Committee would like to be apprised about the pending Utilisation certificates(UCs) (State-wise and scheme-
wise). The Committee wonders whether any action against the implementing agencies can be initiated now after a lapse of
about twenty years or so. The Committee is of the firm view that financial norms need to be strictly adhered by both the
disbursing and implementing authorities. The Ministry should initiate an exercise for procurement of pending UCs without
any further delay. The Committee is also of the view that the Ministry should not be satisfied with the timely submission of
Utilization Certificates by the implementing agencies. There is a need for evolving a system of random checking of utilization
certificates so as to ensure that funds released are being utilized for the intended purposes. This would also give an idea to the
Ministry about the constraints being faced by the implementing agencies in proper utilization of allocated funds.
 
Action Taken 
 
The Ministry is making concerted efforts to settle the pending Utilization Certificates. As a policy, no further grant is
being released to an organization unless the pending UCs are settled. The Chief Controller of Accounts of the Ministry is
monitoring the progress of settlement of pending UCs. The database of pending UCs is being made available to the concerned
Divisions and Sections on the intranet to enable a continuing follow-up. The Pay & Accounts Office of the Ministry has the
clear instructions not to entertain any bill for release of grant to an organization, including autonomous bodies unless the
pending UCs are settled. The Ministry is also reviewing/monitoring the progress at the highest level on regular basis. The
State Governments have also been involved for settlement of the pending UCs.  It is correct that there are difficulties to settle
the old pending UCs but the concerned organizations are being reminded regularly to send the UCs. The list of pending UCs
as compiled by the Pay & Accounts Office is very bulky.  The ATN would become unwieldy if the list is attached.   As such, a
hard copy along with a soft copy of the list is being separately provided to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat along with the Action
Taken Report. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The list of pending UCs supplied to the Committee speaks itself about the alarming proportions this problem has
acquired.  There are as many as 5841 UCs amounting to more than Rs. 32,945 lakhs to be accounted for. Some UCs are
pending since as far back as 1986-87.  The Committee is inclined to agree with the statement of the Ministry that the 224
pages list of pending UCs is very bulky. A quick glance of this list presents a dismal scenario. The Committee is dismayed to
note that almost all the schemes handled by different agencies are covered under this list. What is more shocking is that not
only private NGOs  but Government agencies like Universities, Colleges, Corporations, Institutions even bodies like Central
Social Welfare Board, Bharatiya Adim Jati Sevak Sangh controlled by the Ministry are the defaulters.  Not only this,
submission of UCs notwithstanding, same agencies continue to have the benefit of Government funding year after year
without any break.  It seems that the role of the Ministry has been confined to be a fund-disbursing agency only.  Element of
accountability is simply missing.  Ministry's efforts if any, needless to say, have not fructified and pendency is increasing year
after year.  The Committee is of the opinion that this aspect need to be taken up seriously with a view to identifying inherent
drawbacks/hindrances - systematic, procedural and others.  These pending UCs create a vicious circle and a logjam in which
the schemes are caught and their implementation suffers.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
2.9       Taking a serious view of this alarming situation, the Committee would like to emphasize that the Ministry should
pursue the issue of unspent balances with the concerned States Governments/Autonomous Bodies. The Committee fails to
comprehend the reason for unspent balances. Funds are released in accordance with well-planned projections made by the
implementing agencies. Then why is it so, that they remain unspent thus defeating the very objective of the scheme itself.
Being the nodal authority for carrying out children and women welfare related schemes, it is for the Ministry to ensure
optimum and judicious utilization of Central funds.
 
Action Taken 
 
The observations of the Committee have been noted for guidance/compliance. There is an established system to review
utilization of unspent balances while processing proposals for release of funds under various schemes/projects of the Ministry.
The issue of unspent balances with the concerned State Governments/autonomous bodies is being reviewed through regular
review meetings as well as by sending regular letters. Insofar as ICDS is concerned, the funds under the scheme are generally
released in two instalments. First instalment is released in the first quarter and the second in the third quarter of the financial

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
year. As such, some amount remains unspent as indicated in Para 2.8. However, since ICDS is an ongoing scheme, any
unspent balance at the end of a financial year gets adjusted in the subsequent year. However, monitoring of unspent balance on
quarterly basis has since been started. As regards other schemes, as mentioned in Para 2.8, the present status of unspent
balances  is as under: -
 
World Bank ICDS-III
 
Comments of the Committee are in the context of unspent balances of Rs.94.40 crore available as on 1
st January 2006
with different major State Governments under World Bank assisted ICDS-III Project. Since it was known that the Project
would come to an end on 31.3.2006, vigorous efforts were made to ensure that the expenditure incurred by the Project States
is in the vicinity of their approved allocations.
Details of allocation approved finally, funds released, and expenditure incurred by the major Project States under ICDS-III
Project, as given in Annexure-I, will show that efforts made have been successful largely if not entirely.
 
ICDS Training Programme(UDISHA)
 
The Statewise  present position is as under:-
 
Bihar
 
A total amount of Rs.928.77 lakhs was released to the State Government upto 31-12-2005. The last release of Rs.2.00
crores was made vide sanction letter dated 21-11-2005.  The State Government has now informed that the fund was received
by them on 7-12-2005.  This amount was withdrawn by the State Government after 31-12-2005.  Therefore, effectively, till
31-12-2005, the State Government had Rs.728.77 lakhs under Udisha head against which expenditure to the tune of Rs.705.15
lakhs was made.  Therefore, the State had in fact only Rs.23.64 lakhs as unspent balance on 31-12-2005.
 
Karnataka
 
An amount of Rs.240 lakhs was released by the Government of India vide sanction letters dated 10-11-2005 (Rs.100
lakhs) and 18-11-2005 (Rs.140 lakhs).  According to the State Government, this amount was credited to the State Government
on 22-11-2005 and 30-11-2005 respectively.  Based on the credit confirmation slip from the Finance Department dated 13-12-
05, the above amount was released vide order dated 2-1-2006 by the Government of Karnataka.  Hence the same could not be
spent during the 3rd Quarter of 2005-06 & remained as unspent balance as on 1-1-2006.  Subsequently it was utilised in the
last quarter of 2005-06.
 
Rajasthan
 
(i)                 One Training-cum-Resource Centre (TCRC) was approved for which Rs.2.00 crore was earmarked by the
State Government.  However, due to some technical reasons relating to bidding process and the shortage of
time for construction of the building, the activity could not be taken up.  There was a saving of Rs.190 lakhs.
 
(ii)
                According to the State Government, for additional Angnawadi Centres sanctioned by Government of India
during 2005-06, formalities for selection of 8752 Anganwadi Workers could not be completed.  Therefore,
requisite provision kept for training could not be utilised.  There was a saving of Rs.86 lakhs.
 
According to the State Government, the rest of the amount of Rs.166 lakhs was required for activities upto March,
2006 under Project Udisha.
 
Swayamsidha
 
So far as Swayamsidha scheme is concerned,  the outstanding balance position of the State of Rajasthan has improved
remarkably and now only Rs. 48.11 lakhs remains unspent against Rs. 2.80 crores as shown in the report.  The position of the
State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of unspent balance remains the same.  All efforts at highest level  are being made by this
Ministry for the fructuous utilization for the unspent balance.
 
NIPCCD
 
In the third quarter of the financial year 2005-06 (during November and December, 2005), the Ministry released a sum
st

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
of Rs.3.78 crore on account of grants to the Institute.  Out of this, the Institute could utilize Rs.2.59 crore upto 31  December,
2005.  The remaining unspent balance of Rs.1.19 crore was utilized during the last quarter of the financial year 2005-06 i.e.
January to March, 2006.  As such, there was no unspent balance. 
 
CSWB
 
The reason for unspent balance is accumulation of interest on the fund released by the MWCD kept in the State Bank
Account.
Refund of revolving fund from the State Board on account of SEP (Dairy), loan component.
 
Unspent balance of different welfare programmes in which past liabilities are to be cleared to the Voluntary
Organizations after settlement of accounts.
The Central Social Welfare Board has refunded the interest, revolving fund and unspent balance of Rs.22.51 crore to the
Ministry. The balance amount is to be utilized in the current financial year.
 
NCW
 
As on date NCW has no unspent balance.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            About the problem of unspent balances, the Committee feels, the Ministry needs to remain ever vigilant.  Since some
amounts remaining unspent in certain cases are inherent in the procedure, consistent efforts be made to keep it in reasonable
limits.  Rajasthan's performance in UDISHA must be watched closely and so should be NIPCCD and CSWB also.  The
Committee has observed that there is considerable time gap between the sanction of funds by Central Government and final
release to the implementing agencies at the State level.  The Committee strongly feels that this procedural bottleneck can be
easily handled if initiative is taken at both the ends.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
2.10     The Committee would like to have details of expenditure scheme-wise for the year 2005-2006. The Committee also
adds that since most of the schemes are run with the assistance of State Governments/NGOs, necessary measures should be
taken to coordinate the activities with the concerned implementing agencies so that a transparent picture of detailed
expenditure could emerge and a proper feedback helps in understanding the absorption of allocations.
 
Action Taken 
 
The observations have been noted for guidance. In this regard, it may be mentioned that, as per the existing procedure,
funds under NGO schemes are released only after receipt of Utilization Certificate/audited statement of accounts, physical
progress report, concerned State Government’s inspection report, etc. The State Governments are involved  at every stage of
sanction, monitoring, etc. of NGO schemes/projects. The information regarding schemewise details of expenditure for the year
2005-06 is at Annexure-II. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is concerned about the problem regarding inability to submit Utilisation Certificates (UCs) in time
particularly by the NGOs. It has come to acquire threatening dimension as regard implementing central schemes effectively. In
such a situation, the Committee feels, States need to be little more pro-active in this regard; the centre because of obvious
reasons cannot and has not proved to be effective so far. There is an urgent need for evolving a procedure wherein UCs are
ascertained/obtained at the district level by the DMs and sending them to centre by using electronic mails etc. It might ease the
problem to a great extent.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
2.12     The Committee is constrained to observe that none of the strategies as mentioned above seem to have been
implemented upon by the Ministry during the Tenth Plan. Had it been done, some noticeable changes would have been visible
by now. Final year of the Tenth Plan has started and position remains unchanged. This is a classic example of how strategies
on the paper become fruitless in the absence of strong willpower and mechanism to implement them. The Committee is of the
view that these strategies have become all the more relevant in the present scenario. The Committee would appreciate if the

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
Ministry initiates action without any further delay.
 
Action Taken 
 
In the XI Plan the Ministry is proposing to integrate the existing schemes and have one holistic scheme for Women’s
Economic Empowerment and to increase its coverage. It is also being proposed to extend the scheme providing social support
to cover more areas.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is at a loss to see that the strategies proposed to be adopted regarding women specific schemes/issues
during the tenth plan, as mentioned in paragraph 2.11 of its 175
th Report, could not be implemented/adopted. Now the
Ministry as usual promises to do it during the 11 th Plan. The Committee in view of this, expresses its concern about the
lackadaisical attitude regarding schemes relating to development of women and children.
 
III.            Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme
Recommendations/Observations
3.5       The Committee was informed that the Inter-Ministerial Task Force set up in 2004 to review the existing population
norms for sanction of an ICDS Project/AWC and suggest revised norms had submitted its reports/recommendations in May
2005. The Committee finds that so far 23 States/UTs have undertaken a micro-level Survey/Planning and forwarded
information regarding location specific requirement of additional ICDS Projects and Anganwadi Centres (AWCs). The
Committee has been given to understand that information submitted by some States is incomplete and not in the prescribed
format. One year has passed since the submission of the Report of the Task Force, and the required information is still awaited
from States/UTs. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should make concerted efforts so that AWCs can be set up as
per the revised population norms.
 
Action Taken
 
Information has since been received from all States/UTs and based on the revised population norms recommended by
the Task Force, requirement of 165 additional Projects, 106969 additional AWCs and 25,961 Mini-AWCs has been worked
out. The proposal for sanction of these additional Projects/AWCs/Mini-AWCs has been processed for obtaining the approval
of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). After EFC’s approval, the proposal will be processed further for obtaining approval
of the CCEA.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee notes that it has taken almost a year in the micro-level survey so as to finilise the requirement of
additional projects/AWCs/mini AWCs. The Committee only hopes that the process of setting up of additional AWCs, mini
AWCs in the aftermath of revision of population norm would be taken up on overriding priority basis. The CCEA's approval
must have come by now. All efforts must be made to set up the additional infrastructure in a time - bound manner.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.6       The Committee notes that from 2005-2006, the Government of India were to support States upto 50% of the financial
norms or 50% of the expenditure incurred by them on supplementary nutrition. The Committee is surprised to note that the
Ministry has not held pre-budget discussions with the States on this issue so far. Ministry’s clarification that States can present
their resource position during their discussion on the States Annual Plan with the Planning Commission is not at all
convincing.
 
Action Taken
 
            When this particular intervention was being processed, all States/UTs were requested to make adequate  provision in
their annual budget, based on the number and category of supplementary nutrition beneficiaries   vis-a-vis the financial norms
for each category of beneficiary.  It may also be noted that till the 2004-05, supplementary nutrition was the responsibility of
the State Governments. The States, thus, had to necessarily ensure that the required provision in their budget  is made for
providing supplementary nutrition, as per the prescribed nutrition norms, of the Scheme, to all ICDS beneficiaries. It may be
reiterated here that the States/UTs are supposed to make adequate budget provision in their annual budget based on the
number and category of supplementary nutrition beneficiaries’ vis-à-vis the financial norms for each category of beneficiary. 
Thus, there perhaps was no need to hold pre-budget discussion with the States/UTs on this issue.  Moreover, the States’

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
Annual Plan discussions are held in Planning Commission where the States can present their resource position. To ensure that 
States provide adequate funds in their budget for supplementary nutrition, the Planning Commission has been requested to
address this aspect during formulation of State Annual Plans and also consider earmarking of funds for supplementary
nutrition in States’ Plans.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.7       In the absence of any detail about the supplementary nutrition met by the States/UTs, it is difficult to assess the impact
of the new initiative. The Committee would like to be apprised of the implementation status of this initiative during 2005-06.
 
Action Taken
 
From 2005-06, the Government of India has decided to support States/UTs at the rate of half of the financial norms
laid down for various categories of beneficiaries or 50% of actual expenditure on supplementary nutrition, whichever is less. 
A Statement of Expenditure prescribed may be seen at Annexure-III. As may be seen the details of the amounts spent by the
States/UTs, both out of their share and that of GOI’s share, on SNP alongwith the details of various beneficiaries covered  gets
known before subsequent instalments of funds are released.  It may also be noted that the number of SNP beneficiaries have
since increased from 484.42 Lakh, as on 31.3.2005 to 546.31 Lakh, as on 31.3.06.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The problem of States not being prompt enough to provide adequate funds for supplementary nutrition compelled the
Centre to share it 50:50 basis.  The Committee is surprised to see that the problem still persists.  The Committee while
appreciating Ministry's contention in this regard calls upon the Planning Commission to sort out this problem with individual
States while discussing their Annual Plans every year.  It might consider linking it with the approval of their Plans every year.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.9       The Committee agrees that increasing the number of Anganwadi Centres from existing 7.44 lakhs to 14 lakhs may be a
gigantic task but the Ministry can no longer afford to sit on the problem and delay the process. Instead a plan of action needs
to be formulated by the Ministryexpeditiously for achieving the targets set by the Supreme Court. Implementation of the SC
directives would catapulate the health of the Indian population comparable to the standards of any of the developed countries.
The Committee therefore feels that the Ministry should study the suggestion in its entirety and chalk out a road map to
implement the same. Lack of funds can not be the sole excuse to implement the suggestion. The Committee would also like to
be apprised of the reply given to the Supreme Court by the Ministry in this regard. The Committee desires that Anganwadi
Centres may be immediately made operational in hamlets and tribal areas where concentration of Dalits, SC/ST population is
high.
 
Action Taken
 
With regard to Supreme Court’s direction dated 29.4.2004 to indicate the time by which Union of India proposes to
increase the number of Anganwadi Centres to cover 14 lakh habitations. To comply with this direction of Supreme Court,
population norms for sanction of an AWC were required to be revised for which an Inter-Ministerial Task Force was set up in
September 2004 to review the existing population norms and suggest revised population norms for setting up an AWC.  This
position was also stated in the Affidavit filed in November 2004 in the Supreme Court. Meanwhile, States/UTs were requested
to furnish their requirement of additional Projects/Anganwadi Centres within the existing population norms of the Scheme.
Based on the requirement of States/UTs, 467 additional Projects and 1,88,168 additional AWCs have already been sanctioned
in 2005-06.  Further, on receipt of the recommendations of the Task Force the population norms were revised and States/UTs
requested to indicate additional requirement of ICDS Projects and AWCs based on the revised norms.  Information has been
received from the States and  a proposal for sanction of  165 additional Projects, 1,06,969 additional AWCs and 25961 Mini-
AWCs is under process for obtaining the competent approvals.  As regards coverage of hamlets and tribal areas with
concentration of SC/ST, States/UTs have been requested that, while selecting location of AWCs, priority consideration may be
given to villages pre-dominantly habited by population belonging to SC/ST and minority community. An affidavit indicating
these developments would be filed in the Supreme Court before next hearing of the case.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Government to augment the number of Anganwadis and notes
that proposal for sanctioning additional projects is under process.  However, the need of the hour is also to ensure that these

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
projects were set up in a time bound manner.  In view of the concern of the Supreme Court regarding the children, the
Committee also emphasizes the need to operationalise the sanctioned projects in time bound plan.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.13     The Committee is equally shocked to see the findings of the NCAER. The Committee would like to point out that these
findings are not restricted to the infrastructure status of AWCs. It is very clear that each aspect about the AWCs has been
assessed and reported upon. This Report has been received by the Ministry sometime in March-April 2005. The Committee
hopes that findings of this survey must have been shared with the State Governments and follow-up action started. If not, it
may be done at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard at the earliest.
 
Action Taken
 
The report of Rapid Facility Survey conducted by NCAER on infrastructural facilities at Anganwadi Centres has been 
shared with all the States/UTs and they have been requested to take appropriate steps to improve the position.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
It seems that the report of the Rapid Facility Survey conducted by NCAER on infrastructural facilities at Anganwadi
Centres was shared with the States/UTs only on a specific mention being made by the Committee in its 175
th Report. The
Committee would appreciate if the feedback from the States/UTs not performing well is expedited so as to take required
remedial action.
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.18     The Committee expresses its deep anguish over the large number of vacancies of AWWs, AWHs and Supervisors. It
would not be wrong to conclude that the vacancies have hampered the functioning of AWCs and adversely affected the
scheme itself. The Committee is not aware about the factors responsible for such a state of affairs. In the absence of these key
functionaries, an AWC can not be considered to be operational. The Committee wonders in what manner and by when it
would be possible to fill up this big gap, especially in view of 1,88,055 AWCs sanctioned in 2005-06, with the figure likely to
increase further.  The Committee is of the firm view that the exercise of sanctioning and filling up of these posts should start
simultaneously with the sanctioning of AWCs. Otherwise this shortfall will always persist. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that an intense drive needs to be launched for filling up the vacancies within a fixed time frame. This can be
accomplished if a strategy is worked out in collaboration with the State Governments/local bodies. Those States which are not
willing to follow the time schedule may be pursued on regular basis, if need be, at the highest level, till the vacancies are filled
up. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps proposed to be taken.
 
Action Taken
 
This Ministry is reviewing the vacancy position of AWWs,AWHS and Supervisors continuously.  Due to the concerted
efforts put in by this Ministry, the number of AWWs in-position has increased from 636105 in March 2004 to 699022 in
March 2005; and to   729923 in September 2005. Similarly, no. of AWHs in-position has increased from 611989 in March
2004 to 657327 in March 2005; and to 724047 in September 2005. The no. of Supervisors in-position has also been increased
from 22013 in March 2004 to 23263 in March 2005 and to 24017 in September 2005. Out of 764709 AWCs sanctioned (till
31.3.2005), 744887 had become functional as on 30.9.2005. There are 729923 AWWs in-position and 724047 AWHs in-
position as on 30.9.2005. Thus, 34786 posts of AWWs (4.55%) and 40662 posts of AWHs (5.32%) were lying vacant as on
30.9.2005. In addition, 10472 posts of Supervisors (30.31%) out of 34489 sanctioned were lying vacant as on 30.9.005.  In
addition, 181238 AWCs (excluding 6817 AWCs in Jammu & Kashmir sanctioned in December 2004)  were sanctioned as first
phase of expansion of ICDS during 2005-06. In these 181238 AWCs, 7246 posts of  Supervisors, 181238 AWWs and 181238
AWHs were sanctioned. This Ministry has designed and developed a PERT Chart (Annexure-IV) consisting of all the
activities that are required to be carried out for making an ICDS project/AWC operational.  As per this chart, it takes a one
year of operationalisation of a Project/AWC. All the States have been requested to adhere to the time-frame given in the PERT
Chart and operationalise all the new projects and AWCs during 2006-07. Some of the States like Mizoram and Andhra
Pradesh have informed that they will be able to operationalise their new projects/ AWCs within 10 months and 12 months
respectively.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee could see some improvements during these years in respect of sanctioning/operationalisation of
Anganwadi Centres as also in filling up the vacancies of Anganwadi Workers and Anganwadi Helpers.  In the case of

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
supervisors, however, a lot needs to be done, their vacancy position being 30.31% Similarly massive effort and resources
would be needed for operationalising the new projects.  The Committee hopes that States need to be activated to meet the
deadline which can be fixed for this purpose.
    The Committee reiterates its previous recommendations regarding the need for increasing the honorarium paid to the
Anganwadi Workers/Anganwadi Helpers.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.22     The Committee would like the Ministry to take cognizance of the observations contained in the Mid Term Appraisal
and take immediate remedial measures to streamline the scheme. The Committee desires that it may be apprised about the
steps taken in this direction.
 
Action Taken
 
A few actionable points which emerged out of the Mid Term Appraisal of the Scheme were as under:-        
(i)
                 Restructuring of ICDS
(ii)                Strengthening of pre-school education under ICDS
(iii)              Integration of ANM and Anganwadi worker
 
i.  Restructuring of ICDS: The ICDS Scheme envisages Anganwadi Workers to be honorary workers from local community
who are paid fixed amount of monthly honoraria for rendering their services, on part time basis (for about 4-5 hours in a day)
whereas Creche functions throughout the day on regular basis. Adding Crèche and Day care services/facilities in Anganwadi
would require full day/regular Anganwadi Workers who might claim regular salary or minimum wages. At present there are
more than 14 lakh AWWs and Helpers. This number would increase to over 19 lakh with the proposed expansion of the ICDS
Scheme. On the other hand, there are only a few thousand crèches across the country at present. As such, provision of crèche
and day care service/facilities in Anganwadis does not appear feasible as of now. However, this suggestion would be
examined further and, if found feasible, would be included in our proposal for continuation of ICDS Scheme in the XI Plan.
 
ii. Strengthening pre-school Education under ICDS: The training component under ICDS has been strengthened. The training
syllabus for Anganwadi Workers has also been suitably revised to serve the need of pre-school education component of ICDS.
Deptt. of Elementary Education has issued instructions to all State Secretaries to organize joint training of Primary teachers,
AWWs and health workers for a convergent understanding of pre-school and ECCE. The suggestion to involve the State
Councils for Educational Research and Training (SCERTs) in training of Anganwadi Workers is very good and necessary
action would be taken accordingly.
 
iii. Integration of ANM and Anganwadi Worker: The ICDS Scheme envisages Anganwadi Workers to be honorary workers
from local community who are paid fixed amount of monthly honoraria for rendering their services, on part time basis (for
about 4-5 hours in a day). There is no minimum qualification prescribed for Anganwadi Worker. While the exact data on
educational qualification of Anganwadi Workers in position is not available, as per informal feedback, there is a significant
number of Anganwadi workers who are semi-literate.  The appraisal note does not also indicate the State-wise number of
ANMs sanctioned and in position so as to see the ratio between the two.  It may be noted that under National Rural Health
Mission (NRHM), a health volunteer viz. ASHA is being appointed at the village level.  Bringing AWW under the ANM will
not only drive away the former from her original role and responsibilities under the ICDS Scheme but will also dilute the
delivery of other important services under the scheme viz. supplementary nutrition and pre-school education. The Ministry of
Women and Child Development, therefore,  does not support the integration of the ANM and AWW.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee does not quite agree with the contention of the Ministry about (i) providing day care/creche facilities at
Anganwadi Centres and (ii) about coordination of Anganwadi Workers and Auxiliary Nurse Midwives(ANM)/ASHA. The
Committee reiterates its recommendation to further examine these suggestions for implementation.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
3.23     The Committee observes that in 17 States/UTs, Co-ordination Committees at state, district, block and village levels
have been set up to ensure convergence between ICDS, Health, Drinking Water and Sanitation, Panchayati Raj, Primary
Education, Rural Development etc. Welcoming the initiative taken by these 17 States, the Committee would like to point out
that NE States, Sikkim, J&K, Orissa and Southern States have not come forward so far. The Committee hopes that with the
matter being pursued by the Ministry, these States will be covered very soon.

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
 
Action Taken
 
The remaining States/UTs are being requested, time and again, the last being on 29th May, 2006 to set up Coordination
Committees at State, district, block and village level to ensure proper delivery of services at Anganwadi  level by  concerned
line functionaries of various Departments viz. health, education, drinking water etc.   With the concerted efforts by this
Ministry 21 States/UTs have set up the Coordination Committees.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry in setting up the coordination committee.  The Ministry is
required to make concerted efforts to ensure that Coordination Committees were constituted by all the States in a time bound
manner.
 
IV. Training Programme under ICDS (UDISHA)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
4.5
              The Committee opines that training is the most crucial element in ICDS as achievement of Programme goals depends
upon the effectiveness of frontline workers in improved delivery of packages of services under ICDS. The Committee
notes that the gap between trained and untrained functionaries is increasing every year. The following physical
achievement of target and trained confirms this:-
 
Upto 31.12.2005
 Job Training Refresher Training
 Revised
Target
Trained % of Actual
Target
Revised
Target
Trained % of Actual
Target
AWWs 432143 330942 76.58 646226 433913 67.15
Supervisors 14931 11466 76.79 26304 20358 77.40
CDPO/ACDPOs 4592 3548 77.26 4394 1452 33.50
AWHs 612957 518682 84.62
   
All Functionaries 1064623 864638 81.22 676924 455723 67.32
 
The training of various level of functionaries assumes added importance in view of the proposed increase of 467
additional projects and 1.88 lakh Anganwadi centres. The Ministry informed that due to the prevailing backlogs and
operationalisation of new centres particularly for the ‘Job training’ of ICDS functionaries, the Ministry has taken the following
measures in the recent past:
 
(i)            Duration of the training programmes has been reduced w.e.f. April 1, 2005 which would help in conducting more
batches per training center in a year leading to reduction in backlog of trainees and imparting training to new recruits
under Udisha.
(ii)        Some States like Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan have been permitted to use District Mobile Teams in addition to
AWTCs.
(iii)       States have been asked to impart short duration induction training (pending the Job Training) to newly recruited
AWWs to operationalise the AWCs at the earliest.
(iv)            NIPCCD has been organizing several training programmes to clear the backlogs of training of CDPOs/ACDPOs
and new recruits.
(v)            Continuous review of the status of training is being undertaken by the Ministry in the meetings with the State
Secretaries/Directors and also through the regular visits to the States by the officials of the Ministry. Since October
2004, there had been seven national level review meetings with the State Secretaries/Directors in New Delhi.
 
The Committee would however, like to point out that considering the huge backlog of untrained AWWs and AWHs,
the steps initiated by the Ministry to train all the workers and Helpers have not yield the desired results so far.   The
Committee observes that State Governments/UTs play the most important role in the implementation of the ICDS Training
Programme.   The State Governments are responsible for setting up of Anganwadi  Training Centres and Middle Level
Training Centres (MLTCs), Working of these centres are also monitored by them.   State Governments are also responsible for
identifying NGOs/other organizations for running the Training Centres.   The Committee feels that the status of these Training
Centres both existing and required in different  states is an important aspect of  the Training Programme which perhaps has not

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
been given due impetus so far.   The Committee is of the view that an on the spot assessment of all the existing Training
Centres with priority being given to states lagging behind  needs to be made and remedial measures taken at the earliest.   
Mere release of central funds would not serve the purpose. The Ministry has to play a more pro-active role in the
implementation of training of ICDS functionaries, the most vital aspect of the ICDS programme.Action Taken
 
Action Taken
 
The present position regarding physical achievement of target and trained is as under:-
 
As on 31-3-06
 
 Job Training Refresher Training
 Revised
Target
Trained % of Revised
Target
Revised Target Trained % of Revised
Target
AWWs 440070 365832 83.13 731255 567795 77.65
Supervisors 15017 12107 80.62 30113 23925 79.45
CDPOs/ACDPOs 4821 3824 79.32 3613 1566 43.34
AWHs 645494 545851 84.56 349344 165968 47.51
All Functionaries 1105402 927614 83.92 1114325 759254 68.14
 
As regards spot assessment of AWTCs/MLTCs this Ministry is already seized of the matter.  NIPCCD has already
started the task of appraisal of 2-3 AWTCs/MLTCs in each State to assess the existing facilities, problems faced etc.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee reiterates its concern about considerable backlog of ICDS functionaries training.  The Ministry's
efforts in this regard could not have the desired impact. In view of the significance of the training in implementation of ICDS,
the Committee recommends that the Ministry needs to chalk out an effective strategy in consultation with the States/UTs
concerned institutions/organisations as well as other Ministries/Departments for achieving the targets in a fixed time schedule.
The Committee would also like to emphasize once again that the States lagging behind need to be identified on priority basis,
so that their problem areas can be tackled effectively.
 
V.        Rajiv Gandhi National Creche Scheme for the Children of Working Mothers
Recommendations/Observations
 
5.3       The Committee notes that the Ministry kept an ambitious target of 14719 creches by the end of Tenth Plan i.e. by
2006-2007; the new crèches will be allocated to the Central Social Welfare Board, Indian Council for Child Welfare and
Bharatiya Adim Jati Sevak Sangh in the ratio of 80:11:9. The Committee would like to be apprised about the rationale of
selecting only three agencies for operationalising the Crèche Schcme. The Committee further recommends that more and more
reputed and established NGOs may be selected for implementing the Creche Scheme.
 
Action Taken
 
Keeping in view the long experience of these organizations for running the crèches, it was decided to sanction the
crèches to these organizations.  It may further be added that the implementing Organizations are well equipped with field units
and staff with which it is expected that they will implement crèche scheme effectively.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee does not doubt about the efficiency and experience of Central Social Welfare Board, Indian Council
for Child Welfare and Bharatiya Adim Jati Sevak Sangh in implementing these scheme.  It, however, feels that in view of its
importance, other equally reputed NGOs also may be identified and given the work for enhancing the outreach of the scheme.
 
VI.            Condensed Course for Women Education
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.2       Plan allocation of Rs. 5.40 crore was made for this programme in 2005-2006. The actual expenditure incurred upto 3
rd
March 2006 is Rs. 2.70 crore. The Ministry has informed that sanctions were being issued and entire allocation was to be

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
utilized by 31.3.2006.The Committee has, however, some reservations on the last minute spending by the Department.
Rushing the expenditure in the last few days needs to be discouraged for effective utilization of resources.
 
Action Taken
 
It is a fact that an allocation of Rs. 5.40 crores was made for the programme by the Ministry  in 2005-06. The CSWB
had sanctioned 316 courses and sanctioned an amount of Rs. 3,23,76,400 by 3
rd March 2006. As per records an amount of Rs.
4,12,37,494 was released by CSWB by 3 rd March 2006. The CSWB has fixed quarterly targets for sanction and releases
should be completed by 31 st Dec. 2006 for the year 2006-07. However the Board will be able to achieve quarterly targets in
case funds will be placed timely at the disposal of CSWB. This will also help in optimum utilization and effective
implementation of the scheme.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee as in the past, does reiterate again its disappointment for the last minute spending in the scheme.  The
Ministry has to ensure the timely release of funds as well as spending evenly in every quarter.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that remedial steps needs to be taken in this regard urgently.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.3       The Ministry informed that in pursuance of the recommendations of National/State level workshops, a National
Working Group has been constituted for revamping/evaluation of the scheme in the changing socio-economic and work
environment. The report of the Working Group which was expected in August 2005 is yet to be submitted. The Committee is
unhappy over the delay in submission of the Report and recommends that the matter be expedited without further delay. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of its contents as and when the report is finalized.
 
Action Taken
 
The National Working Group on Condensed Courses of Education for Women has submitted its report to CSWB on
16/5/2006.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is surprised to note that its specific request for being apprised about the contents of the Report of the
National Working Group on the Scheme of Condensed Courses for Women Education remains unattended. The Ministry has
simply mentioned that the Report has been submitted to the CSWB on the 16 th May, 2006. The Committee expresses its
unhappiness on this State of affairs.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.1
              The Committee is not happy with the present state of affairs. It feels that residential courses on selected basis
should be sanctioned in those States where the response is encouraging. Obviously the girls/women are unable to
pursue their studies further because of lack of hostels. The residential courses can help them fill the gap. The
Committee further recommends that additional funds may be sought for the purpose.
 
Action Taken
 
The quantum of funds required for residential courses is almost double of non-residential courses. However, the CSWB has
sanctioned following residential courses during the year 2005-06.
 
 
S.
No.
Name & Address of the institution Courses sanctioned
& batch
Amount
sanctioned
Amount
Released
No. of
benefici-
aries
1. Mahila Shilp Kala Kendra,Vill.& PO
Kalwar,Dt.Bhojpur
Middle Ist 2,52,950 18,97,125 25
2. Banwasi Vikas Ahram, Vill.& PO Primary Level 2,48,300 1,86,225 25

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
Maja,Allahabad Courses (Vth)
3. Kerala Federation of the Blind,
Dt.Thiruvananthapuram,Kerala
SSLC
Ixth
2,27,500 1,70,625 25
 TOTAL  7,28,750 22,53,975 75
 
The CSWB will be able to sanction more residential courses in case adequate funds are provided to CSWB. However,
for residential courses, it is desirable to make an assessment of availability of infrastructure and provision of security with
NGO as the target beneficiaries are adolescent / adult women.
Comments of the Committee
 
Just three institutions for running residential courses is a matter of serious concern. The Committee agrees that more
funds are required for the residential courses.  The Committee recommends that more funds be provided to increase the
residential courses which will benefit larger number of women.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.6       Under the Scheme, details of central assistance released to different States/UTs during 2003-04 and 2004-05 indicate
that there is no fixed criteria about quantum of funds to be released for different courses.
Following examples are self explanatory:-
(Rs. In lakhs)
State 2003-04
Amount Released
Targetted/
actual
beneficiaries
2004-05
Amount
Released
Targetted/actual
beneficiaries
Delhi 18.85 175 8.78 275
Bihar 57.27 1675 61.62 1375
U.P. 72.27 875 83.89 1450
W. Bengal 33.95 325 16.34 475
 
The Committee may be apprised of the criteria/reasons for variations in selection of targetted beneficiaries and
sanction of funds to various States.
 
Action Taken
 
Under the scheme, assistance is being provided as per the schematic budget approval by the Govt. of India. A copy of
the schematic budget for different type of courses is enclosed at Annexure-VI. As regards, variation in number of beneficiaries
amount sanctioned and released for the States of Delhi, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal for the years 2003-04 & 2004-
05 the factual position is as follows :-
 
 
Year 2003-04
 
S.
No.
State No. of courses
Sanctioned
Amount
Sanctioned
Amount released No. of
Benefici-
aries
    Current Year Past
Liabilities
Total  
1. Delhi 7 6.71 5.08 13.77 18.25 175
2. Bihar 67 75.60 57.27 - 57.27 1675
3. U.P. 35 41.06 29.83 42.44 72.27 875
4. WB 13 14.38 10.88 23.07 33.95 325
 
Year 2004-05

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
 
S.
No.
State No. of courses
Sanctioned
Amount
Sanctioned
Amount released No. of
Benefici-
aries
    Current Year Past Liabilities Total  
1. Delhi 11 11.55 8.78 - 8.78 275
2. Bihar 55 59.61 30.37 31.25 61.62 1375
3. U.P. 58 67.59 41.45 42.44 83.89 1450
4. WB 19 21.60 16.34 - 16.34 475
 
It may please be noted from above that the excess release to various State Boards was towards the past-liabilities of
previous years. The variation in targeted number of beneficiaries and actual number of beneficiaries is also due to variation in
number of courses targeted and actual number of courses sanctioned to each State. According to the schematic pattern the
targeted group of beneficiaries is 25 for one course.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Committee's attention has been drawn by the variations in the number of targetted beneficiaries and funds sanctioned
under the scheme to various States. On a specific query with regard to a few States, the Committee has been given to
understand that the excess release of funds to various State Boards was towards the past liabilities of previous years. From the
details furnished by the Ministry in respect of Delhi, Bihar, UP and W. Bengal, it is evident that for the years 2003-2004 and
2004-2005, besides the funds for the current year, there were past liabilities also. The Committee is not aware about the details
of these liabilities. The Committee would, however, like to mention that with students not getting their stipend and teachers
not receiving their salary every month, scheme of Condensed Courses for Women Education seems to be running on paper
only.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
6.8       The Committee has been given to understand that the Ministry has been getting the state-wise feedback in respect of
number of courses sanctioned, amount sanctioned and released alongwith the targeted/actual beneficiaries.   Figures regarding
2003-2004 and 2004-2005 have also been made available to the Committee.   It is, however, surprising to note that no
information is available with the Ministry about the utilized funds, accounts for which are being settled at the State Board
level.   The Committee strongly feels that non-availability of utilization details and availability of unspent balances with the
State Governments cannot be considered a healthy sign.  The Committee is of the view that in the absence of such a vital
information, whatever monitoring  is being done at present cannot be effective enough.   Status of funds released and unspent
balances with some State Boards is self-revealing.
                                                                                                               (Rs. in lakh)
 2003-04 2004-05  
State Amount released Amount released Unspent balances
Andhra Pradesh 9.56 18.96 24.42 (31.3.05)
Arunachal Pradesh 6.45 7.48 6.97(31.3.05)
Bihar 57.27 61.62 4.85(15.9.05)
Gujarat 5.63 9.47 21.94(31.3.05)
Karnataka 10.36 19.54 45.78(31.3.05)
Rajasthan 12.28 18.09 24.83(31.3.05)
Tamil Nadu 8.93 12.86 30.29(30.11.05)
Delhi 18.85 8.78 24.32(31.3.05)
 
Action Taken
 
It is a fact that Central Social Welfare Board has been getting the State-wise feedback in respect of number of courses
sanctioned, amount sanctioned and released alongwith the targetted/actual beneficiaries. Complete information regarding
amount released to State Boards, funds utilized by Voluntary Organizations/State Boards, status of settlement of accounts, as
well as details of unspent balance is available with concerned State Board/Central Social Welfare Board, Ministry of Women

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
& Child Development. Regular monitoring of implementation of programme, flow of funds to voluntary organizations/State
Boards and settlement of accounts is being done.  Year-wise details (2003-04, 2004-05) of amount released, amount utilized
and unspent balance in respect of 8 States are as under:
( Rs. in lakhs )
STATE Year Amt. Released Amt. Utilized Unspent balance
Andhra Pradesh 2003-04 9.56 8.07 -
 2004-05 18.96 5.78 11.29
Arunachal Pr. 2003-04 6.45 1.45 5.01
 2004-05 7.48 10.95* -
Bihar 2003-04 57.27 41.18 16.09
 2004-05 61.62 80.29 * -
Delhi 2003-04 18.85 14.40 4.46
 2004-05 8.78 2.91 23.99
Gujarat 2003-04 5.63 0.94 4.69
 2004-05 9.47 6.81 1.66
Karnataka 2003-04 10.36 11.74* -
 2004-05 19.54 22.02* -
Rajasthan 2003-04 12.28 4.64 7.64
 2004-05 18.09 18.42* 0.99
Tamilnadu 2003-04 8.93 3.29 5.64
 2004-05 12.86 8.01 4.85
·          Utilized out of unspent balance of previous year and unutilized refund received from the institutions.
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee feels that apart from CSWB, there is a need for monitoring of the funds under the scheme by the
Ministry also. The Committee notes significant under-utilization as unspent balance by the States as the figures given to the
Committee show.  The Committee feels that Ministry must be more proactive in respect of these scheme and strict monitoring
by it be ensured.
 
VII.     Balika Samriddhi Yojana(BSY)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
7.2       In 2004-05, funds were released to States, however no funds were kept in BE 2005-2006 and 2006-2007. The Ministry
has informed that no monitoring/publicity was undertaken at central level.  The Committee observes that total funds released
as on 1.3.06 is Rs. 216.15 crore whereas unspent balance as on 30.9.2005 is Rs. 74.97 crore lying with different States like
Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa and Uttaranchal.
 
7.3       Earlier the Committee in its 160th Report had expressed serious concern about the implementation as well as the aspect
of uncertainty in the transfer of BSY to the States. The Committee observes that situation, instead of improving, has worsened
since no decision has been taken in this regard so far. The Secretary in her appearance before the Committee also conceded
that this was a very unsatisfactory status.
 

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
7.4       The Committee is not happy with the uncertainty status of the BSY scheme, continuing for so long.  The Committee
fails to understand as  why Planning Commission has taken such a long time to take a decision on transferring the Balika
Samriddhi Yojana to states.  A decision taken by the Planning Commission at the beginning  of the Tenth Plan is yet to be
finalized even though Tenth Plan period is in its  last year. The Committee is also not aware as to how the Committed Liability
of Rs. 74.97 crore    lying with different states is going to be adjusted.   The Committee is of the view that this is a classic case
of improper formulation of a scheme launched in haste and inherent flaws being noticed during the course of its
implementation.   The Committee does not have much hope about this scheme being effectively implemented by states, with 
some States already facing severe financial constraints.   The Committee would once again reiterate that fate of BSY scheme
needs to be decided at the earliest.   The Ministry being the nodal authority has to vigorously pursue this issue with the
Planning Commission.
 
Action Taken(Para 7.2, 7.3 & 7.4)
 
As per the latest position, the unspent balance has come down to Rs. 65.79 crore from Rs.74.97 crore. The States of
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Orissa have confirmed 100% utilization of the funds.
As far as the liability of unspent balance is concerned, it is expected that State Governments/UT Administrations will
furnish the UCs as this issue has been taken up with them on regular basis.
Regarding transfer of the scheme to the State Sector, the Planning Commission has again been requested to expedite their
decision.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee finds it quite unbelievable that the process of transfer of this scheme to the States has taken unduly
longer time. Why should the Planning Commission delay decision in this regard?  The Committee only hopes that it would
certainly be done in the 11
th Plan.
 
VIII.            Assistance for Construction/Expansion of Hostel Buildings for Working Women with Day Care Centres
for Children
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
8.2       The Committee was informed that there are 40 projects sanctioned from 2001-2002 to 2005-06 in the implementation
stage under the Scheme of Working Women Hostel. Out of these projects, in respect of 17 projects, either the file is not
traceable or no progress report has been received so far. In majority of these cases, implementing agencies are NGOs.  There
are a few cases where expenditure has already exceeded the original estimate and the building project is not yet complete.   
The Committee has been informed that in most of the cases, organizations involve their own construction agency for the
construction of hostel building. Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) in its Report No. 2 of 2004 (Para 6.5) has also
criticized the Ministry for its failure to monitor the utilization of grants totalling Rs. 39.58 crores given to NGOs and local
bodies for construction of hostels for working women.  The Committee is surprised to note that the requisite information is
still awaited from most of the States.
 
Action Taken 
 
The observation has been noted for compliance. The 24 states involved had been requested to liquidate the pending UC
in respect of  Working Women’s Hostel and send us the status of these hostels. Till now responses from 10 states are received.
Some of theses reports are partly complete. States which have not responded or have submitted part information have since
been reminded twice, Last time on 10.04.06. They are again being reminded.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is constrained to say that the performance of the scheme was never found to be satisfactory.  The
replies to the Committee's concern about this has always reflected Ministry's helplessness.  Past, present and future of this
noble scheme has been dogged from the very beginning that needs to be corrected urgently. By now the major reasons for this
must have been clearly identified.  The Government must take initiative urgently to make this scheme viable and effective.
 
IX.            Support toTraining and Employment Programme for Women(STEP)
 
Recommendations/Observations
 

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
9.2       As is evident from above figures, the number of beneficiaries and the number of projects are coming down every
year.    The Committee would also like to point out that although overall allocated funds have remained underutilized during
the Tenth Plan, performance level has been somewhat different in respect of NE Region States.    Expenditure has been more
than the allocated funds for these States.   The Committee would like to have an idea about the status of projects (State-wise)
during the Tenth Plan.
 
Action Taken
 
The figure regarding number of beneficiaries during the year 2005-06 as shown in the report is upto December, 2005. 
However, the total no. of beneficiaries during the year are 34575.  There is no provision of exclusively State-wise allocation of
funds under the scheme. Hence, the release of funds to any particular State depends upon the number of viable projects
forwarded by the respective State Govt. during the specific period.  Moreover, as the projects have considerable technical
inputs, the viability/feasibility of each project is ascertained in consultation with the concerned Technical Department. As
desired by the August committee, a statement incorporating detailed status of the projects (State-wise) during the Tenth Plan
period is enclosed as per Annexure VIII .
Comments of the Committee
Statewise statement about release of funds during the Tenth Plan under the STEP Scheme reveals a very discouraging
scenario. The Committee finds that whereas States like Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Meghalaya, Sikkim seem to
remain untouched by the benefits flowing from this scheme, in majority of the remaining States like Himachal Pradesh,
Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Tripura and West Bengal, no details about the number of beneficiaries are available in spite of
funds being released. The Committee can only conclude that funds are being simply released, without any monitoring at any
level. The Committee takes a serious view of this.
 
XIII            Swadhar
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
13.4            Although the scheme is picking up, however keeping in view the needy women of such categories, this
achievement is just a drop in the ocean. The existence of such Homes needs more publicity. The scheme may be allocated
more funds to finance more number of projects. The Committee recommends that at least one shelter home may be
constructed in each Districts in the country.
 
Action Taken
 
The recommendation of the Committee regarding construction of one shelter home in each district of the country has
been noted.
State Govts. have been requested to give wide publicity about existence of Swadhar Shelter Homes functioning in    their
States  so that maximum number of destitute women can avail the benefits of the scheme. During 2006-2007, funds amounting
to Rs.8.00 crore have been allocated as against Rs.6.00 crore allocated during 2005-2006. Action is being taken to achieve the
same.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation for making efforts to have one shelter homes in every district of the
country that needs serious consideration by the government.
 
XIV            Rashtriya Mahila Kosh
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
14.5            Progress in microfinance activity is pre-dominantly measured in terms of numbers covered, amounts saved,
amounts lent and repayment rates, and not by results achieved in genuine economic development. There is need to assess the
impact on the upliftment of women. The RMK should evaluate the scheme on these parameters. The Committee recommends
that RMK should develop a pool of projects/ schemes/activities which are locally viable and implementable and which can
generate income. The RMK can advise the beneficiaries to opt for any of these schemes, which will be beneficial for them.
The Committee feels that if such an option is available, the disbursement level will increase and the objectives of the scheme
can be achieved.
 
Action Taken

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
 
            RMK basically provides micro-credit to the poor women for income generating, production, skill development and
housing activities in order to make them economically independent.  If we look at the credit disbursals of the last three years
viz. 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 these are Rs. 14.46 crores, Rs. 18.87 crores and Rs. 20.68 crores respectively, it clearly
shows that there has been a constant growth of outreach.
Starting with an initial corpus of Rs. 31 crores provided to RMK at it’s inception in 1993, the total corpus has grown to Rs. 54
crores and total sanctions and disbursements at Rs. 186.73 crore and Rs. 147.54 crores respectively as at 31.03.2006.
5,48,711 Women have benefitted with RMK loans.  The recovery rate has been maintained at above 90%.  All this clearly
gives the eventful success story of RMK.  To assess the impact on the upliftment of women RMK has recommended two
studies:
 
i.
         Socio-economic impact of micro-credit extended to poor women by the Rashtriya Mahila Kosh in the country.
ii.        Comparison of micro-credit delivery by RMK in Southern States v/s Northern States. Recommendations for
bringing about the parity.
 
            RMK from time to time has been adding / modifying its schemes for its beneficiaries. 
Recently it has introduced a special package of concessions for the benefit / to accelerate its credit in the North – East States.
The concessions provided are:-
 
i.          The intermediary organization to be eligible for RMK credit should have completed one year (presently three
years) of its registration as on the date of Application.
ii.         Only 5% margin from the IOs/SHGs will be asked instead of 10% as prescribed under the present scheme.
iii.         A 12 months grace period (presently 6 months) will be provided before starting repayment by IOs.
iv.        A 5 years repayment period will be provided  for all the schemes and for any amount of loan (presently it is 3
years for loan upto Rs. 15,000/.  Four years for Loan upto Rs. 20,000/- & Loan above Rs. 20,000/- repayment
period is 5 years, Housing Loan repayment period is 5 years)
v.
                 A sleeper class rail fare or air fare by cheaper class for places not connected with Rail to & fro may be given to
the members (upto 2 nos) of NGO for coming to Delhi for execution of documents.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee had recommended that the RMK should be assessed on the basis of the genuine economic development and its
impact on upliftment of women. The Committee also recommended that the RMK should formulate viable and implementable
projects, which could generate income. However, the reply of the Ministry does not cover these aspects. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates this recommendation.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
14.6     The Committee was given to understand that a Sub Committee has been setup to examine different aspects of micro
credit programmes, economic viability and sustainability of Kosh under RMK.   In this connection, the Committee would like
to recall its earlier recommendation with regard to lowering of interest rate on loans to be given by RMK.    The Committee is
surprised to note that Governing Body of RMK in its meeting held on 21.12.2005 decided that constitution of a Sub
Committee for examination of various operational issues including lowering of interest rate be left to the discretion of MOS,
Ministry of Women and Child Development and  Chairperson, RMK.    The Committee expresses its serious reservation on
the handling of such a sensitive issue.    The Committee strongly feels that the existing system under which RMK charges
interest @ 8 % on reducing balance from borrowing agency which in turn charges any rate on or above 8% on reducing
balance from the ultimate beneficiaries subject to maximum upto 18% needs to be reviewed at the earliest.  One should not
forget that the main objective of RMK is to provide micro credit support to poor women.
 
Action Taken
 
            As directed by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, a sub-committee has been set-up by the Governing Board of
RMK to examine different aspects of micro-credit programems, economic viability and sustainability of the Kosh.
Besides other issues, the sub-committee also examined the lowering of interest rates of RMK.  The Governing Board chaired
by the Minister of State (Independent Charge) of Ministry of Women and Child Development in its meeting dated 06.09.2006
observed as:
 
“Keeping in view the overall micro-financing scenario prevalent in the country today, it was suggested that the
lowering of interest rates suggested by the Parliamentary Committee and also recommended by the sub-committee
was not advisable and the position may be reviewed after two years when RMK may have expanded business.

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
 
Thus the Governing Board advised that the status quo be maintained on this point.”
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the interest rate needs to be reduced to the reasonable level to
help the beneficiaries.  A cue may be taken from the Bangladesh Gramin Bank propounded by Shri Yunus.
 
Relief and Rehabilitation of Victims of Rape
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
15.5     The Committee feels that the victims of rape undergo the conditions of psychological stress and trauma
notwithstanding the physical assault. The rehabilitation process of such victim involves psychological support as well as
economic assistance. The Committee would like the Ministry to create a separate rehabilitation fund for victims of rape to
ensure that they get all sort of psychological and economic assistance in time.
 
Action Taken
 
As per the draft scheme under the consideration of this Ministry for providing relief and rehabilitation to the victims of rape,
Criminal Injuries Relief and Rehabilitation Board is proposed to be constituted district-wise in all States under the
chairpersonship of the District Magistrate or District Collector to consider claims from rape victims and award relief,
including interim compensation. It is also proposed to constitute District Monitoring Committees to arrange medical and legal
aid to the victim, her shelter, protection and rehabilitation. These Committees will have counselors, medical doctors and
lawyers to assist the victim. One of the functions of the Committee will be to arrange for psychological and medical aid and
counseling to the victim. The Criminal Injuries Relief and Rehabilitation Board constituted at the district level, upon receipt of
the application and after having been prima facie satisfied that a case of rape has been made out and making a preliminary
assessment about the nature of the claim, shall order, as far possible, within a period of three weeks from the date of receipt of
application, an interim financial relief of Rs.20,000/-. The amount of final relief will be awarded by the Board taking into
consideration the needs of the victim, the expenses incurred or likely to be incurred in connection with medical treatment,
psychological counseling, abortion, if it is resorted to in consequence of rape, loss suffered on account of cessation or
interruption of employment or gainful activity, expenses on provision of alternate accommodation, if any and compensation
for damage, pain, trauma, humiliation or inconvenience. The ceiling of the final amount of relief is proposed to be fixed Rs.
2.00 lakhs. However, a provision is included in the draft scheme to raise the maximum amount of final compensation to
Rs.3.00 lakhs in exceptional cases by the National Criminal Injuries Relief and Rehabilitation Board constituted at the Central
level. Though no creation of a separate fund is proposed in the scheme, the proposal to release adequate amount as interim
compensation to the victim within a reasonable time frame and the amount of final compensation upto Rs.3.00 lakhs proposed
to be paid to the victim would help mitigate her sufferings.
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee reiterates that separate rehabilitation fund for
Victims of Rape should be created from the next financial year.
 
XVI            Prevention of Sexual Harassment at Work Place
Recommendations/Observations
 16.5    The Committee is constrained to observe that that the Supreme Court Guidelines had not been properly followed by
the Government Departments.  In a number of cases, Complaint Committees had not been formed.  Where these committees
existed, they did not have 50 per cent reservation for women.  Also in many cases the Committees were headed by men
instead of women and without the involvement of a third party (NGO).  Lack of awareness among the Members of the
complaint Committee was also noticed. The Committee is of the firm view that Supreme Court directive needs to be
implemented in letter and spirit.   The Committee would like to have full details about the 799 organisations covered so far by
the NCW alongwith theorganizations where complaint Committees are yet to be set up.  The Committee would also like to
have an idea about the additional organizations covered by NCW. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should
come forward with a comprehensive legislation for prevention of sexual harassment in work places. The private institutions
may also be brought under the purview of the legislations related to prevention of sexual harassment.
 
Action Taken
 
The National Commission for Women (NCW) has furnished the following information in this regard:-
 

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
List of 799 organisations covered by NCW - Annexure-X
 
List of organisations which have not set up Complaint Committees in their organisations - Annexure-XI
 
NCW has informed that it has written to 99 Universities out of which 46 Universities have replied and confirmed
setting up of Complaint Committees.  The NCW has issued reminders to all the organisations and Universities which have not
set up complaint committees or which have not furnished any information in this regard. As regards enactment of a legislation
to prevent sexual harassment at workplace, the Ministry of Women and Child Development is already examining a draft Bill
on the subject prepared by the NCW in consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice and women voluntary organisations
having expertise on the subject.  The draft Bill covers all employers, whether in Government or Private Sector.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is not at all satisfied with the Ministry’s reply on this issue. The Committee notes that the Ministry is
examining a draft Bill on the subject prepared by the NCW in consultation with Ministry of Law & Justice.  The Committee
would like to emphasize that all conceivable efforts should be made to get the Bill introduced for consideration of the
Parliament at the earliest.
CHAPTER - IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OVSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
-nil-
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
II. Budgetary Allocation
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The list of pending UCs supplied to the Committee speaks itself about the alarming proportions this problem has
acquired.  There are as many as 5841 UCs amounting to more than Rs. 32,945 lakhs to be accounted for. Some UCs are
pending since as far back as 1986-87.  The Committee is inclined to agree with the statement of the Ministry that the 224
pages list of pending UCs is very bulky. A quick glance of this list presents a dismal scenario. The Committee is dismayed to
note that almost all the schemes handled by different agencies are covered under this list. What is more shocking is that not
only private NGOs  but Government agencies like Universities, Colleges, Corporations, Institutions even bodies like Central
Social Welfare Board, Bharatiya Adim Jati Sevak Sangh controlled by the Ministry are the defaulters.  Not only this,
submission of UCs notwithstanding, same agencies continue to have the benefit of Government funding year after year
without any break.  It seems that the role of the Ministry has been confined to be a fund-disbursing agency only.  Element of
accountability is simply missing.  Ministry's efforts if any, needless to say, have not fructified and pendency is increasing year
after year.  The Committee is of the opinion that this aspect need to be taken up seriously with a view to identifying inherent
drawbacks/hindrances - systematic, procedural and others.  These pending UCs create a vicious circle and a logjam in which
the schemes are caught and their implementation suffers.            
(Para 2.7)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            About the problem of unspent balances, the Committee feels, the Ministry needs to remain ever vigilant.  Since some
amounts remaining unspent in certain cases are inherent in the procedure, consistent efforts be made to keep it in reasonable
limits.  Rajasthan's performance in UDISHA must be watched closely and so should be NIPCCD and CSWB also.  The
Committee has observed that there is considerable time gap between the sanction of funds by Central Government and final
release to the implementing agencies at the State level.  The Committee strongly feels that this procedural bottleneck can be
easily handled if initiative is taken at both the ends.                                                                                   (Para 2.9)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is concerned about the problem regarding inability to submit Utilisation Certificates (UCs) in time
particularly by the NGOs. It has come to acquire threatening dimension as regard implementing central schemes effectively. In
such a situation, the Committee feels, States need to be little more pro-active in this regard; the centre because of obvious

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
reasons cannot and has not proved to be effective so far. There is an urgent need for evolving a procedure wherein UCs are
ascertained/obtained at the district level by the DMs and sending them to centre by using electronic mails etc. It might ease the
problem to a great extent.
(Para 2.10)
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is at a loss to see that the strategies proposed to be adopted regarding women specific schemes/issues
during the tenth plan, as mentioned in paragraph 2.11 of its 175 th Report, could not be implemented/adopted. Now the
Ministry as usual promises to do it during the 11 th Plan. The Committee in view of this, expresses its concern about the
lackadaisical attitude regarding schemes relating to development of women and children.                                               (Para
2.12)
 
III.            Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee notes that it has taken almost a year in the micro-level survey so as to finilise the requirement of
additional projects/AWCs/mini AWCs. The Committee only hopes that the process of setting up of additional AWCs, mini
AWCs in the aftermath of revision of population norm would be taken up on overriding priority basis. The CCEA's approval
must have come by now. All efforts must be made to set up the additional infrastructure in a time - bound manner.
(Para 3.5)
Comments of the Committee
 
            The problem of States not being prompt enough to provide adequate funds for supplementary nutrition compelled the
Centre to share it 50:50 basis.  The Committee is surprised to see that the problem still persists.  The Committee while
appreciating Ministry's contention in this regard calls upon the Planning Commission to sort out this problem with individual
States while discussing their Annual Plans every year.  It might consider linking it with the approval of their Plans every year.
                                                                              (Paras 3.6 & 3.7)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Government to augment the number of Anganwadis and notes
that proposal for sanctioning additional projects is under process.  However, the need of the hour is also to ensure that these
projects were set up in a time bound manner.  In view of the concern of the Supreme Court regarding the children, the
Committee also emphasizes the need to operationalise the sanctioned projects in time bound plan.                  (Para 3.9)
 
Comments of the Committee
It seems that the report of the Rapid Facility Survey conducted by NCAER on infrastructural facilities at Anganwadi
Centres was shared with the States/UTs only on a specific mention being made by the Committee in its 175
th Report. The
Committee would appreciate if the feedback from the States/UTs not performing well is expedited so as to take required
remedial action.                                     (Para 3.13)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee could see some improvements during these years in respect of sanctioning/operationalisation of
Anganwadi Centres as also in filling up the vacancies of Anganwadi Workers and Anganwadi Helpers.  In the case of
supervisors, however, a lot needs to be done, their vacancy position being 30.31% Similarly massive effort and resources
would be needed for operationalising the new projects.  The Committee hopes that States need to be activated to meet the
deadline which can be fixed for this purpose.
    The Committee reiterates its previous recommendations regarding the need for increasing the honorarium paid to the
Anganwadi Workers/Anganwadi Helpers.
(Para 3.18)
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee does not quite agree with the contention of the Ministry about (i) providing day care/creche facilities at
Anganwadi Centres and (ii) about coordination of Anganwadi Workers and Auxiliary Nurse Midwives(ANM)/ASHA. The
Committee reiterates its recommendation to further examine these suggestions for implementation.                        
                                                                        (Para 3.22)

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry in setting up the coordination committee.  The Ministry is
required to make concerted efforts to ensure that Coordination Committees were constituted by all the States in a time bound
manner.                                                                                                (Para 3.23)
 
IV. Training Programme under ICDS (UDISHA)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee reiterates its concern about considerable backlog of ICDS functionaries training.  The Ministry's
efforts in this regard could not have the desired impact. In view of the significance of the training in implementation of ICDS,
the Committee recommends that the Ministry needs to chalk out an effective strategy in consultation with the States/UTs
concerned institutions/organisations as well as other Ministries/Departments for achieving the targets in a fixed time schedule.
The Committee would also like to emphasize once again that the States lagging behind need to be identified on priority basis,
so that their problem areas can be tackled effectively.                                                                                (Para 4.5)
 
V.        Rajiv Gandhi National Creche Scheme for the Children of Working Mothers
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee does not doubt about the efficiency and experience of Central Social Welfare Board, Indian Council
for Child Welfare and Bharatiya Adim Jati Sevak Sangh in implementing these scheme.  It, however, feels that in view of its
importance, other equally reputed NGOs also may be identified and given the work for enhancing the outreach of the scheme.
                             (Para 5.3)
 
VI.            Condensed Course for Women Education
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee as in the past, does reiterate again its disappointment for the last minute spending in the scheme.  The
Ministry has to ensure the timely release of funds as well as spending evenly in every quarter.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that remedial steps needs to be taken in this regard urgently.
(Para 6.2)
 Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is surprised to note that its specific request for being apprised about the contents of the Report of the
National Working Group on the Scheme of Condensed Courses for Women Education remains unattended. The Ministry has
simply mentioned that the Report has been submitted to the CSWB on the 16
th May, 2006. The Committee expresses its
unhappiness on this State of affairs.
(Para 6.3)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Just three institutions for running residential courses is a matter of serious concern. The Committee agrees that more
funds are required for the residential courses.  The Committee recommends that more funds be provided to increase the
residential courses which will benefit larger number of women.             (Para 6.5)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Committee's attention has been drawn by the variations in the number of targetted beneficiaries and funds sanctioned
under the scheme to various States. On a specific query with regard to a few States, the Committee has been given to
understand that the excess release of funds to various State Boards was towards the past liabilities of previous years. From the
details furnished by the Ministry in respect of Delhi, Bihar, UP and W. Bengal, it is evident that for the years 2003-2004 and
2004-2005, besides the funds for the current year, there were past liabilities also. The Committee is not aware about the details
of these liabilities. The Committee would, however, like to mention that with students not getting their stipend and teachers
not receiving their salary every month, scheme of Condensed Courses for Women Education seems to be running on paper
only.
(Para 6.6)
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee feels that apart from CSWB, there is a need for monitoring of the funds under the scheme by the

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
Ministry also. The Committee notes significant under-utilization as unspent balance by the States as the figures given to the
Committee show.  The Committee feels that Ministry must be more proactive in respect of these scheme and strict monitoring
by it be ensured.                       (Para 6.8)
 
VII.     Balika Samriddhi Yojana(BSY)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee finds it quite unbelievable that the process of transfer of this scheme to the States has taken unduly
longer time. Why should the Planning Commission delay decision in this regard?  The Committee only hopes that it would
certainly be done in the 11
th Plan.                                                     (Para 7.2, 7.3 & 7.4)
 
VIII.            Assistance for Construction/Expansion of Hostel Buildings for Working Women with Day Care Centres
for Children
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is constrained to say that the performance of the scheme was never found to be satisfactory.  The
replies to the Committee's concern about this has always reflected Ministry's helplessness.  Past, present and future of this
noble scheme has been dogged from the very beginning that needs to be corrected urgently. By now the major reasons for this
must have been clearly identified.  The Government must take initiative urgently to make this scheme viable and effective.
(Para 8.2)
 
IX.            Support toTraining and Employment Programme for Women(STEP)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Statewise statement about release of funds during the Tenth Plan under the STEP Scheme reveals a very discouraging
scenario. The Committee finds that whereas States like Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Meghalaya, Sikkim seem to
remain untouched by the benefits flowing from this scheme, in majority of the remaining States like Himachal Pradesh,
Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Tripura and West Bengal, no details about the number of beneficiaries are available in spite of
funds being released. The Committee can only conclude that funds are being simply released, without any monitoring at any
level. The Committee takes a serious view of this.                                                                                          (Para 9.2)
XIII            Swadhar
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation for making efforts to have one shelter homes in every district of the
country that needs serious consideration by the government.                                                                                                     
(Para 13.4)
 
XIV            Rashtriya Mahila Kosh
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee had recommended that the RMK should be assessed on the basis of the genuine economic development and its
impact on upliftment of women. The Committee also recommended that the RMK should formulate viable and implementable
projects, which could generate income. However, the reply of the Ministry does not cover these aspects. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates this recommendation.                                                                                             (Para 14.5)
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the interest rate needs to be reduced to the reasonable level to
help the beneficiaries.  A cue may be taken from the Bangladesh Gramin Bank propounded by Shri Yunus.
(Para 14.6)
Relief and Rehabilitation of Victims of Rape
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee reiterates that separate rehabilitation fund for
Victims of Rape should be created from the next financial year.                                                                (Para 15.5)
 

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
XVI            Prevention of Sexual Harassment at Work Place
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is not at all satisfied with the Ministry’s reply on this issue. The Committee notes that the Ministry is
examining a draft Bill on the subject prepared by the NCW in consultation with Ministry of Law & Justice.  The Committee
would like to emphasize that all conceivable efforts should be made to get the Bill introduced for consideration of the
Parliament at the earliest.
(Para 16.5)
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
MINUTES
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 25
th January, 2007 in
Committee Room 'E', Basement, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1.         Shri Janardan Dwivedi                        ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
                  Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.                  Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4.                  Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5.                  Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6.                  Smt. Brinda Karat
7.                  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
8.                  Shri Ali Anwar
 
LOK SABHA
 
9.
                  Shri Ashok Argal
10.              Shri Basudeb Barman
11.              Shri Harishchandra Chavan
12.              Shri Harisinh Chavda
13.              Shri Ramswaroop Koli
14.              Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
15.              Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
16.              Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
17.              Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
18.              Dr. Thokchom Meinya
19.              Shri K. Virupakshappa
20.              Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
21.              Shri Francis K. George
22.              Shri Anantkumar Hegde
23.              Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
 

189th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/189threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:33:28]
        SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.   The Committee then considered the following
draft reports:
 
(i)
     *********
(ii)    *********
(iii)  Action Taken Report on recommendations/observations contained in the 175 th Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-2007) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development;
(iv)  *********
(v)   *********
 
3.         The Committee adopted the reports with certain modifications. The Committee decided to present/lay the Reports to
both the Houses of Parliament in the ensuing Budget session.
 
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.10 P.M. to meet again on 19th February 2007.
NEW DELHI
25
th January, 2007
VIMAL KUMAR
UNDER SECRETARY
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matter