Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FIFTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th April, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2013)  
Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 105) of the
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
REPORT NO. 
255


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FIFTH REPORT
Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 105) of the
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th April, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. Abbreviations ................................................................................................................ ......... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—31
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 32—37
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 39—44

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
(Constituted w.e.f. 31st August, 2012)
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Shri Tarun Vijay
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
9. Shri Baishnab Parida
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suresh Angadi
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Sivasami C.
15. Shrimati Helen Davidson
*16. Shrim ati Deepa Dasmunshi
@17. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
18. Dr. Charles Dias
19. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
20. Shri Virender Kashyap
21. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
23. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
24. Capt. Jai Naraian Prasad Nishad
25. Shri Sis Ram Ola
26. Shri M.K. Raghavan
27. Shri K. Chandrashekar Rao
28. Shri M.I. Shanavas
29. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
30. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
31. Shri Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
32. Shri Manicka Tagore
(i)
* Shrimati Deepa Dasmunshi was elevated to Union Minister of State, Urban Development on 28.10.2012.
@ Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  09.01.2013.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred Fifty-fifth Report of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (Demand No.105) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for the year 2013-2014.
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and also heard the Secretaries and other Officials of that
Department on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 2
nd April, 2013.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
30th April, 2013.
OSCAR FERNANDES
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 30, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary
Vaisakha 10, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development

(iv)
ABBREVIATIONS
1 NYKS – Nehru Yuva Kendra
2. NSS – National Service Scheme
3. NSFs – National Sports Federation
4. SAI – Sports Authority of India
5. PYKKA – Panchayat Yuva Krida Khel Abhiyan
6. UC – Utilization Certificate
7. NYC – Nehru Youth Corp
8. SMART – Self-Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Technology
9. MGNREGA – Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
10. TCS – Tata Consultancy Services
11. CPART – Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural Technology
12. DYC – District Tasking Staff
13. MTS – Multi Tasking Staff
14. DYCs – District Youth Coordinator
15. RRs – Recruitment Rules
16. ACT – Account Clerk-cum-Typist
17. LWE – Left Wing Extremist
18. NE – North East
19. APM – Advisor Prime Minister
20. NGOs – Non-Governmental Organizations
21. NSSDS – National Service and Skill Development Scheme
22. CSR – Corporate Social Responsibility
23. BPO – Back Processing Office
24. UGC – University Grant Commission
25. CABE – Central Advisory Board of Education
26. HRD – Human Resource Development
27. RGNIYD – Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development
28. UNICEF – United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
29. UNESCO – United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
30. UNFPA – United Nations Population Fund
31. SAARC – South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
32. CYP – Commonwealth Youth Programme
33. SHGs – Self Help Groups
34. NPY AD – National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development
35. NFC – Nation Fitness Corp
36. MPLAD – Member of Parliament Local Area Development
37. NSTC – National Sports Talent Competition
38. ABSC – Army Boys Sports Companies
39. SAG – Special Area Games
40. STC – SAI Training Centres
41. COX – Centres of Excellence
42. TEAMS – Training of Elite Athletes and Management Support
43. LTDPS – Long Term Development Plan
44. NADA – National Anti Doping Agency
45. NDTL – National Dope Testing Laboratory
46. W ADA – World Anti Doping Agency
47. NIS – National Institute of Sports
48. EFC – Expenditure Finance Committee
49. DPR – Detailed Project Report

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports is entrusted with the responsibilities relating to the
development of Youth and Adolescents, and the functions of the Central Government with regard
to Sports and Physical Education. There are two separate Departments viz. Department of Youth
Affairs and Department of Sports.
1.2 The subject “Youth Affairs” is dealt in the Department of Youth Affairs of the Ministry. As
per the initial figures of the 2011 Census, the current youth population in the country including
adolescents is around 550 million. It is indeed vital to utilize this “demographic dividend” and
channelize the youth and their creative energies for nation-building. The Department of Youth
Affairs is implementing a large number of schemes for youth and adolescents development which
focus on three key thrust areas viz., Personality Development, Preparation for Work Participation/
Employability and Empowerment. The programmes of the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS)
focus towards rural youth and vast network of youth clubs and volunteers who undertake number
of activities for youth at the grassroot level. National Service Scheme (NSS) provides a platform
for students to enhance their personality through community service.
1.3 The Secretary, Youth Affairs in her presentation before the Committee on the 25
th March,
2013 gave an overview of status of plan allocation and utilization thereof during 2012-13. She
informed that during the year, the Department, through its available resources and tapping of funds
from other Departments, trained youth under various skill development training programmes across
the country. At present, about 50 lakh rural youths were associated with Nehru Yuva Kendra
Sangathan and 32 lakh with National Service Scheme. The Committee was given an idea about the
initiatives taken by the Department to start the process of skill development so as to scale up these
activities during the Twelfth Plan. The Department had been in consultation with the Office of
Advisor to Prime Minister on Skill Development on ‘Repositioning NSS’ by introducing ‘Skill
Training’ so that the graduating youth could acquire job-related skills through immersive community
projects.
1.4 The Secretary drew the attention of the Committee to non-availability of required Plan funds
inspite of there being a huge demand for additional hours and additional colleges to be sanctioned
under NSS. Target of enrolling 55 million volunteers under NSS during the Eleventh Plan period
also remained un-achieved. To fill this gap, self-financing units were being started in institutions
which would work as per the existing guidelines of NSS. This initiative had led to setting up of
1100 self-financing units across the country with approximately one lakh volunteers.
1.5 The Committee was also given an idea about the initiatives taken by the Department under
the other Flagship Programme of NYKS. Training programmes with various agencies like Tata
Consultancy Services, Ministries of Home Affairs, Social Justice and Empowerment, Health &
Family Welfare, Women and Child Development, Rural Development and Universities were being
undertaken. However, this Scheme was also not giving the targeted results due to shortage of
funds. The Secretary also touched upon other schemes being implemented by the Department.
1.6 The Department of Sports in the Ministry deals with “Sports”. With reference to
competitive sports and promotion of excellence at the national and international levels, the
responsibility for development of different disciplines rests primarily with the National Sports
Federations (NSFs) concerned, which are registered autonomous organizations. The Government of
India has been supplementing the efforts of the State Governments through certain schemes of

2
financial assistance for sports infrastructure. The Central Government directly, and also through the
Sports Authority of India (SAI), provides financial assistance and a variety of facilities, for
competition exposure, training/coaching etc., to NSFs for preparation of teams for international
events. SAI also has a number of schemes for the spotting and nurturing of young talent. In
addition, the Department is also implementing schemes for providing incentives to sportspersons to
encourage them to take up sports as a career. It is also concerned with physical education, an
aspect of physical fitness as a vital ingredient of youth development, as well as means of enhancing
the sporting abilities of the young.
1.7 The Secretary, Department of Sports also appeared before the Committee on the 25
th March,
2013 and gave an overview of the functioning of the Department during 2012-13 and also the
vision for nurturing sports talent in the country. The Committee was given to understand that the
Department could achieve the optimum utilisation level of allocated funds during 2012-13 with
expenditure being duly accounted for. Inspite of there being massive cut in the fund allocation
during the last quarter of 2012-13, it was ensured that the programmes did not suffer. Another
highlight was improvement in the functioning of National Sports Federations across the country.
The Federations were now working to develop a long term plan for their individual sports with
Olympics, 2020 as the target.
1.8 The Secretary also informed the Committee that the Panchayat Yuva Krida Khel
Abhiyan(PYKKA) was being re-structured in coordination with other schemes like NREGA. The
other major initiative was setting up of the Institute of Sports Medicine and the Institute of Sports
Coaching. Feasibility Report on the two proposed Institutes being done by the National Skill
Development Corporation was expected by June and the work on the two Institutes may start by
November-December in this year.
1.9 The Secretary then dwelt upon the biggest initiative, Scheme of Identification and Nurturing
of Sports Talent which would be a ten-year project. Through the competitions held under PYKKA,
100 talented children in the age group of 6-10 years would be selected from every district of the
country. These children would be admitted in 700 District Sports Schools. The talented children
would ultimately get the opportunity to be trained in SAI Centres of Excellence.
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
2.1 The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has been provided with a budgetary allocation of
`1219.00 crore in BE 2013-14 which includes `1093.00 crore as Plan provision and `126.00 crore
as non-plan one. While allocation of `284.00 crore for Youth related schemes for 2013-14 shows
a marginal decrease when compared with BE 2012-13 allocation of `300.00 crore and RE allocation
of `289.60 crore, Plan allocation of `809.00 crore for Sports related Schemes indicates substantive
enhancement when compared with BE 2012-13 allocation of `741.00 crore and RE allocation of
`600.00 crore.
2.2 The Committee finds that trend of allocation of funds and utilisation thereof during the last
two years shows no change as indicated below:
(` in crores )
2011-12 2012-13 (upto 18.02.2013)
BE RE Actual BE RE Actual
1000.00 884.00 881.35 1041.00 889.00 810.68
The Committee hopes that allocated funds for both the Departments for 2013-14 will
not reflect any reduction at the RE stage. The Committee would like to point out that a

3
comparative analysis of level of achievement of financial targets for both the Departments
shows a marked difference. While BE allocation of Rs.300.00 crore was made for both 2011-12
and 2012-13 for the Department of Youth Affairs, the Department showed optimum
utilisation of allocated funds, nominal decrease at the RE stage notwithstanding. In
contrast, BE provision of `700.00 crore for 2011-12 for the Department of Sports shows a
marginal increase of `36.00 crore in 2012-13. However, in both the years, allocated funds
have been reduced by more than `100.00 crore at the RE stage. Not only this, in 2012-13,
as on 18.02.2013, utilization figures for the Department stand at `539.59 crore. The
Committee is constrained to observe that inspite of satisfactory performance so far as Youth
Welfare Schemes during 2011-12 and 2012-13 are concerned, BE allocation of `284.00 crore
for 2013-14 is at the same level as at the RE stage of 2012-13. In contrast Sports related
schemes have been provided `809.00 crore for 2013-14 showing an increase of `209.00 crore
when compared with RE allocation of 2012-13.
2.3 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the Report of the Working Group on Adolescents
and Youth Development for Twelfth Plan which had recommended an allocation of `5540.42 crore
for the Plan period.  Against this projection, approved schematic outlays of only `2048.00 crore
have been made. The Committee finds it very surprising that even this level of outlay has
not been reflected in the first two years of the Twelfth Plan Period. Similarly, in the context
of Sports Sector, the Working Group on Sports and Physical Education for Twelfth Plan had
recommended an allocation of `10949.00 crore for the Plan Period. Approved schematic
outlays for Sports comes to only `4600.00 crore. What is more discouraging is that even
this reduced provision is missing when the level of allocation for the first two years of the
Twelfth Plan is seen. Following details with regard to some of the schemes are self-
explanatory.
(` in crores )
Scheme Approved 2012-13 2013-14
Outlay Allocation Allocation
Youth Hostels  26.00  2.00  1.50
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute for Youth 508.00  20.00  20.00
Development
NYKS, National Prog. For Youth Development, 11 14.00  198.00 187.00
International Co-operation, National Youth
Corps, Scouting and Guiding
National Sports Federations, Talent Search 1200.00 1 17.50 177.00
and Training, Awards, Pensions
2.4 The Committee strongly feels that allocation of funds during the Twelfth Plan Period
for various schemes/institutions relating to youth and sports should be strictly in accordance
with the approved outlay. The Committee would like to point out that only one year of the
Twelfth Plan has gone and during the first year itself, utilisation level of allocated funds has
been by and large satisfactory. There have been some exceptions but for that the concerned
agencies have to identify the problem-areas and take corrective measures accordingly. This
is all the more required to be done as both the Departments have come up with some
significant initiatives having implications for the welfare and support of our youth. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that at the RE stage, additional funds may be provided
for schemes running satisfactorily.

4
2.5 The Committee has been reviewing every year pendency of Utilisation Certificates with
various implementing agencies. The Committee has been given to understand that this area is being
continuously monitored by the Ministry with all concerned at all levels. Committee’s attention has
been drawn by the following statement indicating the year-wise summary on the UC status and the
amount outstanding in the beginning of 2012-13 and as on 21.02.2013 given below:
(` in crore )
Sl. Financial As on 1
st April, 2012 As on 21 st February, 2013
No. Y ear
No. of Outstanding Amount No. of Outstanding Amount
UCs UCs
1 2007-08 550 12.07 506 7.28
2 2008-09 127 71.27 117 34.16
3 2009-10 116 245.57 100 234.22
4 2010-11 07 9.53 156* 91.29
5 2011-12 01 0.38 34 4.85
T
OTAL : 801 338.82 912 371.80
* The increase is being reconciled with CCA as some Old cases of 1993 onwards relating to HRD included.
2.6 The Committee is intrigued to note that for 2010-11, as on 1.4.2012, number of
outstanding Utilization Certificates was 7 involving `9.53 crore. This figure went upto 156
Utilization Certificates involving `91.29 crore as on 21.2.2013. The Committee is not
convinced by the clarification given by the Ministry that the increase was being reconciled
with CCA as some old cases of 1993 onwards relating to HRD were included. This issue
needed to be resolved at the earliest. The Committee also finds that not much progress has
been made with regard to outstanding Utilization Certificates pertaining to 2007-08, 2008-
09 and 2009-10. The Committee is of the view that all the old outstanding Utilization
Certificates need to be accounted for on priority basis.
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
3.1 Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) is an autonomous body of the Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports. NYKS has its presence in 623 districts of the country. It has become one of
the largest Youth Organisations in the world, reaching out to village-based youth clubs. These Youth
Clubs work in the areas like education and training, awareness generation, skill development and
self-employment, entrepreneurial development, thrift and co-operation, besides development of the
body through sports and adventure and mind through sustained exposure to new ideas and
development strategies. For implementation of the programmes, every district Nehru Yuva Kendra
(NYK) has a trained cadre of District Youth Coordinator, National Youth Corps (NYC) V olunteers
and Youth leaders.
3.2 NYKS accomplishes its task through two categories of programmes i.e.  Regular
Programmes and Schemes assigned to it by the Ministry and Special Programmes undertaken in
collaboration with other Ministries and organisations. During 2012-13, NYKS undertook various
important programmes. 12,307 office bearers of Mentor Youth Clubs were trained. 1000 Members
of Youth Clubs of participating 100 district NYKS visited important places including historical sites,
tourist spots, academic, scientific and technological establishments of host 100 district NYKs. In
606 districts, 3030 skill upgradation training programmes were organised in which 58,882 women

5
participated. SMART courses were run in 66 selected districts. Besides that, 3698 National Youth
Corps volunteers were given Refresher Training and Skill Development Training was provided to
2947 outgoing volunteers in the Agricultural and Allied field through KVK. Awareness and Education
for the Prevention of Drug Abuse and Alcoholism was implemented in Punjab and Manipur which
covered 3000 villages in 75 Blocks of 10 Districts of Punjab and 750 villages of 25 Blocks in
7 Districts of Manipur. Under the Programme of Capacity Building of NYKS Youth Clubs for Social
Empowerment of workers under MGNREGA, workers in 80,000 villages were empowered with
latest updates on the MGNREGA Act. Lastly, NYKS in collaboration with UN Fund for Population
Activities implemented a Project on ‘Adolescent Health and Development in 10 districts of Bihar,
MP, Maharashtra, Odisha and Rajasthan.
3.3 The Secretary during her presentation before the Committee informed that under the NYKS
they have taken up initiatives for the skill development programme through the Tata Consultancy
Services(TCS). They have taken up the training programmes, through the TCS, in four States –
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. About 2000 people will be trained over a period
of three to six months and they will also be provided placements. Similarly, in a pilot project they
are taking up training programme of about 2000 boys and girls from the naxal affected districts
of Bastar in Chattisgarh through the Ministry of Home Affairs. They are also trying to take up such
programmes with other Ministries. There is a `2.20 crore proposed project with the Ministry of
Road Transport for using services of volunteers on the National Highways for providing first-aid
and emergency medical facilities to road accident victims on pilot basis. There is also a project on
Prevention of Drug Abuse and Alcoholism in Punjab with the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment. The project has been started in two districts and will cover other districts as well
for which an additional allocation of `6.70 crore may be given. There are other schemes such as
empowering of rural women through social mobilization and community participation by
convergence of schemes at the village level with the Ministry of Women and Child Development.
Then, there is a proposal for deploying youth professionals with NYKS across the country under
CAPART with the Ministry of Rural Development.
3.4 The Committee is encouraged to find that the Department has come up with various
projects with different agencies, private as well as Government for skill development and
training programmes. However, it appears that these projects/schemes are only in their
initial stages and as mentioned by the Secretary are being constrained by the fund crunch.
Before initiating these projects, the Department should formulate a policy framework or a
road map on the convergence of the scheme with other agencies or Ministries in the matter
of allocation of funds and proper utilization of the volunteers.
3.5 On a specific query whether all the Nehru Yuva Kendras have the required work force, the
Department informed the Committee that as per the sanctioned strength, each Kendra of NYKS was
to be manned by one District Youth Coordinator (DYC), one Accountant-Clerk-Typist(ACT) and one
Multi Tasking Staff(MTS). At present, there was a shortage of 327 DYCs and 199 ACTs. 12,000
volunteers had been allotted to NYKS under the Scheme of National Youth Corps (NYC). These
volunteers were involved in the implementation of different programmes/activities of NYKS. The
volunteers were deployed in all the 623 districts of NYKS @ 2 volunteers per block. As on date,
9300 volunteers were in position and the selection of remaining volunteers against the allocation was
in process. Abut 12,000 volunteers would be in position by the first week of April, 2013.
3.6 At present the Cadre Review of NYKS was being conducted with the following objectives:–
• To assess magnitude of stagnation in various grades of the organisation. While doing so,
the viewpoints of the association and other stakeholders may be examined;
• To review the structure of the organization along with the feeder cadre, keeping in view
the findings of (i) above;

6
• To suggest remedial measures, both short term and long term for career progression of
the officers of the organisation at various levels.
3.7 It was further informed that the Cadre Review Committee was likely to submit its report
by May, 2013. After receipt and acceptance of the recommendations of the Committee, the
Recruitment Rules (RRs) for various posts in NYKS would be reviewed and amended. Thereafter,
the recruitment process to fill up the vacant posts including that of District Youth Coordinator
(DYC) and Accounts Clerk-cum-Typist (ACT) would be undertaken through promotion and direct
recruitment.
3.8 The Committee is constrained to observe that the entire exercise will be a long
drawn affair and will perhaps continue during the entire Twelfth Plan period. That will also
happen only if a final decision on the Cadre Review Committee recommendations is taken
at the earliest. In any case, it will be a long time for each and every Centre to get the
full compliment of the required staff. The Committee can only recommend that the
Department should closely monitor the process of recruitment of NYKS functionaries and
avoid any delay.
3.9 The Committee was informed that against the allocation of `134.84 crore in RE 2012-13
(Plan `106.38 crore and Non-Plan `28.46 crore), the anticipated expenditure was `134.84 crore
For 2013-14, against a projected requirement of `370.30 crore (Plan `336.30 crore and Non-Plan
`34.00 crore), Plan allocation of `106.10 crore and non-plan allocation of `32.10 crore has been
made.
3.10 The Committee observes that continuing with its track-record of previous years, there has
been optimum utilisation of allocated funds by NYKS during 2012-13. Nobody can dispute the fact
that NYKS is not only one of the major youth organisations under the Ministry, particularly with
reference to the rural areas but also a major purveyor of schemes and programmes, in terms of
designing and implementing them. The Committee also takes note of the approach of the Twelfth
Plan – review of the existing sectoral programmes and schemes and bringing into them the required
specific focus and re-orientation and their expansion to cover the whole country and diverse groups
and ultimately empower and enable the youth to become effective and productive participants in
the social, economic and political development of the country.
3.11 The Committee views with serious concern that the projected requirement of
`2182.35 crore for NYKS for the Twelfth Plan remains totally ignored, inspite of optimum
utilisation of allocated funds during the Eleventh Plan period as well as the first year of the
Twelfth Plan. Factors like introduction of some new schemes/programmes, projected
enhancement of the Regular Programme coverage from 501 Districts to 623 Districts, filling
up of vacant posts of NYKS functionaries and payment of enhanced salary to them have to
be addressed in the right earnest. The Committee, accordingly, strongly recommends
enhanced allocation for NYKS for 2013-14. Need of the hour is to utilise the demographic
dividend accruing due to the phenomenal rise in the youth population of the country and
channelize the youth and their creative energies for nation-building. For achieving this
objective, core requirement of funds has to be taken care of.
3.12 The Committee observes that there are some major proposals which have to be
implemented during the Twelfth Plan period as indicated below:
– Establishment of Regional Youth Centres, Yuva Utthan evam Vikas Kendras at
Bangalore, Gandhinagar, Bhubaneswar, Chandigarh and Guwahati
– Information Technology
– Construction of NYKS Office Buildings

7
– Modernisation of NYKS Headquarters
– National Youth Centre
The Committee is of the view that with the above proposals being implemented,
various schemes undertaken by NYKS will be better placed in carrying out their mandated
assignments. The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that all these proposals need to be
carried forward in a time-bound Action Plan having the support of adequate funds as and
when required.
3.13 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the long pending project of construction of
National Youth Centre building in Alipur, New Delhi. The Committee is surprised to note
that inspite of a piece of land (10.95 acres) being made available by Delhi Administration
way back in 1984, things have simply not moved forward. Audit observations about under-
utilization of land at Alipur and also functioning of NYKS HQ on rented premises have
failed to activate the proposal. A formal decision to construct NYKS Office and residential
complex at Alipur could be taken by the Board of Governors on the 27
th July, 1994.
Thereafter, it took another 16 years for the Board of Governors, i.e. on the 2 nd February,
2010 to taka a decision to prepare a Concept Paper/Master Plan for the development of
Alipur Complex. In compliance of the decision of the Board of Governors, a draft Concept
Paper/Master Plan entailing a total project cost of `516.17 crore has been duly prepared and
annual projection of funds beginning from the first year of the Twelfth Plan, i.e. 2012-13
has been specified. The Committee, however, finds that the same has not been reflected in
the non-plan allocation in both 2012-13 and 2013-14. That clearly shows that the project is
yet to take off. It is indeed a very discouraging state of affairs.
3.14 It would be 30 years by the end of 2013-14 when the required land was allotted for
National Youth Centre. Normally, non-availability of land is cited as the primary reason for
implementation of a project. Here, the story is entirely different. Piece of land is duly
available that too in the capital of the country, but the National Youth Centre continues to
operate from rented premises. If the project had been taken in the right earnest in 1984
itself, construction cost would have been minimal when compared with the latest
requirement. The Committee has no doubt in saying that the estimate of `516.17 crore
projected in 2010 would fall behind if the project starts during 2013-14.  The Committee
impresses upon the Department to take up this project without any further delay and get
the same completed during the Twelfth Plan period only.
3.15 The Committee has been closely monitoring the proposal for inclusion of 122 uncovered
districts of the country under NYKS. The Committee was given to understand by the Department
through the Action Taken Note given by the Department to its Report on Demands for Grants
2012-13 that action to open new Kendras had been initiated. The new Kendras were proposed to
be opened during the Twelfth Plan period in a phased manner, depending upon the availability of
funds. However, as per the latest feedback given to the Committee that a Kendra of NYKS has
been opened in all the 122 uncovered districts of the country. The Committee, while appreciating
all the uncovered districts being brought under NYKS in such a short span of time, has its
own apprehensions. The Committee has no doubt that all the new Kendras must have been
declared to be opened but the exercise of making them functional in the real sense is yet
to be initiated. This is borne out by the fact that there is acute shortage of NYKS
functionaries. Even the functional Kendras are not well equipped with the required
manpower, status of new Kendra can very well be imagined.
IV. NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME ((NSS)
4.1 National Service Scheme (NSS) is a centrally sponsored Scheme (CSS) with the objective

8
to develop character and personality of student youth in schools and colleges. The Scheme is
implemented through the State Governments and the operations of NSS are at the University/
College and Higher Secondary School level. The objective of NSS is to arouse social conscience
of students, and to provide them an opportunity to work with the people in the villages and slum
dwellers. The Scheme seeks to achieve its objectives through twin approach i.e. “Campus to
Community” and “College to Village”, which also helps in developing leadership qualities and
personality development of students. NSS has two types of programmes, viz., (a) Regular Activities
and (b) Special Camping Programmes. Under the ‘Regular Activities’, students are expected to
work as volunteers for a continuous period of two years, rendering community service for a
minimum of 120 hours per annum. Under ‘Special Camping Programmes’, a camp of 7 days
duration is conducted every year in any ‘adopted village’ on a specific theme.
4.2 During 2013-14, there is a proposal to include skill development in NSS, so as to strengthen
human resources capacity of the youths to make them employable. Providing employable skill and
empowering youth will be an effective response to the growing problem of unemployment, youth
unrest, violence and terrorism in Left Wing Extremist (LWE) affected districts of Jharkhand,
Chattisgarh, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh and NE States. As a pilot project, at least 1000 volunteers
from these areas are proposed to be imparted skill development training.
4.3 The Committee was informed that NSS has more than 32 lakh student volunteers on its roll
spread over 299 universities, 16,885 colleges/technical institutions and 10,762 Sr. Secondary
Schools to carry out development activities in 26,202 village and urban slums. Each NSS volunteer
who has to give 120 hours of his own in various social activities is paid `250 annually. Some of
the leading activities which are performed by them are blood donation, tree plantation, disaster
management. In view of fund constraints, the Department has introduced self-financing units which
work as per the existing guidelines of NSS and their volunteers get all the benefits of other
programmes conducted by the Ministry. This has resulted in about 1072 self financing units across
the country and over one lakh of volunteers.
4.4  A major initiative on ‘Repositioning NSS’ in consultation with the office of Advisor to
Prime Minister on Skill Development (APM Office) was proposed to be taken by introducing “Skill
Training’ so that the graduating youth acquire job related skill through immersive community
projects. This would involve the engagement of college students over three years, in a multi
stakeholder collaborative model involving NGOs, Universities and Corporate. Tata Institute of Social
Sciences would be the key knowledge partner. A pilot project was being undertaken to reposition
National Service Scheme (NSS) to National Service and Skill Development Scheme (NSSDS)
starting in the academic year 2013 in nine universities for a period of three years. The focus of
the pilot project would be on rural universities. The aim was enabling students to gain employable
skills while undertaking community work that would bring about sustainable social change.
4.5 All students enrolled for NSSDS will gain competency in Computer Literacy, English
Communication, Soft Skills, Financial Literacy and Skills in working with Community. Modules on
computer literacy will be started and competency in computer operation would be an integral part
of gaining competency in other modules; and subsequent skill development process. The ambition
of the Scheme was that NSSDS would be progressively implemented in all universities in the
country by 2016. It is proposed to reach out to 3 million students by 2016. In addition, the idea
was to implement NSSDS in all universities in at least two states by early 2014.
4.6 To meet the financial requirements for this major initiative, the Department proposed to take
benefit from the CSR component of the public sector units and also from the Labour Ministry CSR
component of private industry. It was clarified that children of labour class studying in schools and
colleges could take the benefit from this. Ten domain areas having entrepreneurship and livelihood
modules, i.e. healthcare, agriculture, forest management, construction management, education &

9
training, service sector, fashion designing, fishery, animal husbandry, community organisation and
development practice were proposed to be covered under this initiative. The Committee was
informed that Tata Motors at the moment had taken up about 4000 children in this scheme and
about 1700 of them were at present working in seven different states. The Department is in
discussion with them to increase their coverage to other states. Similarly, in collaboration with
TCS, a programme called ‘Affirmative Action’ was going to start which would include SC, ST,
minority and BPL students selected from NYKS and NSS. In this scheme, the students on the basis
of their aptitude would be given training of 18 days at their own cost. Thereafter, on the basis
of a test, selected children will be given jobs of `12000/- in their BPO. At present 150 students
have been selected on a pilot basis in Pune who are working in BPOs at `12,000/- as salary. On
a pilot basis, out of 400 students from NYKS, Pune given training, 150 students were selected for
BPO jobs and were getting a salary of `12,000.
4.7 Another positive development was the proposal for giving weightage to the marks obtained
in NSS in the grading system on the pattern of NCC being made an elective subject in some
colleges. The Ministry of HRD had been approached for this purpose. Details of 22 universities that
give 3%, 7% and 10% weightage for NSS have been sent to the Ministry with the request to make
the weightage uniform all over. It was expected that this would improve the participation
substantially even under the self-financing units of NSS. This matter was raised in the meeting of
the CABE in November, 2012 and they had advised that UGC should look into this. The Department
had already approached UGC in this regard.
4.8 The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department by introducing
‘Skill Training’ under NSS. The objective of the new component to enable students in
getting employable skills while undertaking community work is indeed laudable and a step
in the right direction. Selection of ten domain areas for equipping the students with
employable skills, that too in collaboration with and under the direct supervision of reputed
and well-established organisations will ultimately yield the expected results. The Committee
would appreciate if agro-industries, khadi and village industries and food processing
industries and other similar industries are also included in the list of domain areas. Besides
that, assistance can also be sought from the Ministries like Rural Development, Social
Justice and Empowerment, HRD and Health and Family Welfare, in view of a large number
of schemes being handled by these Ministries where requirement of personnel at the ground
level in large numbers always remains.
4.9 The Committee has been given to understand that the Department has not been getting the
required funds under the Scheme. During 2012-13, allocation of `80.00 crore was made against
the projected requirement of `90.72 crore. Similarly, for 2013-14, provision of `75.50 crore has
been made against the projected requirement of `88.00 crore. Financial constraint has been cited
as the main reason for substantial gap in the target of enrollment of 55 lakh volunteers and
achievement of only 32 lakh volunteers during the Eleventh Plan period.
4.10 The Committee is, however, not fully convinced by the clarification given by the
Department. Fact remains that funds allocated at BE stage could not be fully utilized during
the last three years. Either the funds had to be reduced at the RE stage or utilization status
at the end of the year remained less than BE and RE allocation. During 2013-14, as on
18.2.2013, out of an allocation of `80.00 crore, expenditure of `68.79 crore could only be
made. Even the Non-Plan funds have remained underutilized.
4.11 When asked to clarify, the Secretary admitted that there were major issues in some states
like Assam and Odisha and a detailed audit was proposed to be undertaken. Transfer of funds to
the implementing agencies entailed a prolonged exercise from Centre to the State Government, then
to the University through the State Department of Education and then to the concerned college and

10
finally to the NSS unit. Even if the funds remained un-utilized, they were put back in the ‘State’
head at the end of the year and utilization certificate duly given to the Centre. The Committee
views with serious concern the handling of Central funds. The Committee strongly feels
that the Department should not restrict the direct funding of NSS funds for two states, i.e.
Assam and Odisha. The revised procedure needs to be made uniformly applicable to all the
States/UTs.
4.12 The Committee observes that at present 299 universities, 16,885 colleges/technical
institutions and 10,762 senior secondary schools are covered under NSS. Number of
institutions remaining outside the coverage of NSS in all the categories is more than
double. The Committee is of the view that self-financing units alone would not be in a
position to bring about any significant improvement. What is required is to sensitize and
increase the awareness about the Scheme in both the targeted beneficiaries as well as the
implementing institutions. The Department has to take a pro-active role in this regard.
4.13 The Committee would like to draw the attention to the following observation of the
Working Group on Adolescents and Youth Development of the Department made in the
context of review of NSS during Eleventh Plan:
“It is expected from the State Governments that they not only contribute their share in time
but also ensure the required mechanism in place, viz. selection of State Liaison officers,
filling up of various posts of Co-ordinators in Universities to facilitate the proper
distribution of funds amongst participating colleges and settlement of accounts. It may be
seen that the scheme has been pre-dominantly enrolling student volunteers in not more than
5-6 States. It is required that in the next coming Plan period, efforts should be made to
interact with such States like Bihar, Jharkhand, J&K, Chhattisgarh and all the North-
eastern States so that the volunteer strength is increased in these States.”
4.14 The Committee observes that very pertinent issues have been raised in the above
observation of the Working Group. Contribution of State share, required manpower at the
ground level and extension of the Scheme to States not covered so far are areas very vital
for the efficacy and sustainability of the Scheme. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that the Department should take up these concerns with States showing shortfall or gap
areas.
4.15 The Committee has also taken note of the Working Group recommendation for rationalizing
and changing the pattern of assistance to States. The Committee was informed that a letter had
been sent to all State Governments and UT Administrations to offer their option of (i) following
the funding pattern of 9:1 for the NE States and from 7:5 to 3:1 ratio in respect of other States
or (ii) Centre meeting the entire expenditure for Special Camping Programme for NSS in States/
UTs and the State Governments/UTs could take care of the entire expenditure for Regular Activities.
As per the latest feedback received from the Department, response from 12 States (including the
NE States) has been received and all except one State has agreed to the 3:1 ratio for other States
and 9:1 ratio for NE States.
4.16 The Committee finds it rather surprising that inspite of attention of the Department
to the above recommendation of the Working Group being drawn in its 245
th Report on
Demands for Grants, 2012-13 presented to Parliament on the 3 rd May, 2012, the consultation
process with the State Governments/UT Administrations is still going on. It has taken more
than a year and response from more than half the States is yet to be received. The
Committee fails to understand that in this age of IT advancement, exercise of getting the
information from States meant to benefit their interests only has become such a prolonged
one. The Committee strongly recommends that this issue should not be allowed to remain

11
undecided any  more. The Committee finds no reason for any reservation on the part of the
States in accepting the revised ratio where their contribution level is proposed to be
reduced.
V. YOUTH HOSTELS
5.1 Youth Hostels are built to promote travel and to enable the young people experience the rich
cultural heritage of the Country. The construction of Youth Hostels is a joint venture of the Central
and the State Governments. While the Central Government bears the cost of construction, the State
Governments provide fully developed land, free of cost with water, electricity and approach roads.
Youth Hostels are located in areas of historical and cultural value, educational centre, tourist
importance etc., where facilities for youth activities are available. Youth Hostels provide good
accommodation for the youth at reasonable rates. Youth Hostels are looked after by managers
appointed by the Central Government.
5.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that so far 81 Youth Hostels had been constructed
across the Country and 3 more Youth Hostels were under various stages of construction which
were at Roing (Arunchal Pradesh), Thoubal and Churachandpur (Manipur). Out of 81 Youth
Hostels, 12 Hostels had been transferred to the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS), Sports
Authority of India (SAI) and the respective State Governments for optimum use for youth and
sports development. The Ministry was also working towards giving the existing Youth Hostels new
look and work system to meet the expectation of today’s youth. Out of 81 Youth Hostels, 60 Youth
Hostels have already been provided financial assistance for face lifting work during the last three
financial years.
5.3 In order to ensure smooth functioning and better day-to-day administration of Youth
Hostels, the following decisions have been taken:
(a) Accommodation to Managers : As the Manager of the Youth Hostel is the immediate
responsible Officer in relation to the affairs of the Youth Hostel, his presence in the
Youth Hostel is some kind of necessity so that he can act as a guardian. For smooth
functioning of Hostels, free accommodation has been provided to the Managers so that
they may be available 24 hours in the Youth Hostels;
(b) Sales linked incentives : To encourage the staff to manage Youth Hostels in a better
way and to attract better candidates for the post of Managers it has been decided that
performance based incentives (25% of profits) be given to the Managers and Staff of
Youth Hostels; and
(c) On-line booking of Youth Hostels : For optimum utilisation of Youth Hostels, it has
been decided to develop a software for introducing on-line booking of accommodation
in Youth Hostels.
5.4 The Secretary in her presentation before the Committee, informed that Youth Hostel Scheme
has virtually been closed down. They have only `1.5 crore for completing construction activities.
Attention of the Committee was also drawn to the advice of the Planning Commission that the
Department should not have this Scheme any longer. These Youth Hostels should either be
transferred to the State Governments or given away under PPP. State Governments were the best
entities to take care of their properties. Some State Governments had not even transferred the
hostels to the Department and they were still occupying those facilities. For example, the Youth
Hostel of Amritsar was being only used for the passengers of the bus that goes to Pakistan. It was
also pointed out that some hostels were located at far away places and were not being put to any
use.

12
5.5 The Department was of the view that availability of `1.5 crore for 80 hostels would mean
`2 lakh per hostel which was not sufficient for running a Youth Hostel. It was, however, felt that
these hostels should be run under PPP mode or by State Governments.
5.6 The Committee is not fully convinced by the contention of the Department that fund
constraint was coming in the way of efficient running of Youth Hostels. The Committee
observes that the approved outlay for Youth Hostels for Twelfth Plan is `25.00 crore. For
the first year of the Plan i.e. 2012-13, against an allocation of `2.00 crore, utilization figure
as on 18
th February, 2013 was only `1.19 crore. Not only this, in the previous years also,
allocated funds remained under-utilized. For example, during 2011-12, allocation of `5.00
crore had to be reduced to `2.50 crore at the RE stage and against that, only `1.30 crore
could be spent.
5.7 The Committee firmly believes that the Youth Hostel Movement operating since 1966
has the greatest potential for promoting national integration and brotherhood among the
countrymen. However, the scheme has not shown a satisfactory progress as against a target
of a Youth Hostel in 200 districts by the end of the Eleventh Plan, presently there are 81
youth hostels and four more are in various stages of construction. The Committee is well
aware that the Planning Commission, while approving allocation of only `12.00 crore for the
Eleventh Plan, had desired to discontinue the scheme thereafter. However, it is also equally
true that the Working Group on Adolescents and Youth Development for the Twelfth Plan
has strongly advocated the continuance of the Youth Hostel Scheme. It has observed that
efforts were required to be made during the Twelfth Plan to bring more synergy between
the Scheme of Youth Hostels and other youth development schemes such as National
Integration, Promotion of Adventure and various programmes of NYKS and NSS and to
develop them as major centres of youth activities.
5.8 The Committee is of the view that it is high time that the problem-areas identified
by the Working Group like administrative mismanagement, low salary structure, poor job
security and involvement of workers, lack of State Government support, lack of popularity
and promotion activity, insufficient staffing and lack of uniform guidelines/instructions are
addressed in the right perspective and without any further delay. The Committee
recommends that steps should be taken to clearly define and strengthen the administration
of Youth Hostels. Initiatives regarding accommodation for Hostel Managers, sale-linked
incentives and on-line booking of Youth Hostels are a welcome step, although very much
delayed. The Committee also observes that involvement of NYK, NSS, Scouts, NCC, all State
Tourism Departments, Schools/Colleges, Education Departments would go a long way in the
promotion of Youth Hostel Scheme and optimum utilisation of its resources. Lastly,
appropriate steps need to be taken by the Department to obtain the required funds for the
Scheme at the RE stage.
VI. RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD)
6.1 The Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Y outh Development (RGNIYD), Sriperumbudur, Tamil
Nadu, is a Deemed University under section 3 of UGC Act, 1956 and an autonomous organisation
of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of India. RGNIYD had been declared as
an Institute of National Importance and RGNIYD Act has been notified in the Gazette on the
19
th November, 2012. RGNIYD endeavours to facilitate nation’s youth with a conducive
environment and tools that will enable them to make most of their natural potential to realise their
aspirations. It functions as a vital resource centre coordinating training, research, orientation,
extension, outreach, documentation and dissemination activities in the field of youth development.
It also offers Post Graduate Programmes in Youth Work viz. , Youth Empowerment, Career

13
Counselling, Gender Studies, Local Governance and Life Skills Education. The consultancy services
of the Institute are available to national and international organisations viz., UNICEF, UNESCO,
UNFPA, SAARC, Commonwealth Youth Programme (CYP) and others, besides various Ministries/
Departments of the Central and State Governments, Universities, Research and Training
Organisations, SHGs, NGOs and CBOs concerned with youth development.
6.2 The Department informed the Committee that the evaluation of RGNIYD was conducted by
M/s Across World Quality International Limited whose evaluation report has since been received.
As per the study, the major/important recommendations are like to motivate all faculty to take up
and submit at least one research project per year on topics of relevance and interest which can
also enable them to learn and acquire skills for faculty development. Collaborative research projects
can be made involving educational institutions/research organisations/development of organisations
in areas of mutual interest:
(i) Separate career counselling and placement cell to be in place;
(ii) Encouraging and helping students for higher education including participating in
competitive exams like IAS/Group I Service, etc.
(iii) Improving access of public for utilisation of Library and infrastructure for
dissemination of knowledge and making RGNIYD self-reliant;
(iv) Utilising collaborations for increasing number of st udents joining the course and
submission of research projects;
(v) Documentation of an apex manual for the Institute;
(vi) Introduction of innovative job-oriented master degree programme;
(vii) Campus interview and placement activities need to be enhanced; and
(viii) Enabling faculty/trainers to attend structured Faculty Development Programmes
conducted by the Academic Staff Colleges/apex level training institutions.
6.3 The Committee is happy to note that RGNIYD has since become an Institute of
National Importance. The Committee is also happy to find that fund utilization is also
optimum. During 2010-11 and 2011-12, its utilization was `9.00 crore and `21.10 crore
against allocation of `9.00 crore and `11.00 crore respectively. The utilization in 2012-13 was
`20 crore against allocation of `20 crore. The Committee fails to understand the reasons
for not increasing the allocation during 2013-14 when there is cent percent utilization.
Against the projected requirement of `68.35 crore for 2013-14, provision of `20.00 crore is
very less. The Committee understands that the approved outlay for the Institute for Twelfth
Plan is `508.00 crore. Projection of `68.35 crore falls short of approved outlay of `100.00
crore per year.
6.4 The Committee would like to point out that declaring any institution as an
institution of national importance and giving it a statutory status is done only when that
particular institution has great potential and needs to be supported.  Availability of adequate
financial resources is thus of paramount importance, especially for an institution of national
importance. One must not forget that this Institution is mandated to cater to the needs of
our youth which constitutes a potential demographic dividend if harnessed adequately and
a challenge of mega proportion if not properly addressed and harnessed. RGNIYD is one of
its own kind of institution in the country and has a vast scope for growth. At this stage,
if more funds are not provided to the Institution, it may not make progress as envisaged.
The Committee also desires that the recommendations made by M/s Across World Quality

14
International Limited need to be implemented as they will be instrumental in overall
improvement of the Institute.
VII NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT
(NPYAD)
7.1 The Umbrella Scheme of National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development
(NPYAD) has come into existence with effect from 1.4.2008 i.e. operational from the year 2008-09.
The Scheme provides for financial assistance in the form of grant in aid under five programmes
namely (i) Youth leadership and personality development; (ii) Promotion of National Integration; (iii)
Promotion of Adventure; (iv) Development & Empowerment of Adolescents and
(v) Technical and Resource Development. Out of the above activities, Youth Leadership &
Personality Development and Technical & Resource Development are implemented exclusively
through NYKS and RGNIYD respectively.
7.2 As per the modified Scheme, financial assistance is provided to all India NGOs/other
voluntary organisations working in the field of youth development, autonomous organisations under
the administrative control of the Central Government and the State Government organisations,
Universities, other educational Institutions etc. Scheme beneficiaries are youth in the age group of
13 to 35 years and adolescents in the age group of 10 to 19 years. They include Members of Youth
Clubs affiliated to Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan or State Governments, NSS Units or Student
Youth in Schools, Colleges and Universities, Adolescents and Youth from other established Youth
Organisations, which have branches in different parts of the country are also eligible. Preference
is given to the youth with special abilities and youth belonging to Schedules Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and other weaker sections.
7.3 The Department has informed that it has been proposed to modify the existing scheme of
NPYAD in the Twelfth Five Year Plan and rename it as Programme for Youth Development (PYD)
and re-designed to have the following components:
(i) Youth Development and Youth Exchange Programme; and
(ii) Promotion of Adventure Sports (non-competitive)
Special emphasis would be laid on the development of female adolescents during the
Twelfth Plan. Keeping in view the inflationary trends, it was also proposed to enhance the cost
norms for various activities under the Programme.
7.4 The Committee finds that for the years 2010-11 and 2011-12, as against the allocation
of `25.63 crore and `23.00 crore, the utilization was `25.12 crore and `22.15 crore
respectively which indicates that the Scheme has been functioning satisfactorily. But the
utilization dropped in 2012-13 against an allocation of `23.00 crore to `19.43 crore.
The Committee hopes that there would be optimum utilisation of `23.00 crore allocated for
2013-14.
VIII. NA TIONAL DISCIPLINE SCHEME
8.1 National Discipline Scheme was originally started in 1954 by the Ministry of Rehabilitation,
which was transferred to the Ministry of Education and Social Welfare in 1958. Consequent upon
the recommendation of Dr. Kunzru Committee in 1963, introducing discipline programme at school
stage, the integrated scheme called National Fitness Corps (NFC) was evolved. The Scheme was
transferred to the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports (now Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports) in eighties when a separate Department was formed.

15
8.2 On the basis of the recommendations of the Dr. Kunzru Committee, the decision to transfer
NDS Instructors to various State Governments was taken in consultation with the State Education
Secretaries. In the year 1969, the Central Cabinet took a decision that the services of the
employees under the NFC would be transferred to the State Governments and so eventually in
1972, the National Discipline Scheme was decentralised and the employees under the National
Discipline Scheme were transferred and absorbed in the services of the State Governments on the
condition that the Central Government would reimburse their pay and allowances so long as they
remained on the strength of the State Governments. About 6145 NDS Instructors were transferred
to various State Governments after decentralisation of the NDS Scheme. This is a non-plan Scheme
under which pay and allowances of NDS Instructors are reimbursed to concerned State
Governments.
8.3 The Committee has been taking up this matter for quite some time now. The
Department has informed the Committee that they still have the liability of `2,43,09,23,230
in the current year but the Committee fails to understand that even after more than forty
years since the transfer of the scheme in 1972, such a huge liability is continuing. The
Department has paid `2.61 crore each year during 2010-11 and 2011-12 whereas another
`2.00 crore would be released in 2012-13. By this pace, it will take more than 120 years to
reimburse the entire amount. The Committee is not aware whether any exercise was taken
by the Department so as to ensure the veracity of claims made by the various State
Governments. Committee’s observations about discrepancies noticed in the State-wise details
of NDS Instructors transferred to States in its Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 have
remained unanswered. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that a thorough
assessment of State-wise details of NDS Instructors should be undertaken without any
further delay. The Department should examine this area of concern and wind up the
reimbursement process at the earliest.
IX. SCOUTING AND GUIDING
9.1 The Scheme of Scouting and Guiding, a Central Scheme, was launched in the early 1980s
to promote the Scouts and Guides movement in the country. This is an international movement
aimed at building character, confidence, idealism and spirit of patriotism and service among young
boys and girls. In the process the Scheme also seeks to promote balanced physical and mental
development among the people. Under the Scheme, financial assistance is provided for various
activities such as organization of training camps, skill development programmes, and holding of
jamborees, etc., to Bharat Scouts and Guides. These activities, inter-alia , include programmes
related to adult literacy, environment conservation, community service, health awareness and
promotion of hygiene and sanitation. The Bharat Scouts and Guides, New Delhi, has been
financially assisted by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for conducting various Scouts and
Guides Activities.
9.2 The Committee finds that the allocation for 2013-14 is `1.00 crore as against `1.5 crore
allocation and utilization in 2012-13. This is a meagre amount for a Scheme that has a national
presence. The Department informed the Committee that Scouting and Guiding Movement is
proposed to be merged with the existing NPYAD and the process would begin in 2013-14. The
Committee hopes that this exercise is completed at the earliest. The Committee also finds
that the various activities of Scouting and Guiding are somewhat similar to those of NSS.
Both NSS and Scouting and Guiding Schemes operate from schools and colleges. Therefore,
Scouting and Guiding may be merged with the NSS and at the same time the allocation of
NSS be increased. The Committee, therefore, is also of the view that this aspect may also
be taken into consideration while carrying out the Impact Assessment Study of the Scheme
of Scouting and Guiding.

16
X. PANCHAYAT YUVA KRIDA AUR KHEL ABHIYAN(PYKKA)
10.1 Pan chayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) launched in 2008-09, is the Flagship
Scheme of the Ministry with the objective of creation of basic sports infrastructure in 2.50 Lakh
village panchayats and 6400 block panchayats of the country in a phased manner over a period of
10 years. The Scheme envisages creation of playfields with basic facilities at panchayat and block
levels, recruitment and training of community coaches (kridashrees), sports competitions at block,
districts, state and national levels. Under the Scheme, village/block panchayats receive a one-time
seed capital grant of `1 lakh/ `5 lakh each, for establishing a playing field with basic facilities. The
state share in this is 25 per cent for all States, except for special category States where it is
10 per cent. So far 56,414 village panchayats and 1739 block panchayats have been approved for
creation/development of basic playfields under the Scheme of PYKKA since its introduction in
2008-09. During 2012-13, 6618 village panchayats and 278 block panchayats were approved for
creation of basic sports infrastructure/playfields upto the end of November, 2012 in 19 States/UTs
and funds amounting to `120.99 crore were released during 2012 to 18 States and SAI for
conducting rural sports competitions at block, district, State and National level, women
competitions and North East Games.
10.2 The Committee notes that an allocation of `1500 crore was earmarked for PYKKA for the
Eleventh Plan Period. However, allocation of only `742.02 crore could be made and there was full
utilisation of the allocated funds. The Committee also takes note of the Working Group on Sports
and Physical Education for Twelfth Plan recommendation of allocation of `3772.00 crore for the
Scheme for the Twelfth Plan. Accordingly, `546.50 crore and `642.50 crore were to be provided
for the first two years of the Twelfth Plan, i.e. 2012-13 an 2013-14. However, the Committee
observes that only a provision of `235.00 crore was made in BE 2012-13 which was brought
down to `135.00 crore at the RE stage. On a specific query in this regard, the Committee was
informed that a cut of `241.00 crore by the Ministry of Finance led to this reduction.
10.3 The Committee views with serious concern this trend of allocation of funds for a
Flagship Programme, inspite of its track-record of full utilisation of allocated funds during
the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee notes that the first year of the Twelfth Plan was also
no exception. Funds amounting to `154.98 crore including `20.00 crore under the NE
component have been utilised upto the 11
th March, 2013. Trend of allocation remains
unchanged in 2013-14. Inspite of projection of `478.33 crore, allocation of less than half, i.e.
`200.00 crore has been made. Not only this, approved outlay for PYKKA, Urban Sports
Infrastructure Scheme and Schemes of Sports for Persons with Disabilities is `1200.00
crore. The Committee is surprised to note that the trend of allocation during the first two
years of the Twelfth Plan clearly indicate that gaps will remain between the approved outlay
and final allocation.
10.4 The Committee was informed that the PYKKA Scheme had been adopted in 28 States
and 4 UTs. As on the 31
st December, 2012, 56,414 village panchayats and 1734 block
panchayats have been approved. Against 58,153 village/block panchayats approved for
creation of basic sports infrastructure, playfields have been developed in 38,138 PYKKA
Centres. The Committee has its own strong apprehensions about the coverage of 2.50 lakh
panchayats and 6400 block panchayats by the end of the Twelfth Plan Period, i.e. 2016-17.
The Committee can only conclude that non-availability of the required funds will remain the
major hurdle in the fulfilment of targets of this ambitious Scheme.
10.5 The Committee was informed that PYKKA encourages convergence with different Central
and State Schemes for meeting its objectives. It recommends convergence approach in terms of
resource mobilization by village/block panchayats through own resources or from other sources like
State Government contribution, MPLAD Scheme, MLALAD Scheme, Backward Region Grant Fund,

17
MGNREGA assistance, Private contributions etc. The Committee is happy to note that invoking
the provision for undertaking activities like levelling of land including playfields under
MGNREGA, some States have already availed funds for development of playfields in village/
block panchayats. In view of some States facing difficulties in availing of these benefits, the
Ministry of Rural Development has issued a notification on 15
th January, 2013 for inclusion
of playfields as a permissible activity under MGNREGA. Secondly, on the request of the
Ministry, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation has decided that MPs
may recommend under MPLADS, works of fixed and durable nature under PYKKA including
development of playfields, levelling of playfields in hilly areas, construction of boundary wall
etc. in villages and blocks from out of the shelf of PYKKA projects, if otherwise eligible
under MPLAD Scheme. The Committee hopes that all these initiatives will go a long way
in making the implementation of PYKKA a success and achieve its targeted goals within the
prescribed time limit. The Committee would impress upon the Ministry to work upon this
convergence component in coordination with both the nodal Ministries for MGNREGA and
MPLAD Schemes and also the State Governments.
10.6 The Committee notes that a plan outlay of `1500 crore was earmarked in the Eleventh Plan
for PYKKA Scheme. The following table shows the budget allocation and its utilization during the
plan period.
(` in crore )
Sl.No. Year Budget Infrastructure Budget utilization
Allocation component Competitions TSCBS Total
(i) 2008-09 92.00 83.85 8.15 – 92.00
(ii) 2009-10 135.00 105.00 30.00 – 135.00
(iii) 2010-11 350.00 260.15 84.85 5.00 350.00
(iv) 2011-12 165.20 134.05 30.97 – 165.02
(v) 2012-13 155.00 92.63 43.65 1.50 137.78
T
OTAL : 897.02 675.68 197.62 6.50 879.80
10.7 The Committee notes that although PYKKA is a centrally sponsored scheme, the
contribution of States is required only for one component of the scheme, i.e. creation/
development of basic playfields, which is 25 per cent for normal category States and 10 per-
cent for Special Category States. The other thr ee components are fully funded by the
Central Government. Committee’s attention has been drawn by the Working Group
recommendations of converting PYKKA fully into a Central Sector Scheme. Reason being
that Sports Departments of many States were finding it difficult to provide the matching
share of 25 per cent (normal States) or 10 per cent (N-E States) from their State budgets
for the PYKKA Scheme. The Committee is also of the view that this issue needs to be
considered in the light of constraints being faced by State Governments and appropriate
action taken accordingly.
10.8 The Committee has been given to understand that there is a well-structured
Monitoring unit assisted by computerised and on line system for receiving of various data
as well as exchange of views with all concerned. Along with Mission Directorate Officials
making regular field visits, 33 eminent sportspersons have been engaged as PYKKA
Observers. More than 400 number of PYKKA Centres have been visited upto October, 2012

18
by the Mission Directorate Officials and PYKKA observers and reports submitted by them.
The Committee would appreciate if an idea about the shortcomings noticed in these field
visits and follow-up action taken thereupon is given to it.
10.9 One of the major components of the PYKKA Scheme is holding of sports competitions at
block, district, state and national levels. National level Sports Competitions are held in twenty sports
disciplines. The Scheme also provides for link as talent identification schemes of SAI and States
to spot and nurture young sporting talent. The Committee is not aware as to upto what extent
State and national level competitions organised through PYKKA have proved to be
successful in identifying young talented sportspersons having the potential for further
growth and winning medals at international events. The Committee would like to have a
status report in this regard.
XI. URBAN SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEME
11.1 Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme, a Central Sector Scheme has been introduced on pilot
basis in 2010-11 with a view to addressing the entire ‘sports eco-system’ holistically i.e., players’
academies, coaching and infrastructure (hockey turf/football turf/multipurpose halls/athletic track).
The Scheme envisages development of playfields by the State Governments through Playfield
Associations, coach training programme through Central and State Governments, setting up of
players academies where SAI centres will provide the nucleus of a hub and spoke model for such
academies catering to premier sports in each State.
11.2 The Scheme will focus on promoting and supporting a mechanism at national and state level
to encourage, assist and preserve community playfields, incentivizing utilization of infrastructure
already available in the State at all levels by filling up critical gaps, creating need-based
infrastructure and creating capacity building among coaches, including community coaches. Under
the Scheme, State Governments, local civic bodies, schools, colleges, universities and sports
control boards are eligible for assistance.
11.3 During 2010-11, the Department released funds for the 4 projects viz., Synthetic Hockey
field at Indira Stadium, Una (Himachal Pradesh), Multipurpose Indoor Hall at Taran Taran (Punjab),
Renovation/modification and modernization of Indoor Sports Complex (Khudiram Anushilan) Eden
Gardens, Kolkata (West Bengal) and an astro turf for Hockey at Aizwal (Mizoram). During 2011-12,
the Department had released funds for 10 projects viz., Synthetic Hockey Surface, Kalinga
Stadium, Bhubhaneshwar (Odisha), Synthetic Track, Indira Gandhi Stadium, Kohima (Nagaland),
Multipurpose Indoor Hall, Mualpui, Aizwal (Mizoram), Multi purpose Hall, Ummed Stadium,
Jodhpur (Rajsthan), Synthetic Hockey Field, Ranital Sports Complex, Jabalpur (Madhya Pradesh),
Synthetic Athletic Tract at JN Sports Complex, Shillong (Meghalaya), Multi purpose Indoor Hall
SAI-SAG Centre, Tinsukia (Assam), Football Turf Ground at TRC Ground, Srinagar (Jammu &
Kashmir), Multi purpose Hall at Tagore Arts College Ground, Lawspet (Puducherry) and Multi
purpose Indoor Hall at Nehru Stadium at Kotltayan (Kerala). During 2012-13, the Department has
till 31.12.2012 released funds for 6 projects viz., Synthetic Hockey playfields (with normal lighting)
at Sports Complex, Hissar (Haryana), Multi-purpose Indoor Hall at Senapati District HQs (Manipur),
Artificial Turf for Football at Dariyapur, Fatehabad (Haryana), Multi-purpose Hall at Karauli, District
Karauli (Rajasthan) and Multi-purpose Indoor Hall at Kalinga State Sports Complex, Bhubaneswar
(Odisha). 7 projects are proposed to be sanctioned during 2013-14.
11.4 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the recommendation of the Working Group on
Sports and Physical Education for Twelfth Plan for a total outlay of `875.00 crore for the Scheme
`175.00 crore for each year so as to ensure providing assistance to each State for one Project
every year. The Committee finds that trend of allocation of funds for this Scheme so far has been
of a low level. Apart from 2010-11, the year when the Scheme was launched on a pilot basis,

19
allocation of `50.00 crore and `40.00 crore has been made for 2011-12 and 2012-13. While during
2011-12, there was full utilisation of allocated funds (brought to `40.50 crore at the RE stage),
position was quite discouraging in 2012-13. Not only the allocation was at a lower level i.e.
`40.00 crore, it was drastically reduced to `30.00 crore at the RE stage and the expenditure
reported upto 18 th February is `18.94 crore. The Committee has been given to understand that the
provision of `50.00 crore for 2013-14 would be adequate for the number of proposals received
from state Governments.
11.5 The Committee, while taking note of the trend of allocation and utilisation of funds
for the Scheme, has also observed that out of 20 Projects sanctioned so far and funds
released therefor, not even a single Project has been completed. The Committee also finds
that out of the 20 projects sanctioned so far, 7 Projects are for having a Multipurpose Hall/
Indoor Hall. The Committee understands that these Projects must be having a time-bound
Action Plan for having them in place. The Committee is of the view that completion of all
these Projects needs to be constantly monitored at all levels so as to ensure their timely
completion and avoid any cost escalation. The Committee would also take the opportunity
to point out that very few States have so far shown their interest in the Scheme. States like
UP, Bihar, Uttarakhand and Southern States/UT except Kerala and Puducherry have not
registered their presence. The Committee would appreciate if this matter is taken up with
all the remaining States. Regional SAI Centres can easily be involved in all co-ordination
and monitoring related issues so far as the Scheme of Urban Infrastructure is concerned.
XII. PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
12.1  The objective of the Scheme for Promotion of Sports and Games among Disabled
introduced during the last quarter of 2009-10 is broad-basing participative sports among the
disabled. It has the following components:
(a) Grant for sports coaching and purchase of consumables & non-consumable sports
equipment for Schools
(b) Grant for Training of Coaches
(c) Grant for holding District, State and National level competitions for the disabled.
12.2 The Committee observes that funds allocated for the Scheme during the last three years
have remained, more or les, under–utilised as indicated below:
(` in crores )
2010-11 201 1-12 2012-13
(upto 18.2.12)
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals
8.52 5.27 5.96 5.50 4.40 4.39 5.00 7.00 4.99
12.3 So far as achievement level of Physical targets is concerned, the position has not been very
encouraging. Out of 150 schools to be released funds during 2010-11, only 56 schools could be
benefitted. Against the target of 150 schools to be given grants during 2011-12, only 100 schools
could be given funds. Similarly, for 2012-13, only 59 schools could be released funds against
the target of 100 schools. With regard to the target for training of 7500 community coaches in
2011-12, the same could be achieved. However, in 2012-13, there was a shortfall of 1000
community coaches trained against the target of 4000 coaches. Shortfall was also noticed with
regard to number of participants in sports competitions during 2011-12 and 2012-13. Only 38,651

20
participants were there in 2011-12 against a target of having 40000 participants. Similarly, during
the first three quarters of the year in 2012-13, only 30000 sportsperson could participate in sports
competitions against a target of 40000 sportspersons.
12.4 The Committee feels that there is a need for having more clarity about all the three
components of the Scheme. Firstly, it is not known as to under what criteria, schools are
selected for coverage of the Scheme. Secondly, it is not known as to what kind of role has
been assigned to community coaches, especially in view of such a large number of
community coaches being trained. Thirdly, details of district, state and national level
competitions for disabled held so far are not available. The Committee would also like to
be apprised about the status and role of Special Olympic Bharat, the nodal authority for
training of community coaches and conduct of sports competitions. The Committee
understands that besides Special Olympic Bharat, there are other NGOs involved in the
implementation of this Scheme. The Committee  would like to have full details about these
NGOs, along with grants released to them year-wise. The Committee also takes note of the
suggestion of the Working Group on sports and Physical Education for the Twelfth Plan for
having the component of sports competitions for persons with disabilities under the PYKKA
Scheme which already has the component of sports competitions. The Committee is in
agreement with the suggestion of the Working Group and recommends that necessary steps
may be taken in this regard.
12.5 The Committee understands that at present there are three different bodies dealing
with differently abled sportspersons. Paralympic Committee of India is concerned with
physically disabled sportspersons, Special Olympics Bharat for intellectually challenged and
the All India Sports Council for Deaf. The Committee has been informed that the Special
Olympics Bharat was given financial assistance of `2.85 crore and `3.59 crore in 2011-12
and 2012-13 respectively. Likewise, Paralympic Committee of India was given assistance of
`1.47 crore in 2012-13. The Committee would like to have an idea about the areas where
these funds were utilised by these bodies, especially for sporting the differently abled
sportspersons participating in international events.
XIII. INCENTIVES FOR DIFFERENTLY-ABLED SPORTSPERSONS
13.1 The Committee puts on record its deep sense of appreciation for the sportspersons
participating in London Para Olympics, 2012 and Special Olympics World Winter Games
2013 for the differently-abled athletes. While one of the Indian participants won a silver
medal in High Jump at London Para Olympics, 2012, Indian athletes won 13 gold, 16 silver
and 16 bronze medals in the Special Olympics World Winter Games, 2013.
13.2 The Committee made an attempt to have an idea about the kind of incentives being
given to such outstanding differently-abled sportspersons. The Committee finds it very
disturbing that at present there is no such scheme for them. Committee’s attention was
drawn to the Scheme of Special Awards to winners in International Sports Events and their
coaches, whereunder substantive cash awards are given to sportspersons winning medals in
Olympic Games, Asian Games/Commonwealth Games, World Championships and Asian and
Commonwealth Championships. Cash award is also given to coaches of medal winners which
is 50 per cent of the award money. The Committee strongly feels that differently-abled
sportspersons winning medals in international sports events also deserve to be given award,
especially keeping in view of their achieving success against all odds.  The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that a scheme giving suitable awards for medal winners from
differently-abled category sportspersons and for their coaches should be formulated without
any further delay.

21
13.3 Committee’s attention has also been drawn by the observations of the Working Group on
Sport and Physical Education that award money for medal winners in World Championships/Asian
Championships,/Commonwealth Championships (at senior, junior and sub-junior level) has not been
enhanced for quite long time. The Working Group had , accordingly, recommended that the award
money in respect of these championships may be doubled. The Working Group had also
recommended that versions of Youth Games introduced in Olympic Games, Asian Games and
Commonwealth Games should also be included in the Special Award Scheme and they should be
given award money equivalent to world Championships, Asian Championships and Commonwealth
Championships, as the case may, of the Sub-Junior level.
13.4 The Committee would appreciate if recommendations of the Working Group are
looked into, if not done already, and a favourable decision is taken. This would go a long
way in nurturing young sport talent and motivating them for achieving new heights in
international sports.
XIV. SCHEME OF PENSION TO MERITORIOUS SPORTSPERSONS
14.1 Under the Scheme of Pension to Meritorious Sportspersons launched in 1994, those
sportspersons who have won gold, silver and bronze medals in Olympic Games, World Cup/World
Championships, Asian Games, Commonwealth Games and Paralympic Games and have attained the
age of 30 years and have retired from active sports career are eligible for life pension. The
Committee observes that under the para-sports category of meritorious sportspersons, winners of
gold, silver and bronze medals in Para-olympics alone are eligible for pension, that too at half the
rate of pension when compared with medal winners of Olympic Games .
14.2 The Committee strongly feels that meritorious sportspersons whether winning medals
in Olympics or Paralympics should be treated at par. Nobody can deny the fact that
differently-abled sportspersons have to undergo lot of problems, keeping in view their
limitations and have to make concerted efforts much more than what the normal
sportspersons have to make. Thus, they need to be given more support. It would be rather
unjustified if they are not given pension at par with abled-bodied sportspersons. Secondly,
the pension facility should be rightly extended to differently-abled sportspersons wining
medals in Commonwealth Games and Para-Asian Games. The Committee would appreciate
if a final decision in this regard is taken at the earliest. The Committee understands that
the Working Group had already recommended on these lines.
XV. SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
15.1 Sports Authority of India (SAI) was set up in 1984 as a registered Society. SAI is engaged
in spotting and nurturing talent at all levels by providing the requisite infrastructure and equipment,
coaching facilities, scientific back up, nutritious diet, and competition exposure.
15.2 SAI stands out as an apex body for promotion of sports and sports excellence in the
country. For fulfilling its mandate, SAI has been running five schemes. All these Schemes have
specific domain area, well laid out selection criteria for selection of trainees, disciplines covered
and facilities provided.
(a) National Sports Talent Competition (NSTC): The main objective of the scheme
is to identify gifted and talented sportspersons among school children in the age group
of 8-14 years. It has the following sub-schemes:
– Regular Schools of NSTC Scheme
– Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas

22
– Indigenous Games and Martial Arts
– Akharas
– Sports Centre on the Pattern of Akharas
– Come and Play Scheme
At present, there are 17 Regular Schools (Total 677 ( Boys 513 and Girls 164) 13 schools
adopted to promote indigenous games/martial arts (Total 141 (Boys 98 Girls 43) and 35
Akharas (Total 396 (Boys 374 and Girls 21) and 2 Sports Centres on the pattern of Akharas
(Total 40 – Boys 31 and Girls 9) adopted and being trained in various disciplines.
(b) Army Boys Sports Companies (ABSC) is implemented in collaboration with the
Army. Children in the age group of 8-14 years are imparted with scientific training to
achieve excellence at national and international levels. The Scheme also provides job
opportunities in the Indian Army. Similar arrangements are proposed to be entered into
with Centre Para-military forces. At present, there are 15 Centres in the Country where
trainees are being trained (1005 Boys).
(c) Special Area Games (SAG): This Scheme follows an area-specific approach to scout
and nurture talent for modern competitive games and sports from tribal, rural, coastal
and hilly areas of the country. The main objective of the Scheme is to train talented
and meritorious sportspersons in the age group of 14-21 years. At present, there are
20 centres in the country where trainees are being trained (Total 1895-(Boys 1099 and
Girls 796).
(d) SAI Training Centres (STC): Under this scheme, talented youth in the age group of
14-21 years are given the option to join the scheme on residential or non-residential
basis. At present, there are 58 Special Training Centres in which trainees are being
trained all over the country (Total 6681 (Boys 4679 and Girls 2002).
(e) Centres of Excellence (COX): The main objective of this Scheme is to identify and
train outstanding sportspersons who are medal prospects for the country in
international competitions. At present, there are 10 centres where trainees are being
trained. (Total 347 – (Boys 161, Girls 186).
15.3  Thus, under the aforesaid five schemes, strength of trainees is 12,555 (8798 boys and
3757 girls) SAI Regional Centres/Sub-Centres and Academic Institutions are the implementing
agencies for its Sports promotional schemes and academic programmes across the country. The
Committee notes that there has been optimum utilisation of allocated funds by SAI every year.
15.4 In addition, SAI, through its Training of Elite Athletes and Management Support (TEAMS)
Division provides support to NSFs by way of coordinating their Long Term Development Plans
(LTDPs), and providing logistical and training support. In this role, a number of activities are being
carried-out by SAI out of funds provided to them by the Ministry.
15.5 The Committee was also informed that ‘Come & Play’ Scheme was initiated at various SAI
Stadia Complexes in Delhi in phases in May 2011. The Scheme has been encouraging a large
number of sports enthusiasts. The objective of the Scheme is not only to impart professional
training to established sportspersons but also to beginners to broad-base sports and encourage
participation in sports so as to aim at optimum utilization of stadia facilities. Present, Stadia wise
strength of trainees under the scheme ‘Come & Play’ in various disciplines like  Badminton,
Boxing, Basketball, Cricket, Cycling, Football, Hockey, Gymnastics, Judo, Shooting, Swimming,
Table Tennis, V olleyball, Weightlifting, Wrestling may be seen below:

23
1. J.N Stadium 2039 trainees
2. I.G. Sports Complex 1546 trainees
3. MD National Stadium 1544 trainees
4. Dr. KSS Ranges  904 trainees
5. Dr. SPM Swimming Pool Complex  532 trainees
After the successful launch of the Scheme in Delhi, the Scheme was extended all over the
country in SAI Regional Centre/Sub-Centres/Institutions, and other SAI field units in October, 2011.
15.6 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the following recommendations/suggestions made
by the Working Group on Sports and Physical Education for Twelfth Plan in the context of Sports
Authority of India:
– SAI should identify the most talented players in the country in the sub-junior category
upwards by professional talent spotters and undertake their long term development on
the same lines as done in China, US, Cuba etc.
– Centres of Excellence should be opened in Seven States, i.e. Mizoram, Arunachal
Pradesh, Odisha, Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh which do not have
any such Advanced Centre at present and operationalised during the Twelfth Plan Period.
– 20 new SAI Training Centres/Special Area Games Centres should be opened in the
areas, where there are no such centres.
– SAI should take adequate steps for developing a pool of highly qualified and accredited
technical officials, such as referees, judges etc.
– SAI should develop a programme for Training of Trainees for updation of knowledge
and latest techniques of various disciplines by its coaches.
15.7 The Committee is of the view that all the above recommendations/observations made
by the Working Group are very relevant and need to be implemented so as to improve the
image of the country so far as international sports is concerned. SAI being the apex body,
having the crucial mandate of spotting and nurturing sports talent of the country and
having earned great experience and also having the infrastructure and manpower needs to
be given every conceivable support. The Department of Sports has to lead the way and play
a pro-active role in this regard.
XVI. ANTI DOPING
16.1 Scheme of Assistance for anti-doping activities:  Under this Scheme, financial assistance
is extended to the National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA) and National Dope Testing Laboratory
(NDTL) to carry out their respective activities. The primary objective of the National Anti Doping
Agency (NADA)  is to implement anti-doping rules as per W ADA code, regulate dope control
programme, to promote education and research and creating awareness about doping and its ill-
effects. During the year 2012-13, a total of 3491 urine samples and 255 blood samples have been
collected by NADA till February, 2013. NADA conducts education/dope control awareness
programmes and distributes education materials to sportspersons participating in training camps,
selection trials and national events. A total of 30 educational programmes have been conducted
during sport events/training sessions conducted by National Sports Federations (NSF), Association
of All India Universities (AIU), Sports Authority of India Centres, Sports Authority of India Sports
Training Centres, School Games Federation and Services Sports Control Boards.

24
16.2 Under the Anti-Doping Rules of NADA 2010, the following panels and committees have
been constituted:
(i) Anti Doping Disciplinary Panel:
(ii) Anti Doping Appeal Panel; and
(iii) Therapeutic Use of Exemption Committee.
All the three bodies are independent of NADA in so far as their functioning is concerned
and the two panels include eminent legal professionals, medical practitioners and legendary
sportspersons as their members. The TUE Committee consists of renowned medical practitioners.
The two panels regularly conduct hearing of the athletes who had violated Anti Doping Rules and
pass judgements in accordance with the provisions contained in the WADA Code and Anti Doping
Rules of NADA.
16.3 National Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL) is responsible for testing dope samples and
conducting advance research on the subject by maintaining close association with W ADA and
WADA accredited laboratories. It has received ISO/IEC17025:2005 and is accredited by National
Accreditation Board for Testing & Calibration Laboratories (NABL). During 2012-13, 4949 samples
have been tested till 31.12.2012, which included 1987 international samples. On the basis of its
performance in proficiency testing rounds for 2013, WADA accreditation for NDTL has been
extended till the 31
st December, 2013. NDTL has signed a contract with W ADA for testing samples
from Regional Anti-Doping Organizations, as part of WADA’s programme development activities to
facilitate and promote the development of testing programmes within these regions.
16.4 The technical officials of NADA are regularly visiting Sports Authority of India (SAI) Regional
Centres and other places (wherever training camps are held) and educating the athletes on doping in
sports and harmful side effects of the dope substances by conducting lectures/seminars/workshops
etc. on regular basis with the help of dope control handbooks printed in English, Hindi, Tamil, Telugu,
Malayalam and Punjabi. To achieve a better outreach and to reach the masses, NADA is coordinating
with CBSE schools and School Games Federation of India both at national and regional levels for
programmes regarding anti-doping measures through sport events organized by the Federations.
Keeping special focus on rural sports centres various Anti-Doping awareness Symposia and
workshops have been conducted in the Sports Authority of India (SAI) Training Centres (STC) in
rural areas namely Hissar, Sonipat, Kurukshetra, Rohtak, Kashipur and Bhiwani.
16.5 The Committee is encouraged to find that allocation for 2013-14 has been increased
to `8.30 crore from RE 2012-13 of `3.00 crore. At the same time, the Committee is not
happy with the utilization during 2012-13 which is only `1.80 crore. At a time when
performance of Indian sportspersons is rising in International arena, it becomes all the
more necessary to make the sportspersons aware of the anti-doping rules and its violations.
The Committee is happy to find that the panels and committees constituted under the Anti-
Doping Rules of NADA 2010 are fully functional and NADA is making all efforts in
educating sportspersons on doping. The Committee desires that all the anti-doping
initiatives need to be further intensified so as to make sports in our country dope-free.
16.6 The Department informed the Committee that NADA has conducted 12654  dope tests on
athletes during the last four years, with details as under:
Sl. Year Total Dope Samples Number of Anti Doping
No. Collected Rule Violations
12 3 4
1 2009 2331 67

25
12 3 4
2 2010 2794 123
3 2011 3206 116
4 2012 4323 119
T
OTAL : 12654 425
During the period from 2009-12, a total number of 425 Anti Doping Rule Violations have
been reported. There is no Anti Doping Rule Violation reported during any international event by
Indian Athletes.
16.7 The Committee was informed that 425 cases of Anti-Doping Rule Violation were referred
to the Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel. The Panel, after detailed hearings has issued sanction for
penalty in 366 cases and the remaining were at various stages of hearing. The Anti-Doping Appeal
Panel has so far taken up 32 appeal cases and disposed. 14 cases were in the process of hearing
and pending for decision. Penalties imposed ranged from a reprimand to two year period of
ineligibility from sporting events.
16.8 The very fact that out of 425 doping cases, penalty had to be imposed in as many
as 366 cases clearly indicates that there is a need for increasing the awareness level of our
sportspersons so that they are properly sensitised about the ill-effects of taking doping
substances. The Committee notes that from 2009 onwards, NADA has conducted more than
80 education and outreach programmes and over 8000 sportspersons, including support
personnel have been attending such programmes. While the Committee appreciates the
efforts made by NADA, increasing number of Anti-Doping Rule Violations confirm the
apprehensions that still more needs to be done. The Committee is of the view that along
with awareness programmes, efforts need to be made at all levels to keep a discreet watch
on sportspersons selected for participating in various categories  of competitions during their
coaching camps/preparatory exercises.
16.9 The Committee also takes note of two research Projects of NDTL which deal with the
following areas;
Detection of Synthetic glucocorticoids in Indian herbal drugs and supplements
The outcome of this project will help create awareness among athletes about appropriate use
of health/herbal supplements.
Characteristics of IEF Patterns and SDS-PAGE Results of Indian EPO Bio similar
The project will help detect Erythropoietics, a doping substance used by cyclists,
weightlifters, boxers and long distance runners.
16.10 The Committee feels that findings of these research Projects will go a long way in
sensitizing our sportspersons and their coaches against use of such doping substances. These
findings may be shared with all concerned.
XVII. DE-MERGER OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE (NIS), PATIALA FROM SPORTS
AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI) FOR SETTING UP OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF
SPORTS COACHING
17.1 The availability of well-qualified coaches is a critical area for the promotion of sports
excellence, and requires focused attention in the Indian context. There is a need for producing

26
quality coaches of international standards within the country and develop a holistic system for
imparting coaching. Keeping this objective in view, the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has
decided to de-merge National Institute of Sports (NIS), Patiala from Sports Authority of India
(SAI) for forming a new society for creating an institute for coaching of national importance.
Governing Body of SAI at its meeting held on the 2
nd November, 2011 approved de-merger of NIS,
Patiala from SAI. This decision of the Government is aimed at restoring the position of NIS, Patiala
as a premier national institute for coaching education.
17.2 The vision of NIS Patiala as an independent coaching institution would be to emerge as a
leading international institution for providing comprehensive education in sports coaching including
options for specialization in specific areas for advanced coaching. NIS, Patiala, as independent
coaching institute, would strive to achieve the following objectives:
(i) to develop and promote a flagship three-year integrated graduate programme in sport
coaching which will cover various aspects related to coaching, including
physiotherapy, nutrition, sports technology, sports science etc.
(ii) To of fer specialized diploma courses in different aspects of sports coaching;
(iii) To strengthen existing M.Sc. course in coaching;
(iv) To undertake R&D activities in different areas of sports coaching.
(v) To offer a general one-year diploma course as a vocational option for students passing
out of 12
th standard, for taking up coaching as a self-employment avenue, including
community sports coaching.
17.3 The Department has informed that the proposal has also been considered by the Expenditure
Finance Committee at its meeting held on the 12 th September, 2012 and it was suggested that a
detailed feasibility report containing the budgetary requirement, item wise cost estimates alongwith
project viability be brought before EFC through a revised proposal. It has been decided to assign
the task of preparation of a Detailed Project Report (DPR) or a feasibility report by the 30
th June,
2013 and thereafter the implementation process will start. The estimated expenditure over the three
year period will be about `250 crore.
17.4 The Committee is happy to note the decision to set up the Institute of Coaching has
been taken since coaching is the backbone of sports and lack of coaching proves to be a
deterrent in excellence of sports.  The Committee hopes that NSDC will submit the Feasibility
Report in time. The Committee was given to understand that the Institute was likely to start
functioning from November -December this year. The Committee, however, has little hope in
this regard. This is borne out by the fact that a provision of `1.00 crore has been made for
the Institute for 2013-14. The Committee is of the view that the Department will have to
closely monitor the progress made in the implementation of the project. There is an acute
sense of urgency as there is a big gap between the sanctioned strength of coaches and those
in position. As per the information made available to the Committee, out of the sanctioned
strength of 1524 coaches, 453 posts are lying vacant. One must not forget the fact that even
after the Institute is established and starts functioning, it will take at least two to three years
for prospective coaches being trained by the Institute.
XVIII.  SETTING UP OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF SPORTS SCIENCE AND SPORTS
MEDICINE
18.1 Sports Science and Sports Medicine are in the present era of competitive sports, at the core
of preparation of teams and athletes for improved performance in international sports. No country

27
which wishes to achieve a certain standing in the sporting world, can afford to ignore the role and
importance of sports science and sports medicine.
18.2 The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports set up an Expert Group in February, 2011 which
made the following recommendations:
(i) To upgrade the existing sports science and medicine facilities at SAI Centres on
priority to fulfil immediate need of London Olympics 2012, Commonwealth Games
2014 and Asian Games 2014.
(ii) To set up the New Institute viz., National Institute of Sports Science and Medicine
(NISSM) as Centre of Excellence by providing highly integrated, quality-assured
services (Testing), the development of leading experts (Training) who will
subsequently drive innovation and share knowledge (research & cooperation to
positively impact sporting performance.
18.3 The Department informed the Committee that while examining the need for having a
separate Sports Science and Medicine Institute at national level, the Expert Group has taken note
of the gaps in the existing set up in SAI in terms of manpower and equipment deficiency and made
specific recommendations to fill in those gaps for giving immediate support to elite sports persons.
The Expert Group has also stated clearly that there should be no overlap between upgrading of
facilities for Sport Sciences and Sport Medicine within SAI and setting up of a National Institute
for Sport Sciences and Sport Medicine, as the two would meet two distinct objectives. Role of
the new Institute will be:
(i) Treatment and rehabilitation of Sportspersons.
(ii) To provide testing services for sportspersons.
(iii) Performance enhancement through use of sports sciences.
(iv) Inter-disciplinary research in the field of Sports Science and Medicine.
(v) Accreditation and certification of physical trainer/masseurs/nutritionists/physiotherapists/
psychologists through a Quality Assurance Department which will also take care of
the accreditation of testing laboratories and training courses.
(vi) To provide certification of food supplements to support anti-doping activities.
(vii) Dissemination of sports science/sports medicine information.
(viii) International co-operation and collaboration.
18.4 The proposed Institute will also be awarding following academic and certificate courses:
(i) MD, DSM in Sports Medicine
(ii) Doctorate Degree in relevant discipline
(iii) Integrated Ph.D. programme in relevant discipline
(iv) Certificate courses in relevant discipline.
18.5 The Ministry has decided to set up the National Institute of Sports Science and Sports
Medicine at the Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium Complex, New Delhi. The Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) has approved the proposal for setting up National Institute of Sports Science and
Sports Medicine at its meeting held on the 3
rd July, 2012 and further action is being taken in
accordance with the Minutes of the EFC. The Secretary, during presentation before the Committee,

28
informed that the National Skill Development Corporation had been asked to do a Feasibility Study
and submit a Detailed Feasibility Report containing the budgetary requirement after taking revenue
generation into consideration, and cost estimates along with project viability to be placed before the
EFC through a revised proposal. The proposal was expected to cost about `250 crore.
18.6 The Committee observes that the setting up of an Institute of Sports Sciences is
a major step towards rationalising sports activities and achieving excellence in sports. The
Committee notes that the task of preparation of a Detailed Project Report (DPR) is to be
given to the National Skill Development Corporation and the allocation of `2.00 crore for
2013-14 will meet the expected expenditure towards the first step for setting up the
Institute after due approvals. It is evident that it will take quite some time for the
setting up of the proposed Institute. The Committee can only hope that all the procedural
formalities would be expedited so as to ensure the setting up of the Institute at the
earliest.
XIX. CONCEPT NOTE ON ‘IDENTIFYING AND NURTURING SPORTS TALENT’
19.1 The Secretary during his presentation before the Committee informed that the Ministry had
prepared a Concept Note on ‘ Identifying and Nurturing Sports Talent’  and put in public domain
for inviting suggestions and comments of the general public and all stakeholders. The Concept Note
seeks to bring out the need for addressing the fundamental weakness in the sports sector such as
up-gradation of skills of our sportspersons through better coaching, more dependence on sports
medicine, better support services, enhanced participation in competitions of a higher standard both
in India and overseas, developing a strong bench strength, making sports a rewarding career option
and enhancing the investment in sport sector, which is at present almost negligible. It also seeks
to explore the possibilities of increased private sector involvement and the methods by which sports
can become a significant business opportunity.
19.2 For overcoming the shortcomings in the sports sector and achieving the goals and
milestones listed above, the Concept Note proposes for identification of young talent through sports
competitions conducted at block, district, state and national levels under the Ministry’s Centrally
Sponsored Scheme ‘Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan’(PYKKA); setting up of District Level
Sports Centres in a selected school in every district in the country in next 10 years and setting
up of 25 High Performance Centres in the country. The young talented sportspersons identified
through PYKKA competitions will be nurtured and groomed for participation in national and
international sports competitions in the proposed District Level Sports Centres, which would have
adequate sports facilities in the form of athlete track, hockey/football fields, multipurpose halls,
volleyball, basketball, badminton courts etc., hostel facilities. These District Level Sports Centres
will be set up under the Public Private Partnership (PPP). 25 proposed High Performance Centres
would concentrate on 3-4 core disciplines, where the elite athletes will be trained and junior athletes
will also be trained at these centres in the company of the elite sportspersons. The Concept Note
provides for establishing linkages of the National Sports Federations with the corporate
sponsorships. Corporate will have a role in the development of the identified talented sportspersons
by way of offering sponsorships, league competitions modelled on the Hockey India League and
Indian Premier League (IPL), setting up specialised training centres for different sports and setting
up sports research centres and academies. Over a period of time, sports could become a major
business activity for many corporate as is the case in USA and Britain.
19.3 The Secretary informed the Committee that the scheme will cost approximately `30,000
crore. As of now, a small amount has been kept and a Feasibility Study is being conducted. The
scheme is likely to be implemented by next year and over the next 20-25 years, India will produce
greatest champions.

29
19.4 The Concept Note sets up specific goals and milestones such as third position in the overall
medals tally in the Commonwealth Games at Glasgow, 2014, with a medal tally 125 Medals, fifth
position in Incheon Asian Games 2014 with a medal tally of 75 medals, achieving position in top
twenty in medals tally with 20 medals in 2016 Rio Olympics, second position in Commonwealth
Games, 2018, maintaining 5
th position in Asian Games, 2019, and getting into the list of first en
sporting nations in Olympics 2020 with a medals tally of not less than 25-30, but at least five
medals.
19.5 The Committee appreciates the spirit behind the Concept Note on ‘Identifying and
Nurturing Sports Talent’. The objective of the mega initiative is laudable. The Committee
would, however, like to point out that there are already a number of schemes being
administered by well-established bodies working across the country which have been
engaged in the exercise of identifying sports talent at different levels, beginning right from
a tender age of the child and nurturing the same by providing support of all kinds. The
Sports Authority of India is the apex sports promotion body of the country, well-equipped
with the expertise and necessary infrastructure and manpower. SAI has been in existence
since 1984 and, by and large, has been successful in achieving its objectives. It administers
as many as five sports Promotion Schemes, i.e. National Sports Talent Contest Scheme,
Army Boys Sports Company Scheme, SAI Training Centres, Special Area Games Scheme
and Centres of Excellence Scheme. Besides that, one of the objectives of the PYKKA
Scheme is to harness available and potential sporting talent among rural youth through a
well-developed competition structure from the block level. The Committee is of the view
that before taking any final decision with regard to the Concept Paper, it would be better
to review the functioning of SAI so as to have an idea about its shortcomings and strength
and bring out further modifications, as and wherever desired. It is a well-known fact that
SAI through its variety of schemes has been engaged in the task of sporting and nurturing
sports talent from diverse areas of the country. The need of the hour is to further
strengthen this apex body which has considerable experience and expertise of its domain
area and all the allied aspects. Whatever new areas/aspects are proposed to be introduced
through the new ambitious scheme can very well be handled by SAI.
XX NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
20.1 National Sports Federations play a major role so far as performance of sportspersons in
both national and international sports is concerned. Their mandate has become more crucial keeping
in view the fact that there has been resurgence of Indian Sports, in terms of performance by our
athletes at the international level. In the recent years, our sportspersons have been doing very well
in the Delhi Commonwealth Games-2010, Guanzhou Asian Games-2010, London Olympic Games-
2012 and other events like Asian Championships, Commonwealth Championships, World
Championships etc. The Committee is also aware that our country’s best-ever and vastly improved
performance in London Olympic-2012 increases the stake for building this momentum and
improving achievements in future multi-disciplinary sporting even targeting Olympics-2020,
Preparations for Commonwealth Games-2014, Asian Games-2014, Olympics-2016, Commonwealth
Games-2018 and Asian Games-2019 are also required to be made.
20.2 The Committee notes that enhanced allocation `160.00 crore has been asked for
owing to the forthcoming Asian Games and Commonwealth Games in 2014. These funds
would be required for booking of additional coaching camps for preparation of teams,
specialized training and participation in international events/tournaments abroad. The
Committee recommends that all the concerned Sports Federations should be given all
possible support for facilitating our sportspersons participating in the forthcoming
international games.

30
20.3 Committee’s attention has been drawn to suspension and withdrawal of recognition of two
Federations, i.e. Indian Amateur Boxing Federation and Archery Association of India respectively.
The Committee finds that the election to the post of President, Secretary and Treasurer of the
Athletic Federation of India has been set aside. The Federation has been advised to hold fresh
elections after amending its constitution. If this was not done by 18
th February, 2013, the
recognition of the Federation was bound to be withdrawn without further notice. The Committee
would like to be informed about the latest position in this regard.
20.4  The Committee has been given to understand that inspite of these three
Federations not functioning at present, the preparation of Indian Sportspersons and their
participation in international events will not be adversely affected as their training is going
on. Out of 53 NSFs, three being not functional due to valid reasons should not be a cause
of concern. However, the Committee would like to mention that the domain of the two
Federations i.e. Amateur Boxing and Archery, the two Sports where our sportspersons have
always proved themselves by their commendable performance is very crucial. The
Committee can only emphasise that for want of these Federations remaining inactive, our
effort should be made to given them full support.
20.5 The Committee is happy to note that with a view to ensure good governance in
sports, Government has put in place, a set of guidelines in the form of National Sports
Development Code of India, 2011 which is mandatory for the NSF to follow. All the
Federations are also required to submit Utilization Certificates for the grants received from
the Government. The Committee would like to be apprised about the status of UCs
submitted by Sports Federations.
20.6 The Committee notes that in view of the need for promoting good governance and
transparency in the functioning of sports bodies, the system of annual recognition of Sports
Federations has been introduced in 2010. These Federations have also been declared as
public authorities under the RTI Act, 2005. Guidelines for fixing age and tenure limits for
the elected office bearers of the Federations have also been issued. The Committee finds
that so far only four Sports Federations dealing with the disciplines of Chess, Kayaking and
Canoeing, Ball Badminton and Bridge have already amended their constitutions and Bye-
laws incorporating age and tenure limits prescribed by the Ministry, 28 Federations have
agreed to do so.  The Committee welcomes these path-breaking initiatives taken by the
Department which will go a long way in bringing the much-awaited element of transparency
and in the process streamlining the functioning of National Sports Federations. The
Committee would appreciate if the needful is done by all the remaining Federations at the
earliest.
XXI. CONCLUSION
21.1 The Committee observes that the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has the
mandate to take care of youth and adolescent population of the country which comes to
around 550 million as per the 2011 Census figures. This vast segment of our population is
virtually the future of our country. They have to be given all kinds of support so as to
make them responsible citizens of the country, both mentally and physically geared up to
carry out their responsibilities. Both the Departments of the Ministry have been
accomplishing their assigned tasks through a variety of programmes and schemes, having
the support of a large number of organisations. The Ministry also has to co-ordinate with
a number of Ministries dealing with youth related areas. Element of convergence is also
there with quite a few schemes being administered by other Ministries. Not only this, the
actual implementing agencies, both in the Government and private sector, are scattered

31
across the country having their area-specific problems and limitations. In such a scenario,
it is a tall order for the Ministry to carry out its mandate successfully. The Committee can
only say that the spirit and well-intention of the Ministry is very much there and almost
all the schemes are well-conceptualised. Grey areas are there in their implementation
related complexities at the ground level. Fund constraint is also very visible in some of the
schemes. The Committee would only like to reiterate that the Ministry has to play the role
of a co-ordinator with a well-equipped and vibrant monitoring mechanism. The Committee
understands that in a Government set-up, the procedural formalities and accountability
cannot be overlooked. But even there should be an under-current of flexibility also to the
extent of viability.

32
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee strongly feels that allocation of funds during the Twelfth Plan Period
for various schemes/institutions relating to youth and sports should be strictly in accordance
with the approved outlay. The Committee would like to point out that only one year of the
Twelfth Plan has gone and during the first year itself, utilisation level of allocated funds has
been by and large satisfactory. There have been some exceptions but for that the concerned
agencies have to identify the problem-areas and take corrective measures accordingly. This
is all the more required to be done as both the Departments have come up with some
significant initiatives having implications for the welfare and support of our youth. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that at the RE stage, additional funds may be provided
for schemes running satisfactorily. (Para 2.4)
The Committee is intrigued to note that for 2010-11, as on 1.4.2012, number of
outstanding Utilization Certificates was 7 involving `9.53 crore. This figure went upto 156
Utilization Certificates involving `91.29 crore as on 21.2.2013. The Committee is not
convinced by the clarification given by the Ministry that the increase was being reconciled
with CCA as some old cases of 1993 onwards relating to HRD were included. This issue
needed to be resolved at the earliest. The Committee also finds that not much progress
has been made with regard to outstanding Utilization Certificates pertaining to 2007-08,
2008-09 and 2009-10. The Committee is of the view that all the old outstanding Utilization
Certificates need to be accounted for on priority basis. (Para 2.6)
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
The Committee is encouraged to find that the Department has come up with various
projects with different agencies, private as well as Government for skill development and
training programmes. However, it appears that these projects/schemes are only in their
initial stages and as mentioned by the Secretary are being constrained by the fund crunch.
Before initiating these projects, the Department should formulate a policy framework or a
road map on the convergence of the scheme with other agencies or Ministries in the matter
of allocation of funds and proper utilization of the volunteers. (Para 3.4)
The Committee views with serious concern that the projected requirement of
`2182.35 crore for NYKS for the Twelfth Plan remains totally ignored, inspite of optimum
utilisation of allocated funds during the Eleventh Plan period as well as the first year of the
Twelfth Plan. Factors like introduction of some new schemes/programmes, projected
enhancement of the Regular Programme coverage from 501 Districts to 623 Districts, filling
up of vacant posts of NYKS functionaries and payment of enhanced salary to them have to
be addressed in the right earnest. The Committee, accordingly, strongly recommends
enhanced allocation for NYKS for 2013-14. (Para 3.11)
IV. NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME ((NSS)
The Committee would appreciate if agro-industries, khadi and village industries and
food processing industries and other similar industries are also included in the list of
32

33
domain areas. Besides that, assistance can also be sought from the Ministries like Rural
Development, Social Justice and Empowerment, HRD and Health and Family Welfare, in
view of a large number of schemes being handled by these Ministries where requirement
of personnel at the ground level in large numbers always remains. (Para 4.8)
The Committee observes that at present 299 universities, 16,885 colleges/technical
institutions and 10,762 senior secondary schools are covered under NSS. Number of
institutions remaining outside the coverage of NSS in all the categories is more than
double. The Committee is of the view that self-financing units alone would not be in a
position to bring about any significant improvement. What is required is to sensitize and
increase the awareness about the Scheme in both the targeted beneficiaries as well as the
implementing institutions. The Department has to take a pro-active role in this regard.
(Para 4.12)
V. YOUTH HOSTELS
The Committee firmly believes that the Youth Hostel Movement operating since 1966
has the greatest potential for promoting national integration and brotherhood among the
countrymen. However, the scheme has not shown a satisfactory progress as against a target
of a Youth Hostel in 200 districts by the end of the Eleventh Plan, presently there are 81
youth hostels and four more are in various stages of construction. The Committee is well
aware that the Planning Commission, while approving allocation of only `12.00 crore for the
Eleventh Plan, had desired to discontinue the scheme thereafter. However, it is also equally
true that the Working Group on Adolescents and Youth Development for the Twelfth Plan
has strongly advocated the continuance of the Youth Hostel Scheme. It has observed that
efforts were required to be made during the Twelfth Plan to bring more synergy between
the Scheme of Youth Hostels and other youth development schemes such as National
Integration, Promotion of Adventure and various programmes of NYKS and NSS and to
develop them as major centres of youth activities. (Para 5.7)
The Committee is of the view that it is high time that the problem-areas identified
by the Working Group like administrative mismanagement, low salary structure, poor job
security and involvement of workers, lack of State Government support, lack of popularity
and promotion activity, insufficient staffing and lack of uniform guidelines/instructions are
addressed in the right perspective and without any further delay. The Committee
recommends that steps should be taken to clearly define and strengthen the administration
of Youth Hostels. Initiatives regarding accommodation for Hostel Managers, sale-linked
incentives and on-line booking of Youth Hostels are a welcome step, although very much
delayed. The Committee also observes that involvement of NYK, NSS, Scouts, NCC, all
State Tourism Departments, Schools/Colleges, Education Departments would go a long way
in the promotion of Youth Hostel Scheme and optimum utilisation of its resources. Lastly,
appropriate steps need to be taken by the Department to obtain the required funds for the
Scheme at the RE stage. (Para 5.8)
VI. RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD)
The Committee would like to point out that declaring any institution as an
institution of national importance and giving it a statutory status is done only when that
particular institution has great potential and needs to be supported.  Availability of adequate
financial resources is thus of paramount importance, especially for an institution of national
importance. One must not forget that this Institution is mandated to cater to the needs of
our youth which constitutes a potential demographic dividend if harnessed adequately and

34
a challenge of mega proportion if not properly addressed and harnessed. RGNYD is one of
its own kind of institution in the country and has a vast scope for growth. At this stage,
if more funds are not provided to the Institution, it may not make progress as envisaged.
The Committee also desires that the recommendations made by M/s Across World Quality
International Limited need to be implemented as they will be instrumental in overall
improvement of the Institute. (Para 6.4)
X. PANCHAYAT YUV A KRIDA AUR KHEL ABHIYAN (PYKKA)
The Committee was informed that the PYKKA Scheme had been adopted in 28 States
and 4 UTs. As on the 31
st December, 2012, 56,414 village panchayats and 1734 block
panchayats have been approved. Against 58,153 village/block panchayats approved for
creation of basic sports infrastructure, playfields have been developed in 38,138 PYKKA
Centres. The Committee has its own strong apprehensions about the coverage of 2.50 lakh
panchayats and 6400 block panchayats by the end of the Twelfth Plan Period, i.e. 2016-17.
The Committee can only conclude that non-availability of the required funds will remain the
major hurdle in the fulfilment of targets of this ambitious Scheme. (Para 10.4)
The Committee is happy to note that invoking the provision for undertaking
activities like levelling of land including playfields under MGNREGA, some States have
already availed funds for development of playfields in village/block panchayats. In view of
some States facing difficulties in availing of these benefits, the Ministry of Rural
Development has issued a notification on 15
th January, 2013 for inclusion of playfields as a
permissible activity under MGNREGA. Secondly, on the request of the Ministry, the Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation has decided that MPs may recommend under
MPLADS, works of fixed and durable nature under PYKKA including development of
playfields, levelling of playfields in hilly areas, construction of boundary wall etc. in villages
and blocks from out of the shelf of PYKKA projects, if otherwise eligible under MPLAD
Scheme. The Committee hopes that all these initiatives will go a long way in making the
implementation of PYKKA a success and achieve its targeted goals within the prescribed
time limit. The Committee would impress upon the Ministry to work upon this convergence
component in coordination with both the nodal Ministries for MGNREGA and MPLAD
Schemes and also the State Governments. (Para 10.5)
The Committee is not aware as to upto what extent State and national level
competitions organised through PYKKA have proved to be successful in identifying young
talented sportspersons having the potential for further growth and winning medals at
international events. The Committee would like to have a status report in this regard.
(Para 10.9)
XI. URBAN SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEME
The Committee would take the opportunity to point out that very few States have so
far shown their interest in the Scheme. States like UP, Bihar, Uttarakhand and Southern
States/UT except Kerala and Puducherry have not registered their presence. The Committee
would appreciate if this matter is taken up with all the remaining States. Regional SAI
Centres can easily be involved in all co-ordination and monitoring related issues so far as
the Scheme of Urban Infrastructure is concerned. (Para 11.5)
XII. PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
The Committee would like to be apprised about the status and role of Special
Olympic Bharat, the nodal authority for training of community coaches and conduct of

35
sports competitions. The Committee understands that besides Special Olympic Bharat, there
are other NGOs involved in the implementation of this Scheme. The Committee  would like
to have full details about these NGOs, along with grants released to them year-wise. The
Committee also takes note of the suggestion of the Working Group on sports and Physical
Education for the Twelfth Plan for having the component of sports competitions for persons
with disabilities under the PYKKA Scheme which already has the component of sports
competitions. The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of the Working Group
and recommends that necessary steps may be taken in this regard. (Para 12.4)
The Committee understands that at present there are three different bodies dealing
with differently abled sportspersons. Paralympic Committee of India is concerned with
physically disabled sportspersons, Special Olympics Bharat for intellectually challenged and
the All India Sports Council for Deaf. The Committee has been informed that the Special
Olympics Bharat was given financial assistance of `2.85 crore and `3.59 crore in 2011-12
and 2012-13 respectively. Likewise, Paralympic Committee of India was given assistance of
`1.47 crore in 2012-13. The Committee would like to have an idea about the areas where
these funds were utilised by these bodies, especially for sporting the differently abled
sportspersons participating in international events. (Para 12.5)
XIII. INCENTIVES FOR DIFFERENTLY-ABLED SPORTSPERSONS
The Committee puts on record its deep sense of appreciation for the sportspersons
participating in London Para Olympics, 2012 and Special Olympics World Winter Games
2013 for the differently-abled athletes. While one of the Indian participants won a silver
medal in High Jump at London Para Olympics, 2012, Indian athletes won 13 gold, 16 silver
and 16 bronze medals in the Special Olympics World Winter Games, 2013. (Para 13.1)
The Committee strongly feels that differently-abled sportspersons winning medals in
international sports events also deserve to be given award, especially keeping in view of their
achieving success against all odds.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that a scheme
giving suitable awards for medal winners from differently-abled category sportspersons and for
their coaches should be formulated without any further delay. (Para 13.2)
The Committee would appreciate if recommendations of the Working Group are
looked into, if not done already, and a favourable decision is taken. This would go a long
way in nurturing young sport talent and motivating them for achieving new heights in
international sports. (Para 13.4)
XIV. SCHEME OF PENSION TO MERITORIOUS SPORTSPERSONS
The Committee strongly feels that meritorious sportspersons whether winning medals
in Olympics or Paralympics should be treated at par. Nobody can deny the fact that
differently-abled sportspersons have to undergo lot of problems, keeping in view their
limitations and have to make concerted efforts much more that what the normal
sportspersons have to make. Thus, they need to be given more support. It would be rather
unjustified if they are not given pension at par with abled-bodied sportspersons. Secondly,
the pension facility should be rightly extended to differently-abled sportspersons wining
medals in Commonwealth Games and Para-Asian Games. The Committee would appreciate
if a final decision in this regard is taken at the earliest. The Committee understands that
the Working Group had already recommended on these lines. (Para 14.1)
XVI. ANTI DOPING
The very fact that out of 425 doping cases, penalty had to be imposed in as many

36
as 366 cases clearly indicates that there is a need for increasing the awareness level of our
sportspersons so that they are properly sensitised about the ill-effects of taking doping
substances. The Committee notes that from 2009 onwards, NADA has conducted more than
80 education and outreach programmes and over 8000 sportspersons, including support
personnel have been attending such programmes. While the Committee appreciates the
efforts made by NADA, increasing number of Anti-Doping Rule Violations confirm the
apprehensions that still more needs to be done. The Committee is of the view that along
with awareness programmes, efforts need to be made at all levels to keep a discreet watch
on sportspersons selected for participating in various categories  of competitions during their
coaching camps/preparatory exercises. (Para 16.8)
XVII. DE-MERGER OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE (NIS), PATIALA FROM SPORTS
AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI) FOR SETTING UP OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF SPORTS
COACHING
The Committee is happy to note the decision to set up the Institute of Coaching has
been taken since coaching is the backbone of sports and lack of coaching proves to be a
deterrent in excellence of sports.  The Committee hopes that NSDC will submit the
Feasibility Report in time. The Committee was given to understand that the Institute was
likely to start functioning from November-December this year. The Committee, however,
has little hope in this regard. This is borne out by the fact that a provision of `1.00 crore
has been made for the Institute for 2013-14. The Committee is of the view that the
Department will have to closely monitor the progress made in the implementation of the
project. (Para 17.4)
XVIII.  SETTING UP OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF SPORTS SCIENCE AND SPORTS
MEDICINE
The Committee observes that the setting up of an Institute of Sports Sciences is a
major step towards rationalising sports activities and achieving excellence in sports. The
Committee notes that the task of preparation of a detailed Project Report (DPR) is to be
given to the National Skill Development Corporation and the allocation of `2.00 crore for
2013-14 will meet the expected expenditure towards the first step for setting up the
Institute after due approvals. It is evident that it will take quite some time for the setting
up of the proposed Institute. The Committee can only hope that all the procedural
formalities would be expedited so as to ensure the setting up of the Institute at the earliest.
(Para 18.6)
XIX. CONCEPT NOTE ON IDENTIFYING AND NURTURING SPORTS TALENT
The Committee is of the view that before taking any final decision with regard to the
Concept Paper, it would be better to review the functioning of SAI so as to have an idea about
its shortcomings and strength and bring out further modifications, as and wherever desired.
It is a well-known fact that SAI through its variety of schemes has been engaged in the task
of sporting and nurturing sports talent from diverse areas of the country. The need of the
hour is to further strengthen this apex body which has considerable experience and expertise
of its domain area and all the allied aspects. Whatever new areas/aspects are proposed to be
introduced through the new ambitious scheme can very well be handled by SAI. (Para 19.5)
XX. NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
The Committee notes that in view of the need for promoting good governance and

37
transparency in the functioning of sports bodies, the system of annual recognition of Sports
Federations has been introduced in 2010. These Federations have also been declared as
public authorities under the RTI Act, 2005. Guidelines for fixing age and tenure limits for
the elected office bearers of the Federations have also been issued. The Committee finds
that so far only four Sports Federations dealing with the disciplines of Chess, Kayaking
and Canoeing, Ball Badminton and Bridge have already amended their constitutions and
Bye-laws incorporating age and tenure limits prescribed by the Ministry, 28 Federations
have agreed to do so.  The Committee welcomes these path-breaking initiatives taken by the
Department which will go a long way in bringing the much-awaited element of transparency
and in the process streamlining the functioning of National Sports Federations. The
Committee would appreciate if the needful is done by all the remaining Federations at the
earliest. (Para 20.6)

MINUTES

XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the
25th March, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
4. Shri Baishnab Parida
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Suresh Angadi
6. Shri  P.K. Biju
7. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
8. Shri Sivasami C.
9. Shri Mahadeo Singh Khandela
10. Dr. Charles Dias
11. Shri Virender Kashyap
12. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
13. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
14. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
I. Department of School Education and Literacy
(i) Shri R. Bhattacharya, Secretary
(ii) Ms. Vrinda Sarup, Additional Secretary
(iii) Dr. Amarjit Singh, Additional Secretary
(iv) Ms. S. Radha Chauhan, Joint Secretary
(v) Dr. Nagesh Singh, Economic Adviser
(vi) Ms. Maninder Kaur Dwivedi, Director
41

42
(vii) Ms. Meenakshi Jolly, Director
(viii) Shri Gaya Prasad, Director
(ix) Shri K. Mathivanam, Director
(x) Shri Vineet Joshi, Chairman, CBSE
(xi) Shri Avinash Dikshit, Commissioner, KVS
(xii) Shri G.S. Bothyal, Commissioner, NVS
(xiii) Dr. S.S. Jena, Chairman, NIOS
(xiv) Prof. P. Sinclair, Director, NCERT
(xv) Ms. R. Jaya, Member Secretary, NCTE
(xvi) Shri Alok Verma, Director CTSA
II. Department of Youth Affairs
(i) Ms. Nita Choudhury, Secretary (Youth Affairs)
(ii) Dr. G .S.G. Ayyangar, Joint Secretary (Devp.)
(iii) Ms. Anjali Anand Srivastava, Joint Secretary
(iv) Shri Sudhir Kumar, Joint Secretary, (Parl.)
III. Department of Sports
(i) Shri P.K. Deb, Secretary, Sports
(ii) Dr. G .S.G. Ayyangar, Joint Secretary (Sports)
(iii) Ms. Anjali Anand Srivastava, Joint Secretary & F .A
(iv) Shri Mukul Chatterjee, Joint Secretary (NADA)
(v) Shri Jiji Thomson, Director General (SAI)
(vi) Shri V ivek Narayan, Director (Sports)
(vii) Shri R.D. Chouhan, Director (Scheme) (Sports)
(viii) Dr. P .C. Kashyap, Executive Director (SAI)
(ix) Ms. Radhica Sreeman, Regional Director (SAI)
(x) Shri Sanjay Saraswat, Director (SAI)
(xi) Shri Roque Dias, Director (SAI)
(xii) Shri Ramesh Pal, Vice Chancellor, LNUPE
(xiii) Dr. L.N. Sarkar, Registrar, LNUPE
(xiv) Shri Rhera, Deputy Registrar, LNUPE
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened for having the presentation of the Secretaries of Department of School Education and
Literacy and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports.
3. The Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy then made his presentation
before the Committee on the Demands for Grants 2013-14 of the Department with special
emphasis on the reasons for budgetary allocations for various schemes/programmes of the
Department, performance of schemes/programmes, problem areas faced in the implementation of
schemes/programmes and remedial steps taken by the Government. The Chairman and members
raised certain queries which were replied to by the Secretary and other officials of the
Department.
(The witnesses then withdrew)

43
4. The Committee re-assembled after lunch and had the opportunity to interact with the
Secretary, Department of Youth Affairs on Demand for Grants 2013-14 of the Department
concerning the activities and achievements of the Department, justification for budgetary  allocation
for various schemes/programmes, problem areas faced in the implementation of schemes/
programmes and remedial measures taken by the Department.  The Chairman and members raised
queries which were replied to by the Secretary and other officials of the Department.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Sports briefed the Committee on the Demands for
Grants 2013-14 of the Department pertaining to the achievements made, justification for budgetary
allocations for various schemes/programmes, problem areas encountered in the implementation of
schemes/ programmes and remedial measures taken by the Department. The Chairman and
members asked clarifications which were replied to by the Secretary and other officials of the
Department
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.55. 
P.M.

XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, the
22nd April, 2013 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Tarun Vijay
5. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
LOK SABHA
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Dr. Charles Dias
10. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
11. Shri Virender Kashyap
12. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
13. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the draft 253
rd, 254 th and 255 th Reports on the Demand for Grants
2013-14 of the Department of School Education and Literacy, Mnistry of Women and Child
Development, and the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports respectively.
3. The Committee, then considered and adopted the draft 253
rd, 254 th and 255 th Reports with
frew modifications.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.55 P.M.
44

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.