  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
220 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-2011 (DEMAND NO. 105) OF  
 (MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS) 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON ----- APRIL, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON ---- APRIL, 2010) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2010/CHAITRA, 1931 (SAKA) 
 
 
 


  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-2011 (DEMAND NO. 105) OF THE  
 (MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS) 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON ----APRIL, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON ----APRIL, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2010/CHAITRA, 1931 (SAKA) 


  
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …..................................................................…    (i)-(ii) 
2.  PREFACE………………………........... ..........................................................................…     (iii) 
3.  REPORT ....................................................................................................................... ...…  
4. *OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE..      
5. *MINUTES ................................................................................................................... ..........  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*will be appended at printing stage 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD 
(2010-11) 
  
 
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes   Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
4. Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
5. Shri M. Rama Jois 
6. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
8. Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran 
9. Shri N.K. Singh 
10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shri Suresh Angadi 
12.  Shri Kirti Azad 
13.  Shri P.K. Biju 
14.  Shri Jitendrasingh Bundela 
15.   Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
16.  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
17.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
18.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
19.  Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
20.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
21.  Shri P. Kumar 
22.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
23.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
24.  Shri Sis Ram Ola 
25.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 
26.  Shri Tapas Paul 
27.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
28.  Shri Ashok Tanwar 
29.  Shri Joseph Toppo  
30.  Shri P. Viswanathan 
31.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 

  
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Secretary 
Smt. Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
Smt. Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

  
PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Depa rtment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to pres ent the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred Twentieth Report of the Committee on the Demands 
for Grants (Demand No.105) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports for the year 2010-2011. 
2. The Committee considered the various docum ents and relevant papers received from the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports and also he ard the Secretary and ot her Officials of that 
Ministry on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 26th March, 2010. 
3. The Committee consid ered the Draft Report a nd adopted the same in its meeting held on 
19th April, 2010. 
 
 
 
N
EW DELHI;                   OSCAR FERNANDES 
April 19, 2010                                                                   Chairman, 
Chaitra 29, 1931 (Saka)              Department-related Parliamentary 
                   Standing Committee on 
                          Human Resource Development 

  
REPORT 
 
 I.  INTRODUCTION  
 
 
1.1 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports is entrusted with the responsibilities relating to 
the development of Youth and Adolescents, and the functions of the Ce ntral Government with 
regard to Sports and Physical Education.   
 
1.2 The subject “ Youth Affairs” is dealt in Department of Youth Affairs of the Ministry.  
The population of the y outh and adolescents is nearly 45% of the to tal population, and the 
number of persons belo w the age of 35 is ar ound 75% of the population.  Addressing the needs 
of the youth and adolescents, therefore, in a comprehensive manner with the objective of creating 
a healthy and productive work force has become very important.  
 
1.3 The Department of Youth Affairs is implem enting a large number of schemes for youth 
and adolescents development.   Programmes of the Nehru Yu va Kendra Sang athan (NYKS) 
focus towards rural youth and vast netw ork of youth clubs and volunteers undertake number of 
activities for youth at the gra ssroot level.  The National Se rvice Scheme (NSS) provides a 
platform for students to enhance their personality through community service.  The Rajiv Gandhi 
National Institute of Youth Development, RGNIYD,  a Deemed University is functioning as a 
Centre of Advance Study in the field of yout h development.  The Y outh Hostel scheme is 
intended to promote youth travel.     
 
1.4 The Committee appreciate s that the Ministry has unde rtaken review of certain 
schemes such as NYKS, NSS, Youth Hostel s etc. through studies done by reputed 
institutions.  The success of these studies is directly related with th e effective monitoring 
mechanism for supervising the activities or ot herwise these studies will remain more as 
futile exercises undertaken by the Minist ry, reaching nowhere.  At the same time, 
Committee is of the opinion that there is general lack of  awareness about manifold 
activities of NYKS and recommends focuse d publicity to attract more and more youth 
towards its programmes.  More and more activities should, therefore, be planned for youth 
living in villages and ru ral areas. The Committee would like to keep a track of activities to 
be carried out under the auspices of Nation al Youth Corps and Rajiv Gandhi National 
Institute of Youth Development (RGNIYD)     
1.5 The Department of Sports of  the Ministry deals wi th “Sports”.  Sports  being in the State 
List, State Governments are primar ily responsible for the developm ent and promotion of sports.  

  
The Government had been  supplementing the effo rts of the State Govern ments through certain 
schemes of financial assistance for sports infrastructure, but these were transferred to State sector 
w.e.f. 01.04.2005.  The Ce ntral Government directly, and thr ough the Sports Au thority of India 
(SAI) is providing financial assistance and variety of facilities, for competition exposure, training 
/ coaching etc., to NSFs with reference to the pr eparation of teams for international events.  SAI 
is also running a number of schemes for the spotting and nurturing of young talent.   
 
1.6 Following the a ssignment of the Commonwealth Games in 2010 in  Delhi by the 
Commonwealth Games Federation, preparations are being made to ensure that all the required 
infrastructure and facilities are put in place well in time.  Action is  being taken to ensure that the 
performance of Indian teams is commensurate with the expectations as a host country.   
 
1.7 A new scheme titled ‘Panchayat Yuva Krid a Aur Khel Abhiyan’ (PYKAKA), recently 
launched by the Department, is aimed at creating basic sports infrastructure, and promoting 
sports activities at the village/sub-district leve l.  Another ambitious scheme, namely, the Urban 
Sports Infrastructure Scheme has been prepared by the Ministry merging four erstwhile centrally 
sponsored sports infrastructure schemes, which we re earlier transferred to  the States in April, 
2005.  The objective of th e scheme is to create sp orts facilities in  urban areas and installing of 
synthetic surfaces to familiarise the players with  synthetic surfaces righ t from the beginning of 
their sporting career so as to  equip them to appropriate skills and training necessary for 
participation in international co mpetitions.  The Scheme is expe cted to be appr oved by June, 
2010.  With two different sets of schemes operating separate ly in rural and urban areas, the 
Committee is hopeful of a vast network of sports infrastructu re available th rough length and 
breadth of the country.    
 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
 
2.1 The Ministry of Y outh Affairs and Sports has been pr ovided with a budg etary allocation 
of Rs.3565 crores in BE 2010-1 1 which includes Rs.2844 crore as plan outlay and Rs.721 crore 
as non-plan one.  This is Rs.492 crore more when compared to BE 2009-10 but Rs.141 crore less 
than RE 2009-10. 
 
2.2 The following table gi ves a better idea of th e allocations and utilization of funds by the 
Ministry during last three years :- 

  
 
                                                          Rs. (in crore) 
 Youth Affairs Sports 
BE Plan 176.45 454.55 
BE Non-Plan 29.33 40.10 
RE Plan 140.63 489.32 
RE Non-Plan 33.15 114.26 
Actual Plan 96.39 504.78 
2007-08 
Actual Non-Plan 27.55 113.16 
BE Plan 217.80 605.00 
BE Non-Plan 34.38 176.83 
RE Plan 160.80 1095.50 
RE Non-Plan 51.56 217.83 
Actual Plan 150.35 1087.21 
2008-09 
Actual Non-Plan 48.03 217.76 
BE Plan 225.90 2403.00 
BE Non-Plan 45.12 316.27 
RE Plan 225.90 2671.00 
RE Non-Plan 45.12 679.67 
Actual Plan 173.16 2105.87 
2009-10  
(Up to 06.03.2010) 
Actual Non-Plan 41.68 263.58 
 
 
2.3 The Committee in the past has time and again been recommending higher allocation 
for the Ministry in general and the Department of Sports in pa rticular.  It is a matter of 
satisfaction that not only the allocation of the Department has increased but the utilization 
level is also quite satisfactory.  The Commit tee hopes that the Depa rtment would continue 
its sustained efforts in optimum utilization of the enhanced allocations.  The Committee is, 
however, not happy with the fund utilization status in the Departme nt of Youth Affair, 
which has been approximately 56% in 2007-08, 70% in 2008 -09 and about 76% (Up to 28 th 
February, 2010) in 2009-10.  Underu tilisation of funds is indicative of poor implementation 
of the schemes and lack of pr oper monitoring mechanism.  The Department’s projections 
before the Planning Commission  for higher allocations become  weak once the utilisation 
figures are poor.  How can the department stake claim for enha nced outlay when there is 
under utilisation of funds.  The Department needs to set its house in order with better fiscal 
management techniques backed up by strong  monitoring mechanis m to ensure that the 
outlays are utilized optimally and then appr oach the Planning Commi ssion with requisite 
supporting documents to prove its claims for hike  in allocations.  Given the poor rate of 
utilisations in the past, the allocations provided to the Department are quite justified. 

  
III. NEHRU YUVA KEND RA SANGATHAN (NYKS) 
 
  
3.1 Nehru Yuva Ke ndra Sangathan (NYKS) an autonomous body of th e Ministry of Youth 
Affairs and Sports has 501 Kendr as, 28 Zonal Offices and over 3.05 lakh vill age based Youth 
Clubs with enrolmen t of about 8 million volun teers.  Government propo se to extend  NYKS to 
the remaining 123 new districts of  the country during the current pl an period.  Be ing the largest 
grass root level voluntary organization, the NYKS channelises the power of youth who are in the 
age group of 13-35 years on the principle of voluntarism, self help and participation.   
 
3.2 The Youth Clubs en rolled with NYKS work in the areas like education and training, 
awareness generation, skill development and self-employment, entrepreneurial development, 
thrift and cooperatives, beside s development of the body through sports and adventure and also 
through sustained exposure to new ideas an d development strategies.  For implementation of the 
programmes, every district Nehru Yuva Kendra (NYK) has a trained cadre of District Youth 
Coordinators, Volunteers and Youth leaders.   
 
3.3 The Committee observ es that NYKS through  its district Nehru Yuva Kendras, Youth 
Clubs and Mahila Mandals has been actively involved in a number of activities directly affecting 
the general public.  In co-ordination with District/State Health Departments, NYKS are 
supporting Anti-Malaria Prog rammes, National Immunizatio n Programme, National Eye 
Cataract Operation Campaign, De-Addiction, Prev ention of Alcoholism, Organization of Health 
Check-up, Blood Donation Camps, etc.,  as pe r local requirements on voluntary basis.  Country-
wide Mass Awareness Campaign  for Prevention of  HIV /AIDS during Red Ribbon Express 
Phase-I was also carried ou t by NYKS.  Nation-wide Sa ve Water Campaign, Communal 
Harmony weeks are other regular activities organized by NYKS.  Besides that, as part of disaster 
management, drought and flood relief activities are also carried out by NYKS as and when 
required.  The Committee was also  informed that Youth Clubs organize School Chalo admission 
drive especially for girl / poor students.   
 
While appreciating the contribution being made  by Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan in the 
advocacy, social audit,  implementation of va rious Government progra mmes across the country, 
the Committee feels that th ese activities need to be further strengthened.  First and the most 
crucial aspect which has drawn the attention of the Committee is general lack of awareness about 
the manifold activities being carried out by the Nehru Yuva Ke ndra Sangathan.  The 
Committee, therefore, rec ommends that focused publicity so as to attract more and more 

  
youth power towards NYKS programmes needs to be taken up as a priority.  Secondly, the 
Committee would appreci ate if more and more activities are planne d exclusively for the 
youth living in villages and rural areas.  Another initiative which can be taken by the 
NYKS is setting up of Youth Service Centres in the Universities, wh ich can take care of 
needs, both personal and educational of th e young students.  These centres can be the 
windows for building up leadership  qualities, sense of patriotism  and social service in the 
college students.  The Committ ee would be happy if the Depart ment takes up this matter 
with the M/O HRD.   
 
3.4 Eleventh Plan propos ed Outlay for Nehr u Yuva Kendra Sa ngathan was Rs.890.00 crore.  
The Committee observed that during the first thr ee years of the Plan peri od, plan allocation has 
been much below the pr oposed outlay and even that has re mained under -utilised.  Following 
details are self-revealing.   
 
(Rs. in crores) 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Proposed 
Outlay 
Allocati
on 
Actua
ls 
Proposed 
Outlay 
Allocat
ion 
 
Actual
s 
Propose
d 
Outlay 
Alloca
tion 
Actuals 
Up to 
26.02.10 
130.00 58.50 0.01 165.00 68.0 0 50.68 175.00 70.00 66.50 
 
The Committee fails to understand the reasons for plan allocation for NYKS remaining less 
than half of the proposed outlay during the pl an period.  The Committee finds that in spite 
of a projected re quirement of Rs.150.00 crore for 2010-11 being made by the Department, 
plan allocation has been kept at Rs.92.00 crore.   With only one year of Eleventh Plan, the 
Committee can conclude that proposed outlay of  Rs.890.00 crore made  for NYKS for the 
Eleventh Plan will remain on  paper only.  The Co mmittee would like to point out that 
before arriving at final figures of Plan outlay  for any scheme, extensive analysis of past 
track record of utilization, capacity of the implementing agencies and the most important 
of all, genuine requirements based both on implementation of th e scheme in true spirit and 
broad policy parameters is carried out.  Thereafter, it is for the Department to convince the 
Planning Commission / Mi nistry of Finance for allocation of funds as per plan outlay and 
projected requirements.  The Committee is, however, disappointed to note that the 
Department has so far not shown any success on this front.  Rather it has weakened its case 
by not showing optimum utilization of allocated funds.  The Committee would, therefore, 
like to impress upon the De partment to make all concei vable efforts for optimum and 
judicious utilization of a llocated funds of Rs.92.00 crore fo r 2010-11.  At the same time It 

  
also needs to make every atte mpt to convince the Planning Commission / Finance Ministry 
for additional release of funds at the RE Stage.   
 
3.5 The Ministry info rmed the Committee that  IIM, Ahmedabad was entrusted with the 
holistic management study of NYKS.  IIM, Ahmedabad submitted its report in Fe bruary, 2009.  
Some of the major recommendations made by them are as under : 
 
 Reorganisation of NYKS Programmes; 
 Impact of NYKS on empowerment and development of youth; 
 Structural changes for improving the delivery of services; 
 Making NYS administration more effective; 
 Evaluation of the Voluntary Schemes namely National Service Volunteer Scheme and 
Nehru Yuva Sathi Scheme; 
 Use of MIS for organizational effectiveness; 
 Augmenting resource generation; 
 Convergence with schemes and programmes of other Ministries and International 
agencies etc.   
3.6 Based on the recommendation s made in the study  report condu cted by IIM, Ahmedabad 
of the follow up action taken by the Ministry is mentioned below:- 
 
a) Introduction of a new scheme of volunteers namely – Na tional Youth Corps (NYC) by 
amalgamating the two existing Schemes – The National Service Volunteer Scheme 
(NSV) and Rahstriya Sadhbavana Yojana (RSY). 
 
b) A drive has been launched  for generation of funds /resources from different 
Ministries/Departments and International agencies. 
 
c) Introduction of new programme for Youth Leadership and Personality Development.   
 
d) Introduction of traditional employability skill certification project.   
 
e) Preparation of revised trai ning manuals through Rajiv Gandhi National Institute for 
Youth Development (RGNIYD) on variou s subjects for Youth Development and 
Empowerment, Life Skills Education, National Integration & Social Harmony. 
 
f) Introduction of traini ng programme on capacity  building for increased use of personal 
computers and other fields for the employees of NYKS. 
 

  
g) Filling up the vacant posts in NYKS through deputation from State Government officials.   
 
h) Streamlining the posting/transfer policy for the employees of NYKS. 
 
i) Enhancement of honorarium from  Rs.1000/- to Rs.2500/- pe r month being paid to the 
volunteers. 
 
The Committee appreciates the follow up action on some of the recommendations made 
by the IIM, Ahmedabad.  Increas ing the number of Zonal Office s of NYKS from 18 to 28 
and strengthening of State & District level Advisory Committees on Youth Programmes 
can be considered a step in the right direction.  Effectiv e monitoring mechanism for 
supervising the activities of Kendras spread across the country  has to be there, otherwise 
there are chances of main objective of such a vital programme getti ng diluted are very 
much there.   
 
3.7 At present, Nehru Yuva Kendras are functio ning in 501 districts in the country.  The 
Committee has been drawing the attention of the De partment to the urgent need of coverage of 
the remaining 123 districts also under the Programme.  The Committee is, however, dismayed to 
note that no progress wh atsoever has been made in this di rection so far.  The Committee has 
been given to understand  that the time-frame for expansion of the Programme is subject to 
necessary approvals and sanctions of the Governme nt.  For operationalisation of a Kendra, there 
is a staff requirement of one District Youth Co-o rdinator, one Accountant Clerk, Typist and one 
Group ‘D’ Staff.  Fund s are also required for conducting regular programmes and for the 
deployment of volunteers .  In addition, there is a requirement of re curring and non-recurring 
expenditure in the establishmen t of a new Kendra.  The Committee has been informed that the 
proposed expansion would have financial im plication of Rs.49.56 cror e during the remaining 
two years of the plan pe riod.  The main reason fo r delay in the setting up of Kendras in the 
remaining 123 districts is the pr oposal for creation for the requir ed posts not be ing accepted by 
the Ministry of Finance, in spite of being appr oached twice by the Depa rtment.  Instead, re-
deployment of existing manpow er in the new Kendras was s uggested by the Ministry of 
Finance.  The other op tion was to explore the option for out-sourcing wherever required.  The 
Committee is inclined to agree with the Department’s sta nd that both additional posts and 
funds are required for operationalisation of a Kendra in the real se nse.  The Committee 
would also like to point out that already 413 posts are lying vacant under NYKS.  In such a 
situation, creation of required posts for the proposed Kendras is essential.  The Committee 
strongly feels that for setting up new Kendras , functional Kendras be ing deprived of the 
required staff is a solution worse than the problem.  The Co mmittee, therefore, 

  
recommends that the Ministry of Finance ne eds to make available the required funds and 
also give its approval for required posts.  One mu st not forget that youths residing in these 
uncovered 123 districts also belong to the country.   
 
3.8 One of the major bottlenecks in the performance of NYKS is  the large number of vacant 
posts.  The Committee was given to understand th at at present 413 posts in different grades, 
including 168 vacanc ies in the grade of District Youth Coordinator (DYC), are lying vacant.  
According to the Department the vacant posts in different grades which were required to be 
filled up on promotion basis have already been fi lled up by promotion of eligible departmental 
candidates.  Action to fill up the vacant posts on deputation basi s is in hand.  The Recruitment 
Rules for various gr ades in NYKS are in the process of review and revision.  Campus based 
recruitment from institutes of  repute offering courses in social work are also being 
contemplated.  The Ministry has, however, not re sponded to a query wh ether departmental 
candidates are not availabl e in the Sangathan.  The Committee observes that despite a 
number of administrative a nd structural changes under process in NYKS, the large 
number of vacant posts that to o at DYC level is a matter of serious concern.  NYKS has 
already faced a lot of criticis m in earlier selectio n process of DYC post s held in 1996 after 
which no recruitment has take n place.  With the propos ed expansion programmes 
covering 123 more distri cts across the co untry, the present level of vacant posts cannot be 
allowed to continue.  The Committee would li ke NYKS to expedite revision of its 
recruitment rules so that pro cess for fresh recruitment coul d take place to fill up the 
vacancies.  Filling up these vac ancies should be the priority  area for NYKS in case it 
wishes to achieve its objective in real terms.     
 
3.9 It further recommends setting up an adviso ry committee at the apex level in which 
peoples representatives shou ld be included to chalk ou t a programme sheet.  The 
Committee would like the Department to de vise a focused programme on anti-terrorism 
measures under NYKS by traini ng the youth, with a view to  involve them in national 
development so that they could come back to the mainstream.  The very objective of NYKS 
should be to develop qualities of citizens hip and community develo pment and also engage 
rural youth in national buildin g activities, training and rese arch in youth development.  
State Government plays a key role in the suc cess of the programmes and activities of NYKS 
through its volunteers which are identified an d sponsored by Stat e governments only.  
Involvement and in terest of State Govern ments in NYKS programme  is, therefore, quite 
significant.  The Committee would like the Department to conceive and formulate State 

  
specific activities in consultation with Governments so as to increase the level of education 
and general awareness among the youth.       
 
3.10 Youth Clubs and Mahila Mandals have major role in creating impact of NYKS on 
empowerment and development of youth.  The number of youth clubs varies from State to State.  
There appears to be no fixed criteria for opening of these clubs.  The Committee has noticed that 
the Youth Coordinators have the liberty to set up  as many clubs and mand als they want.  There 
needs to be a policy for this purpose.  Further, the functioning of these clubs is also not proper as 
a result of which the office bearers are loos ing interest and movi ng into other jobs.  The 
Committee would like the De partment to review the func tioning of these clubs and 
formulate a concrete plan to re activate and rejuvenate them in case the noble objectives of 
NYKS are to be achieved in true sense.  In fact, the mo nitoring mechanism under NYKS 
needs a complete overhauling to strengthen the delivery system.  The study of IIM, 
Ahmedabad might be containing the road map to undertake such review exercise.   
 
IV. NATIONAL SERVI CE SCHEME (NSS)
 
 
4.1 National Service Scheme (NSS) is a Centrall y Sponsored Scheme (CSS) with the 
objective to develop character and personality of  student youth in schoo ls and colleges.  The 
Scheme is implemented through the State Governments and the operations of NSS are at the 
University/College and Higher Secondary School level.  The objective of NSS is to arouse social 
conscience of the st udents, and to provide th em an opportunity to work wi th the people in the 
villages and slum dwellers.  The motto of the N SS “Not me but you” seek  to imbibe a spirit of 
volunteerism and community service in the minds  of youth students.  The scheme seeks to 
achieve its objectives through twin approach i.e. “Campu s to Commun ity” and “College to 
Village”, which also helps in de veloping leadership qualities and personality development of 
students.  Under the ‘Regular Ac tivities’, students are expected  to work as volunteers for a 
continuous period of tw o years, rendering comm unity service for a mini mum of 120 hours per 
annum.  Under ‘Special Camping Programme’ a camp of 7 days durati on is conducted every 
year in any ‘adopted village’ on a specific theme.   
 
4.2 The Committee takes not e of involvement of NSS volunteers in diverse activities focused 
on creating social awareness on various crucial issues of public interest.  A number of health and 
hygiene programmes, espe cially in tribal areas of MP, Gu jarat, Maharashtra, West Bengal, 
Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and all the North-East States have been undertaken by NSS 

  
Units located in tribal belts.  NSS has also b een regularly organizing awareness programmes 
against untouchability.   Communal Harmony Week, National  Integration Camps, Medical 
Check-up Camps and School Chalo Andalon are also or ganized by NSS.  Volunteers of NSS 
also play a very crucial role in providing relief during national calamities across the country.   
 
4.3 So far NSS is operational in  251 universities and 42  Boards at 42 schools.  It is spread 
over 14698 colleges and 8174 schools with an enrolment of 32,5 7,104 NSS Volunteers.  On a 
specific query about th e further expansion plans, the Comm ittee was informed that Regional 
Centres were being directed to collect the data abou t the universitie s, colleges and schools that 
are not covered under th e scheme.  The Committ ee strongly feels that su ch an exer cise should 
have been initiated much earlier.  The Committee expects the exercise to be completed within 
a specific time-limit  so that follow-up action is not del ayed further.  The Committee is of 
the view that with the expans ion of higher education in th e recent years and with Right to 
Education Act coming into force, the number of targeted students under the scheme is 
going to increase substantially.   Even otherwise, the cover age of only 8174 schools and 
14,698 colleges shows a consid erable gap between eligible students and those enrolled 
under the scheme.  Details of universities and colleges covered presently under NSS also 
seem to indicate that professional colleges like medical and engineering colleges which have 
shown a phenomenal growth over the recent years have p erhaps remained outside the 
purview of the scheme.  If that be so, Commit tee can conclude that a vast potential of our 
youth has remained devoid of positive impa ct of NSS which has creation of social 
awareness as its main objective, the need of the hour.   
 
 4.4 The Department has inform ed that during  2009-10, a number of reform measures and 
policy initiatives were underta ken / introduced.  A ne w centrally funded sc heme, i.e. a mega 
summer  camp for 400 volunt eers was introduced where under the first Mega Summer 
Camp was held from 22nd  June to 3 rd July, 2009 at the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth 
Development, Sriperumbudur, Ta mil Nadu attended by 375 NSS Volunteers and 39 Liaison 
Officers.  The other new scheme launched on 26 th June, 2009 was Raji v Gandhi Adventure 
Scheme where under Adventure Camps were organized at various places in the country.   
 
4.5 The physical target envisaged in the Eleventh Plan is to reach the volunteer strength of 55 
lakhs as compared to 32  lakhs at present.  The Committee wa s given to understand that in view 
of the cap on the plan outlay, the Department ha s been constrained to restrict to the current 
strength of 32 lakh volunteers.  The Committee is not fully convinced by the reason given for 

  
coverage of NSS remaining static.  The Commit tee would like to draw  the attention of the 
Department to the Eleventh Pl an outlay of Rs.850.00 crore fo r NSS.  Reasons for Budget 
provision of Rs.52.60 crore in  2007-08 and Rs.86.00  crore each in 2008-09 and 2009-10 
much below the plan outlay of Rs.129.74 crore (2007-08), Rs.156.00 crore (2008-09) and 
Rs.172.00 crore (2009-10)  are not known to the Committee.  Not only this, no change is 
reflected in the provision of Rs .92.00 crore against a plan outlay of Rs. 189.00 crore.  It 
seems that the Department has failed to convince the Planni ng Commission / Ministry of 
Finance about its required Projecti on of Rs. 150.00 crore.  Trend of utilization of allocated 
funds during 2008-09 and 2009-10 lends creden ce to Committee’s assessment.  Plan 
allocation of Rs.86.00 crore in 2008-09 was to be brought do wn to Rs.54.51 crore at the RE 
stage and expenditure reported at the end of the year was Rs.4 7.31 crore.  In  2009-10 also, 
utilization figures up to 06.03.2010 stood at Rs.56.95 crore against an allocation of Rs.86.00 
crore.    
 
4.6 Committee’s attention has been  drawn by 66 posts in different categories lying vacant in 
NSS.  Committee observes maximum number of vacancies were of Youth Officer (14 
vacancies), LDC (12 vacancies), Stenographe r (11 vacancies).  Th e committee fails to 
understand the reasons for these posts lying vacant for more than one year.  The Committee was 
informed that recruitmen t rules for all posts were  under revision and on ce notified steps would 
be initiated to fill up all the v acant posts.  It hopes that the revision exercise for recruitment rules 
will be expedited at the earliest and the vacancies filled up at the earliest.   
 
4.7 The Committee is happy to note that the much-awaited revi sion of cost norms has been 
cleared by EFC on 22
nd March, 2010.  Per Volunteer cost per annum has been revised from Rs. 
160 / Rs.200 to Rs.250/ - and for the Special Camping Progra mmes from the exis ting rates of 
Rs.300/Rs.400 to Rs.450/- per volunteer per annum w.e.f. 1st April, 2010.  The Committee notes 
that this revision in the cost norms was recommended by the Tata Institute of Social Sciences in 
its evaluation study of NSS.  Th e Committee hopes that this upwar d revision of over due cost 
norms fixed in 2000 will add momentum to involvement of our youth in the im plementation of 
the National Service Scheme.  Th e committee also finds that TISS has also pointed out to the 
need for sensitizing the vol unteers about the various progr ammes conducted under NSS.  The 
Committee is of the view that required action will be initiate d by the concerned authorities 
on this very crucial observation made in the evaluation study.   
 

  
4.8 Non settlement of accounts of certain Stat es has been an important issue before the 
Committee.  Quite a few States were showing pendency  f o r  t h e  l a s t  s o  m a n y  y e a r s .    T h e  
Committee expresses its deep concern over the fact that these states have not been able to adhere 
to the financial norms.  The Department has clar ified that State Governments are required to 
furnish a disbursement certificat e to the Ministry and the sec ond installment of NSS can be 
processed only after receipt of settlement of account from States / UTs.  These are often received 
late as the data is to be collected by the States from which one of the universities to which grants 
have been released by them which results in delayed release of funds.  The Committee observes 
that with respect to States like J & K, Assam and Sikkim, accounts have been settled up to 2007-
08 and release of grants fo r 2009-10 was under process.  De lhi and Manipur have settled 
accounts up to 2006-07 a nd grants released up to 2008-09.  Accounts have no t been settled by 
Jharkhand beyond 2001-02.  Such a state of affair s clearly indicates that NSS is not operating in 
these States as envisaged.  The Committee would like the Department to persuade the States 
in expediting the disbursement  certificate as it would help  them to secure the second 
installment of NSS grants. Long pendency in settlement of account s would do more harm 
than good for the scheme.  At the same time it was also required to understand the reasons 
behind the States’ inability to adhere to the basic financial norms.   
 
4.9 The Committee was informed  that the Government has allowed opening of new NSS 
Units on self-financing basis, in addition to the present system of fully funded units.  These units 
are meant to be at par with ot her regular NSS units except th at the funding for the regular 
activities and special camping and institutional establishment expe nses are to be  borne by the 
SFU institutions.  The Committee would like to have an idea about th e number of self-
financing units set up, their location s and also their performance level.   The Committee 
finds that most of the replies from the Departme nt particularly those relating to social and 
nation-building activities under NSS do not give clear picture thereof.  It would have been 
more comfortable with more specific and precise replies.   
 
V. NATIONAL DISCIPLINE SCHEME 
 
5.1 As per the Cabinet decision in 1969 the National Discipline Sc heme was decentralized 
and 6145 National Discipline  Scheme instructors were transfe rred and absorbed in the services 
of 21 State Governments / UTs.   However, Central Government was committed to bear the 
liability of pay and allo wance of these employees.  This sy stem has continued since 1972.  The 
Committee notes that due to inadequa te budgetary allocations under non plan head of National 

  
Discipline Scheme every year, the Central Governme nt had never been able to bear liability of 
States/UTs to the fulles t extent and the accumulated liability  has continued to grow.  The total 
liability to various stat es as on date is Rs. 250 crores w ith the following states showing the 
maximum liability:- 
                                                            (Rs. in crores) 
State Liability 
Madhya Pradesh 37.07 
Maharashtra 40.14 
Rajasthan 37.34 
Uttar Pradesh 53.54 
5.2 The Government is contemplating a proposal to clear the dues as one time measure for 
which more funds is needed.  The Committee has been voicing its serious concern on the Central 
Government continuing to pay the committed liabili ty for a scheme transferred to the States 
decades ago.  Services of 6145 NDSIs, were transfer red to 21 States / UTs in 1972.  The 
Committee has been informed that at the time of transfer of the scheme, these Instructors were in 
the pay scale of Rs. 290-540 and Rs.365-760.  The Committee does not dispute the contention of 
the Department that the pay structure of these Inspectors had changed as in the case of other 
State Government employees.  A ll along these years, the Depart ment has been releasing some 
funds whatever the quantum towards its committed liability.   
 
5.3 The Committee has been give n to understand that the total liability with regard to ten 
States as on date is Rs.250.00 crore liability details from si x States, i.e. MP, Assam, UP, 
Chandigarh, Tripura, and West Bengal were still awaited although MP and UP already show Rs. 
37.07 crore and Rs.53.54 crore as outstandings.  In 15 States, no NDS Instructor is in service for 
eight States, committed liability details were al ready available, and for the remaining seven 
States, there seem to be no outstanding.  Thus, virt ually in respect of only four States / UTs i.e. 
Assam, Tripura, West Bengal and Chandigarh , there are chances of committed liability 
remaining to be intimated to th e Department.  Not only this, th e Committee finds th at as per the 
details furnished by the Departme nt during the last fi ve years, it has paid Rs.13.10 crore as 
committed liability to eleven Stat es.  Details of payments made to States during the last five 
years and committed liability remaining are as follows:  

  
 
                                                                                          (Rs. in crores) 
State Payments during last 5 years Committed liability  
Bihar .05 .14 
Gujarat 1.00 18.17 
Haryana .50 14.08 
Himachal Pradesh .05 14.88 
Kerala 0.03 8.66 
Madhya Pradesh 1.33 37.07 
Maharashtra 2.16 40.14 
Punjab .10 26.16 
Rajasthan 6.97 37.35 
Uttar Pradesh 0.61 53.54 
 
5.4   The Committee fails to understand as to wh y so much liability has accrued even 
after the scheme was transferred to the States 38 years back.  It cannot be that all the 6145 
NDS Instructors have continued to remain in  service for such a long period.  The 
Committee has been info rmed that reimbursement to the States is ba sed on the projection 
of liability towards payment of salary and al lowances to NDS Instructors by the respective 
State Governments.  The Comm ittee wonders whether the Depa rtment is aware about the 
exact number of Instructors in each State and salary / allowa nces payable to them.  The 
Committee also doubts whether any assessment about the number of times pay structure of 
these Instructors might have undergone a change all these ye ars.  The Committee would 
appreciate that before the rel ease of committed liability, an attempt is made by the 
Department to have an idea  about the quantum of committe d liability released so far, 
number of NDS Instructors cov ered thereunder, basis of outs tanding committed liability 
along with number of NDS Instructor (State-wis e).  One must not forget that Government 
funds are to be duly accounted for as per the well-establis hed financial norms.   The 
Committee expresses its deep concerns about the never ending  liabilities and would like 
that accountability part of concerned officials be established and an action taken report be 
furnished to the Committee within one month of the presentation of the report.   
 

  
VI. YOUTH HOSTELS  
 
 6.1 Youth Hostels are bu ilt to promote yout h travel within the country.  The construction of 
the Youth Hostels is a joint venture of the Central and the State Governments.  While the Central 
Government bears the cost of construction, the State Governments provide fully developed land 
free of cost.  Youth Hostels are located in areas of historical and cultural value; educational 
centre; tourist importance etc., where facilities for youth activ ities are available.  Fifteen 
functional Youth Hostels are in  State Capitals.  As on 1
st March, 2010, 80 Yo uth Hostels have 
been constructed and 5 hostels are under various stages of construction.  The Scheme of Youth 
Hostel has been reviewed by the Standing Finance Committee of the Department and changes in 
structure, design and management of the Youth Hostels ar e being brought out keeping in view 
the pace with the new plan of action.   
 
 6.2 Youth Hostels is a nother scheme where plan  outlay for the Eleventh Plan has remained 
virtually on paper during the first three years of the plan period.  What is more  surprising is that 
allocation being made every year in spite of being increased at the RE  stage have remained 
under-utilised by th e end of the year.  The Committee notes that  in 2009-10 the Ministry could 
utilise only Rs.84 lakh ou t of the sanctioned Rs. 3-25 crore up to 26.02.2010.  In spite of 
expenditure of Rs. 2,64 ,69,443/- booked under by that time.  It was cl arified that the exact 
utilisation figures takes some tim e to be compiled as data is of ten awaited from the field level 
construction agencies.  A plan outlay of Rs. 5 crore has been provided for 2010-11 for the capital 
expenditure on construction of y outh hostels in di fferent parts of the coun try as per progress of 
work.    
 
6.3 Elaborating the physical achievements the Mini stry has informed that during the financial 
year 2009-10, construction of one new youth Hostel at Tarn Taran, Punj ab, had been completed.  
Five Youth Hostels were under va rious stages of cons truction whereas 20  (twenty) of the 
existing Youth Hostels have been taken up for face lifting work.  The Ministry has not given any 
reason for delay in completion of these five hostels and it can be pr esumed that at least the funds 
were not the constraints for delay in completing the construction of five hostels.  Details of 
excess grants during 2007 -08 indicates that Minist ry’s projection for incr ease at RE stage for 
repair of the youth hostels on ac tual requirements could not be used.  The Ministry could use 
only Rs. 52 lakhs out of  Rs. 1.25 Crore plan al location for the purpose.  The Committee is not 
convinced with the maintenance level, leave alone the pace of construction of Youth 
Hostels.   

  
 
6.4 The Ministry has shared the following difficu lties / constraints being faced in the running 
of Youth Hostels:- 
  i) Poor management 
  ii) Poor maintenance 
iii) Poor location of some youth hostels 
iv) Shortage of manpower 
v) Lack of funds and poor revenue of hostels 
vi) Poor occupancy of youth hostels 
 
The Committee opines that the difficulties ment ioned by the Department  are inter-related.  
With shortage of manpower and funds, manage ment and maintenance of youth hostels is 
bound to suffer.  Further the location of yo uth hostels is directly  related with their 
occupancy and revenue generation.  Out of  55 hostels appraise d by Youth Hostel 
Association of India, 46 hostels have been rate d poor or bad for one reason or the other.  
The Department has proposed changes in th e management, structure, appointment of 
Receptionist cum caretaker, maximize bed capa city, changes in norms of burnishing youth 
hostels and enhanced financ ial ceiling for renovation and redesigning work of youth 
hostels.  It is a matter of su rprise for the Committee to know  that the youth hostels were 
being run without Caretakers and Reception ists.  How could the management and 
maintenance of youth hostels be possible in  the absence of a Caret aker?  The Committee 
also feels that the pr oposed rate of honorarium for manager and receptionist is quite 
meagre to attract professionally  qualified people.  This am ount needs to be increased 
appropriately.  In addition to  these corrective meas ures, the Committee strongly feels that 
there is a need to take a comprehensive review of all these under-performing Youth Hostels 
based on the findings of Youth Hostel Association of India in coordination with all the 
concerned authorities at all levels so that these Hostels can also be rated as good 
performing hostels.   
 
6.5 The Committee has also deliberated on the pe rformance of Youth Hostels.   In reply to a 
query the Department informed th at recently a concept of performance based incentive has been 
introduced in the compensation pa ckage of youth hostel  managers (previously warden).  The 
Department is also exploring best possibilities to  put the assets of bad performing youth hostels 
to alternative use to serve the in terest of youth / sports department.  The Committee opines that 
performance appraisal of these hostels would certainly help in motivating and encouraging good 

  
performers.  It would also crea te a sense of competitiveness among them and help in overall 
success of the scheme.   The Committee recomme nds that the Ministry should take positive 
and concrete action on the suggestions provided in the study report of International Youth 
Association with regard to the functioning of the youth hostels. 
 
VII. NATIONAL YOUTH CORPS 
 
 7.1 The Ministry has introduced a new sc heme called - National Youth Corps (NYC) by 
amalgamating the two existing schemes – the Na tional Service Volunteer Scheme (NSVS) and 
the Rashtriya Sadhbavana Yojana (RSY).  The scheme would enable young men and women in 
the age group of 18-25 y ears to serve up to two years in nati on building.  The scheme envisages 
enrolment of 20,000 volunteers, of which 8,000 will be deployed in Jammu and Kashmir (J & K) 
and 12,000 volunteers in  other States. This scheme has been  launched on 18th April, 2010. The 
Scheme will be implemented by Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) with the following 
objectives:- 
 
(i) To set up a group of disciplined and educated youth who have the inclination and 
spirit to engage in the task of nation building. 
(ii) To facilitate the realization of inclusive growth (both social and economic). 
(iii) To act as points for di ssemination of informatio n, basic knowledge in the 
community. 
(iv) To act as group modulators and peer group educators. 
(v) To act as role models for the younger people especially towards enhancement of 
public ethics, probity and dignity of labour.   
 
7.2 The Committee finds that the budget allocation fo r this scheme has been substantially 
increased from Rs.28.60 crore in BE 2009-10 to Rs.56.50 crore in BE 2010-11.  The 
enhancement in allocation is due to increase in the number of vo lunteers from existing about 
12000 to 20,000 volunteers.  Further, under the existing Rashtriya Sadbhavana Yojna (RSY) the 
rate of honorarium of Rs.1000/- pe r month been enhanced to Rs .2500/- per month. Government 
propose to deploy four volunteers per bl ock in the districts where Kendra of NYKS has been 
established.  The scheme propose to deploy 870  volunteers in 435 blocks of North Eastern 
States. 
 

  
7.3 The Committee appreciates the idea of combining these schemes as both were working 
towards nation-building through volunteers.  It is satisfying to note that 8000 volunteers out of 
20,000 would be deployed in  Jammu & Kashmir, a State wh ere it is very important to 
bring the youth into mainstream and inculcate in them  the feeling of national building.  
The proposal to deploy a sizeab le number of volunteers in North East Stat es would help in 
arresting the sense of alienation which has cropped up amongst the citizens of this area due 
to alleged neglect of the regio n over the years.  The Committ ee would like to keep a watch 
on the implementation of this useful scheme. 
 
VIII. RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INST ITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT 
(RGNIYD) 
 
 8.1 The Rajiv Gandhi Nationa l Institute of Youth Devel opment, an autonomous body 
registered as a Societ y under the Societies Re gistration Act, 1860, was set up in March, 1993 
with the mandate to undertake adva nced study and applied research in the field of  youth related 
activities.  The Institute  is an action forum to  design, develop and conduct appropriate training 
and orientation programmes; to sponsor, promote, conduct research evaluations and programme 
development projects; and to work  as an advanced centre and apex body for al l the identified 
training, orientation and research centers on youth, sponsored and aided by the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs and Sports.   
 
 8.2 The Institute has 5 Divisions namely (i) Training, Orientation and Extension Division, (ii) 
Research, Evaluation and Documentation/Dissemination Division, (iii) Panchayati Raj and 
Youth Affairs Division, (iv) International Cent re for Excellence in Youth Development Division 
and (v) Social Harmony and National Unity Divi sion.  The RGNIYD was declared as “Deemed 
University” in 2008.  
 
8.3   During 2007-08, RGNI YD conducted 104 Tr aining Programmes  involving 8,351 
Participants while during 2008- 09, 12,584 Participants were  covered under 168 Training 
programmes.  Major themes duri ng these Training Programmes we re Adolescent Health, Anti-
Terrorism measures, Capacity-bu ilding, challenging Youth Power,  Life Skill and Leadership 
Development, etc., 
 
8.4    The Committee is quite happy with the init iatives taken by the Inst itute in the field of 
youth development.  These initiativ es have translated into a good performance to the extent that 
the funds have been op timally utilized over the years.  During 2007- 08 and 2008-09 the fund 

  
utilization was Rs.8.00 crore (each year) against an  allocation of Rs. 8.00  crore. Comparatively 
in 2009-10 the utilisation has been Rs.6.75 crore as  against an allocation of  Rs.9.00 crore.  The 
Committee expects the Department to encourage the Institute in achieving its targets in 2010-11 
as well.  The Committee notes that RGNIYD was gr anted the status of a Deemed University by 
UGC in October, 2008.  A number of youth specified MA Programme was launched after proper 
consultation with experts and academicians as specified under Section 22 of the UGC Act, 1956.  
The Institute has also been engaged in research  activities on topics of Youth and media, 
Problems and Needs of Adolescents, Youth in co nflict, etc. The Committee understands that the 
deemed university status of the Institute has been cancelled.  The Committee is not aware about 
the status of Faculty at the Institute.  As pe r the reports, all the requ isite norms for Deemed 
University were also in place.  The Committee would like to understand the reasons for 
withdrawal of ‘Deemed University’ status from the Institutes.   
 
IX. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT 
DEVELOPMENT 
 
9.1 The Programme has been formul ated by merger of four 100 per cent central sector grants-
in-aid schemes, namely, Promotion of Youth Ac tivities and Training, Promotion of National 
Integration, Promotion of Ad venture and Development and Em powerment of Adolescents from 
2008-09. 
 
9.2 Plan provision for this Umbrella Programme for 2010-1 1 is Rs.25.00 crore.  The 
Committee notes that against an allocation of Rs.22.55 crore in 2009-10, expenditure reported up 
to 26.02.10 is only Rs.17.49 crore.  During the 2008-09 also allocated funds had remained under-
utilised.  One of the main reasons for all th e erstwhile four scheme s being brought under one 
composite programme was pendency of Utilisatio n Certificate.  The Committee has been given 
to understand that under the revised guidelines, all the proposals of N GOs are being received 
duly recommended by the State Governments.  The other details of the grantee Organisation 
such as PAN number, details of bank accounts and members are also being obtained.  As a result 
of all such precautions, the Comm ittee finds that pendency of utilization Certificates has come 
down considerably.  Th e Committee, however, notes that there are 15 and 364 pending UCs 
against the four erst while schemes for 2006-07 and 2007-08.  The Committee hopes that as a 
result of sustained efforts being made by the Department, all these pending UCs will also be 
accounted for.  The Committee would also like to poin t out that under the revised scheme 
also trend of pending UCs has started.  There are 75 pendi ng UCs for 2008-09 .  Remedial 

  
measures in the initial stage of  the scheme needs to be take n otherwise this problem would 
continue to aggravate.   
 
X. SCHEME OF ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS 
 
10.1 Under this scheme financial assistance is  provided to National Sports Federations for 
holding National Champions hip, National Coaching Camps including engagement of various 
coaches to ensure participation of national te ams in international competitions, organising 
international tournaments and a rranging equipment support.  This  is a flexi scheme of the 
Ministry to assist NSFs in promoting excellence in sports and improving the medal tally at major 
international events. 
 
10.2 The following table indi cates the budgetary allocations of the scheme during 2010-11. 
 
BE 2009-10 
(Rs. in crores) 
RE 2009-10 
(Rs. in crores) 
BE 2010-11 
(Rs. in crores) 
Plan N. Plan Total Plan N. Plan Total Plan N. Plan Total 
44.00 3.00 47.00 52.00 3. 00 55.00 150.00 3.00 153.00 
 
The Committee notes th at plan allocati on during 2009-10 remained under-uti lised.  As on 
06.03.10, expenditure repo rted is Rs.40.81 crore, which is less than BE allocation of Rs.44.00 
crore.  The Ministry ha s clarified that enhanc ement of Rs. 109 crore in  plan 2010-11 is due to 
Asian and Olympic Youth Games.  Besides that, requirements of  funds during 2010-11 will be 
more as after completion of Commonwealth Games,   assistance for 17 di sciplines covered under 
the CWG Scheme will be provided from this scheme only. 
 
10.3 Assistance to National Sports Federation s viz-a-viz their accountability has been a matter 
of debate in the Committee.  Th e role of these federations has been examined by the Committee 
at different points of time.  There have been divergent views for funding to NSFs.  Majority 
opinion has been that these federations get th e money from the exchequer but the utilisation 
thereafter has been questionable.  There is pendency of utilisation certificates and the federations 
do not feel accountable to submit their account to the Government.  However, given the mandate 
of these federations in the context of Co mmonwealth Games their role assumes greater 
significance in terms of preparation of teams for the Games.  Th e amount of assistance extended 
to these federations however is not channelizing for the purpose its meant for.   The Indian 

  
players like Abhina v Bindra, Liander Paes, Vijender Si ngh have won the me dals without any 
assistance from these federations.  Today we recognize them for their individual  efforts and 
glory where these federations had hardly any role to play.  The Committee finds that the 
assistance provided by these federa tions is quite low because they did not have any event to do.  
Major chunk of financial assistance is spen t on the administra tive cost.  These federations have 
not admitted to create awareness among the people.   The office bearers of these associations 
continue to hold the post for years together w ithout doing mu ch for the cause of the sports.  In 
the opinion of the Committee the popularity level of sports exce pt cricket is very low and 
the federations could have cont ributed to raise the standard and popularity of different 
games by a number of innovative measures. 
 
10.4   The Committee is happy to note that a system of  annual recognition of federations based 
on submission of require d documents, which includ e audited accounts, sele ction criteria, details 
of technical officials, etc., ha s been introduced from 2010.  So far 33 Federations have been 
accorded annual recognition.  The National Sports Federations not applying for annual 
recognition or not fulfilling the re quirement of annual re cognition will no mo re be eligible for 
assistance from the Department .  The Committee furthe r appreciates that the audited accounts 
submitted by federations are now open for scruti ny by the Department.  It is a matter of 
satisfaction that the acti vities of federations wo uld be liable to be di sclosed under RTI.  The 
Committee is hopeful that these in terventions and developments wo uld help in es tablishing the 
accountability of federations whic h were otherwise not answerable to any authority for their 
commissions and omissions. 
 
XI. PANCHAYAT  YUVA  KRIDA  AUR  KHEL ABHIYAN (PYKKA)
 
 
11.1 Launched in 2008-09, the sche me aims to provide basic sports infrastructure in all village 
and block Panchayats of the coun try over a period of 10 years. Under the Scheme, village/block 
Panchayats receive one-time seed capital grant of       Rs.1 lakh / Rs.5 lakh each, for establishing 
a playing field with basic facilities.  The state share in this is 25 per cent for normal States and 10 
per cent for special catego ry States.  In addition, village Panchayats are given annual acquisition 
grant for procuremen t of sports equipment an d annual operational grant to meet the operational 
expenses of non-competition nature @ Rs.10,000/- and Rs.12,000/- per annum, respectively, and 
block Panchayats are @ Rs. 20,000/- and Rs. 24,000/-, respectively.   
 

  
11.2 The Planning Commission has sanctione d Rs. 1500 crore for XIth  Plan for the scheme. 
The total requirement of funds for XIth and XIIth Plan periods is estimated to be Rs. 4500 crore. 
The Committee was informed  that budgetary allocatio n during the first thre e years of XIth Plan 
has been Rs. 295 crore which was reduced to Rs. 237 crore at RE stage.   The Committee finds 
that during 2008-09, fina ncial assistance of Rs. 250.77 cror e was sanctioned to 24 States for 
creation of sports facilities in 22,854 village panchayats and 601 block panchayats. However, the 
budget allocation of Rs. 125 crore (BE) including allocation for North-Eastern States for the year 
2008-09 was reduced to  Rs.92 crore at RE stage. The en tire allocation of Rs. 92 crore was 
utilized during 2008-09. Funds amounting to Rs.83.85 crore were  released to 19 States for 
creation of sports infrastructure / sports faci lities and Rs.8.15 crore were released to SAZ for 
conduct of Annual Sports  Competition in States / UTs. During the year  2009-10, allocation of 
Rs.160 crore was provided at BE stage, which wa s reduced to Rs. 135 cror e at RE stage. During 
this year funds amounting to Rs. 105 crore have been released to the states for creation of Sports 
infrastructure sports facilities and Rs. 30 crore to Sports Authority of India for conduct of Annual 
Competitions in the Stat es/UTs. As such the enti re allocation of Rs. 135 cr ore has been utilized. 
During 2010-11 an allocation of Rs.413 cror e has been made for PYKKA . Thus total allocation 
of Rs.650 crore in the first four years of the Eleventh Plan period has been made against an 
outlay of Rs.1500 crore.  The Ministry has claimed that it has utilized 100 percent of allocation.  
 
11.3   According to the Ministry the shortfall between approved outlay and actual allocation is 
not within their control.The Committee treats the Ministry's argument that the shortfall between 
projected outlay and budgetary allocation is not within their control as  undesirable and uncalled 
for. The fact remains th at the Planning Commis sion had approved Rs.1500 crore for the scheme 
for Eleventh Plan pe riod out of which  th e Ministry could utilize only Rs.227 crore in first three 
years of the plan period.  It was the Department  of Sports wh ich conceptualiz ed the scheme, 
approached the Planning Commissi on with its projections and th ereafter the onus remained with 
that Department to prepare a sustainable action  plan worth achieving the physical as well as 
financial targets, year-wise, wh ile implementing the scheme. The Department has to accept that 
the launch of the scheme which delayed leading to loss of precious first y ear of Eleventh Plan 
period.  The Ministry may be part ially correct in claiming 100 per cent utilization of fund out of 
the allocated funds bu t fact remains that the financial discip line with regard to projected outlay 
for Eleventh Plan could not be adhered to.  On the one hand the Ministry expresses a huge cry 
and grouse for cut in their projections by the Planning Commi ssion whereas in the case of 
PYKKA the projections approved by the Pla nning Commission have  remained grossly 
underutilized. The Committee feels that important schemes like PYYKA with its noble 

  
objectives to provide infrastr ucture in rural areas, which ha ve so far remained utterly 
neglected, cannot be operated, with such a shaky and casual approach. Be that as it may 
be, there are still two full financial years available within  E l e v e n t h  P l a n  period for the 
Ministry to make up the time lost and im plement the scheme in a mission mode. The 
implementing agencies would h ave to exhibit the extra level of commitment and vigour in 
achievement of targets so that the shortfalls so far noticed in  the delivery of performance 
are bridged. The Committee hopes that the Department would ad opt a proactive and 
pragmatic approach for better performance during the remaining period of plan.     
 
XII. PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG DISABLED.  
 
12.1    The scheme for promotion of sports among Disabled aims at bringing up disabled 
sportspersons in the mainstream of sports at nati onal / international level.  The scheme seeks to 
cover special coaching and training requirements of the target groups, organizing competitions at 
district, State and national level & participation in international competitions and other need-
based specialized support.   
 
12.2    The Committee is not aware about the date of approva l given by the Apex Committee 
to 61 schools.  But fact ual position is that out of 61 schools approved, 1
st Instalment of 
sanctioned grant could be released to on ly 6 schools on 31 st March, 2010.  The Committee has 
been informed that assi stance to remaining schools will be released during the financial year 
2010-11 out of funds amoun ting to Rs.9.52 crore allocated for the year.  Th e Committee finds 
that during first three years of 11 th Plan a provision of Rs. 5 crore kept every year for first three 
years of the Plan has remained unutilized.  The on ly reason for such a st ate of affairs was that 
during this period the existing scheme was being recast.  The Committee has been monitoring the 
working of the previous scheme meant for the mo st marginalized section of the society while 
earlier scheme had virtually remained on paper all these years.  When finally it was realized that 
there was a need for recasting of the scheme, protracted process for the same got started.  It took 
almost an entire plan period to get the scheme finally approved by all concerned.  As admitted by 
the Department itself, it has taken about one and a half year in getting the scheme approved from 
the date draft sc heme was prepared.  Draft scheme was formulated in July, 2008.  It took more 
than six months to get the Draft Note circulat ed for inter-ministerial consultation amongst the 
concerned Ministries/Departments for comments on 30.01.2009.  Meeting of SFC could be held 
on 15.04.2009.  However, due to cropping up of some practical pr oblems with regard to 
implementation of the scheme, a revised draft had to be appr oved by SFC on  23.09.2009.  

  
Finally, revised scheme was communicated to States / UTs, NSFs, IOA,  etc. on 16.11.2009. The 
Committee notes that in response to Ministry’s notice inviting applicatio ns from schools a total 
number of 142 applications we re received in the Departme nt.  The Apex Committee after 
consideration of applic ations in terms of liability crit eria has recommended 61 schools for 
assistance for engagement of coaches on contract basis and procurement of sports equipment. 
 
12.3    The Committee can only  hope that the last two years of the Eleventh  Plan will see 
launch of this much-awaited sche me in the real sense with opti mum and judicious utilization of 
allocated funds.  The Committee expresses its displeasure over the casual manner in which 
the scheme is being handled.  It strongly f eels that the scheme fo r Sports and Games for 
disabled needs to reach the targ eted beneficiaries.  One must not forget that creation of 
exclusive sports facilities for the disabled not only would help  in boosting the confidence 
level of sportspersons who are not at the same level as normal sportspersons for no fault of 
theirs but would also indirectly help in bringing them in the mainstream of society.   
 
XIII. URBAN SPORTS IN FRASTRUCTURE SCHEME
 
 
13.1   An Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme has been prepared in the Ministry and action is 
underway for obtaining the approval of the competent authority.  This scheme is expected to be 
approved by June, 2010.  The scheme has b een prepared me rging four erst while centrally 
sponsored sports infrastructure schemes viz. (i) Gr ants for creation of spor ts infrastructure; (ii) 
Grants for installation of synthetic surfaces; (iii) Grants for promotion of sports in universities 
and colleges (iv) Grants to rural schools.  These four sche mes were transferred to the State 
Governments w.e.f. 1st April, 2005.  The objective of the new scheme is to create sports facilities 
in urban areas and inst alling of synthetic su rfaces to familiarize the players with synthetic 
surfaces right from the beginning of their sporting career so as to equip them to appropriate skills 
and training necessary for participation in internat ional standard competitions.  According to the 
Ministry the erstwhile sports infrastructure schemes involved committed liabilities worth Rs. 
60.51 crore for projects approved prior to 1st April, 2005.   
 
13.2    The Ministry has clar ified that since the scheme coul d not be formulat ed during 2009-
10 no provision was kept at RE stage.  A plan outlay of Rs. 93 crore has been , however, kept in 
BE 2010-11 for assistance to be prov ided for creation of urban sports infrastructure in States and 
development of play fields. 

  
13.3   In the reply to a query seeking distinctiv e features of the new sc heme compared with the 
erstwhile schemes the Mi nistry clarified that there was no  major problem areas with earlier 
schemes which were transf erred to state sectors on  the ground that sports is a state subject.  
However, subsequently Planning  Commission on pers uasion from the Mini stry and the State 
Governments acknowledge the need to have a scheme for providi ng central assistance for the 
creation of sports infrastructure in urban ar eas.  With regard to the release of committed 
liabilities of the erstwhile schemes the Planni ng Commission has assu red to earmark those 
liabilities in Additional Central Assistance (ACA) of the concerne d states.  So far as selection of 
proposals from State Governments are concerned the Department will ensure that urban areas not 
having sport facilities ar e given preference provid ed that they meet th e requirements of the 
scheme. 
 
13.4    The proposal to  transfer the centrally sponsored schemes to th e state has never been 
acceptable to the Committee.  In fact the Ministry was cautioned time and again that states would 
not be able to bear the financial burden on creating infrastructure, despite the fact that sports is a 
state subject.  The Committee is satisfied that the Ministry has taken its view points seriously and 
convinced the Planning Comm ission for keeping some provision of central assi stance to states.   
Planning Commission’s agreement to adjust those liabilities under ACA of the concerned states 
vindicated the stand taken by the Committee.  The Committee hopes that the States would get the 
share of Central assist ance under ACA to take care of the expenses in curred on the erstwhile 
schemes approved before 2005.  The Committee would appreciate if the Department plays a 
proactive role in monitoring the completion of all the pending proj ects in the erstwhile 
schemes for want of funds all these years.  The Committee is also hopeful that the new 
scheme would get the approval within the time  frame indicated by the Ministry so that 
necessary funds for infrastructure projects in urban areas could be released in time. 
 
XIV. NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND
 
 
14.1    National Sports Development Fund was instituted by the Central Gove rnment in 1998 
for mobilizing resources from non-Government sources including the private or corporate sectors 
and NRIs with Government providing matching gran t for the promotion of sports in the country.  
As per the information made av ailable to the Committ ee a contribution of Rs. 55.40 crore has 
been made by the private sector  which included some banks, PSUs, private companies and some 
individuals. 
 

  
14.2   A provision of 15 crore has been kept  in BE 2010-11 as matc hing grant towards the 
fund.  In reply to a query about reduced ou tlay in RE 2009-10 the Depa rtment clarified that the 
same has been decreased due to considering over riding requirements of funds for Sports 
Authority of India and scheme of Assistance to National Sports Federations. 
 
14.3    The Committee is not satisfied with the maintenance and operation of the fund.  
The Committee finds that the contribution from private sector has been negligible and no 
NRI has come forward for this noble cause.  The Ministry’s argument that many private 
sector entities and NRIs assist the sports persons and sports ac tivity directly in their own 
independent way cannot be denied.  But it is also very obvious that the failure of the 
Department in mobilizing private contribution indicates that necessary serious efforts have 
not been made to motivate pr ivate entities particularly big business houses through 
different Chambers of Commerce.  The Depar tment did not even co ntemplate to use the 
Pravasi Diwas platform for ra ising contributions from NR Is.  Another discouraging 
development noticed by the Committee is that  the Department has managed only 50 per 
cent matching grants of the total corpus in NSDF.  The Committee is  not ready to buy the 
argument of the Department that contribution is made by it in a phased manner depending 
on overall approved budget of  the department.  It rather reflects the somewhat casual 
approach of the Department towards this v ery important corpus, which if successfully 
handled could generate sizeable funds which can benefit our meritori ous sportspersons.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the matchi ng contribution from the 
Government should be released in the current financial year itself. 
 
XV. NATIONAL WELFARE FU ND FOR SPORTPERSONS.
 
 
15.1  This scheme was set up in  March, 1982 with a vi ew to assisting outstanding sportspersons 
of the past, living in in digent circumstances, wh o had brought glor y for the countr y in sports.  
Scheme has been review ed in July , 2009 to provide fo r lump sum ex-gra tia assistance to 
outstanding sportspersons.  Provision of pension has been don e way with as there is already a 
Scheme of Pension for Meritorious Sportspersons.   Now, lump sum ex-gra tia assistance will be 
given to the sportspersons or their families for medical treatment etc. 
 
15.2   The Committee observes th at only negligible allocation ha s been made du ring the first 
three years of the Eleventh Plan period.  A provision of only Rs.5 lakh was made during 2007-08 
and 2008-09.  During 2009-10, a provision of Rs.1.00 crore was made but utilization status as on 

  
26.02.10 was only Rs.33 lakhs.  This amount was utilized, apart from disbursement of pension to 
existing 29 beneficiaries, lump sum assistance from the Fund has been provided to only 4 
beneficiaries.   
 
15.3   The Committee is of the view that every now and then, the media reports the condition 
of some indigent sportspersons living in miserable conditions, but the Ministry could identify 
only 4 beneficiaries duri ng the entire year.  Moreover, not ev en half of th e meager budget 
allocation has been spen t on the welfare of sp ortspersons.  The Committee has been given to 
understand that the Scheme has be en put on the website of the Ministry. Copies of the Scheme 
have also been sent to all State Governments / UTs and all recognized NSFs.  The Committee, 
however, feels that perhaps the scheme lack s the reach to rural and remote areas.  
Persistent Efforts have to be made to provi de wide publicity of scheme through print and 
electronic media in addition to  the Ministry’s website and ot her useful links  in order to 
create awareness of the Welfare Fund. 
 
XVI. SCHEME  OF PENSION TO  MERITORIOUS SPORTSPERSONS
 
 
16.1  Scheme of Pension for Me ritorious sportspersons  launched in  1994 is one of the main 
components of Umbrella Scheme of  Incentives to sports persons.  All those Indian sportspersons 
of 30 years who have won gold/silver/br onze medal in Olympic Games, World Cup / 
Championships, Asian/Commonweal th/Paralympic Games and have retired from active sports 
are eligible for pension.   
 
16.2     The Committee notes th at 525 sportspersons are at present drawing pension.  Rates of 
pension have also been revised w.e.f. 01.07.2008.  A provision of Rs.7.50 crore has been kept for 
this Scheme for 2010-11.  The Co mmittee has been given to under stand that proposals as and 
when received are covered under the Scheme.  The Committee strongly feels that with eligibility 
of pension is based on a very specific criteri a of performance based on winning of medals, 
sanction of pension should also be automatic.  Wh ere is the need for wai ting for applications for 
pension to come?  The Committee al so notes that so far award of pension is rest ricted to only 
those sportspersons who have participated in in ternational sports events.  The Committee is of 
the view that this Scheme n eeds to be extended to those sp ortsperson, who win medals in 
various national championships.  Such an init iative would indirectly lead to drawing more 
and more young talent towards sports  
 

  
 XVII.   NATIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP FOR WOMEN 
 
17.1     Under this Sche me, assistance is being prov ided to hold a nnual National 
Championships for Women in vari ous sports discipline s.  For the past ma ny years the budget 
allocation for this scheme has remained static.  The Committee ha s observed that an amount of 
Rs. 1.10 crore has been sanctioned for 2010-11 even when the same amount remained unutilized 
during 2009-10.  The Ministry has informed that it has been decided to subsume this scheme into 
Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) which will enable funding as per norms 
applicable to other competitions under PYKKA. 
 
17.2    The Committee understands that the Fl agship Scheme PYKKA itself has not 
taken off as it should have been.  Merging other schemes into it may not be a good idea.  
Moreover, this scheme is sp ecifically for women.  Merging it with PYKKA, which is 
primarily for rural areas, this scheme would lose its identity .  In other words, subsuming it 
with a scheme pertaining to ru ral areas would amount to neglect of championship for women in 
urban area.  Any initiatives taken for the promot ion of sports among women can only be done in 
the schemes specifically fo rmulated for women.  Before a decision is ta ken to subsume this 
s c h e m e  i n  P Y K K A ,  t h e  D e p a r t m e n t  a l s o  n e e d s  to review this scheme itself in order to 
strengthen it.  The other viable option could be  that sports disciplines for women in urban 
areas are specifically covered under proposed Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme as a 
separate component. 
 
XVIII.    GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM
 
 
18.1   Lack of foolproof grievance redressal m echanism available to the sports persons has been 
an issue agitating the minds of the members of the Committee.  Given the range and quantum of 
grievances and the problems in  our sports arena, such mech anism does not appear to be 
functional. The country has be en witnessing various controve rsies like those of Hockey 
Federation, weightlifting doping ch arges, selection of players for various national / international 
events, training of sportspersons in India and abroad, remuneration of sportspersons and coaches, 
appointment of coaches, misbehaviour with women sportspersons, medical facilities etc.  The list 
of grievances is never ending.  The Committee pr esumes that more grievances must have piled 
up at the camp venues wher e our sportspersons are undergoing traini ng for Commonwealth 
Games.  Under the present scheme of arrang ements, the aggrieved sportspersons have no 
alternative but to consult their co aches or camp Incharge.  In most  cases their grievances remain 

  
unattended.  Indifference to their   grievances does not argues well for ps ychological well being 
of the sportspersons. 
 
18.2 The Committee desires that Ministry may set up a regulatory body / grievance 
redressal cell that will look into all aspects of  the problems faced by  the sportspersons, 
coaches, sports federations, NGOs, schools, colleges and other sports bodies receiving grant 
from the Government.  This would not only  help in confidence  building among the 
sportspersons but would also bring down the grievances of all affe cted sportspersons / 
sports bodies / agencies implementing sports programmes.   
 
XIX. COACHES
 
 
19.1    There has been acute shortage of coaches in the Spor ts Authority of India as no 
recruitment of coaches has been done since 1998.  The Committee finds that since recruitment of 
regular coaches in terms of the provisions of Mini stry of Personnel & Training and Ministry of 
Finance guidelines could have taken a very long time and requirement of coaches was urgent in 
view of the preparations for the forthcoming international sports competitions like 
Commonwealth Games, 2010, Asian Games 2010 and London Olym pics, 2012, approval to SAI 
for engaging 100 coaches on contract basis was given by the Department.   
 
19.2    The Committee find s that present status of coaches in the country is very disappointing.  
The Committee has been given to  understand that st rength of 1623  coaches way back in 1997 
was brought down to 831 by the Ministry of Finance.  It took prolonged deliberations in bringing 
back the strength of coac hes to 1258 on regu lar basis and 85 coaches on  contact basi s.  As per 
the latest information furnis hed by the Depart ment, there are 1254 re gular coaches and 85 
coaches are working on contract basis in SAI.  The exercise of cadre review including review of 
recruitment rules of coaches is in progress at present and is likely to be completed by 31
st 
August, 2010.  The Committee feels that the most cruci al aspect for preparedness of our 
sportspersons in different sports disciplines ha s remained the most neglected one so far.  
Lack of qualified and experien ced coaches clearly indicates that our country still lags 
behind when compared with ot her countries performing we ll in sports arena.  The 
Committee once again enjoins upon the Department to give  top priority of building up 
required number of coaches.  One must not forg et that in the recent decades things have 
changed significantly in sports also.  To compete with well-trained sportspersons, the basic 

  
requirement is to have qualified experienced cadre of coaches which is also satisfied with its 
service conditions.   
 
XX. COMMONWEALTH GAMES-2010 
 
20.1    Commonwealth Game s-2010 (CWG) are sche duled to be held  in Delhi from 3 rd 
October to 14 th October, 2010 for which co llective efforts are underway for developing world-
class infrastructure and preparation of Indian teams in various disciplines for the Commonwealth 
Games, 2010.  Specific time lines have been fixed for various competitions and training venues.   
 
20.2    A budgetary provision of Rs. 2069.52 (including plan outlay of Rs. 1454.98 and Rs. 
614.54 crore as non-plan)  in BE 2010-11 has been made to meet expenses on upgradation of 
infrastructure by SAI,  conduct of games by Organising Committee and preparation of Indian 
Contingent for Commonwealth Games, 2010.  The decrease in pl an 2010-11 is due to the reason 
that the Commonwealth Games would conclude in October, 2010.  Th e plan allocation for 
Commonwealth Games-2010 during th e last three years presents  a mixed bag of financial 
review.  The plan outlay in 2007 -08 was Rs. 150 crore wh ich was enhanced to Rs. 237.98 crore.  
In 2008-09, the Games got Rs. 224 crore at BE st age which was raised to  Rs. 800 crore but the 
actual expenditure was Rs. 492 cr ore only.  The plan  allocation in BE 2009-10 was Rs. 2000 
crore which was revised to Rs. 2268 crore but only Rs. 1796.51 crore could be spent.  The 
Committee finds that at a stage when the constr uction work was in full  swing the budget has 
remained underutilized. 
 
20.3    The Committee has kept  a close watch on the prepara tion of CWG since they were 
awarded to us.  It has noticed lack of coor dination and non-adheren ce to the schedule for 
completion of infrastructure projects relating to  the Games.  Now with the scheduled deadlines 
over, hurried construction may lead to compromise  with the standards to be maintained for an 
event of international level.  Even underutili sation of funds has delayed the readiness of 
infrastructure facilities for our sportspersons.  The Committee is worried about the preparation of 
sportspersons for the event particularly with regard to thei r practice, dietary and kit requirement. 
The Ministry has informed  that work at all the sports infra structure projects for the Games is 
progressing at a rapid p ace and are in an advanced stage of completion.  Four stadia viz Major 
Dhyanchand National Stadium, Talkatora Stadiu m, Yamuna Sports Complex and Dr. Karni 
Singh Shooting Range have  already been completed.  All these stadia have  also hosted 

  
international events recently.  The Committee has noted  the following progress of work with 
regard to other competition venues:   
 
Sl. 
No. 
Competition Progress in %age 
(as on 28.02.10) 
1 Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium (JNS) – Lawn Bowls  85 
2 JNS – Weight Lifting 73 
3 JNS – Athletics 82 
4 Indira Gandhi Stadiu m (IG) – Cycling 91 
5 IG – Gymnastics 92 
6 IG – Wresting 93 
7 R K Khanna Tennis Complex 90 
8 Big Bore Shooting Range, Kadarpur 95 
9 SPM Swimming Pool Complex 78 
10 Siri Fort Sports Complex - Badminton and Squash 85 
11 Yamuna Sports Comp lex – Table Tennis 86 
12 Rugby Main Ground, Delhi University 86 
13 Thyagraj Sports Complex 98 
  
Updating the status of projects for CWG-2010 the Minist ry has informed that  various stadia are 
in advance stage of co mpletion though ther e has been certain delays but recovery schedule has 
been drawn.  5 stadia have been co mpleted and 7 would be completed by 30 th April, 2010 and 
rest of the stadia would be completed between 1 st May and 30 th June, 2010.  According to the 
Ministry, the Indian Athletes would be able to practice on these grounds for quite some time and 
hence they would be able to ta ke advantage. In all thirty tw o training venues are also being 
developed for the Games, which will be completed before the Games.  
 
20.4     The Committee is no t convinced with this contenti on of the Minist ry that the 
completion dates of both the competition and training venues have been rescheduled due to delay 
in construction of projects.  The sportspersons ar e getting training at places different from these 
venues.  The delay in venues ha s already reduced the period of practice and the advantage of 
home turf and conditions to a great extent.  These venues may be useful for future events and not 
only for the Commonwealth Games.  At th is stage the Committee can only rely on the 
Departments readiness about the venues and also the facilities be ing extended to our 
sportspersons.  Another aspect related to completion schedule is the cost factor on these projects.  
Considerable delay has already taken place in completion and the projects are bound to have cost 

  
overruns.  Hike in prices of building materials due to general inflationa ry trend coupled with 
recent addition of service tax, the overall cost, in all probabilities, is likely to increase.  In reply 
to a query under RTI, the Depart ment has informed that collect ive cost overrun for the five 
projects viz. Jawahar Lal Nehru Sports Comple x, Indira Gandhi Sports  Complex, Dr. S.P. 
Mukherjee Aquarium Complex, Major Dhyan Chand Hockey Stadium and Dr. Karni Singh 
Shooting Range is over 100 per cent.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry has taken care 
of this cost escalation factor while reduc ing budgetary allocations for 2010-11.  It would 
like the Ministry to furnish a comprehensive statement showing the initial cost projections 
and the revised one, pr oject-wise including the reasons for delay and hi ke in cost in its 
Action Taken-Notes. 
 
20.5   The Ministry has informed that Government is providing upfront funding to the 
Organising Committee for conduct and delivery of the Games.  Th is funding is in form of 
unsecured loan at the prevailing Government rate  of interest, the Government is also committed 
to meet any shortfall between the revenue an d expenditure of the Organising Committee.  
However, the host city contract stipulates that any su rplus that may accrue at the conclusion of 
Commonwealth Games, 2010 woul d be paid to the Commonwea lth Games Federation (CGF) 
and the Indian Olympic Associa tion (IOA) for use in legacy programmes to operate sports 
venues.  The Committee is of the co nsidered views that since it would be Government 
money to be used by the Organising Committee for conduct and delivery of the Games, any 
revenue generated should be utilized for the benefit of the sportspersons and development 
of sports.  The Committee would like the Ministry to prepare action plan including the 
modalities on usage of the revenue generated during the Games and sh are the details with 
it. 
 
20.6    Commonwealth Games-2010  is not only an oppo rtunity to showcase our potential as a 
host but also provide a lear ning experience to frame the long pending review for a 
comprehensive sports polic y.  We as a nation need to change our approach towa rds the sports.  
Instead of attempting for all events we need to pick up four or five events in which we are 
capable of giving good pe rformance at international level and prepare our sportspersons with all 
facilities/infrastructure so that they deliver to win medals for us. 

  
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 I.  INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
 The Committee appreciates that the Mini stry has undertaken review of certain 
schemes such as NYKS, NSS, Youth Hostel s etc. through studies done by reputed 
institutions.  The success of these studies is directly related with th e effective monitoring 
mechanism for supervising the activities or otherwise these studies will remain more as 
futile exercises undertaken by the Minist ry, reaching nowhere.  At the same time, 
Committee is of the opinion that there is general lack of  awareness about manifold 
activities of NYKS and recommends focuse d publicity to attract more and more youth 
towards its programmes.  More and more activities should, therefore, be planned for youth 
living in villages and ru ral areas. The Committee would like to keep a track of activities to 
be carried out under the auspices of Nation al Youth Corps and Rajiv Gandhi National 
Institute of Youth Development (RGNIYD).                             (Para 1.4)     
 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
 
 
 The Committee in the past has time and again been recommending higher allocation 
for the Ministry in general and the Department of Sports in pa rticular.  It is a matter of 
satisfaction that not only the allocation of the Department has increased but the utilization 
level is also quite satisfactory.  The Commit tee hopes that the Depa rtment would continue 
its sustained efforts in optimum utilization of the enhanced allocations.  The Committee is, 
however, not happy with the fund utilization status in the Departme nt of Youth Affair, 
which has been approximately 56% in 2007-08, 70% in 2008 -09 and about 76% (Up to 28 th 
February, 2010) in 2009-10.  Underu tilisation of funds is indicative of poor implementation 
of the schemes and lack of pr oper monitoring mechanism.  The Department’s projections 
before the Planning Commission  for higher allocations become  weak once the utilisation 
figures are poor.  How can the department stake claim for enha nced outlay when there is 
under utilisation of funds.  The Department needs to set its house in order with better fiscal 
management techniques backed up by strong  monitoring mechanis m to ensure that the 
outlays are utilized optimally and then appr oach the Planning Commi ssion with requisite 
supporting documents to prove its claims for hike  in allocations.  Given the poor rate of 
utilisations in the past, the allocations provided to the Department are quite justified.  
                  ( P a r a  2 . 3 )  

  
III. NEHRU YUVA KEND RA SANGATHAN (NYKS) 
 
  
The Committee recommends that focused pub licity so as to attract more and more 
youth power towards NYKS programmes needs to be taken up as a priority.  Secondly, the 
Committee would appreci ate if more and more activities are planne d exclusively for the 
youth living in villages and rural areas.  Another initiative which can be taken by the 
NYKS is setting up of Youth Service Centres in the Universities, wh ich can take care of 
needs, both personal and educational of th e young students.  These centres can be the 
windows for building up leadership  qualities, sense of patriotism  and social service in the 
college students.  The Commit tee would be happy if the De partment takes up this matter 
with the M/O HRD.                (Para 3.3) 
 
The Committee fails to understand the reaso ns for plan allocation for NYKS 
remaining less than half of the proposed outlay during the plan period.  The Committee 
finds that in spite of a proj ected requirement of Rs.150.00 crore for 2010-11 being made by 
the Department, plan allocation has been kept at Rs.92.00 crore.  With only one year of 
Eleventh Plan, the Committee can conclude that  proposed outlay of Rs.890.00 crore made 
for NYKS for the Eleventh Plan  will remain on pa per only.  The Commi ttee would like to 
point out that before arriving at final figu res of Plan outlay for any scheme, extensive 
analysis of past track record of utilization, capacity of the implemen ting agencies and the 
most important of all, genuine  requirements based both on implementation of the scheme 
in true spirit and broad policy parameters is  carried out.  Thereaf ter, it is for the 
Department to convince the Pla nning Commission / Ministry of Finance for allocation of 
funds as per plan outlay and projected requirements.  The Committee is, however, 
disappointed to note that the Department has so far not shown any su ccess on this front.  
Rather it has weakened its case by not showing optimum utilization of allocated funds.  The 
Committee would, therefore, like to impress upon the Depa rtment to make all conceivable 
efforts for optimum and judiciou s utilization of allocated f unds of Rs.92.00 crore for 2010-
11.  At the same time, it al so needs to make every atte mpt to convince the Planning 
Commission / Finance Ministry for additional release of funds at the RE Stage.    (Para 3.4) 
 
The Committee appreciates the follow up action on some of the recommendations made 
by the IIM, Ahmedabad.  Increas ing the number of Zonal Office s of NYKS from 18 to 28 
and strengthening of State & District level Advisory Committees on Youth Programmes 
can be considered a step in the right direction.  Effectiv e monitoring mechanism for 

  
supervising the activities of Kendras spread across the country  has to be there, otherwise 
there are chances of main objective of such a vital programme getti ng diluted are very 
much there.                         (Para 3.6) 
 
The Committee is inclined to agree with the Department’s stand that both additional 
posts and funds are required for operationalisat ion of a Kendra in the real sense.  The 
Committee would also like to point out th at already 413 posts are lying vacant under 
NYKS.  In such a situation,  creation of required posts fo r the proposed Kendras is 
essential.  The Committee stro ngly feels that for settin g up new Kendras, functional 
Kendras being deprived of the required staff is  a solution worse than  the problem.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Mi nistry of Finance ne eds to make available 
the required funds and also give its approval fo r required posts.  One must not forget that 
youths residing in these uncovered 123 districts also belong to the country.           (Para 3.7)  
 
The Committee observes that despite a num ber of administrative and structural 
changes under process in NYKS, the large number of vacant posts that too at DYC level is 
a matter of serious concern.  NY KS has already faced a lot of criticism in earlier selection 
process of DYC posts held in 1996 after which no recruitment has taken place.  With the 
proposed expansion programmes covering 123 more districts acro ss the country, the 
present level of vacant posts cannot be allowed to continue.  The Committee would like 
NYKS to expedite revision of  its recruitment rules so that process for fresh recruitment 
could take place to fill up the vacancies.  Filling up these vaca ncies should be the priority 
area for NYKS in case it wishes to achieve its objective in real terms.                     (Para 3.8) 
 
 It further recommends setting up an adviso ry committee at the apex level in which 
peoples representatives shou ld be included to chalk ou t a programme sheet.  The 
Committee would like the Department to de vise a focused programme on anti-terrorism 
measures under NYKS by traini ng the youth, with a view to  involve them in national 
development so that they could come back to the mainstream.  The very objective of NYKS 
should be to develop qualities of citizens hip and community develo pment and also engage 
rural youth in national building activities, training and research in youth development. 
   The Committee would like  the Department to conceive  and formulate State specific 
activities in consultation with  Governments so as to increase the level of education and 
general awareness among the youth.                         (Para 3.9) 
 

  
 The Committee would like th e Department to review the functioning of these clubs 
and formulate a concrete plan to reactivate and rejuvenate  them in case the noble 
objectives of NYKS are to be achieved in true sense.  In fact, the monitoring mechanism 
under NYKS needs a complete overhauling to strengthen the delivery system.  The study of 
IIM, Ahmedabad might be containing the road map to undertake such review exercise. 
                (Para 3.10) 
 
IV. NATIONAL SERVI CE SCHEME (NSS)
 
 
The Committee expects the exercise to be co mpleted within a speci fic time-limit so 
that follow-up action is not delayed further.  The Committee is of th e view that with the 
expansion of higher e ducation in the recent years and with  Right to Education Act coming 
into force, the number of ta rgeted students under the sche me is going to increase 
substantially.   Even otherwise, the coverage of only 8174 schools and 14,698 colleges shows 
a considerable gap between el igible students and those enro lled under the scheme.  Details 
of universities and co lleges covered presently under NSS also seem to indicate that 
professional colleges like medical and en gineering colleges which have shown a 
phenomenal growth over the rece nt years have perh aps remained outsid e the purview of 
the scheme.  If that be so, Committee can conc lude that a vast pote ntial of our youth has 
remained devoid of positive impact of NSS wh ich has creation of social awareness as its 
main objective, the need of the hour.                      (Para 4.3) 
 
The Committee is not fully co nvinced by the reason given fo r coverage of NSS remaining 
static.  The Committee wo uld like to draw the attention of  the Department to the Eleventh 
Plan outlay of Rs.850.00 crore for NSS.  Reason s for Budget provision of Rs.52.60 crore in 
2007-08 and Rs.86.00 crore each  in 2008-09 and 2009-10 much below the plan outlay of 
Rs.129.74 crore (2007-08), Rs.156.00 crore (2008-09) and Rs.172.00 crore (2009-10) are not 
known to the Committee.  Not on ly this, no change is reflected  in the provision of Rs.92.00 
crore against a plan outlay of Rs.189.00 crore.  It seems that the Depa rtment has failed to 
convince the Planning Commission / Ministry of Finance about its req uired Projection of 
Rs. 150.00 crore.  Trend of utilization of allocated funds during 2008-09 and 2009-10 lends 
credence to Committee’s assessment.  Plan allocation of Rs.86.00 crore in 2008-09 was to be 
brought down to Rs.54.51 crore at the RE stage and expenditure reported at the end of the 
year was Rs.47.31 cro re.  In 2009-10 also, utilization figures up to 06.03.2010 stood at 
Rs.56.95 crore against an allocation of Rs.86.00 crore.      (Para 4.5) 

  
 
The Committee is of the view that required action will be initiated by the concerned 
authorities on this very crucial observation made in the evaluation study.            (Para 4.7) 
 
The Committee would like the Department to  persuade the States in expediting the 
disbursement certificate as it would help th em to secure the second installment of NSS 
grants. Long pendency in settlement of acco unts would do more harm than good for the 
scheme.  At the same time, it was also required to understand the reasons behind the 
States’ inability to adhere to the basic financial norms.            
(Para 4.8) 
 
The Committee would like to have an idea about the number of self-financing units 
set up, their locations and al so their performance level.   The Committee finds that most of 
the replies from the Department  particularly those relating to social and nation-building 
activities under NSS do not give clear pict ure thereof.  It would have been more 
comfortable with more specific and precise replies.                        (Para 4.9) 
 
V. NATIONAL DISCIPLINE SCHEME 
 
   The Committee fails to understand as to wh y so much liability has accrued even 
after the scheme was transferred to the States 38 years back.  It cannot be that all the 6145 
NDS Instructors have continued to remain in  service for such a long period.  The 
Committee has been info rmed that reimbursement to the States is ba sed on the projection 
of liability towards payment of salary and al lowances to NDS Instructors by the respective 
State Governments.  The Comm ittee wonders whether the Depa rtment is aware about the 
exact number of Instructors in  each State and salary/allowa nces payable to them.  The 
Committee also doubts whether any assessment about the number of times pay structure of 
these Instructors might have undergone a change all these ye ars.  The Committee would 
appreciate that before the rel ease of committed liability, an attempt is made by the 
Department to have an idea  about the quantum of committe d liability released so far, 
number of NDS Instructors cov ered thereunder, basis of outs tanding committed liability 
along with number of NDS Instructor (State-wis e).  One must not forget that Government 
funds are to be duly accounted for as per the well-establis hed financial norms.   The 
Committee expresses its deep concerns about the never ending  liabilities and would like 

  
that accountability part of concerned officials be established and an ac tion taken report be 
furnished to the Committee within one month of the presentation of the report.    (Para 5.4) 
 
VI. YOUTH HOSTELS  
 
The Committee is not convinced with the main tenance level, leave alone the pace of 
construction of Youth Hostels.               (Para 6.3)  
 
The Committee opines that the difficulties mentioned by the De partment are inter-related.  
With shortage of manpower and funds, manage ment and maintenance of youth hostels is 
bound to suffer.  Further the location of yo uth hostels is directly related with their 
occupancy and revenue generation.  Out of  55 hostels appraise d by Youth Hostel 
Association of India, 46 hostels have been rate d poor or bad for one reason or the other.  
The Department has proposed changes in th e management, structure, appointment of 
Receptionist cum caretaker, maximize bed capa city, changes in norms of burnishing youth 
hostels and enhanced financia l ceiling for renovati on and redesigning  work of youth 
hostels.  It is a matte r of surprise for the Committee to know that the youth hostels were 
being run without Caretakers and Receptionists.  How could the management and 
maintenance of youth hostels be possible in  the absence of a Caretaker?  The Committee 
also feels that the proposed rate of hono rarium for manager and receptionist is quite 
meagre to attract professionally  qualified people.  This am ount needs to be increased 
appropriately.  In addition to these corrective measures, th e Committee strongly feels that 
there is a need to take a comprehensive review of all these under-performing Youth Hostels 
based on the findings of Youth Hostel Association of India in coordination with all the 
concerned authorities at all levels so that  these Hostels can al so be rated as good 
performing hostels.                                                                                                          (Para 6.4)  
 
The Committee recommends that th e Ministry should take positi ve and concrete action on 
the suggestions provided in the study report of Internatio nal Youth Association with 
regard to the functioning of the youth hostels.            (Para 6.5)  
 
VII. NATIONAL YOUTH CORPS 
 
It is satisfying to note that 8000 volunteers out of 20, 000 would be depl oyed in Jammu & 
Kashmir, a State where it is very importan t to bring the youth into mainstream and 

  
inculcate in them the feeling of national building.  The proposal to deploy a sizeable 
number of volunteers in North Ea st States would help in arre sting the sense of alienation 
which has cropped up amongst the citizens of this  area due to alleged neglect of the region 
over the years.  The Co mmittee would like to keep a watc h on the implementation of this 
useful scheme.                (Para 7.3)  
 
IX. RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INST ITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT 
(RGNIYD) 
 
The Committee would like to understand th e reasons for withdrawal of ‘Deemed 
University’ status from the Institutes.               (Para 8.4)  
 
 
IX. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT 
DEVELOPMENT 
 
The Committee would also like to point out th at under the revised sc heme also trend of 
pending UCs has started.  Th ere are 75 pending UCs for 2008- 09.  Remedial measures in 
the initial stage of the scheme needs to be ta ken otherwise this problem would continue to 
aggravate.                  ( P a r a  9 . 2 )   
 
 
X. SCHEME OF ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS 
 
In the opinion of the Committe e, the popularity level of sp orts except cricket is very 
low and the federations could have contributed  to raise the standard and popularity of 
different games by a number of innovative measures.          (Para 10.3) 
 
XI. PANCHAYAT  YUVA  KRIDA  AUR  KHEL ABHIYAN (PYKKA)
 
 
The Committee feels that im portant schemes like PYYKA with its noble objectives 
to provide infrastructure in rural areas, wh ich have so far remain ed utterly neglected, 
cannot be operated, with such a shaky and casual approach. Be that as it may be, there are 
still two full financial years availa ble within Eleventh Plan period for the Ministry to make 
up the time lost and implement the scheme in a mission mode . The implementing agencies 
would have to exhibit the extra level of comm itment and vigour in achievement of targets 

  
so that the shortfalls so fa r noticed in the delivery of performance are bridged. The 
Committee hopes that the Department would adopt a proactive and pragmatic approach 
for better performance during the remaining period of plan.            (Para 11.3) 
 
XII. PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG DISABLED.  
 
The Committee expresses its displeasure over the casual manner in which the 
scheme is being handled.  It  strongly feels that the sc heme for Sports and Games for 
disabled needs to reach the targ eted beneficiaries.  One must not forget that creation of 
exclusive sports facilities for the disabled not only would help  in boosting the confidence 
level of sportspersons who are not at the same level as normal sportspersons for no fault of 
theirs but would also indirectly help in bringing them in the mainstream of society.    
                (Para 12.3) 
 
XIII. URBAN SPORTS IN FRASTRUCTURE SCHEME 
 
The Committee would appreciate if the De partment plays a proactive role in 
monitoring the completion of a ll the pending projects in the erstwhile schemes for want of 
funds all these years.  The Co mmittee is also hopeful that the new scheme would get the 
approval within the time fram e indicated by the Ministry so that necessary funds for 
infrastructure projects in urban areas could be released in time.      (Para 13.4) 
 
XIV. NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND
 
 
    The Committee is not satisf ied with the maintenance a nd operation of the fund.  
The Committee finds that the contribution from private sector has been negligible and no 
NRI has come forward for this noble cause.  The Ministry’s argument that many private 
sector entities and NRIs assist the sports persons and sports ac tivity directly in their own 
independent way cannot be denied.  But it is also very obvious that the failure of the 
Department in mobilizing private contribution indicates that necessary serious efforts have 
not been made to motivate pr ivate entities particularly big business houses through 
different Chambers of Commerce.  The Depar tment did not even co ntemplate to use the 
Pravasi Diwas platform for ra ising contributions from NR Is.  Another discouraging 
development noticed by the Committee is that  the Department has managed only 50 per 
cent matching grants of the total corpus in NSDF.  The Committee is  not ready to buy the 

  
argument of the Department that contribution is made by it in a phased manner depending 
on overall approved budget of  the department.  It rather reflects the somewhat casual 
approach of the Department towards this v ery important corpus, which if successfully 
handled could generate sizeable funds which can benefit our meritori ous sportspersons.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the matchi ng contribution from the 
Government should be released in the current financial year itself.                        (Para 14.3) 
 
XV. NATIONAL WELFARE FU ND FOR SPORTPERSONS. 
 
The Committee, however, feels that perhaps the scheme lacks the reach to rural and 
remote areas.  Persistent Effo rts have to be made to prov ide wide publicity of scheme 
through print and electronic me dia in addition to the Minist ry’s website and other useful 
links in order to create awareness of the Welfare Fund.                                           (Para 15.3) 
 
XVI. SCHEME  OF PENSION TO  MERITORIOUS SPORTSPERSONS
 
 
The Committee is of the view that this Scheme needs to be extended to those 
sportsperson, who win medals in various national championships.  Such an initiative would 
indirectly lead to drawing more and more young talent towards sports. (Para 16.2) 
 
 XVII.   NATIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP FOR WOMEN
 
 
The Committee understands that  the Flagship Scheme PYKKA itself has not taken 
off as it should have been.  Merging othe r schemes into it may not be a good idea.  
Moreover, this scheme is sp ecifically for women.  Merging it with PYKKA, which is 
primarily for rural areas, this scheme would lose its identity.   
Before a decision is taken to subsume this scheme in PYKKA, the Department also 
needs to review this scheme it self in order to strengthen it.  The other viable option could 
be that sports disciplines for women in urban areas are specifi cally covered under 
proposed Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme as a separate component.             (Para 17.2) 
 
XVIII.    GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 
 
 The Committee desires that Ministry may set up a regulatory body / grievance 
redressal cell that will look into all aspects of  the problems faced by  the sportspersons, 

  
coaches, sports federations, NGOs, schools, colleges and other sports bodies receiving grant 
from the Government.  This would not only  help in confidence  building among the 
sportspersons but would also bring down the grievances of all affected sportspersons / 
sports bodies / agencies implementing sports programmes.       (Para 18.2)  
 
XIX. COACHES  
 
The Committee feels that the most cruci al aspect for preparedness of our 
sportspersons in different sports disciplines ha s remained the most neglected one so far.  
Lack of qualified and experien ced coaches clearly indicates that our country still lags 
behind when compared with ot her countries performing we ll in sports arena.  The 
Committee once again enjoins up on the Department to give top priority of building up 
required number of coaches.  One must not forg et that in the recent decades things have 
changed significantly in sports also.  To compete with well-trained sportspersons, the basic 
requirement is to have qualified experienced cadre of coaches which is also satisfied with its 
service conditions.              ( P a r a  1 9 . 2 )  
 
XX. COMMONWEALTH GAMES-2010
 
 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry has ta ken care of this cost escalation factor 
while reducing budgetary allocati ons for 2010-11.  It would like  the Ministry to furnish a 
comprehensive statement showing the initial cost projecti ons and the revised  one, project-
wise including the reasons for delay and hike in cost in its Action Taken-Notes.   (Para 20.4) 
 
The Committee is of the considered views that since it would be Government money 
to be used by the Organisi ng Committee for conduct and de livery of the Games, any 
revenue generated should be utilized for the benefit of the sportspersons and development 
of sports.  The Committee would like the Ministry to prepare action plan including the 
modalities on usage of the revenue generated during the Games and sh are the details with 
it.                 (Para 20.5) 
 
********* 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
****************************************************************************** 
MINUTES 
****************************************************************************** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Human Res ource Development met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 26th 
March, 2010 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes   Chairman 
2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
3. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
4. Shri N.K. Singh 
5. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
7. Shri Kirti Azad 
8. Shri P.K. Biju 
9. Shri Jitendrasingh Bundela 
10.  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
11.  Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
12.  Shri P. Kumar 
13.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
14.  Shri Sis Ram Ola 
15.  Shri Tapas Paul 
16.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
17.  Shri Ashok Tanwar 
18.  Shri Joseph Toppo  
19.  Shri P. Viswanathan 
20.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
I. LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
***   ***   *** 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matter 
 

  
II. DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS 
 
1.  Sh. A.K. Upadhaya  - Secretary, Deptt. Of Youth Affairs 
2.  Shri Sanjiv Mittal   - Jo int Secretary, & Financial Advisor 
3.  Sh. Mukul Chatterjee  - Director (NYKS) 
4.  Smt. Sarda Ali Khan  - Director (NSS) 
5.  Sh. R.N. Biswas   - Director (IC) 
6.  Sh. D.P. Bhardwaj  - Deputy Secretary (NPYAD) 
7.  Sh. Michael Vedha Siromany - Director (RGNIYD) 
8.  Sh. Radhakrishnan  - Faculty Head, (RGNIYD) 
9.  Sh. Paresh Johri   - Executive Director (NYKS) 
10. Sh. D.C.S. Rao   - De puty Secretary (Finance) 
11. Dr. Chandrasekhar Pran - Director (Programme), NYKS) 
 
III. DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS 
1.  Sh. Sayan Chatterjee - Director General, SAI 
2.  Sh. Injeti Srinivas - Joint Secretary, (Sports) 
3.  Sh. Sanjeev Mittal - Joint Secretary & FA 
4.  Sh. Rahul Bhatnagar - Joint Secretary (ISD) 
5.  Maj. Gen (Retd) S.N. Mukherjee - Vice Chancellor, LNUPE, Gwalior 
6.  Sh. Pravir Krishan - Join t Secretary & Special Officer 
7.  Sh. H.S. Kingra - Join t Secretary & Special Officer 
8.  Sh. S.S. Chhabra - Secretary 
9.  Dr. P.C. Kashyap - Executive Director, SAI 
10. Dr. L.S. Rawat, - Ex ecutive Director, MS, SAI 
11. Sh. Joe Sebasteain -             (-do-) 
12. Smt. Rachna Govil - Director, SAI 
13. Ms. Ruchika Shreeman - Director , SAI 
14. Ms. Meena Bore - Director, SAI 
15. Sh. S.K. Sagar - Chief Technical Advisor, PYKKA 
16. Sh. Dhaja Singh - Project Officer, PYKKA 
17. Sh. Pramod Agarwal - Director (ISD) 
    
SECRETARIAT 
Smt.Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
Smt. Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
 
2. ***   ***   ***   ***  ***  
 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matter 

  
3. The Committee reassembled at 3.00 p.m. to  hear the Secretary, Department of Youth 
Affairs on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of the Department. The Secretary made a presentation on 
the activities and achievem ents of the Department  and briefly ex plained the budget ary allocation 
under different heads an d also the functio ning of the Depa rtment.  The members then sought 
clarifications in the light of the presentation and th e budgetary documents. Since replies to all 
queries could not be answered by  the Secretary, Committee directed  that written replies of the 
same may be furnished within a week for its consideration.   
 
4. The Committee then took up the considerat ion of Demand for Grants  of Department of 
Sports. Initiating the discussi on, the Chairman info rmed the Members th at Smt. Sindhushree 
Khullar, Secretary, Ministry of Sports had sought exemption of her appe arance before the 
Committee due to her pre-occupation abroad and th e Director General of the Department would 
represent on her behalf.  The Director General,  Department of Sports made a presentation on 
Demands for Grants 2010-11 of the Department including the budgetary allocations, activities and 
achievements of the Department.  As the clarific ations involved number of issues, the Committee 
directed the Ministry to send wr itten replies to the queries within  a week which was agreed to by 
the Director General.     .    
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 p.m.  
 
 

  
 
 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Human Res ource Development met at 4. 00 P.M. on Monday, the 19th 
April, 2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
    
 
 
1. Dr. E.M. Suda rsana Natchiappan  in the Chair 
2. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
3. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
4. Shri Suresh Angadi 
5. Shri Kirti Azad 
6. Shri P.K. Biju 
7. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
8. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
9. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 
10 Shri Tapas Paul 
11. Shri Jose ph Toppo  
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Smt.Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
Smt. Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
 
 
2. ***   ***   ***   *** 
 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matter 

  
3. The Committee then considered draft 220 th Report on Demand fo r Grants (2010-11) of 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports.  After some discus sion, the Committe e adopted the 
report with some minor changes. 
4. The Committee then decided to present th ese Reports to both Hous es of Parliament on 
20th April, 2010.  It was decided th at while Dr. E.M. S udarsana Natchiappan and in his absence, 
Shri Penumalli Madhu will pres ent the Reports in Ra jya Sabha, Shri Kirt i Azad, and in his 
absence, Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey will lay the Reports in Lok Sabha. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 p.m. to  meet again at 4.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 
22nd April, 2010. 
 