142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED – FORTY SECOND REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE HUNDRED THIRTY SIXTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS 2003-2004 (DEMAND NO. 48) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY WELFARE
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON12TH DECEMBER, 2003)
LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2003)
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/ AGRAYANA, 1925 (SAKA)
                                                       E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
                                                              Website: http//parliamentofindia.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                 
2.         PREFACE                                                                                           
3.         REPORT                                                                                                                        
CHAPTER I    Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government                           
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
                        Government’s replies                           
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
                        accepted by the Committee
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited
     
3.                  MINUTES                                                                              

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2003)
 
1. Shri Arjun Singh           ¾¾                Chairman
 
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Dr. Abrar Ahmed        
3. Dr. Akhilesh Das
4. Shri B.P. Apte 
5. Shri Bachani Lekhraj
6. Shri Eduardo Faleiro
7. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
8. Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
9. Shri Lalhmingliana
10. Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
11. Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi
12. Shri R. Sarath Kumar
13. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
14. ^Shri Mrinal Sen
15. Smt. Vanga Geetha
16. *Shri Dara Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
17. Shri Ambareesha
18. Shri Ramakant Angle
19. Shri Kirti Jha Azad
20. Shri G. S. Basavaraj
21. Shri Ram Rati Bind
22. Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria
23. Prof. Kailasho Devi
24. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
25. Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit
26. Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal
27. Shri R.L. Jalappa
28. Shri Baliram Kashyap
29. Shri Brij Lal Khabri
30. Shri Samik Lahiri
31. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
32. #Shri  G.Mallikarjunappa
33. Dr. Manda Jagannath
34. Smt. Nivedita Mane
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
^ Ceased to be member w.e.f.26
th August, 2003
*  Nominated   w.e.f. 26th September, 2003.
# Died on 30th November, 2003.
 
 (i)
 
35          ^ Shrimati Jas Kaur Meena

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
36          Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
37          Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja
38          Smt. Kumudini Patnaik
39          Smt. Renu Kumari
40          Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao
41          Shri Sunil Dutt
42          Shri Ramsheth Thakur
43          Dr. N. Venkataswamy
44          Smt. Ganti Vijaykumari
45          Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
46          *Shri G.J. Javia
47          *Shri Ali Mohammed Naik
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
^ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 29
th   January, 2003
*  Nominated   w.e.f. 7th April, 2003.
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee,   do hereby present this Hundred-Forty Second Report on
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Hundred Thirty Sixth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand No.48) of the Department of Family Welfare,  Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare for the year 2003-2004.
2.         The Hundred-Thirty Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to  the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23
rd  April, 2003. 
Replies of the Department to the recommendation/observation contained in the Report were considered by the
Committee at its meeting held on the 9th December, 2003. 
 
3.         The Committee considered the draft Report on the Action Taken and adopted the same in its meeting held on 9 th
December 2003.
NEW DELHI
December 9, 2003
Agrahayana 18,1925 (Saka)     
 
ARJUN SINGH
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development.
      REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its
One Hundred-Thirty-Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No.48) of the Department of Family Welfare,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2003-2004.
2.         Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report,
have been categorized as follows:-

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
(i)      Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: I, V, V, XIII; (Chapter I) Total-
4
 
(ii)    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:  IV, VIII, IX, X, XIV;  (Chapter II) Total-5
 
(iii)    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not   been accepted by the
Committee: I, II, III, VI,VII, XI, XII, XV, XVI,    (Chapter-III)  Total-9
 
(iv)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are    awaited:   (Chapter –
IV) Total-NIL
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
I           INTRODUCTION
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Immunisation Status (% coverage) has considerably gone up in
2001-02 as compared to 1985-86 in respect of pregnant women as also infants. The Committee recommends this tempo
may be maintained with a view to ensure cent percent coverage.
 
Action Taken
 
            The Department has noted the observations of the Committee.
 
A number of measures like replacement of ageing cold chain equipment, training of district level managers,
preparation of micro plans for routine immunisation, improved monitoring and supervision are being undertaken in
order to improve and sustain the quality and coverage of the immunisation programme.
 
V         REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH (RCH) PROGRAMME
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
Although in BE 2003-04, the higher allocation of funds have been provided than that of RE 2002-03 but it is still
less than that of BE 2002-03. The Committee hopes that again at RE stage during this financial year, the allocation may
not be curtailed like previous year due to the same reasons. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should take steps in right earnest and utilize the entire allocation effectively without any lacklustre attitude.
 
Action Taken
 
The Department agrees with the observations of the Committee about not curtailing the outlay of these
programmes at RE stage. All efforts will be made to utilize the entire allocation effectively, as recommended by the
Committee.
 
V         Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee notes that out of 17 States, 9 States actively organizing RCH camps have shown positive results

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
in those States. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to pursue the remaining State Governments
where the RCH camps could not be held and efforts should be made to cover maximum number of districts in these
States.
 
Action Taken
 
 The scheme of providing RCH services to people living in remote areas through RCH camps has been initiated
during the year 2000-01.   Initially 102 districts in 17 States were selected for implementation of the scheme.   Later,
based on the reports received from the State Governments, the scheme was extended to 76 more districts, which are now
spread in 29 States.   These include all the EAG States namely Bihar, Jharkhand, UP, Uttranchal, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhatisgarh, Rajasthan and Orissa and all the NE States. It has been decided to extend the scheme in all the districts of
EAG and NE States. The States have been requested to reflect the requirement in their State Action Plan.
 
A total of 4633 camps have been held as reported. The Government of India has so far released a sum of Rs.
16.97 crores for this scheme. In the year 2002-03, a sum of Rs. 2.92 crores had been released.  While detailed guidelines
have been circulated to all the States/UTs for implementation of the Scheme, States have also been pursued to hold the
camps regularly in selected PHCs as per the guidelines of the programme, through various review meetings and
communications.
 
XIII
     AREA PROJECT
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee also notes that during the year 2000-01 and 2001-02, allocation at RE stage was reduced due to
reasons such as unspent balance lying with States. The Committee is not happy with the trend of utilization of the funds
and recommends that accounting procedure should be strengthened to check the practice of unspent balance.
 
Action Taken
 
To ensure proper utilization of funds, the utilization certificate of funds earlier released are invariably called for.
To check the practice of unspent balance, release of funds are now made only after taking into account the expenditure
incurred out of amount already released and after reviewing the physical and financial progress of the project from time
to time. The concerned State Governments are being informed about the concern of the Committee regarding slow
utilization of funds.
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENTS’ REPLY
IV        URBAN FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES (UFWS)
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee notes that the allocation under the scheme has marginally been increased from BE & RE of Rs.
109.80 crores to Rs. 119.50 crores in BE 2003-04. The actual expenditure figures were not available at the point of time.
The Committee hopes that the Department would be able to utilize the allocation judiciously as well as timely.
 
Action Taken
 
The figure indicated in the Report relates to the States and UTs other than NE States and Sikkim. The
corresponding actual expenditure during the year 2002-2003 was Rs. 101.60 crores.  An amount of Rs. 6.97 crore
earmarked for Delhi could not be released due to non-submission of audited statement of accounts by Delhi
Government.
 

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
            The Department has noted the comments of the Committee. Every effort will be made to utilize the allocation
judiciously.
 
VIII
     TRANSPORT
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee observes that the impact of non-release of funds for providing transport to ANMs and others be
assessed and the scheme reconsidered in light of this assessment for reintroduction with such modifications as are
considered necessary.
 
Action Taken
 
As regards Moped Loan Scheme for purchase of mopeds for ANMs in order to increase their mobility, its initial
implementation was with UNFPA assistance.   Under the scheme, a fixed amount of Rs.16000/- was to be given to the
ANMs as loan that was to be returned without interest to the State Governments. During the year 2000-01, an amount of
Rs.84.57 lakhs was released for the purpose.   
 
However, this one time support from UNFPA is not available any more. Though the scheme continues to be a
part of RCH Programme of the Department, its strengthening is proposed in the RCH-II Project. In it, it is envisaged
that the Government of India will release funds for being used by the State Governments for extending loans to ANMs
for procurement of mopeds to increase their mobility. There will be no interest subsidy from Government of India.  The
State Governments will work out the list of remote PHCs (a remote PHC should be at least 10 Km. away from a District
and Sub-divisional headquarters) and, therefore, the number of ANMs eligible for such loans should not exceed more
than 25% of the total ANMs in the State.   On the basis of such number, the State Government will request the
requirement of funds to the Central Government.   The nationalized banks or State Cooperative banks will make the
arrangements for receiving the money from Government of India and put it in the Corpus Fund out of which loans will
be sanctioned by their branches to the ANMs.   The number of ANMs to be covered, the size of Corpus Fund required,
the decision to provide interest subsidy and copy of the MOU finalized with the bank will have to be furnished to the
Government of India for securing release of funds for the purpose.
           
After the ANMs in the identified remote PHCs would have been covered, the recovery of loan from these ANMs
will be utilized for extending loan to other ANMs and para-medical employees of the State Health & Family Welfare
Department.
 
IX 
       COMPENSATION
 
Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee notes the enhancement in the amount of compensation and recommends a review thereof after making a
realistic assessment of cost of inputs thereunder such as diets, transport and drugs and dressings etc., and also the
component of payment to motivator.
 
Action Taken
 
The government is providing assistance to the States/UTs to compensate the people for the loss of wages for the
days they come to the medical centre for permanent or temporary methods of family planning. The Government has
modified the scheme of cash compensation for sterilisation/IUD insertion w.e.f. 7th February 2001.
 
Regarding the review of the cash compensation, it is mentioned here that norms of compensation for sterilisation/
IUD insertion were revised very recently, with effect from 7.2.2001. However, the Department is considering its
revision at the time of implementation of RCH-II Project, which is likely to be taken up from next financial year.
 

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
X         INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION (IEC)
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee is happy to note the steps taken by the Department. However, it appears that the people in
villages and remote areas may not be reached until and unless intensive advertising is forthcoming. The Committee feels
that the possibility  of involvement of local administration and representatives of local people for these programmes
should also be explored.
Action Taken
 
IEC activities are carried out to achieve wider publicity of the RCH and population stabilization programme by
respective Mass Education and Media Set-up created in the States and through Media Units of the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting.
 
The Department, with the enhanced allocation in BE 2003-04, will carry out the intensive IEC activities in 8
EAG States; enhanced publicity through print and electronic media, viz, printing of immunisation cards and booklets
through Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP); and upgraded publicity for Pulse Polio Immunisation
Programme on Doordarshan & All India Radio.
 
Since the year 2002-03, the bigger States are being allocated Rs. 5.00 crores and the smaller States Rs. 2.00 to
Rs. 3.00 crore annually for intensive IEC activities. Special IEC activities are being planned for the Adolescent Health
Programme, which has been made a part of IEC during 2003-04. For this purpose a Task Force has been constituted and
two meetings have been held. NGOs already in these fields are also being released grant for IEC activities on adolescent
health.
 
As part of the new IEC strategy for the Reproductive and Child Health Programme, private professional agencies
for creating audio visual and visual software and for designing advertising campaigns for the Mass Media have been
contracted. The new campaign in the mass media is targeted for the younger generation, who are either entering, or have
just entered, the reproductive age groups.
 
As regards the Committee’s observation that the people in villages and remote areas may not be reached until
and unless intensive advertising is forthcoming, it is brought to the notice of Committee that this Ministry has organized
sensitization workshops at State/Dist./PHC and Block level involving local people of repute, MLAs, elected
representatives of Municipal/Zila Parishad bodies etc. This programme is still going on. Involvement of Panchayats,
village level Swasthya committees are also being mobilized.
 
XIV     PRE-NATAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES (REGULATION AND PREVENTION OF MISUSE) ACT,
1994
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
The Committee notes the developments made in this regard and feel that the provisions made in the Amendment
Act be implemented expeditiously in order to curb the malpractice of PNDT. The Committee also recommends that
awareness programmes may be started in collaboration with the cooperation of the concerned Departments to make the
people realise the importance of the eradication of this social evil.
 
Action Taken
The Government is making serious efforts towards implementation of the law and to curb female foeticide.
 
a)
            The Central Supervisory Board (CSB) has been constituted at the Central Govt. level under the chairmanship of
Union Minister for Health and Family Welfare. It consists of 23 members including representatives of States/UTs;
non-official members from amongst medical geneticists, gynaecologists and obstetricians and pediatricians; social
scientists; women activists and women Members of Parliament. Its meetings are held regularly.

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
 
b)            All the States and the UTs with legislature have been advised to constitute State/UT Supervisory Board. Under
the amended provisions of the Act, State level Supervisory Board is to be appointed in each State and UT having
legislature under the chairmanship of Minister in charge of Health and Family Welfare in the State/UT concerned. 
The State Board consists of 21 members including non-official members from amongst medical geneticist,
gynaecologist and obstetricians, pediatricians, social scientists, women activists and women Members of State/UT
Legislature.   The State Board may also co-opt seven more members.  Madhya Pradesh has already constituted the
State Board.
 
c)
            The Appropriate Authorities assisted by Advisory Committees have been constituted at State/UT level and at
District level in all the States and UTs and also at sub-district level in major States. Separate Appropriate
Authorities and Advisory Committees have been constituted for the Defence Services Medical Installations.
 
d)
            The State/UT level Appropriate Authorities have been asked to organize conduct raids at the ultrasound clinics
operating in all the districts and sub-districts of the State/UT by deploying decoy customers.  For this purpose they
may use the services of the staff available in the offices of the district and sub-district level Appropriate
Authorities.  They have also been advised to complete the registration, inter-alia, of all those clinics and centres
using ultrasound machines whose lists have been supplied to them by the Department of Family Welfare,
Government of India.  All States/UTs have been advised to register all organizations using Ultrasound machines,
failing which their machines may be sealed and seized in terms of the Supreme Court’s Order dated 29.1.2002.
 
As regards awareness programmes, the following initiatives have been taken:
 
·
              Workshops/seminars are being organized at State/regional/district/block levels to create awareness about
the provisions of the Act.  Voluntary Organizations are also being involved to carry out projects for creating
awareness about the provisions of the Act. Grant-in-aid has been released to a number of NGOs for creating
awareness about the provisions of the PNDT Act.
 
·
                                Religious leaders’ meets were organised at New Delhi (organised by National Commission for
Women, IMA and UNICEF) and at Fatehgarh Sahib (Punjab) against the practice of female foeticide where
this practice was widely condemned and pledge was taken to stop it. The Akal Takht has issued a Hukumnama
to the Sikh community to stop the practice of female foeticide.
 
·               Various activities are being undertaken regularly for creating public awareness through Government
media viz. Radio, TV and other media units. Various stations of AIR are broadcasting spots, group
discussions, talks and panel discussions on PNDT Act in various languages.
 
·                      The States/UTs have been advised by the Central Government to mount effective awareness campaign
to make the public and service providers aware of the provisions of the Act.  The States/UTs have also been
advised to provide protection to social activists and Non-Governmental Organizations giving information or
filing complaints of violation of provisions of the Act.
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
I           INTRODUCTION
Recommendation/Observation

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
The Committee notes that there have been marginal fluctuations in the case of contraceptive methods at certain
point of time. Nevertheless, the Committee feels satisfied that the concept of family planning has at last been accepted
and has become a part of family life. The Committee recommends that the awareness programme in this respect should
continue so that the apprehensions of general public about the usage of contraceptives are allayed.
 
Action Taken
 
Awareness generation activities are being taken up through the mass media, both electronic and print. Efforts
will continue to be made to achieve the maximum population coverage. A national Commitment for Population
Stabilisation is being launched through a signature campaign throughout the country to create awareness in all age
group.
 
Comments of the Committee
Despite the efforts made by the Department to create awareness about the usage of contraceptives,   it appears to
be far from reality, as the desired  results are not foreseen. The Department should hire the services of Advertising
Agencies to create mass awareness specially in rural areas through intensive advertising.    Besides this, the involvement
of office bearers of village Panchayats and other local bodies should also be explored so that the message is
communicated effectively at every level specially in  remote areas.
II 
        BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
While the Committee appreciates the constraints of budgetary exercise of matching the known resources of
revenue with the requirements of outflow of funds, it expresses its concern over huge cut in the allocation. We are
already seized of the effects of over population. Family Planning as well as Welfare are, therefore, unavoidable vital
component of the Planning in our country. Abdication of responsibility by way of non-allocation is fraught with
disastrous consequences. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Planning Commission should review the
allocation and provide additional funds at the earliest so that continuity of welfare programmes and schemes is ensured
so that it does not affect the pace of steps being taken to right-size the population of the country.
 
Action Taken
 
            The Planning Commission has replied that it has made every effort to provide the Department of Family Welfare
as much outlay as possible within the existing financial constraints during Annual Plan 2003-04. The total increase in
Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) provided for Annual Plan 2003-04 is Rs.7474 crores for both Central and State Plans.
Keeping in view the commitments and policy announcement of the Government, only the sectors identified for special
thrust like power, railways, road transport and atomic energy & space etc. have been given marginal increase. Budget
allocations to all other Central Ministries and Departments have been frozen at the BE level of 2002-03. Although the
GBS for Annual Plan 2003-04 of the Department of Family Welfare has been kept at the BE level of 2002-03 (Rs.4930
crores), it is higher by 18.8 % than the RE of Rs.4150 crores for the year 2002-03.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is baffled to know that the Planning Commission does not consider the family welfare, whose
basic mandate is to control the population, as special thrust area. Population, in fact, neutralizes the fruits of
development and reduces the per capita availability of resources. Population control, therefore, has to have equal
emphasis as is being given to areas like power, railways, road transport, etc.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that
the Planning Commission may be requested to keep this fact in mind and raise the budgetary allocation for the
Department during the next financial year.
 
III        RURAL FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES (RFWS)
 
Recommendations/Observation

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
 
While the Committee keenly awaits the outcome of survey referred to above in respect of
PHCs/CHCs/FRU/District Hospitals etc., it can assess the plight of these units based on the grossly inadequate and poor
health care system that prevails in metros and other big towns of the country. The Committee, however, recommends
that steps should continue to be taken to strengthen these units to provide maximum health care facilities as also in
terms of man power.
 
Action Taken
 
            To strengthen health care infrastructure, Government of India is assisting all the States in improving/constructing
labour rooms and operation theatres and in providing water/electricity supply in CHCs/PHCs etc. so that essential and
emergency obstetric services are improved. Under Minor Civil Works Scheme, an amount of Rs.10 lakhs per district has
been provided (one time release). Under Major Civil Works Scheme, an amount of Rs.10 lakhs per CHC/District
Hospital is being provided.
 
            The Government of India provides funds for Sub-Centres but filling up of the vacancies and transfer & posting
of the concerned staff lies totally under the control of State Government. However, Director, Health Services of all
States have been requested time & again for filling up the vacancies at various levels.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
India has shown significant improvement in the area of health and well being of its people.  But the Committee
feels that we are still not fully equipped in the area of health management, including quality of care. The facilities at
CHC/PHCs are still not adequate enough to meet the challenges of new kind of diseases, which are erupting in various
parts of the country now and then. In the absence of poor facilities in the Rural and Urban Health Centres, the load in
the Hospitals in the Metros and bigger cities has increased tremendously resulting in the available services going
haywires.
 
The Department has informed that the filling of vacancies and posting of medical officials in the PHC/CHCs
comes under the purview of State Governments. However, the Committee feels that Central Government cannot and
should not sit as mute spectator as it is supporting the States in a big way for extending /improving health and family
welfare services for these people.   Therefore, the Centre must persuade them effectively for filling up the posts lying
vacant for a long time.  It may link release of funds by it with this aspect.    
 
VI        REPRODUCTIVE TRACT INFECTION/SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
            The Committee notes with concern that only 307 Laboratory Technicians have been appointed for 429 identified
clinics. The Committee observes that it is not sufficient to redress the problem. It, therefore, recommends that the
appointment of Technicians for rest of the clinics be expedited.
Action Taken
            To strengthen the services for RTI/STI, assistance from the Government of India is given in the form of training
and provision of drug kits at First Referral Unit (FRU) level @ 3 kits for A-category, 2 kits for B-category and 1 kit for
C-category districts. There is also a provision for engaging 2 laboratory technicians per district on contractual basis in
the First Referral Units, where such technicians are not available. Granting of fund under the scheme is, however, based
on the State’s proposal.   As of date, 409 Lab. Technicians have been reported to have been appointed by the
States/UTs.  The scheme is in operation in almost all the States/UTs.
 
            These Lab. Technicians are engaged from the funds provided by Govt. of India, based on the proposal from the
States/UTs. They are appointed in addition to the existing regular staff under the State/UT Govts. to make up the
shortfall only. These numbers do not reflect the actual number of such staff actually working in the FRUs throughout
the country. The State/UT Govts. are reminded regularly to fill up these posts wherever they are vacant, as per

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
applicability under the RCH programme.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is amazed at the indifferent attitude of the State Governments in filling up the vacancies of
Laboratory Technicians which are lying vacant for longer duration.
In the wake of spread of dreaded diseases like AIDS, Dengue etc., the role of laboratory technicians has assumed
greater importance. Treatment can not be started until one has confirmed a disease on the basis of lab tests.   The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should ensure that these lab technicians not only were
appointed by the States but are not given some other duty than what these have been provided for.
 
VII      STRENGTHENING OF IMMUNISATION PROGRAMME AND ERADICATION OF POLIO
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
Keeping in view the importance of this scheme, the Committee observes that it was unwise to reduce the
allocation of funds for this scheme at RE stage.
 
The Committee notes with concern the number of polio cases detected in 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001 and 2002.
 
Year Wild Polio cases
1998 1934
1999 1264
2000 265
2001 268
2002
(upto 30
th November)
1211
 
The Committee observes that in matters of health and that too of the children even a single such case would
suffice to send wrong signals among people about the scheme. The Department should, therefore, create awareness
among general masses about the benefits of the Scheme and ensure that no child is left uncovered under immunisation
programme. At the same time the Committee recommends that no cuts should hereafter be made in such schemes.
 
Action Taken
 
 Since the initiative to eradicate polio from India was started in 1995, significant progress was achieved by the
end of 2001 in limiting the spread of virus to certain foci in the western and central UP and Bihar only. The number of
polio cases declined from 1934 in 1998 to 1128 in 1999, 265 in 2000 and 268 in 2001. At that stage, it was anticipated
that by the end of the year 2002, it would be possible to eradicate the virus from the remaining reservoirs in UP and
Bihar. However, during 2002, the polio eradication effort in India suffered a major setback due to large-scale outbreak
in UP and spill over into other neighboring States, and the number of cases sharply increased from 268 to 1600. India,
which reported around 37% of the global cases in 2000, reported 83% of the global cases during 2002. During 2001, 11
States had reported 268 cases across 63 districts. During 2002, 1600 cases have been reported from 16 States and 169
districts. In view of the seriousness of the situation and in order to interrupt the transmission of virus, the Government is
actively considering implementation of two National Immunization Days (NIDs) and four Sub-national Immunization
Days (SNIDs) in continuation of the January and February, 2003 rounds (which have already been conducted) so that
the gains of the January and February 2003 national rounds could be consolidated in the high risk States/districts
through these additional rounds.
 
The social mobilization and IEC activities have been significantly improved and local areas of rumours and
misconceptions are being addressed with the focus that not a single child is missed during the ensuing rounds.
Comments of the Committee
 

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
While the Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Government for eradicating polio from this
Country, it should have found out the reasons for abrupt upsurge of polio cases from 260 to 1600 in 2002.  After having
done that the Department should have made efforts to tackle the causes responsible for this sudden increase.  
 
XI        TRAINING, RESEARCH AND EVALUATION
 
Recommendation/Observation
 
While the Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Department, it recommends that adequate
monitoring mechanism and accounting procedure should be provided for running the scheme. Utilization Certificates
and Statement of Expenditure should be obtained quarterly and reviewed. However, the Committee observes that for the
purpose of Family Welfare Programme in the country, the schemes are in abundance but the basic problem with all the
schemes is that they lack in appropriate strategy in implementing the schemes. This scheme was formulated almost two
decades back but no one ever thought of its effective implementation.
 
Action Taken
This Head of Training, Research & Evaluation consists of the 13 Schemes. The major schemes being ‘Basic
Training for ANMs/LHVs’, ‘Maintenance & Strengthening of HFWTCs’,  ‘Basic Training for MPWs (Male)’,
‘Strengthening of Basic Training Schools’, ‘ICMR’, ‘Population Research Centres’, ‘NIHFW’ and ‘IIPS’. Except
‘Strengthening of Basic Training Schools’, all the other schemes are old schemes and are functioning effectively.
During the Tenth Five Year Plan, the scheme ‘Strengthening of Basic Training Schools’ envisages to strengthen the
ANM/LHV Training Schools in terms of repair/upgradation of the buildings of training centres and procuring furniture,
equipments, books, audio-visual aids for conducting training. This initiative has been taken to improve the infrastructure
in the Schools for Basic Training of ANMs/LHVs. The SFC proposal for this scheme has been prepared. The appraisal
of Planning Commission has also been obtained. After approval of the scheme, the releases will be made based on the
merit of each proposal, forwarded by the State Governments. The State Governments will be instructed regarding
periodical submission of UCs/SOEs.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee reiterates that there are plethora of Schemes, but not all of these were being implemented
effectively for various reasons.  Lack of adequate monitoring and effective accounting procedures is one of these
causes.  The Committee recommends that a comprehensive evaluation/review of all these schemes be done with a view
to evolving appropriate strategies for their implementation.
 
XII 
     LOGISTIC IMPROVEMENT
Recommendations/Observations
            The Committee expresses its displeasure that the scheme was finalized and budget allocated without making
details of the procedure to be followed to run the scheme. The Department should fix a timeframe to study the reports
and implement the modified scheme. Since, the Department is proposing a lot for RCH II Project, it should be ensured
that all the steps are taken in a manner to make the project practically viable to achieve the target.
 
Action Taken
Studies were conducted for strengthening of Logistics in the State of Karnataka, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and
Orissa. The European Commission is providing the funds for this activity and as such these projects are being finalized
in consultation with them.
            The State-wise position of Strengthening of Logistics is as under: -
(i) Karnataka - A project for strengthening of Logistics in the State of Karnataka has been initiated. There have been
some initial delays but now the state Government has achieved first benchmark. Construction of all 14 warehouses has
been taken up and the whole work is scheduled to be completed by March 2004.
 

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
(ii) Gujarat - M/s Raman Consultants and Engineers, Ahmedabad conducted Study of Strengthening Logistics in the
State of Gujarat. The report has been submitted by them and has been discussed with the representatives of State
Government, European Commission and Department of Family Welfare. Recommendations from Government of
Gujarat are awaited.
 
(iii) Andhra Pradesh - M/s Tamil Nadu Medical Systems Corporation (TNMSC), Chennai conducted Study of
Strengthening Logistics in the State of Andhra Pradesh. They have submitted the report and joint comments of
European Commission and Department of Family Welfare have been forwarded to the State Government.
Recommendations from Government of Andhra Pradesh are awaited.
 
(iv)    Orissa - Delhi Society for Rational Use of Drugs, Delhi conducted Study of Strengthening Logistics in the State
of Orissa. They have submitted the report on the weaknesses of the system being adopted by Government of Orissa.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes with concern that the study indicates that the appropriate resulting steps are yet to be taken
to strengthen the Logistic.   It seems the rest of the States are not making any efforts to improve the position in this
regard. The Department should take it up on a priority basis and fix a schedule to make the scheme operational and
successful.
 
XV       NEW INITIATIVES NATIONAL POPULATION POLICY 2000
Recommendations/Observation
The Committee feels that the problem of exponential growth of the population is the mother of all the problem in
the country which would have an impact on economic needs of the people irrespective of the growth rate of national
economy. However, the Committee is of the view that the population explosion in the country has not received adequate
attention. In fact, the problem should have been tackled on a war footing. Nevertheless, the Committee feels that instead
of producing coercion in family planning, a system of incentives be introduced where under the families with one or two
children may be given preferences in various types of services e.g. telephone connection, railway reservation, admission
of children to schools including public schools so on and so forth, in order to send a clear message of preference and a
place of pride to small families.
 
Action Taken
            The Government has adopted the National Population Policy (NPP) in February 2000, which envisages certain
National Socio-demographic goals to be achieved by 2010 for paving the way for a stable population in the country by
2045, at a level consistent with the requirements of sustainable economic growth and social development. It provides a
policy framework for advancing goals and prioritizing strategies during the next decade, to meet the reproductive and
child health needs of the people of India, and to achieve net replacement levels (TFR = 2.1) by 2010. Before finalizing
the NPP, the drafts were discussed repeatedly by the Group of Ministers. However, there was no unanimity on inclusion
of personal incentives or disincentives. Accordingly, no mention was made of these in the NPP-2000.
 
However, certain promotional/motivational measures in the form community incentives, cash incentive of Rs.
500/- under the Balika Samridhi Yojana, National Maternity Benefit Scheme etc. have been introduced to encourage the
adoption of small family norm, care of the girl child, adoption of healthy behaviour by women during pregnancy, etc.
 
The Government proposes to launch a Janani Suraksha Yojana under which cash support of Rs. 500/- will be
given for birth of male child and Rs.1000/- for birth of female child upto two live births to all women aged 19 years or
above belonging to below poverty line (BPL) household in both rural and urban area. After two children, if any pregnant
woman chooses for permanent contraception, she will also be eligible for the above assistance under the scheme. A
assistance of Rs. 150/- shall be given for transportation to hospital for delivery. In case the trained birth attendant (Dai)
has been instrumental in taking a pregnant woman to a Primary Health Centre/Hospital for delivery, she will also be
paid Rs. 25/-.

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee feels that the amount of incentives given for adopting small family norms is not adequate
enough to encourage people to adopt these norms vigorously. Enhancing these incentives to appropriate extent should
be considered, as the present incentives have not attracted people towards adopting small family norms.
 
XVI     NUTRITIONAL ANAEMIA CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
            The Committee recommends that such corrective steps be taken to ascertain the reasons behind this condition
and if necessary an extension survey be considered to unfold the hidden problem.
 
Action Taken
To improve nutritional status of pregnant women, in addition to distribution of IFA tablets among all pregnant
women, feasibility of introducing herbal/Ayurvedic formulations is being planned. Studies in India and abroad indicate
that introduction of de-worming in the 2 nd/3rd trimester of pregnancy may reduce the level of anemia. However, wider
consultation in this regard would be essential before introduction of this treatment in the National Programme.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Department. However, it feels that whatever consultation/
experiment/study/research is required to introduce the treatment for improving the nutritional status of pregnant women
should be completed at war footing so that, nutritional anemia control programme may be made successful.   All sorts of
post treatment apprehensions should also be cleared out by media publicity.
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
NIL
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
I           INTRODUCTION
Comments of the Committee
Despite the efforts made by the Department to create awareness about the usage of contraceptives,   it appears to
be far from reality, as the desired  results are not foreseen. The Department should hire the services of Advertising
Agencies to create mass awareness specially in rural areas through intensive advertising.    Besides this, the involvement
of office bearers of village Panchayats and other local bodies should also be explored so that the message is
communicated effectively at every level specially in remote areas. (Para 1)
II         BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is baffled to know that the Planning Commission does not consider the family welfare, whose
basic mandate is to control the population, as special thrust area. Population, in fact, neutralizes the fruits of
development and reduces the per capita availability of resources. Population control, therefore, has to have equal
emphasis as is being given to areas like power, railways, road transport, etc.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that
the Planning Commission may be requested to keep this fact in mind and raise the budgetary allocation for the
Department during the next financial year. (Para II)
 
III        RURAL FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES (RFWS)

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
 
Comments of the Committee
 
India has shown significant improvement in the area of health and well being of its people.  But the Committee
feels that we are still not fully equipped in the area of health management, including quality of care. The facilities at
CHC/PHCs are still not adequate enough to meet the challenges of new kind of diseases, which are erupting in various
parts of the country now and then. In the absence of poor facilities in the Rural and Urban Health Centres, the load in
the Hospitals in the Metros and bigger cities has increased tremendously resulting in the available services going
haywires.
 
The Department has informed that the filling of vacancies and posting of medical officials in the PHC/CHCs
comes under the purview of State Governments. However, the Committee feels that Central Government cannot and
should not sit as mute spectator as it is supporting the States in a big way for extending /improving health and family
welfare services for these people.   Therefore, the Centre must persuade them effectively for filling up the posts lying
vacant for a long time.  It may link release of funds by it with this aspect. (Para III)   
 
 
VI
        REPRODUCTIVE TRACT INFECTION/SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is amazed at the indifferent attitude of the State Governments in filling up the vacancies of
Laboratory Technicians which are lying vacant for longer duration.
In the wake of spread of dreaded diseases like AIDS, Dengue etc., the role of laboratory technicians has assumed
greater importance. Treatment can not be started until one has confirmed a disease on the basis of lab tests.   The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should ensure that these  lab technicians not only were
appointed by the States but are not given some other duty than what these have been provided for.(Para VI)
 
VII 
      STRENGTHENING OF IMMUNISATION PROGRAMME AND ERADICATION OF POLIO
Comments of the Committee
 
While the Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Government for eradicating polio from this
Country, it should have found out the reasons for abrupt upsurge of polio cases from 260 to 1600 in 2002.  After having
done that the Department should have made efforts to tackle the causes responsible for this sudden increase.                
(Para VII)
 
XI        TRAINING, RESEARCH AND EVALUATION
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee reiterates that there are plethora of Schemes, but not all of these were being implemented
effectively for various reasons.  Lack of adequate monitoring and effective accounting procedures is one of these
causes.  The Committee recommends that a comprehensive evaluation/review of all these schemes be done with a view
to evolving appropriate strategies for their implementation. (Para XI)
 
XII 
     LOGISTIC IMPROVEMENT
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes with concern that the study indicates that the appropriate resulting steps are yet to be taken to
strengthen the Logistic.  It seems the rest of the States are not making any efforts to improve the position in this regard.
The Department should take it up on a priority basis and fix a schedule to make the scheme operational and successful.
(Para XII)
 
XV       NEW INITIATIVES NATIONAL POPULATION POLICY 2000

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
Comments of the Committee
The Committee feels that the amount of incentives given for adopting small family norms is not adequate enough to
encourage people to adopt these norms vigorously. Enhancing these incentives to appropriate extent should be
considered, as the present incentives have not attracted people towards adopting small family norms. (Para XV)
 
XVI 
    NUTRITIONAL ANAEMIA CONTROL PROGRAMME
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Department. However, it feels that whatever consultation/
experiment/study/research is required to introduce the treatment for improving the nutritional status of pregnant women
should be completed at war footing so that, nutritional anemia control programme may be made successful.   All sorts of
post treatment apprehensions should also be cleared out by media publicity. (Para XVI)
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
XXIII
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 9 th December, 2003 in Committee Room No. 63 First Floor,
Parliament House , New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1. Shri Arjun Singh                       Chairman
 
      RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Smt. Vanga Geetha
3. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
4. Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik
5. Shri Lalhmingliana
6. Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey
7. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
8. Shri Dara Singh 
 
      LOK SABHA
 
9. Shri Kanti Lal Bhuria
10. Shri Ram Rati Bind
11. Shri R.L. Jalappa
12. Shri A. F. Golam Osmani
13. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
14. Shri Ramsheth Thakur
15. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer

142nd Report of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/142ndreport.htm[01-07-2016 15:19:20]
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
               
2.           The Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee, specially the new member Shri Dara Singh, MP,
Rajya Sabha who attended the meeting for the first time.
 
3.         The Committee then took up for consideration   the Action Taken Reports (142
nd to 147 th ) on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Reports of the Committee on Demand-for-grants(2003-04) relating to
the Departments of Family Welfare; Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy; Elementary Education and
Literacy; Secondary and Higher Education; Women and Child Development; and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports.
The Committee adopted these reports and decided to present them reports to the Houses of Parliament on the12 th
December, 2003.
 
4.          Thereafter, some members raised the issue of taking the ISM&H for a special study. The Committee was
informed that a Background Note on the subject had been received from the Department. It was decided that the same
could be circulated to the members before a meeting with the officials of the Department of the ISM&H could be held at
an appropriate time.
 
5.         The Chairman informed the Committee that Action Taken Report of the Department of Health could not be
prepared as the Department had not sent action taken notes so far, despite several reminders, written and verbal.  He also
informed that many other references made by the Committee were pending with the Department for the past several
months. They do not even acknowledge our letters, not to speak of sending replies.   The Committee viewed it seriously
and decided to summon Secretary, Department of Health to ascertain reasons for not being able to send
information/papers to the Committee.      
 
6.         The Committee also decided to visit Bangalore to hear the representatives of some banks /financial institutions
tentatively from 13
th to 15th  January, 2004 on the subject of Gender Budget Analysis – Micro Credit to Women Self
Help Groups.  The Committee authorised the Chairman of the Committee for seeking permission of the Chairman Rajya
Sabha for the said visit.
 
7.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 4.30 p.m.